                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE SALARY TABOO:
               PRIVACY NORMS AND THE DIFFUSION OF INFORMATION

                                         Zoë B. Cullen
                                     Ricardo Perez-Truglia

                                      Working Paper 25145
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25145


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2018, Revised February 2020




We are thankful for numerous comments from colleagues and seminar discussants. In particular
we would like to thank Emily Breza, Kai Barron, Lauren Cohen, Mu-Jeung Yang, Robert
Metcalfe, Irene Lo, Rediet Abebe, Bobby Pakzad-Hurson, Shane Greenstein, Teresa Amabile,
Pietro Ortoleva, Edward Lazear, Chris Stanton, Robert Gibbons, David Slusky, Sera Linardi,
Olga Stoddard, Teodora Boneva, Silvia Saccardo, and Clayton Featherstone for their helpful
questions, comments and encouragement. The collaborating firm provided financial support for
the research being conducted. Additionally, Zoë Cullen was a full-time, salaried employee at that
firm while the research was being conducted. Katherine Fang, Anh Nguyen and Dylan Balla-
Elliott provided excellent research assistance. This project was reviewed and approved by the
Institutional Review Board at University of California Los Angeles (IRB#18-001467). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Zoë B. Cullen and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Salary Taboo: Privacy Norms and the Diffusion of Information
Zoë B. Cullen and Ricardo Perez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 25145
October 2018, Revised February 2020
JEL No. C93,D83,D91,J3,J71,M5,Z1

                                         ABSTRACT

The limited diffusion of salary information has implications for labor markets, such as wage
discrimination policies and collective bargaining. Access to salary information is believed to be
limited and unequal, but there is little direct evidence on the sources of these information
frictions. Social scientists have long conjectured that privacy norms around salary (i.e., the
“salary taboo”) play an important role. We provide unique evidence of this phenomenon based on
a field experiment with 755 employees at a multibillion-dollar corporation. We provide revealed-
preference evidence that many employees are unwilling to reveal their salaries to coworkers and
reluctant to ask coworkers about their salaries. These frictions are still present, but smaller in
magnitude, when sharing information that is less sensitive (seniority information). We discuss
implications for pay transparency policies and the gender wage gap.


Zoë B. Cullen
Rock Center 210
Harvard Business School
60 N. Harvard
Boston, MA 02163
zcullen@hbs.edu

Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ricardo.truglia@anderson.ucla.edu




An online appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25145
         “You may know about your colleague’s sex life, your friend’s drinking problem, or what
         your neighbor really thinks of her mother-in-law. But you probably don’t know what they
         take home in each paycheck.” — Margaret Littman, Working Woman, 2001.


                                       1. INTRODUCTION

Employees rely on information about salaries in several ways. For example, they may need
the information to negotiate raises or to compare positions or employers. Most employers
provide limited information about salaries. As a result, employees’ knowledge about salaries
depends largely on their ability to communicate with each other. Recent evidence suggests
that the diffusion of information about salaries can be highly imperfect (Cullen and Perez-
Truglia, 2018). Social scientists claim that these information frictions may stem from a
“salary taboo”, which is a social norm around salary privacy that discourages coworkers
from revealing or inquiring about salary information (Trachtman, 1999; Edwards, 2005).
According to this view, salaries reflect things like one’s economic contribution to society
and whether one is valued by one’s employer, which is the type of personal information that
individuals often want to conceal from coworkers and even friends and family. However, there
is little direct evidence to support the role of privacy norms in the diffusion of information.
In this study, we fill this gap by conducting a field experiment with a multibillion-dollar
corporation.
     The diffusion of salary information, or lack thereof, has broad labor market implications.
For example, information frictions can facilitate workplace discrimination, increase employ-
ers’ market power (Danziger and Katz, 1997; Cullen and Pakzad-Hurson, 2016), and hinder
collective bargaining and unionization (Corbett, 2002).1 Understanding the precise sources
of these information frictions is relevant for ongoing policy debates. For example, current
U.S. legislation intended to promote pay transparency has focused on punishing employers
when they retaliate against workers who talk to their coworkers about salaries (Pender, 2017;
Siniscalco et al., 2017). This policy can be effective, assuming that the reason employees are
not discussing salaries is that they fear being caught by their employers (Gely and Bierman,
2003; Hegewisch et al., 2011). However, if employees are unwilling to discuss salaries due
to privacy norms, they may fail to learn information regardless of whether they are discour-
aged by their employers. If the salary taboo exists, then other policies would be needed to
guarantee that employees have access to salary information.
     Most employees around the world report a desire to be better informed about the salaries
of their coworkers, but they also report that they rarely discuss salaries with their coworkers
   1
    For a discussion on wage inequality, collective bargaining, and unionization, see Card, Lemieux, and
Riddell (2004).

                                                   2
(Glassdoor, 2016; PayScale, 2018). Although these patterns are indicative of information
frictions, they are not necessarily due to a salary taboo. For example, employees may be
uninformed because the cost of acquiring salary information, in terms of time and energy
spent, outweighs the expected benefits.2 We partnered with a large firm to conduct a field
experiment with its employees. We designed this experiment to disentangle the role of privacy
norms in how employees share their salary information and inquire about the salaries of
coworkers.
    We assess the salary taboo directly by using measures of social norms around privacy.
We ask employees whether it is socially acceptable to ask peers (i.e., coworkers in the same
unit and with the same position title) about their salaries and whether they feel comfortable
themselves asking peers about their salaries.
    To address the usual concerns with subjective data, we designed a revealed-preference
measure of preferences for privacy. Measuring these preferences in a natural, high-stakes
context presents challenges. For instance, the experimenter must verify whether the salary
information was shared. We developed a method that addresses this challenge. We offer the
subject the opportunity to reveal his or her own salary to a specific set of five peers effortlessly
over email. Using an incentive-compatible method, we elicit the subject’s willingness to share
this information; that is, we offer employees rewards in exchange for revealing (or concealing)
their salary information.
    In addition to measuring employees’ willingness to share their salary information with
others, we also measure whether employees are willing to ask coworkers about their salaries.
This elicitation presents several challenges of its own. For example, we do not want any
concerns about revealing information sources to the experimenter or any concerns about
repercussions from management for searching for information. We developed a method that
addresses those challenges.
    In our experiment, employees must guess the average salary of a random sample of five
of their peers, listed by their first and last names. For example, a Junior Researcher from
Investment Banking is asked to guess the average salary of five other Junior Researchers
working in Investment Banking. If the subject’s guess falls within 5% of the truth, he or she
receives a monetary reward from $13 to $63.3 Next, we offer respondents the opportunity
to have an extra week to search for salary information on their own. This additional time
would allow them to improve their guesses and thus increase the chances of winning the
guessing game. For instance, subjects could use the extra time to reach out to the five peers

   2
      Also, the information frictions could be attributed to a firm’s efforts to discourage employees from
discussing salaries (Gely and Bierman, 2003; Hegewisch et al., 2011).
    3
      These amounts, as well as all other monetary amounts discussed in the paper, have been converted to
U.S. dollars using PPP-adjusted exchange rates from February 2018.

                                                    3
on the list and ask about their salaries. We elicit the probabilities of winning the guessing
game with and without the additional week, using both non-incentivized and incentivized
methods. The additional probability of winning with the extra week should measure the
employees’ willingness to search for information. For example, if the probability of winning
the game increases from 50% to 100%, that would indicate that the individual expects to
acquire perfect information during the extra week. On the contrary, if the probability remains
at 50%, that would indicate that the individual does not expect to search for information.
     To further assess the role of privacy norms, we randomize subjects into one of two survey
types: the salary survey or the seniority survey. The seniority survey is identical to the salary
survey, except that instead of revolving around information about salary, it revolves around
information about seniority. That is, for every question in the salary survey, the seniority
survey has a question that replaces the word “salary” with the word “seniority”, but it is
otherwise identical. For example, the salary survey asks employees whether it is socially
acceptable to ask peers about their salaries, and the seniority survey asks employees whether
it is socially acceptable to ask peers about their seniority.
     Like salary information, seniority information can be useful in making important career
choices. For example, anecdotal evidence suggests that employees in this firm use their
relative seniority to assess whether they are due for a promotion. Just like when acquiring
information about salary, acquiring information about seniority involves investing time and
effort. We conjecture that privacy norms around seniority will be much weaker than privacy
norms around salary.4 If there are no privacy norms around seniority information, then the
comparison between salary and seniority information would help explain the role of privacy
norms.
     We conduct the experiment with a sample of 755 employees from a large commercial
bank (hereafter, referred to as the firm) with thousands of employees, millions of customers,
and billions of dollars in revenues. The firm provides a context that seems most relevant to
the study’s information frictions: the firm does not disclose salary information, its employees
reportedly desire more salary transparency, and its employees rarely discuss salaries with their
coworkers. Several studies show that these institutional factors are common in organizations
from several countries, including but not limited to the United States (Trachtman, 1999;
Edwards, 2005; Hegewisch et al., 2011; Glassdoor, 2016; PayScale, 2018).
     We find that, consistent with the salary taboo hypothesis, employees find salary discus-
sions to be a sensitive topic: 69% of employees find it socially unacceptable to ask coworkers
about their salary, and 89% of respondents would feel uncomfortable if they had to ask a
   4
    For example, relative salary is believed to be sensitive, because it reflects one’s value to the firm (Gely
and Bierman, 2003; Hegewisch et al., 2011). Relative seniority, however, may not be nearly as informative
about one’s value to the firm.

                                                      4
coworker about their salary. In contrast, employees do not find discussion about seniority
to be nearly as sensitive as discussion about salary: only 6% find it unacceptable to ask
coworkers about their seniority, and only 5% would feel uncomfortable asking a coworker
about his or her seniority.
    The revealed-preference measures are consistent with the subjective measures of privacy
concerns. Regarding the willingness to share their own information, we find that a minority
of employees (20%) prefer to share personal salary information with five of their peers, but
most (80%) prefer to conceal this information. Moreover, those who prefer not to reveal
their salaries with others have high willingness to pay for their privacy. For example, 38% of
respondents are not willing to reveal their salary information, even if offered the maximum
incentive ($125) to do so. Yet, we find a significantly higher willingness to share seniority
information. For instance, employees are twice as likely (23%) to be willing to reveal their
seniority for the maximum reward of $125.
    Although privacy norms seem to play a significant role, we by no means imply that they
are the only factor preventing individuals from sharing their salary information. Indeed,
the fact that information frictions are present to some extent for seniority suggests that
privacy norms must not be the only factor at play. In particular, some of the preference
for secrecy may be strategic in nature. Take, for example, an employee who is paid more
than peers who must decide whether to reveal his or her salary to peers. On the one hand,
revealing the information may gain respect and admiration from peers. On the other hand,
the information may generate resentment from coworkers or even undermine the employee’s
leverage in future salary negotiations. Indeed, we find evidence for the second channel: those
who perceive themselves to be higher relative earners are less willing to reveal their salaries
to peers.
    Next, we turn to the willingness to search for information. When presented with financial
incentives to do so, most individuals are willing to search for seniority information: two-
thirds of participants who expressed uncertainty in their initial guess expected to return
after a week with the correct answer. However, willingness to search falls significantly when
subjects are asked about the (more sensitive) salary information. Less than one-third of
participants expect to return after a week with an answer within five% of the true average
salary. Furthermore, 25% of respondents are not willing to search for salary information
on their own, even when offered the highest prize for accuracy ($63, an average three days’
salary).
    We designed a validation test to measure willingness to search for information. We ran-
domized the reward of the guessing game to take one of five different values ranging from $13
to $63. According to models of rational information acquisition, we expect higher rewards to


                                              5
increase employees’ willingness to search for information, because they stand to gain more
from it (Woodford, 2001; Sims, 2003; Mankiw and Reis, 2002; Reis, 2006). Consistent with
this prediction, we find that employees have significantly higher willingness to search when
they are randomly assigned to higher reward amounts.
    The data on salary misperceptions can help explain the presence and sources of infor-
mation frictions. To measure misperceptions, we compare the employees’ guesses about the
average salary of peers to the true averages from the administrative records of the firm.
Guesses about the average salary of the five peers have a mean absolute error of 15%. This
level of misperception is what we would expect if employees had used their own salary to
guess the salaries of their peers, thus suggesting that employees have little information about
salaries besides their own salary. In contrast, employees are substantially more accurate when
guessing seniority than they would be if they just reported their own seniority. This evidence
suggests that employees have access to other information about seniority besides their own
seniority but have no other information about salaries other than their own. This evidence
suggests the presence of more social learning for less sensitive information, compared with
sensitive information.
    Prior theoretical and empirical studies suggest that, in the presence of social learning,
employees who are more central in the network (or better connected to the specific five
peers they have to guess about) should have lower misperceptions (Mobius and Rosenblat,
2014; Alatas et al., 2016; Banerjee et al., 2013). We show that employees who are more
central in the network do have lower misperceptions about peers’ seniority, but they do not
have lower misperceptions about peers’ salaries. This evidence again suggests that the social
diffusion of less sensitive information (seniority) is greater than the social diffusion of sensitive
information (salary).
    Our last result relates to the widespread belief that pay secrecy and privacy norms dispro-
portionately hurt women (Babcock and Laschever, 2009). For example, survey data indicate
that women feel less informed than men about the salaries where they work (Glassdoor, 2016;
Cullen and Pakzad-Hurson, 2016). Consistent with these prior survey findings, our own data
indicate that female employees are less confident than male employees about their ability to
guess the salaries of their peers. However, we find that those differences in confidence do not
correspond with any real differences in accuracy. If anything, female employees have slightly
more accurate perceptions than their male counterparts. Moreover, we find that the gender
differences across other outcomes are also small, statistically insignificant, and precisely es-
timated: female and male employees are equally willing to say that they are uncomfortable
asking others for their salaries and equally willing to reveal their own salaries to their peers
or to search for information.


                                                 6
    Our estimates show significant reluctance to share and inquire about salaries, which may
even constitute a lower bound. In our experiment, the firm fully endorsed the sharing of salary
information, which made it easier for us measure how comfortable employees felt discussing
salaries when the firm allowed it. In most companies, however, employers discourage this
type of behavior, so the unwillingness to share and search for information may be even
higher. Likewise, our experiment may underestimate the reluctance to search for information,
because it may have provided an “excuse” to ask peers about their salaries or to share their
salaries with peers. For example, participants could motivate their request for information
by mentioning that they want to win the guessing game.
    Our results are relevant for several policy pay transparency policies that have been en-
acted or discussed recently. Our evidence suggests that some of these policies may be more
useful than others. For example, from 2016 to 2018, 13 of the 50 U.S. states passed legisla-
tion punishing employers that retaliate against workers who discuss wages with coworkers.
Our evidence suggests that this policy alone may have a limited effect on the diffusion of
salary information, because employees are still constrained by privacy norms. Also, our ev-
idence on employees’ demand for privacy suggests that employees can be hurt significantly
by transparency policies that result in disclosing non-anonymous information. For instance,
the salaries of public employees in all U.S. states are made publicly available and easily ac-
cessible online. These databases include not only salary information but also the full names
of employees. Our findings suggest that this disclosure can have a direct utility cost to the
individuals whose information is disclosed.
    Our study relates to various strands of literature. First, our study relates to literature
on the diffusion of information in social networks. Several models explain how individuals
form beliefs based on peer-to-peer communication (Bass, 1969; Ellison and Fudenberg, 1995).
More recent studies measure social learning in the field (Mobius and Rosenblat, 2014). Some
of these studies artificially create incentives for information diffusion. For instance, Mobius,
Phan, and Szeidl (2015) recruited college students to play a “treasure hunt” game in which
they earned rewards by collecting information from peers. Other studies exploit natural
incentives for information diffusion. For example, Beaman, Dillon, and Lori Beaman (2018)
seeded useful information about composting and measured its diffusion in an agricultural
network. These papers provide evidence that, even in settings where information is mutually
beneficial, its diffusion is highly imperfect.
    Our contribution to the social learning literature is twofold. First, we provide evidence of
a phenomenon that has not been documented before: privacy norms hinder social learning.
Beyond salary discussions, information taboos may hinder information diffusion in a range
of topics. For example, clients might not want to talk to each other about the prices that


                                               7
they paid, which enabled price discrimination; and individuals with mental health afflictions
may not want to discuss this information with others, which limits the social learning about
treatments.5 Second, we contribute a new method for measuring the willingness to search
for information and the willingness to share information with others. Our method is unique
in that it does not require participants to reveal explicitly that they have searched in any
incriminating way nor does it incriminate the people who would have shared the information.
As such, our method could be used to test the spread of sensitive information in other settings
where it could be dangerous for individuals to reveal their connections.6
    Our paper also relates to the literature on the economics of privacy (Acquisti et al., 2016).
For example, Goldfarb and Tucker (2012) showed that, even in anonymous internet surveys,
some respondents refuse to reveal information about their incomes and demographics. Athey,
Catalini, and Tucker (2017) and Adjerid, Acquisti, Brandimarte, and Loewenstein (2013)
studied the demand for privacy in the crypto-currency market. They showed that even
individuals who report that they highly value privacy are willing to give away sensitive
information for small incentives. We contribute to this literature by measuring preferences for
privacy in a context with high stakes (i.e., an employee’s willingness to reveal personal salary
information to coworkers). In contrast to those other contexts, we find a high willingness
to pay for privacy. Perhaps more surprisingly, we find a large heterogeneity in preferences
for privacy, with some individuals willing to pay to reveal their salary to peers rather than
conceal it.
    More broadly, our study is related to a literature on the effects of pay transparency. A
small but growing literature shows that increased pay transparency affects employee behavior
and satisfaction (Card et al., 2012; Perez-Truglia, 2019; Mas, 2016, 2017; Breza et al., 2018;
Cullen and Pakzad-Hurson, 2016), including one study using a different experiment in this
same firm (Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018). This evidence suggests that individuals have
imperfect access to information, but it does not address the sources of these information
frictions.7 We contribute to this literature by measuring the role of privacy norms. Last,
this study relates to literature on wage discrimination. There is a widespread view that
information frictions hurt minorities disproportionately (Phillips, 2009; Colella et al., 2007).
Our evidence does not support this assumption: women and men face similar frictions and

   5
      Relatedly, Chandrasekhar, Golub, and Yang (2018) investigate whether shame hinders information ac-
quisition (i.e., whether individuals avoid seeking helpful information when doing so would signal ignorance).
    6
      For example, our method could allow participants to share politically sensitive information without
revealing their sources.
    7
      In (Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018), we document that employees have large misperceptions about the
salaries of managers and peers, and when we provided that information for free to a random sample of
employees, the information did not spread to other employees in the firm. We follow up on that earlier study
by studying the sources of information frictions.

                                                     8
have similar degrees of misperceptions. However, we do find that female employees are less
confident than male employees about the accuracy of their beliefs, which could in itself affect
negotiations about salary or promotions.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the conceptual framework
and survey design. Section 3 discusses the implementation details. Section 4 presents the
results. The last section concludes.


                                  2. RESEARCH DESIGN

Appendix C includes a full sample of the survey instrument. In this section, we describe the
main aspects of the survey.

2.1 Survey Types: Salary Versus Seniority

One of the key aspects of the survey is that participants are assigned with equal probability
to one of two survey types:

     Salary Survey: this survey type asks about the average salary among peers. We use
     the standard definition of peers: other employees who share the same position title and
     work in the same organizational unit (Card et al., 2012; Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018).
     For instance, the peers of a teller from a specific branch would be the other tellers in the
     same branch. We use one specific type of salary, the monthly gross base salary, which
     we describe in detail in the survey. This salary excludes any additions or deductions,
     such as taxes, allowances, commissions, or bonuses. According to interviews with the
     HR department and employees who did not participate in the experiment, this salary
     type is the most salient for employee compensation and is typically the most relevant
     figure in the employee’s contract. Base salary also is the total compensation amount
     for nearly all subjects in our sample.

     Seniority Survey: this survey type asks about the average seniority of peers, which is
     defined as the number of years elapsed since the employee joined the company.

   To simplify exposition, in the remaining of the section we only describe the questions
corresponding to the salary type. The two types of survey instruments are identical, except
that the word “salary” replaces all instances of “seniority” and the corresponding “$” units
replace all instances of the “years” units.
   Just like information on peer salary, the information on peer seniority can be useful for
career decisions such as salary negotiations, asking for a promotion or deciding whether


                                               9
to take an outside offer. However, there may be stronger privacy norms around salary
information than around seniority. For example, while there are countless studies mentioning
the term “salary taboo,” there are no mentions of a “seniority taboo.” As a result, the
comparison between the results of the salary and seniority surveys may give us hints about
the role of privacy norms for the diffusion of information.

2.2 Incentive-Compatible Elicitations

In this study we strive for incentive-compatible survey methods whenever possible. While
incentivized surveys are generally welcomed in Economics, this seems to be particularly
valuable in the topic of privacy. For example, individuals tend to say that they value their
privacy a lot, but then their behavior reveals that they do not value it nearly as much as they
say. Athey et al. (2017) documents a 54% decline in the likelihood that an MIT undergraduate
protects their friends’ contact information when they introduce a small incentive, free pizza.
This is despite the fact that respondents rank friends’ contact information as the second most
private piece of data, just below social security numbers, in the National Cyber Security
Alliance (NCSA) survey. When asked directly, 60% stated they would never feel comfortable
sharing these contact details if asked.
    To elicit valuations (for privacy and other things) in an incentive-compatible way, we
employ the traditional Becker-DeGroot-Marschak (BDM) method. We use the open-ended
variation (Andersen et al., 2006), in which the respondent bids against the computer for a
particular item (the respondent’s privacy). The rules are as follows. The respondent’s bid is
compared to a price that is determined by a random number generator. If the respondent’s
bid is lower than the price, then the respondent gets a dollar amount equal to the price. If
the bid is higher than the price, then the subject gets the item and no dollar amount. The
rules of this mechanism makes it a dominant strategy for respondents to bid exactly their
true valuation for the item. The rationale for this dominant strategy is equivalent to that in
the Vickrey auction, wherein the dominant strategy is also to bid one’s true valuation.
    One important detail of the BDM mechanism is that all subjects must provide a bid for
the item at hand, but this bid is not always “executed.” We tell subjects that bids from “a few
lucky participants” will be chosen at random to be executed. Subjects find out if their bids are
selected on the screen immediately after entering their bids. For the “few lucky participants,”
the next screen also informs them about the outcome of the mechanism (i.e., whether they
will receive the item or whether they will receive a sum of money to be deposited in their bank
accounts). The survey then terminates prematurely, thereby excluding the participant from
the subject pool. For those who are not among the “few lucky participants,” the following
screen notifies them that their bids will remain hypothetical. These subjects continue with

                                              10
the rest of the survey.
    We do not specify to the respondent the number of participants whose bids are selected
to be executed. In theory, to ensure BDM to be incentive compatible the subjects must
know that the probability is positive but it does not matter exactly what the value of the
probability is. There is abundant evidence that this is true in practice too: the results from
elicitations are similar regardless of whether one uses low or high probabilities, as long as
the probabilities are greater than zero (Carson and Groves, 2007; Charness et al., 2016). We
executed the BDM choices for 1% of the subjects invited to the survey. We selected a small
probability for two reasons. First, the selected respondents cannot continue with the rest of
the survey, so a higher share of respondents selected reduces the sample size. Second and
most important, the firm wanted to limit the number of items being allocated, because some
of these items (e.g., revealing the employee’s salary to peers) could be distracting to the
employees.
    Another important feature of the BDM mechanism is that subjects never “lose” money,
because they choose between receiving money or something else. Many studies use this type
of mechanism (Allcott and Kessler, 2019; Fuster et al., 2018), which differs from another com-
mon mechanism in which subjects must pay out of their pockets. We did not implement this
latter mechanism because the firm wanted to avoid collecting payments from its employees’
bank accounts.
    While the BDM method has some advantages, it is of course not perfect. Some of their
imperfections have been documented in the literature. For example, some subjects may shade
their valuations, as if they were playing a first-price auction, even though that is a dominated
strategy (Cason and Plott, 2014).8 One of the ways in which we try to mitigate these sources
of biases and measurement error is by including a training module at the beginning of the
survey (Cason and Plott, 2014). In our instructions, we note explicitly that it is in the
respondents’ best interest to bid their true valuations. Additionally, we include a couple of
practice questions to familiarize subjects with the BDM elicitation.9 Additionally, in order to
show that there is some signal among the noise, we present a number of validation exercises.10
   8
       In some special cases, it may not even be incentive-compatible to report one’s true valuation. This
situation can arise if the auctioned object is a lottery (Karni and Safra, 1987), and even if the auctioned
object is non-random (Horowitz, 2006).
     9
       One of the training questions elicits the willingness to pay for an iPhone X. The other training question
elicits the willingness to forfeit a lottery that pays $100 with probability 50%. There are no correct or
incorrect answers for these questions. However, if the subjects provide responses that are abnormally high
or abnormally low, we provide some feedback explaining describing the typical responses to these questions.
    10
       While our efforts may mitigate these biases and measurement error, they will not eradicate them. This
fact is important to keep in mind while interpreting some of the results. For example, while subjects may
seem quite heterogeneous in their bids, some of that heterogeneity may simply reflect measurement error in
the elicitation exercise. And when we estimate a regression where these variables are in the right hand side
of the equation, the measurement error will generate attenuation bias.

                                                      11
2.3 Privacy Norms

We included three subjective questions related to privacy norms. The first question, Unac-
ceptable, elicits the norm directly, asking whether it is “socially acceptable to ask someone
about their salary”, with possible answers of “highly acceptable,” “somewhat acceptable,”
“somewhat unacceptable”, and “highly unacceptable.” One potential challenge with this
measure is that an individual may perceive a certain norm and still feel comfortable breaking
it. Thus, we include a second question, Uncomfortable, to elicit whether the respondent finds
it “uncomfortable to ask information about salary to your peers” with the possible answers
“not at all,” “a little uncomfortable,” “uncomfortable” and “very uncomfortable.”
    The last question is intended to measure a reciprocity norm. Individuals may be averse
to asking about salary not because they want to avoid bothering others, but because they
want to avoid being asked to reciprocate by revealing their own information. To assess this
possibility, we ask the question Reciprocal: “if you ask a peer about his or her salary, would
you expect this peer to ask you about your salary?” The possible answers are “Yes” and
“No.”

2.4 Demand for Privacy

We designed a revealed-preference method to elicit preferences for privacy. The survey de-
scribes an email that might be sent from the experimenters to five peers, the same five peers
whose salaries they have to guess about in the guessing game described below. This email
would include the first and last name of the respondent and the respondent’s own salary.
This email explicitly states that the information is being shared in the context of an experi-
ment. By communicating on behalf of the participant, the channel explicitly shut down the
two-way face-to-face communication.
    Because the value of sending this email can be positive or negative, we elicit preferences
about this email in two steps. First, we ask respondents whether they would like us to send
this email. For respondents who want us to send it, we ask them to report their willingness
to pay for sending the email. For respondents who do not want us to send it, we ask them to
report their willingness to accept payment in exchange for sending the email.11 Because we
wanted to make it clear to respondents that it was entirely up to them whether we send this
email or not, we capped the range of the bids: the instructions noted that, by bidding $125,
the respondent would get their choice (either to send or conceal the email). The resulting
measure of willingness to pay for privacy can take values from -$125 to $125. A positive
amount indicates that the subject demands privacy and is willing to pay that amount to
   11
        As before, bids are executed only for a random minority of respondents and remain hypothetical for the
rest.

                                                       12
conceal her salary. A negative amount indicates that the subject is willing to pay (the
absolute value of) that amount to reveal her salary.
   The fact that we collaborated with a bank helped to make reward payments smooth and
credible. The survey rewards can be deposited directly to the subject’s bank account after
the survey participation is over.

2.5 Willingness to Search for Information

We want to elicit whether the respondents are willing to search for more information on
their own. We do this by setting up a guessing game about the salaries of peers. In the
instantaneous guessing game, respondents must guess the average salary among a group of
peers whose names and position titles are listed within 3 minutes. The guessing game offers
a reward for accuracy: if the guess falls within 5% of the true average characteristic of the
five peers, the subject receives an additional amount from the experimenter, in addition to
the other survey rewards. This extra reward ranges from $13 to $65, or approximately 1/2
to 3 days salary on average.
    We give subjects three minutes to read the instructions and provide the first guess. At
that time there is no indication that they will be able to revise this guess. A clock in the upper
left corner of the screen displays the time remaining. If the respondent does not provide a
guess within the allotted time, the guess does not qualify for the reward. This was intended
to make sure that participants did not have time to search for information.
    Next we elicit the subjects’ confidence in their belief, we elicit the probability with which
they expect to win the reward. The subject can respond with any number from 0% to
100%, in 1% increments (we also implemented an incentive-compatible elicitation, described
below). Next, subjects are told that some participants, selected at random, will be given
the opportunity to get an extra week to search for information and revise their guesses.
During the extra week, subjects may consult their peers, or even look up information on the
Internet. We ask subjects to report the likelihood that they could guess accurately if given
the extra week. The difference between the winning probabilities with and without the extra
week measures the expected value from searching (i.e., if subjects expect the probability of
winning the guessing game to increase with the extra week, that would indicate that they
expect to find useful information).
    To illustrate our measure of willingness to search, consider the following simple model
of information acquisition. Assume that an employee’s utility is a function of the accuracy
of his or her belief about the average peer salary. Employees can take actions in order to
improve the accuracy of their peer salary beliefs. Those actions, however, come at a cost –
e.g., the employees must spend time and attention to acquire the information, plus they may

                                               13
need to incur the cost of inquiring about sensitive information. As a result, the decision of
how much information to acquire boils down to a cost-benefit analysis. Figure 1.a provides
a graphical representation of this cost-benefit analysis. The x-axis represents the employee’s
accuracy. Searching for information would allow individuals to move towards the right in
the x-axis. For instance, finding new information about a peer’s salary should increase the
perceived accuracy by some positive number.
     Figure 1.a also shows the Marginal Benefit (MB) and Marginal Cost (MC) curves, under
the classical assumption that the MC curve has an upward slope and the MB curve has
a downward slope.12 The point q0 on the x-axis represents the point at which a rational
individual stops acquiring new information: i.e., exactly at the point where the marginal
cost of information equals the marginal benefit of information. We will come back to this
framework to motivate and illustrate the different survey measurements that follow.
     Figure 1.b corresponds to the introduction of the guessing game, which shifts the MB
curve from MB to MB0 . For example, if the individual is risk-neutral, the MB shifts the
curve upward by exactly the amount of the accuracy reward. Since the individual was not
given enough time to search for information before providing his or her guess, the individual
must stay at q0 . However, if the individual had extra time to search for information before
providing the guess, he or she would want to search for additional information up to point
q1 , where the MB0 curve intersects the MC curve. This expected gain in accuracy, q1 − q0 ,
measures the individual’s willingness to search for information.13
     One potential challenge with this measure of willingness to search is that it is based on
probabilities that individuals may not report truthfully because they are not incentivized to
do so. Thus, we introduced additional questions designed to be incentive-compatible. After
eliciting the probability of winning the guessing game (without and with the extra week),
we elicit the subject’s willingness to accept to forfeit the right to play the guessing game.
Subjects can ask for any dollar value from 0 up to the full reward amount. We explicitly
mention that, due to the BDM mechanism, it is in the respondent’s best interest to bid their
true willingness to accept for giving up the guessing game. As aforementioned, all individuals
   12
      The assumptions about the slopes of the MC and MB curves help simplify the explanation, but they
are not crucial for the following results. Moreover, there are simple ways of micro-founding these slopes. For
example, a given employee may be more comfortable asking some peers than others. This employee will by
asking the peer he or she feel most comfortable asking, then move to the second most comfortable, and so
on. This will result in an upward slope for the MC curve. In turn, the downward slope of the MB curve can
arise due to the principle of diminishing marginal returns: a given increase in accuracy may be more useful
to an individual who is completely uncertain about the topic than to an individual who is almost certain.
   13
      Note, we are estimating the marginal cost of increasing accuracy, not the average cost. It is possible, for
example, that employees are facing a high marginal cost of searching because that cost curve is convex and
they have search up to a point in which the marginal cost is high. Thus, differences in willingness to search
between individuals may reflect differences in marginal cost curves, or differences in their locations on the
same marginal cost curve.

                                                       14
must provide bids, but the bids are executed only for small sample selected at random for
whom the survey is prematurely terminated. We can normalize the bid that the subject
provides as a share of the reward amount. This normalization makes the outcome more
comparable across subjects who are randomly assigned to different reward amounts. This
outcome takes a value from 0 to 1, like a probability. Indeed, if the subject was risk-neutral,
this ratio would reveal the perceived probability of winning the guessing game.
    The alternative measure of willingness to search for information is equal to the difference
between the normalized willingness to forfeit the guessing game with and without the extra
week. In the case of risk-neutral individuals, this difference should be equal to q1 − q0 .
Figure 1.b illustrates the incentive-compatible measure of willingness to search too. The
introduction of the guessing game increases the welfare of the individual by an amount equal
to the area of the shaded parallelogram from Figure 1.b. This area represents the certainty
equivalent that would make the subject forfeit the right to play the guessing game without
the extra week. In turn, the shaded triangle between q0 and q1 corresponds to the willingness
to search: i.e., the willingness to pay to acquire extra time to search for information and
improve one’s guess.
    Despite the advantage of being incentive compatible, this alternative measure has some
disadvantages. First, it may introduce measurement error because the willingness to for-
feit the game depends not only on the perceived probability of winning but also on risk
preferences. Second, it may introduce measurement error because the question is harder to
understand than the simple probability question.14
    We also designed a validation test for our measure of willingness to search. We ran-
domized the reward for the guessing game to take values X ∈ {$13, $26, $39, $52, $65}, with
equal probability. According to models of rational information acquisition, we would expect
employees to be more willing to search for information when the rewards are higher (Wood-
ford, 2001; Sims, 2003; Mankiw and Reis, 2002; Reis, 2006). By randomizing the size of the
reward, we generate exogenous variation in the expected benefits of holding accurate beliefs.
Thus, we can test if individuals who were randomly allocated to higher reward amounts were
indeed more willing to search for information. This validation test can also be illustrated
with the framework of Figure 1. Figure 1.c shows two hypothetical scenarios in which the
individual is offered different reward amounts. With a lower reward, the MB curve shifts
upward to MB0 . With a higher reward, the MB curve shifts even further, to MB00 . When
facing the higher reward, the rational individual responds by searching for more information,

  14
     We try to mitigate this problem by breaking the question into parts. First, we elicit the probability
that respondents win the game first. Second, we calculate and show the subjects their expected value of the
game (i.e., the subjective probability of winning the game multiplied by the reward amount). Last, we ask
respondents to bid for the right to play the game.

                                                    15
up to the point q2 > q1 .
    Last, to capture the gross value of the information, we also included in the survey a
question that elicits the willingness to pay about information. We implement a variation of
the method used in Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2018). We computed a signal about the peer
salary (the average salary among a different random sample of five peers), and then let the
subjects bid for this piece of information. For more details, see Appendix A.4.


              3. INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT, DATA, AND SUBJECT POOL

Our study was conducted in collaboration with a large, private, commercial bank in Asia with
thousands of employees, hundreds of branches, and billions of dollars in assets and revenues.
The setting has several features in common with firms of similar size around the world.
    The firm is typical in other relevant respects. It does not have an open salary policy.
A 2003 survey of Fortune-1,000 firms shows that only 3.5% of the surveyed firms had open
salary policies (Lawler, 2003). Several other surveys corroborate this pattern of pay secrecy. A
survey of about 1,000 companies indicates that only 3% have open salary policies and less than
a quarter disclose data on salary ranges (Scott, 2003). And a survey of employees from eight
developed countries show that they are uninformed about salaries and want employers to be
more transparent regarding pay (Glassdoor, 2016). Moreover, this firm discourages employees
from sharing salary information. Many organizations around the world have similar policies,
particularly in the United States (PayScale, 2018; Hegewisch et al., 2011). For example, a
2001 survey of U.S. employees finds that more than one-third work for firms that forbid them
from discussing their pay with coworkers (Day, 2007; Vault, 2001).15 Anecdotally, employees
continue to discuss the topic of pay despite the firm’s pay secrecy policy. Empirically, half
of the employees in our context report that they do discuss salaries with their coworkers.
This evidence suggests that most employees are not significantly concerned about the firm’s
secrecy policy, to the extent that they are willing to admit this behavior in a survey.
    Also, in our firm, survey data indicate that almost half of the employees never discuss
their salaries with coworkers. Other firms and countries report similar patterns. For example,
according to a 2017 survey of Americans aged 18-36 years, 70% report that they never discuss
their salaries with coworkers (Gee, 2017).16 Last, as shown below in the results section, in
this firm there seems to be a taboo around salary discussions. This taboo is believed to be

  15
      There is no consensus on why firms prefer pay secrecy or whether it is in the firm’s best interest.
Some argue that firms use secrecy to undermine collective bargaining (Bierman and Gely, 2004), reduce
manipulative behavior (Brickley et al., 2007), or avoid the diffusion of information about outside offers
(Danziger and Katz, 1997).
   16
      In a survey of 1,022 employees from the United Kingdom found that less than half (48%) discuss salaries
with their peers (Burchell and Yagil, 1997).

                                                     16
present in a broad range of countries including but not limited to the United States (Edwards,
2005), Canada (Bierman and Gely, 2004) and Israel (Fox and Leshem, 2005).17 One of the
conjectures for the cause of the salary taboo is that individuals do not feel comfortable
discussing pay because it is equivalent to discussing self-worth (Trachtman, 1999). This
conjecture could explain why the salary taboo is so universal: as long as individuals perceive
that pay is somewhat related to the marginal product of labor, which is the case in market
economies, the salary taboo will emerge.

3.1 Survey Implementation

We start with the universe of thousands of employees. We focus on two specific units of the
firm, with some added filters.18 We invited the remaining 1,899 employees to take the survey.
    Appendix B includes a sample of the invitation email (stripped of formatting and iden-
tifying information). The survey was not compulsory, but employees were encouraged to
participate. Indeed, the unit heads reached out to their employees by email to encourage
participation in our survey. The invitation email did not provide any specifics about the con-
tent of the survey, but it explained that survey participants could earn monetary rewards,
which would be deposited in their bank accounts, for participating in the survey.
    The email invitations were sent gradually from February 9, 2018, to March 1, 2018. We
sent a reminder by email to the subjects who had not completed the survey after one week
of sending the original email and another reminder two weeks after the original email. The
first subject responded on February 9, 2018, and the last subject responded on March 14,
2018. Of the 1,899 invitations sent, 755 individuals finished the survey, corresponding to a
39.7% response rate.19 The median respondent took 15 minutes to complete the survey.

3.2 Descriptive Statistics and Randomization Balance

The subject pool includes employees from 46 different positions, such as tellers, salespeople,
and branch directors. Of these, 18% are located in the two headquarter offices, and the rest
are scattered across several branches.
    Table I presents some descriptive statistics about the subject pool. Column (1) corre-
sponds to the entire sample of 755 survey respondents: 73% are female, 86% finished college

  17
      For example, Fox and Leshem (2005) present survey data indicating that most individuals in Israel
report feeling highly uncomfortable when asked about their pay and other financial matters.
   18
      For instance, we exclude employees from the highest step of the corporate ladder. And to avoid any
contamination, we exclude employees who participated in a previous survey that was related to peers’ salaries
(Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018).
   19
      By construction, this sample excludes individuals who were randomly selected to have their surveys
terminated prematurely (e.g., the subjects whose bids were selected to be executed).

                                                     17
or a higher degree, and on average they are 29 years old and have been working at the firm
for the last 4.2 years. In Appendix A.1, we show that this subject pool is representative of
the universe of employees in these same observable characteristics.
    Regarding the pay differentials between peers, the mean absolute difference between one’s
own salary and the average salary among all peers is 14% of one’s own salary. In comparison,
seniority has more horizontal inequality: the mean absolute difference between one’s own
seniority and the average seniority among all peers is 137% of one’s own seniority.
    We cross-randomized two features of the survey. In columns (2) and (3) of Table I, we
break down the descriptive statistics by the two survey types, salary and seniority. The last
column reports p-values for the null hypothesis that the average characteristics are the same
across these two treatment groups. The results show that, consistent with successful random
assignment, the observable characteristics are balanced across the two treatment groups. The
second feature of the survey that we randomized was the reward amount for the guessing
game, which takes one of five different values. Columns (5) through (9) of Table I provide
the corresponding balance test for this treatment arm. Again, the results are consistent with
successful random assignment.


                                               4. RESULTS

4.1 Salary Information Frictions

We start by discussing a couple of results that, despite some methodological differences and
using a different subject pool, replicate the results from an earlier study that motivated this
work (Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018). To measure misperceptions, we compare the employ-
ees’ guesses about the average salary of peers to the true averages from the administrative
records of the firm. We find that misperceptions are economically significant: the guesses
about peer salary have a mean absolute error of 15%. Employees seem aware of their misper-
ceptions: the average individual expects to win the guessing game with a probability that is
significantly below 100%: 56% according to the non-incentivized measure, and 43% according
to the incentivized measure.20 And employees do not seem to be misinformed due to lack of
interest. When given the opportunity to buy the signal about the average peer salary, most
subjects were willing to pay substantial amounts.21
    The next sections provide direct evidence of the sources of these information frictions, in

  20
      When compared to the fraction of accurate responses (32%), this evidence suggests that employees were
somewhat overconfident.
   21
      For example, among the top half of the sample, the willingness to pay for salary information has a median
of $130 and a mean of $369, approximately 1 and 3 weeks’ worth of salary, respectively (see Appendix A.5
for more details).

                                                      18
particular the role of privacy norms.

4.2 Privacy Norms

Figure 2 shows the subjects’ responses when asked directly about their privacy norms. This
evidence suggests that privacy norms are strong for salary and much weaker for seniority. A
whooping 69% of employees find it unacceptable to ask a coworker about salary, compared
to only 7% who find it unacceptable to ask about seniority. Similarly, 89% of employees
find it uncomfortable to ask a coworker’s salary, whereas only 23% find it uncomfortable
to ask about seniority. The difference in these distributions across salary and seniority are
highly statistically significant. On a scale from 0 to 3, Unacceptable averages 1.8 for salary
versus 0.5 for seniority, and Uncomfortable averages 1.6 for salary versus 0.3 for seniority
(p-value<0.001 for both Unacceptable and Uncomfortable, Fig. 2).
    Norms about reciprocity, on the other hand, are similar: 89% of respondents report that
they will get asked to reveal their own salaries if they ask someone about theirs, whereas
93% of respondents report that they will be asked to reciprocate when asking someone about
their seniority. The reciprocity norm may be one reason that a demand for privacy serves to
dampen both the asking and sharing of salary information.

4.3 Preference for Privacy

Our revealed-preference measure of these preferences for privacy aligns with the direct ques-
tions about norms and attitudes. The solid histogram from Figure 3.a shows the distribution
of the willingness to share the own salary information with five peers. Roughly 20% of
employees prefer the experimenter to reveal their salaries to peers, and the remaining 80%
prefer to avoid sending the email.22 Figure 3.a shows that, both among individuals who want
to reveal and conceal their salaries, there is quite a bit of variation in the strength of their
preferences. Roughly 40% of subjects have weak preferences for privacy because they are
willing to pay less than $5 to reveal or conceal their salary information. The remaining 60%,
however, show strong preferences: a whopping 40% are not willing to reveal their salaries
even under the maximum incentive of $125.


  22
     The fact that a minority of people would be willing to pay us to send the informative email may seem
puzzling considering that individuals could in principle reveal the information themselves for free (e.g., by
sending a similar email or by mentioning the information in casual conversations). However, we explicitly
inform respondents that the email revealing their salaries will mention that it is being sent in the context of
an experiment. Thus, individuals may be willing to pay for this email so that they can use the experiment as
an excuse to reveal their salaries without appearing to gloat. They may also prefer to share this information
when they can avoid reciprocity. Higher-paid employees may be motivated by status concerns to reveal, but
nevertheless fear embarrassing lower-paid peers who reciprocate disclosure, for example.

                                                      19
    The hollow histogram from Figure 3.b is equivalent to the solid histogram but corresponds
to the seniority information instead of the salary information. The comparison between those
two histograms indicate that individuals are significantly more willing to share their seniority
information than their salary information. While 40% of subjects are not willing to reveal
their salaries for $125, the corresponding fraction is about half as large when it comes to
seniority information. This significant difference in the distribution of demand for privacy
(difference p-value<0.001) is consistent with the differences in reported privacy norms.
    Note that, even though the privacy norms are much weaker for seniority information, there
is still significant willingness to pay to conceal seniority information. That evidence suggests
that while privacy norms are a significant barrier to share information, it is probably not the
only factor at play. For example, the unwillingness to share one’s salary information with
coworkers may reflect strategic incentives. There are two mechanisms that fit the strategic
motive. On the one hand, if an employee reveals to a coworker that she gets paid more, her
peers may stop treating her well, especially if the advantage is not clearly deserved.23 If her
manager finds out, it may reflect poorly on him or her, and the manager may deny her a raise
in the future. Thus, the higher the relative salary of the employee within the peer group, the
stronger the preference should be to keep the salary information private. On the other hand,
the models of social status (Frank, 1984; Bursztyn et al., 2018) make the opposite prediction:
employees with higher relative salary should be more excited about revealing their salary,
because that will be a boost to their social status.
    Our unique data on willingness to pay for privacy allows a direct comparison of these
two mechanisms with opposing predictions. Figure 3.b shows the relationship between the
willingness to pay for privacy and the perceived distance between own-salary and the reference
group. There is a significant relationship: increasing the individual’s perceived relative salary
by 1 standard deviation is associated with an increase in willingness to pay for privacy of
$30, which is equivalent to 50% of the standard deviation of this outcome ($76). In contrast,
the relationship is downward sloping and statistically insignificant, for the willingness to
share seniority information.24 A perception of earning more is a deterrent for sharing salary
information, consistent with the notion that this information could have detrimental effects
on team effort (Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018), cause resentment from the manager or even
put their relative salary at risk.
    The fact that a large fraction of individuals strongly prefer not to share their salary with
others, irrespective of perceived relative standing, suggests a demand for privacy beyond a

   23
     In this context salary reflects a combination of performance and good fortune. See Cullen and Perez-
Truglia (2019) for evidence of favoritism in this context, as well as a longer discussion about the meritocratic
and unmeritocratic sources for pay increases.
  24
     The results are shown in Appendix Figure A.5.b.

                                                      20
particular strategic motivation. This demand for privacy may be an important contributing
factor in the lack of information diffusion. Consistent with this interpretation, survey data
indicate that employees are more comfortable with sharing salary information when they can
do so anonymously. For instance, surveys from seven developed countries indicate that more
than 62% of employees would be willing to share information about their own salaries if they
could do so anonymously (Glassdoor, 2016).
    To complement this evidence on privacy demands, we use data from a separate survey
in the same firm with responses from 2,033 employees. We explained that currently at the
firm, salaries are confidential information and asked employees to please report preferences
over two alternative disclosure policies. The first policy was described as follows: “the bank
created a website showing the average salary by position/unit, for all positions within the
bank.” We then asked “Would you be in favor or against the creation of a website like this?”
Respondents could rate their approval in the following scale: “strongly in favor,” “in favor,”
“I would not care,” “against,” and “strongly against”. The second scenario was described as
follows: “The bank created a website with the list of names and salaries of all its employees,
including your name and your salary. As a result, you could look up the incomes of any other
employee, and any employee could look up your own income.” And we asked the respondent
whether they would be in favor or against this alternative policy, using the same scale ranging
from “Strongly in favor” to “Strongly against”.
    The data from this complementary survey suggests that there is a majority supporting
higher salary transparency, but only if it is anonymous. Whereas 65% of respondents report
that they would be better off if the bank disclosed average salaries by position, only 13%
reported that they would be better off if the bank disclosed salary information in a non-
anonymized manner.

4.4 Willingness to Search for Information

Next we present the results on willigness to search for information. We first report measures
of baseline guesses about the salaries of five specific peers, and the respondent’s confidence
in that guess. Second, we report how employees would change these answers with the option
to search, revealing their willingness to search and their expectations of gathering accurate
information.
    Figure 4.a shows the distribution of the self-reported probability of winning the guessing
game with the initial guess. Employees understand that they do not have perfect beliefs,
but many (56%) believe that their guess for average peer salary is within 5% of the truth.
Yet, only 32% of guesses actually fall within that range, indicating overconfidence among
respondents. Participants are similarly overconfident in their ability to predict the seniority

                                              21
of their peers.25 The incentive-compatible elicitation of confidence, willingness to forfeit the
guessing game as a share of the game reward, corroborates these findings (See Appendix A.3
for more details).26 Overconfidence appears to be one channel that may lead individuals to
under invest in gathering information. What happens when participants consider having an
extra week to search for the right answer? Regardless of whether we use the self-reported
(Figure 4.a) or incentive-compatible (Figure 4.b) measures, employees expect their accuracy
about peer salary to rise with the additional week. According to Figure 4.a, the average
probability of winning the game about peer salary increases from 56% to 79% (p-value of the
difference is <0.001) with the additional week. Although somewhat smaller in magnitude, this
gap remains significant when using the incentive compatible measure: the average probability
increases from 43% to 57% (p-value<0.001).
    A standardized measure of search intensity is shown in Figure 5.a. This measure equals
the difference between the reported probability of winning the game with and without the
extra week, divided by the probability of losing the game without the extra week. A 0% in this
measure means that the individual does not expect to eliminate any of the initial inaccuracy,
and 100% means that the individual expects to fully eliminate the initial inaccuracy.27
    The solid histogram from Figure 5.a corresponds to the willingness to search for salary
information. There is large variation in this measure. The distribution can be roughly divided
in three parts. The first third does not expect to get better (i.e., less than 10% better) with
an extra week. For those individuals, the marginal costs of searching for information must
be greater than the marginal benefits from winning our guessing game. The second third
of the sample expects to improve all the way up to certainty. The misperceptions for these
individuals are largely voluntary (i.e., they do not acquire information, because the benefits
from the information are not significant enough yet). The last third of the sample is between
these two extremes.28
    To assess the role of privacy norms, we focus on the differences in willingness to search for

   25
      60% believe their guess about seniority is within 5% of the truth, and in reality 13% of baseline guesses
are within 5% of the truth. Note, there is substantially more variation in peer seniority than peer salary,
making it more difficult to guess correctly. For this reason we normalize by standard deviations in the
underlying distribution for direct comparisons of misperceptions.
   26
      On average, 43% of subjects expect their guess for average peer salary to be within 5% of the truth,
which is still significantly higher than the 32% of guesses that actually fall within that range. 50% of subjects
expect their guess for average peer seniority to be within 5% of the truth, compared to 13% whose guesses
are within the range.
   27
      This sample excludes individuals who reported 100% confidence in their initial guesses and for whom
there could be no gain in certainty by construction.
   28
      It must be noted, however, that the ex-ante anticipated gains may not coincide with the actual ex-post
gains from searching. In particular, given that individuals are overconfident about the accuracy of their
initial guesses, they also may be overconfident about the expected gains from searching. In any case, our
measure of anticipated gains is the relevant measure for the decision to search for information or not.

                                                       22
salary and seniority information. In Figure 5.a, the hollow histogram is similar to the solid
histogram only that it corresponds to seniority information instead of salary information.
This measure suggest that individuals are not willing to search about salary information
nearly as much they are willing to search for seniority information: on average, the extra
week increases the probability of winning the guessing game by 54% for salary and 75% for
seniority. The higher reluctance to search for salary than seniority information are consistent
with the difference in privacy norms.
    In addition to privacy considerations, there may be other reasons why employees are not
willing to search for information, such as the time and effort needed to search.29 Indeed, even
for seniority, nearly one-fifth of participants do not expect to improve their accuracy despite
the insensitive nature of the information. This evidence suggests that the other sources of
information frictions, such as attention and time costs, must be significant too.
    Next, we present the validation of our measure of willingness to search, discussed in
Section 2. According to the rational inattention hypothesis, individuals should be more
willing to search for information when the gains from doing so are higher. That is, a higher
reward in the guessing game should cause individuals to search more intensively. Figure 5.b
presents the results from this test, by comparing the willingness to search with the (randomly
assigned) reward amounts. Consistent with rational inattention, individuals who are assigned
to higher rewards expect to search more intensively for salary information. More precisely,
a $100 increase in the guessing reward would result in an expected accuracy increase of 14
percentage points. This difference is not only statistically significant, but also economically
large: this 14 percentage points increase implies a 25% improvement relative to the average
perceived accuracy rate of 56 percentage points.

4.5 Salary Misperceptions vs. Seniority Misperceptions

The previous section documented that, relative to the seniority information, employees find
the salary information to be more sensitive and more difficult to share and ask for. In this
section, we compare misperceptions between salary and seniority information to test if there
are, as expected, higher frictions for the more sensitive information.
    The solid histogram from Figure 6.a shows misperceptions about average peer salary when
participants have less than three minutes to respond. This figure indicates that only 32%
of subjects guess within 5% of the correct answer. The mean absolute difference between
the perceived average and the actual average (i.e., the mean absolute error) is 14.6%. These
misperceptions are not skewed: approximately as many subjects overestimate the average

  29
      See Stanton and Seegert (2020) for an estimate of how much money employees leave on the table by
failing to discuss work tactics with their co-workers.

                                                 23
peer salary as the number of subjects who underestimate it, resulting in an average under-
estimation of peer salary of just -1.5% (p-value=0.184). The mean absolute error is equally
large in all the reward conditions, suggesting inattention is an unlikely explanation for the
dispersion.
    Figure 6.b present the equivalent results to Figure 6.a but for seniority information instead
of salary information. Since there is significantly more variation in peer seniority than in peer
salary, we cannot compare the distribution of errors between Figures 6.a and 6.b. To make
the misperceptions more comparable, we can normalize them by the within-group standard
deviation in salary or seniority. This measure suggests that individuals are better at guessing
peer seniority: the mean absolute error is of 0.707 standard deviations when guessing peer
salary but of only 0.469 standard deviations when guessing peer seniority (difference p-
value<0.001).
    Our favorite comparison between salary and seniority misperceptions relies on a bench-
mark: a “naive” guess that consists of guessing one’s own salary (or seniority). The errors
under those hypothetical guesses are shown in the hollow bars from Figures 6.a and 6.b.
Guesses about the average salary of the five peers have a mean absolute error of 15%. If
employees had instead reported their own salary as their guess for the peer average, their
mean absolute error would have been 16% instead. The fact that these two misperceptions
are similar (difference p-value=0.209) suggests that employees have little information about
salaries besides their own salary. In contrast, when it comes to guessing seniority, the mean
absolute error for their actual guesses is 29% and it would have been 72% if they had guessed
their own seniority (difference p-value < 0.001) . This evidence suggests that employees have
access to other information about seniority besides their own seniority but have no other
information about salaries other than their own.
    Theoretical and empirical evidence shows that, in presence of information diffusion, indi-
viduals who are more central in the network, or more connected to the information source,
tend to have significantly lower misperceptions (Alatas et al., 2016; Banerjee et al., 2013). We
can use this strategy to test for social learning in the cases of salary and seniority information.
    As a measure of how connected an employee is to the information source, we measure the
overlap between the subject and the five peers he or she has to guess about. This overlap
is defined as the time that the subject overlapped in the same position with each of the five
peers, as a share of the total time the employee has been working at the firm. For instance,
an overlap of 1 would indicate that the subject has overlapped with each of the five peers
during his or her entire tenure at the company. We also construct a measure of how central
an employee is in the network. We use data on the emails sent and received by the employees
in the months before the experiment. More precisely, we define the employee’s centrality as


                                                24
the Eigenvector centrality in the directed graph of emails.
    Figure 7.a shows a binned scatterplot between the subject’s degree of misperceptions
(measured as the mean absolute error of their guess) and the subject’s overlap with the
five peers. The red diamonds correspond to the salary misperceptions. The slope between
peer overlap and salary misperceptions is negative but close to zero (-0.018), statistically
insignificant (p-value=0.461) and precisely estimated. This slope suggests that increasing
the overlap from the minimum possible (0, meaning no overlap with any of the peers) to the
maximum possible (1, meaning full overlap with all of the peers) would reduce misperceptions
by an statistically insignificant 1.8 percentage points (relative to an average of 15 percentage
points). In contrast, the blue circles from Figure 7.a indicate that the relationship between
peer overlap and misperceptions about seniority is negative (-0.133) and highly statistically
significant (p-value<0.001). This slope suggests that increasing the overlap from 0 to 1
would reduce misperceptions by 12 percentage points (relative to an average of 29 percentage
points).
    Figure 7.b reproduces Figure 7.a, but using the measure of network centrality instead
of peer overlap. The results are robust: salary misperceptions do not change with network
centrality, but seniority misperceptions are significantly lower when the subject’s central-
ity is higher. In sum, the evidence from Figure 7 indicates that seniority misperceptions
decline with peer overlap and network centrality but salary misperceptions do not decline
with these same variables. This evidence indicates that, consistent with the rest of the evi-
dence presented above, there is significantly more information diffusion for the less sensitive
information (seniority) than for the more sensitive information (salary).
    Taken together, the findings presented in the above sections highlight significant differ-
ences in the employee’s willingness to share and search for information about salary versus
seniority. Our preferred interpretation of these differences in diffusion patterns stem from
the difference in privacy norms. However, other channels may contribute to these differences
as well. We documented some evidence that strategic reasons to conceal salary information
particularly by those who perceive themselves to be the highest paid employees. Another
contributing factor may be lingering concerns about the consequences of asking about salary
if their manager were to find out. While we think that our communication about this study
was effective at alleviating concerns about repercussions, and deliberately did not collect
any direct evidence on the act of asking others, it remains a possibility that the general
atmosphere of secrecy intimidates employees.




                                              25
4.6 Gender Differences

As a final exercise, we explore whether there are any gender differences in the diffusion of
salary information. There is a widespread belief that pay secrecy tends to hurt women and
minorities disproportionately, allegedly because women are less likely to search for salary
information (Babcock and Laschever, 2009). These claims, however, are mostly based on
survey data and anecdotal evidence. For example, in the United States, 65% of men and 53%
of women believe that they have a good understanding of how employees are compensated at
all levels in their company. This gap is qualitatively consistent in eight countries included in
the survey (Glassdoor, 2016). In a survey conducted by Cullen and Pakzad-Hurson (2016),
participants of both genders believe that men are more likely than women to ask about and
discover a co-worker’s wage. However, there is no evidence on whether those survey claims
are backed by actual differences in knowledge and information acquisition.30
    Table II presents regressions of several outcomes on a dummy variable that equals 1 if
the employee is female and 0 if the employee is male. The evidence from Table II suggests
that, consistent with the aforementioned survey data from Glassdoor (2016) and Cullen and
Pakzad-Hurson (2016), women tend to be less confident than men about their knowledge of
peer salaries. In fact, men and women are equally accurate in their guesses. Column (1)
indicates that, according to the self-reported measure, the perceived probability of winning
the game is 60% for men versus 54% for women (p-value of the difference = 0.186). Column
(2) indicates that, according to the incentive-compatible measure, the perceived probability of
winning the game is 50% for men versus 40% for women (p-value of the difference = 0.041).
However, the comparison of actual accuracy indicates that these differences in perceived
accuracy are misleading. Column (3) of Table II indicates that, if anything, women are more
accurate than men when it comes to guessing salaries: the share of men winning the guessing
game is 26.9% versus 34.2% for women (p-value of the difference = 0.142); and the mean
absolute error of their guesses are also similar by gender (column (4)).
    Besides this difference in confidence, there are no significant gender differences in any
of the other outcomes reported in Table II. Female and male respondents find it equally
unacceptable to ask peers about their salaries (column (5)), feel equally uncomfortable asking
their peers (column (6)), and perceive a similar reciprocity norm when asking (column (7)).
Employees of both genders are equally willing to reveal their salary to their peers (column
(8)), equally willing to search for information (column (9) for self-reported measure and
   30
     There is evidence of gender differences in the diffusion of other forms of information besides salaries. For
example, (Beaman et al., 2018) find that diffusion of productivity-enhancing information does not extend far
beyond the initial individuals contacted; thus, women who happen to be peripheral in this network are less
informed than men. Similar evidence indicates that job referral networks that operate through word-of-mouth
tend to favor men over women (Beaman et al., 2018).

                                                       26
column (10) for the incentive-compatible measure). They are also equally likely to pay for
readily-available salary information (column (11)).


                                          5. CONCLUSIONS

We provide evidence on the role that privacy norms play in the diffusion of salary information.
By designing and conducting a field experiment with 755 employees at a multibillion-dollar
corporation, we provide revealed-preference evidence that privacy norms exist and hinder the
diffusion of salary information. For example, we show that a significant share of employees
are not willing to share their salaries with their coworkers or ask their coworkers about their
salaries. When the topic changes from salary information (which has strong privacy norms)
to seniority information (which does not have such strong privacy norms), the willingness to
share and ask information increases considerably.
    The relative unwillingness to ask others about their salaries is consistent with some data
on search behavior in a different but related context. In Norway, individuals can use a public
website to find out the incomes of others. The data suggests that the number of searches
being conducted were extremely sensitive to the degree of anonymity. When searches for
others’ income became non-anonymous, a once active topic of inquiry on the web ceased to
be popular (Perez-Truglia, 2019).
    In the last decade, several policies have been enacted around the world to promote pay
transparency, and new policies are being discussed. Our findings can inform the design of
these policies. For example, from 2016 to 2018, 13 of the 50 U.S. states passed legislation
punishing employers that retaliate against workers who discuss wages with coworkers. Our
evidence suggests that this policy alone may have a limited effect on whether employees
discuss salaries with their coworkers, because employees will continue to be constrained by
privacy norms. Indeed, in our own study, despite lifting the non-disclosure policy for the
duration of our study, a significant fraction of employees remain unwilling to search for and
share salary information.
    The transparency policies being used and proposed around the world differ substantially
in whether they disclose sensitive data.31 Our evidence suggests that these policies should
avoid compromising employee privacy whenever possible. Our findings also show that, al-
though employees value having access to salary information, they value their privacy too,
sometimes even more than the information itself. Moreover, when asked directly, employ-
ees strongly support anonymous transparency policies (e.g., disclosing salary averages) and

  31
     For example, in 2018, California began requiring that employers provide prospective employees with
their current employees’ salary range(Pender, 2017; Siniscalco et al., 2017). This policy helps employees in
bargaining with the firm without compromising employee privacy.

                                                    27
strongly oppose non-anonymous policies (e.g., disclosing individual salaries). For instance,
consider the case of individuals employed by the U.S. state governments, whose salaries are
disclosed on the Internet along with their full names and other personal information. Our
findings suggest that this type of non-anonymous disclosure may impose significant costs on
some of those employees. The government should consider limiting these costs to the extent
possible. For example, they could anonymize this information, such as disclosing average
salaries by position and employer, and make individual data available by request.
    Last, our findings suggest an important role for third-party aggregators of salary informa-
tion, such as Glassdoor, PayScale, and Comparably.32 These companies are quickly gaining
popularity, which is consistent with our evidence that employees would like to be better
informed but have trouble collecting information from coworkers. Our findings suggest that
this growing informational sector may create a lot of value to employees, both by allowing
them to make informed career choices and by improving their leverage in negotiations with
employers. Estimating the effects of these salary aggregators is a promising avenue for future
research.




  32
     For more information, refer to https://www.glassdoor.com/,   https://www.payscale.com/ and
https://www.comparably.com/.

                                              28
                                           References

Acquisti, A., C. Taylor, and L. Wagman (2016). The Economics of Privacy. Journal of Economic
  Literature 54 (2), 442–492.

Adjerid, I., A. Acquisti, L. Brandimarte, and G. Loewenstein (2013). Sleights of Privacy: Framing,
  Disclosures, and the Limits of Transparency. Proceedings of the Ninth Symposium on Usable
  Privacy and Security, 1–9.

Alatas, V., A. Banerjee, A. G. Chandrasekhar, R. Hanna, and B. A. Olken (2016). Network
  Structure and the Aggregation of Information: Theory and Evidence from Indonesia. American
  Economic Review 106 (7), 1663–1704.

Allcott, H. and J. B. Kessler (2019). The Welfare Effects of Nudges: A Case Study of Energy Use
  Social Comparisons. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11 (1), 236–276.

Andersen, S., G. W. Harrison, M. I. Lau, and E. E. Rutström (2006). Elicitation using multiple
  price list formats. Experimental Economics 9 (4), 383–405.

Athey, S., C. Catalini, and C. Tucker (2017). The Digital Privacy Paradox: Small Money, Small
  Costs, Small Talk. NBER Working Paper No. 23488 .

Babcock, L. and S. Laschever (2009). Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and the Gender Divide.
  Princeton University Press.

Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson (2013). The Diffusion of Microfi-
  nance. Science 341 (6144).

Bass, F. M. (1969). A New Product Growth for Model Consumer Durables. Management Sci-
  ence 15 (5), 215–227.

Beaman, L., A. Dillon, and A. D. Lori Beaman (2018). Diffusion of agricultural information
  within social networks: Evidence on gender inequalities from Mali. Journal of Development
  Economics 133, 147–161.

Beaman, L., N. Keleher, and J. Magruder (2018). Do Job Networks Disadvantage Women? Evidence
  from a Recruitment Experiment in Malawi. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (1), 121–157.

Bierman, L. and R. Gely (2004). Love, sex and politics? Sure. Salary? "No Way": Workplace social
  norms and the law. Berkley Journal of Law and Employment 25 (1), 167–191.

Brebner, S. and J. Sonnemans (2018). Does the elicitation method impact the WTA/WTP dispar-
  ity? Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 73 (C), 40–45.



                                               29
Breza, E., S. Kaur, and Y. Shamdasani (2018). The Morale Effects of Pay Inequality. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 133 (2), 611–663.

Brickley, J. A., C. W. Smith, and J. L. Zimmerman (2007). Managerial economics and organizational
  architecture. Boston: McGraw-Hill Irwin.

Burchell, B. and D. Yagil (1997). Socioeconomic and Political Initiators of Pay Comparison. Work,
  Employment, & Society 11 (4), 737–748.

Bursztyn, L., B. Ferman, S. Fiorin, M. Kanz, and G. Rao (2018). Status Goods: Experimental
  Evidence from Platinum Credit Cards. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3), 1561–1595.

Card, D., T. Lemieux, and W. C. Riddell (2004). Unions and wage inequality. Journal of Labor
  Research 25 (4), 519–559.

Card, D., A. Mas, E. Moretti, and E. Saez (2012). Inequality at Work: The Effect of Peer Salaries
  on Job Satisfaction. American Economic Review 102 (6), 2981–3003.

Carson, R. T. and T. Groves (2007). Incentive and informational properties of preference questions.
  Environmental and Resource Economics 37 (1), 181–210.

Cason, T. N. and C. R. Plott (2014, 12). Misconceptions and game form recognition: Challenges
  to theories of revealed preference and framing. Journal of Political Economy 122 (6), 1235–1270.

Chandrasekhar, A. G., B. Golub, and H. Yang (2018). Signaling, Shame, and Silence in Social
  Learning. NBER Working Paper No. 25169 .

Charness, G., U. Gneezy, and B. Halladay (2016). Experimental methods: Pay one or pay all.
  Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 131, 141–150.

Colella, A., R. Paetzold, A. Zardkoohi, and M. Wesson (2007). Exposing pay secrecy. Academy of
  Management Review 32, 55–71.

Corbett, W. R. (2002). Waiting for the Labor Law of the Twenty-First Century: Everything Old
  Is New Again. Berkeley Journal of Employment and Labor Law 23 (2), 259–306.

Cullen, Z. and B. Pakzad-Hurson (2016). Equilibrium Effects of Pay Transparency in a Simple
  Labor Market. Working Paper.

Cullen, Z. and R. Perez-Truglia (2018). How Much Does Your Boss Make? The Effects of Salary
  Comparisons. NBER Working Paper No. 24841 .

Cullen, Z. and R. Perez-Truglia (2019). The Old Boys’ Club: Schmoozing and the Gender Gap.
  NBER Working Paper No. 26530 .


                                                30
Danziger, L. and E. Katz (1997). Wage Secrecy as a Social Convention. Economic Inquiry 35 (1),
  59–69.

Day, N. E. (2007). An investigation into pay communication: Is ignorance bliss?         Personnel
  Review 36, 739–762.

Edwards, M. A. (2005). The Law and Social Norms of Pay Secrecy. Berkeley Journal of Employment
  and Labor Law 26, 41–63.

Ellison, G. and D. Fudenberg (1995). Word-of-Mouth Communication and Social Learning. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (1), 93–125.

Fox, S. and L. Leshem (2005). Displeasure From Disclosing Information on Financial Matter to
  Different Categories of Others. Megamot 44 (1), 163–178.

Frank, R. (1984). Are Workers Paid Their Marginal Products? American Economic Review 74 (4),
  549–571.

Fuster, A., R. Perez-Truglia, M. Wiederholt, and B. Zafar (2018). Expectations with Endogenous
  Information Acquisition: An Experimental Investigation. NBER Working Paper No. 24767 .

Gee, K. (2017). Ask Me How Much Money I Make. The Wall Street Journal, October 26 2017 .

Gely, R. and L. Bierman (2003). Pay secrecy/confidentiality rules and the National Labor Relations
  Act. Journal of Labor and Employment Law 6, 120–156.

Glassdoor (2016). Global Salary Transparency Survey. Technical report.

Goldfarb, A. and C. Tucker (2012). Shifts in Privacy Concerns. American Economic Review 102 (3),
  349–353.

Hegewisch, A., C. Williams, and R. Drago (2011). Pay Secrecy and Wage Discrimination. Institute
  for Womens Policy Research, June 9 2011 .

Horowitz, J. K. (2006). The Becker-DeGroot-Marschak mechanism is not necessarily incentive
  compatible, even for non-random goods. Economics Letters 93 (1), 6–11.

Karni, E. and Z. Safra (1987). "Preference Reversal" and the Observability of Preferences by
  Experimental Methods. Econometrica 55 (3), 675.

Lawler, E. J. (2003). Pay Practices in Fortune-1,000 Corporations. WorldatWork Journal 12 (4),
  45–54.

Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis (2002). Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal To Replace
  The New Keynesian Phillips Curve. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1295–1328.

                                               31
Mas, A. (2016). Does Disclosure affect CEO Pay Setting? Evidence from the Passage of the 1934
  Securities and Exchange Act. Working Paper.

Mas, A. (2017).    Does Transparency Lead to Pay Compression?           Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 125 (5), 1683–1721.

Mobius, M., T. Phan, and A. Szeidl (2015). Treasure Hunt: Social Learning in the Field. NBER
  Working Paper No. 21014 .

Mobius, M. and T. Rosenblat (2014). Social Learning in Economics. Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics 6 (1), 827–847.

PayScale (2018). 2018 Compensation Best Practices Report. Technical report.

Pender, K. (2017).         New law bans California employers from asking applicants their prior
  salary.   https://www.sfgate.com/business/networth/article/New-law-bans-California-employers-
  from-asking-12274431.php.

Perez-Truglia, R. (2019). The Effects of Income Transparency on Well-Being: Evidence from a
  Natural Experiment. The American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Phillips, M. (2009). Now Comes Lilly Ledbetter. https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2009/01/25/now-
  comes-lilly-ledbetter.

Reis, R. (2006). Inattentive consumers. Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (8), 1761–1800.

Scott, D. (2003). Survey of Compensation Policies and Practices.

Sims, C. (2003). Implications of rational inattention. Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (3), 665–
  690.

Siniscalco, G. R., E. M. Connell, and C. Smith (2017). State Pay Equity Laws: Where a few go,
  many may follow. Mimeo.

Stanton, Christopher, J. S. R. S. and N. Seegert (2020). Workplace Knowledge Flows. Working
  Paper.

Stigler, G. J. (1962). Information in the Labor Market. Journal of Political Economy 70 (5), 94–105.

Trachtman, R. (1999). The Money Taboo: Its Effects in Everyday Life and in the Practice of
  Psychotherapy. Clinical Social Work Journal 27 (3), 275–288.

Vault (2001).   More employers ducking pay confidentiality issue.      Business and legal reports,
  Vault.com.

Woodford, M. (2001). Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy. NBER
  Working Paper No. 8673 .

                                                 32
                                                     Figure 1: Conceptual Framework

             a. Basic Framework                       b. Willingness to Search                 c. Willingness to Search, by Reward
     $                                       $                                                 $




                              MC                                                   MC                                      MC
33




                                                                                                                           MB00
                                                                                   MB0
                                                                                                                           MB0
                              MB                              Expected gain in     MB                                      MB
                                                            accuracy from search

     0                                       0                                                 0
         0         q0             Accuracy
                                                 0               q0     q1          Accuracy       0          q0 q 1 q 2    Accuracy
                                        Figure 2: Privacy Norms
         a. Is it Acceptable to Ask?                      b. Are you Uncomfortable Asking?




Notes: Panel (a) shows the distribution of responses to the question Unacceptable, asking whether it is
“socially acceptable to ask someone about their salary/seniority”. Panel (b) shows the distribution of
responses to the question Uncomfortable, eliciting whether the respondent finds it “uncomfortable to ask
information about salary/seniority to your peers.”



                       Figure 3: Willingness to Share Information with Peers
     a. Willingness to Pay for Privacy                          b. By Perceived Relative Standing




Notes: Panel (a) shows a histogram of the distribution of the willingness to pay for privacy: negative
values denote the amount the individual is willing to pay to reveal her information to peers, while positive
values denote the compensation the individual is willing to give up in order to conceal this information.
15% of participants selected $0, and all of these individuals also indicated that they would not like the
email to be sent, so they are included in the bracket [$0,$25). Panel (b) provides a binned scatterplot
with the relationship between the willingness to pay for privacy and the respondent’s perceived relative
salary with respect to the reference peer group. Distance from the reference group has been normalized
by a standard deviation among peers, and winsorized at the 5th/95th percentiles. The slope is calculated
using interval regression with robust standard errors.



                                                    34
      Figure 4: Salary Information: Perceived Accuracy with and without the Extra Week
              a. Self-Reported                                      b. Incentive-Compatible




Notes: Panel (a) shows a histogram of the respondent’s perceived probability of winning the guessing
game, without an extra week to search for information (grey bars) and with the extra week (red bars).
Panel (b) is equivalent to the first panel, only that instead of using self-reported probabilities, we use
an incentive-compatible proxy: the ratio between the willingness to forfeit the guessing game and the
reward amount.



                           Figure 5: Willingness to Search for Information
          a. Willingness to Search                                b. Rational Inattention Test




Notes: Panel (a) shows the measure of willingness to search: the difference between the probability of
winning the game with and without the extra week, divided by one minus the probability without the
extra week (this sample excludes individuals who were 100% confident in their initial guess). Panel (b)
provides a binned scatterplot with the relationship between the reward amount (x-axis) and the expected
accuracy gain with the extra week (in percentage points). This relationship is exclusively for individuals
being asked about salary information and excludes 30 individuals who were 100% confident in their
initial guess. The slope is calculated with ordinary least squares, with standard errors clustered at the
position level reported in parentheses.


                                                   35
                           Figure 6: Misperceptions: Salary and Seniority
   a. Guess Vs. Own-Salary Benchmark                          b. Guess Vs. Own-Seniority Benchmark




Notes: Histograms of the salary (panel b, seniority) misperceptions, defined as the difference between
the respondent’s guess about the average salary/seniority among the sample of five peers (according the
incentivized elicitation) and the actual average salary/seniority (according to the firm’s administrative
records), divided by the actual average salary. These histograms provide the following benchmarks:
what the misperceptions would have been if the respondent had provided a guess equal to her own
salary/senority.



                         Figure 7: Salary Perceptions and Peer Connectivity
      a. Misperceptions with Peer Overlap                  b. Misperceptions with Peer Centrality




Notes: In panel (a) the binscatter plot and corresponding OLS regression estimates show the relationship
between absolute misperception about the average seniority or salary among the five peers (y-axis) and
the amount of time that the survey respondent overlapped with the five peers (x-axis). Peer overlap is
measured as the average share of the 8 year panel that the survey respondent overlapped at the bank with
the five selected peers. We include fixed effects for the unit that the peers and respondent share at the
time of the survey. The difference in slopes when jointly estimated is 0.114 (0.0391), p-value= 0.004 In
Panel (b) the specification is identical but the independent variable (x-axis) is the individual’s centrality
in their peer group measured using the eigenvector centrality of the directed work email graph.



                                                     36
                               Table I: Randomization Balance Test

                       All              Survey Type                               Reward Size
                               Salary    Seniority   P-value    $13      $26      $39      $52      $65     P-value
                       (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)
Female (=1)            0.72     0.71       0.74       0.50      0.70     0.72     0.73     0.72     0.75     0.89
                      (0.02)   (0.02)     (0.02)               (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.03)
Age (Years)           29.24    29.39      29.09       0.40     28.80    28.93    29.64    29.23    29.62     0.48
                      (0.18)   (0.26)     (0.25)               (0.42)   (0.38)   (0.42)   (0.38)   (0.41)
College (=1)           0.86     0.86       0.85       0.76      0.83     0.86     0.85     0.89     0.84     0.55
                      (0.01)   (0.02)     (0.02)               (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.03)
Seniority (Years)      4.21     4.29       4.13       0.55      3.82     4.02     4.25     4.45     4.44     0.51
                      (0.13)   (0.19)     (0.19)               (0.30)   (0.30)   (0.33)   (0.28)   (0.30)
Own Salary (Masked)    1.00     0.99       1.01       0.64      0.92     1.00     0.96     1.04     1.06     0.38
                      (0.02)   (0.03)     (0.04)               (0.04)   (0.05)   (0.05)   (0.05)   (0.06)
Observations           755      377        378                  135      161      131      167      161


Notes: Average pre-treatment characteristics of the employees, with standard errors in
parentheses. Female takes the value 1 if the employee is female and 0 otherwise. Age
is the employee’s age (in years) as of December 2017. College takes the value 1 if the
employee finished College or a higher degree, and 0 otherwise. Seniority is the number of
years from the date when the employee joined the company until December 2017. Own
Salary is the employee base monthly salary as of December 2017 (due to the sensitive
nature of the data, we do not reveal the unit of measurement for this variable). Column
(1) corresponds to the entire subject pool. Columns (2) and (3) break down the sample
in the two treatment groups that subjects were randomly assigned to: the survey about
salary or about seniority, with column (4) showing the p-value of the null hypothesis
that the averages are the same across these two groups. Columns (5) through (9) break
down the sample in the five treatment groups regarding the reward amount, with column
(10) showing the p-value of the null hypothesis that the averages are the same across
these five groups.




                                                      37
                                            Table II: Salary Information: Heterogeneity by Gender

                   Perceived Acc. (pp)   Accuracy (pp)     Error (pp)              Attitudes              WTP ($)      Extra Week (pp)      WTP ($)
                     (1)        (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)        (11)
                    Direct    Indirect       Actual        Abs. Error   Uncomf.     Unacc.     Recipr.    Privacy     Direct     Indirect     Signal
     Female (=1)    -0.057    -0.107∗∗        0.073           0.002       -0.063     0.141      -0.000     -16.765     -0.025     0.017       19.369
                   (0.043)     (0.052)       (0.050)         (0.017)     (0.099)    (0.101)    (0.033)    (12.778)    (0.028)    (0.033)     (35.612)
     Constant      0.598∗∗∗   0.504∗∗∗       0.269∗∗∗       0.145∗∗∗    1.472∗∗∗   1.056∗∗∗    0.889∗∗∗   81.599∗∗∗   0.603∗∗∗   0.247∗∗∗   164.821∗∗∗
                    (0.039)    (0.043)        (0.046)        (0.015)     (0.083)    (0.082)     (0.027)    (11.794)    (0.039)    (0.037)    (30.623)
38




      Notes: N=376. Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%. Standard errors in parentheses clustered by peer group. Each column corresponds to a
      different regression and based on a different dependent variable: the expected probability to win the game without the extra week (columns
      (1) and (2), based on self-reported and incentive-compatible measures respectively), a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the individual
      won the guessing game (column (3), the absolute error of the actual guess provided by the respondent (column (4))), the survey measures
      Unacceptable (column (5)), Uncomfortable (column (6)) and Reciprocal (column (7)), the willingness to accept or pay for sending an email
      revealing the respondent’s salary to five of his or her peers (column (8)), the expected gain in probability of wining the guessing game with
      the extra week (columns (9) and (10), based on self-reported and incentive-compatible measures respectively), and the willingness to pay for
      a signal of the average salary among five peers (column (11)). The right hand size variable, Female, equals to 1 if the respondent is female
      and 0 if male. Columns (9) and (10) control for the probability of winning the game without the extra week. All columns are estimated with
      Ordinary Least Squares, except for columns (8) and (11) which are estimated by means of an interval regression model.
