                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               UNLUCKY COHORTS:
                       ESTIMATING THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS
                 OF ENTERING THE LABOR MARKET IN A RECESSION
                      IN LARGE CROSS-SECTIONAL DATA SETS

                                      Hannes Schwandt
                                     Till M. von Wachter

                                     Working Paper 25141
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25141


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2018




We thank Ioannis Kospentaris and Nicolas Oderbolz for excellent research assistance, and David
Card, Janet Currie, Lisa Kahn, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and participants at the NBER Youth
conference and several seminars for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Hannes Schwandt and Till M. von Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unlucky Cohorts: Estimating the Long-term Effects of Entering the Labor Market in a Recession
in Large Cross-sectional Data Sets
Hannes Schwandt and Till M. von Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 25141
October 2018
JEL No. E32,J21,J31

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies the differential persistent effects of initial economic conditions for labor
market entrants in the United States from 1976 to 2015 by education, gender, and race using labor
force survey data. We find persistent earnings and wage reductions especially for less advantaged
entrants that increases in government support only partly offset. We confirm the results are
unaffected by selective migration and labor market entry by also using a double-weighted average
unemployment rate at labor market entry for each birth cohort and state-of-birth cell based on
average state migration rates and average cohort education rates from Census data.


Hannes Schwandt
SIEPR
366 Galvez Street Stanford
and CEPR
schwandt@northwestern.edu

Till M. von Wachter
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
MC 147703
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
tvwachter@econ.ucla.edu
1       Introduction

The first years after entering the labor market are typically a very productive period for young
workers. During this period, young workers’ wages grow rapidly and they frequently switch
towards better paying jobs.2 At the same time, young workers are particularly vulnerable to
adverse conditions in the labor market. For example, it is well known that young workers
bear the brunt of recessions in terms of higher unemployment rates, partly because wages
tend to fall most for those workers entering new jobs (e.g., Elsby et al. (2016)). Economists
and policy makers alike have long been concerned that interruptions of the initial process of
career progression caused by recessions can have lasting consequences on earnings and other
relevant outcomes, including health insurance coverage, health effects, and family formation
(e.g., Von Wachter (2012)).
    There is indeed increasing evidence from careful studies of college graduates that even
temporary exposure to increased unemployment rates can lead to persistent earnings reduc-
tions. For example, using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY),
Kahn (2010) shows that college graduates entering the labor market during the deep reces-
sion in the early 1980s experienced reductions in earnings lasting up to fifteen years. Oyer
(2008; 2006) presents evidence on the persistent effect on career choice for MBAs and PhD
Economists. Oreopoulos et al. (2012) show that college graduates in Canada suffer persistent
earnings losses and that these losses are substantially larger for those graduates predicted to
have low earnings to begin with.3 Outcomes other than earnings appear to respond to initial
labor market entry as well.4 For example, based on the NLSY, Maclean (2013) finds that
male entrants during the early 1980s recession have experienced long-lasting effects on self-
reported health, which is consistent with findings based on mature workers that show labor
market shocks can have long-term effects on health, including mortality.5
    These studies provide powerful evidence that the fear that recessions can have lasting
repercussions for young workers is well founded. These findings are worrisome, in partic-
ular because new college graduates are typically not eligible for programs meant to buffer
    2
      E.g., Topel and Ward (1992), Murphy and Welch (1990).
    3
      See also Altonji et al. (2016) for analysis of differential effects of graduating in a recession by college
majors.
    4
      E.g., Altonji et al. (2016) analyze earnings and occupational choice of college graduates using multiple
data sources, spanning a similar time period as we do; Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014) analyze the effects on
attitudes; Oreopoulos et al. (2012) study employer characteristics.
    5
      E.g., Sullivan and Von Wachter (2009) show that mature job losers suffer long-term increases in mortality
rates. We explore the effect of entering the labor market in a recession on long-term mortality in a companion
paper (Schwandt and Von Wachter (2018)).


                                                       1
temporary earnings losses. By focusing on college graduates, the aforementioned papers
have been able to provide empirical evidence that is highly compelling and provides impor-
tant proof-of-concept results establishing the significance of persistent effects of early labor
market conditions. This is partly because they can exploit high-quality longitudinal data
that allow measuring the state in which workers first entered the labor market, among others
things, and partly because the date of entry and typical career progression is well defined for
college graduates.
    However, it is well known that less-advantaged groups in the labor market, such as low-
educated workers or minorities, experience much larger increases in unemployment during
recessions (e.g., Hoynes et al. (2012)). These groups are thus at risk of suffering even larger
longer-term effects than the highly educated workers studied in depth in the existing liter-
ature. At the same time, in contrast to college graduates, these workers are more likely to
have access to the social safety net. Indeed, recent work from European countries suggests
that entry conditions have a stronger effect on a range of outcomes, including self-reported
health, for lower-educated individuals (e.g., Cutler et al. (2015)), despite the wide-spread
prevalence of generous social support systems in these counties. Despite the concern that
less advantaged individuals could fare worse, the effect of adverse labor market entry for
these groups of workers has not been studied extensively in the literature, especially for the
United States, where safety nets are less extensive. This is partly because typical longitu-
dinal data do not have sufficient samples to study these groups and partly because career
progression, and hence initial conditions, are harder to measure.6
    To advance the literature, in this paper we examine the persistent effects of entering the
labor market in a recession on a broad range of socio-economic outcomes for all young
workers who entered the labor market in the United States from 1976 to 2015. Our study in-
cludes college graduates, but also focuses on groups not typically analyzed separately, such
as women, non-whites, and individuals with less than a college degree. To identify the effect
of initial labor market conditions, we exploit year-to-year variation in unemployment rates
in the state of labor market entry. To estimate these effects, we use several data sets with ex-
tensive coverage over time and large sample sizes: repeated cross-sections from the Annual
Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey; Decennial Census data
    6
      In an exception, Speer (2016) uses the NLSY to study the effects of initial labor market conditions for
lower educated men graduating chiefly in the early 1980s recession and finds similar results to ours. There is
a separate body of literature on the scarring effects of individual labor market shocks for young workers, such
as unemployment spells, occurring independently of macroeconomic conditions (e.g., Gardecki and Neumark
(1998)). While identification is difficult, Von Wachter and Bender (2006) pursue an instrumental variables
approach based on temporary condition at workers’ first employer.


                                                      2
and American Community Survey data.
    Given that these data sets contain information on a large number of entry cohorts in
the labor market, they allow us to generate the first estimates of entering the labor market
in a recession for a typical young labor market entrant in the United States. Another key
advantage is that the large sample sizes allow us to study with sufficient precision the effect
for smaller groups, such as high school dropouts. Finally, the data contain information on
a range of additional outcomes that have not been studied for young workers in the U.S.
labor market. This includes information about the role of the social insurance system for
young workers, such as receipt of Medicaid and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP, formerly Food Stamps), as well as measures of poverty.
    These substantive advantages come at a price in terms of precision of our research design
imposed on us by the data. In particular, the cross-sectional data we use do not contain
information on the timing and location of entry into the labor market. The first data issue
concerns potential endogenous timing of labor market entry, something all studies of this
kind have to deal with.7 The second is unique to our use of cross-sectional data because
regional mobility can introduce either random measurement error or systematic bias. Given
the importance of these measurement aspects, we address these issues head on in the paper
using several approaches. Overall, after careful analysis, we conclude that our approach for
studying the persistent effect of adverse labor market conditions based on repeated cross-
sectional data is feasible and yields very similar findings to estimates that explicitly correct
for mobility or endogenous labor market entry.
    Based on this approach, we obtain three key findings. First, for the full sample of labor
market entrants in the United States from 1976 to 2015, we find that entering the labor mar-
ket in times of high unemployment leads to a substantial initial effect on earnings. Consistent
with findings in the previous literature, this effect fades gradually, but persists for ten years
into workers’ careers. Our findings imply that for a moderate recession that raises unem-
ployment rates by three points, the loss on cumulated earnings is predicted to be on the order
of 60% of a year of earnings. These effects are substantial and very robust to controls for
selective migration or endogenous entry into the labor market. Further analysis suggests that
the initial effect is due to both employment and wage reductions, whereas the longer-term
effect is mainly due to persistent declines in wages.
    Second, we find that the effect on earnings varies considerably in the population. While
all groups we studied experience persistent effects from adverse initial labor market condi-
   7
    However, our analysis of lower-education groups has to deal with the possibility that our approach inap-
propriately includes individuals whose education is in progress. We discuss this explicitly in the paper.


                                                     3
tions—including women, high school graduates, and those with some college—the effects
are particularly large for two groups: nonwhites and high school dropouts. Although smaller
samples lower the precision for these groups, the earnings losses are substantial. In examin-
ing the sources, we find these differences are partly driven by greater losses in employment,
measured in terms of the number of weeks worked in the past year, for nonwhites and high
school dropouts.
    Third, we find that the U.S. social insurance system provides a buffer for unlucky labor
market entrants and that these effects are largest for those who suffer the greatest earnings
losses. We find precisely estimated temporary but long lasting increases in the probability
of receiving Supplemental Nutrition Program Assistance (SNAP, formerly known as Food
Stamps) for the full sample. The effects are present for both men and women and whites and
nonwhites and are driven by a rise in probability of receiving benefits among those with a
high school degree and high school dropouts. As a result, the effect on household income
– our measure of income available from all sources – is lower than the effect on annual
earnings. However, the insurance provided is imperfect, and we find effects on poverty
lasting up to six years among all groups except those with at least some college or more.
    We also find that adverse initial labor market conditions raise the receipt of Medicaid
for all groups with exception of those with at least some college or more. Again, the ef-
fects are particularly strong for nonwhites, and high school dropouts. For those with a high
school degree, a rise in the probability of receiving Medicaid appears to buffer a temporary,
employment-related loss in private health insurance coverage. Only those with some college
experience a temporary reduction in private health insurance coverage that leads to a net de-
cline in any health insurance receipt, but the effect is short lived. College graduates do not
experience a reduction in health insurance coverage.
    These findings extend the literature on persistent effects of temporary labor market con-
ditions along several dimensions. The foregoing literature, especially on U.S. youth, con-
centrated mainly on college graduates. Although there are some findings based on broader
samples, this is the first study to comprehensively address and compare differences in the
persistent effect of initial labor market conditions for labor market entrants in the United
States.
    Our results also provide useful information regarding the importance and effect of the
social insurance system in buffering cyclical employment effects. Most of the focus in this
area is on mature workers, and in particular what sources of income are available for the
long-term unemployed (e.g., Rothstein and Valletta (2017)). But little is known about how


                                              4
the social insurance system helps labor market entrants weather weak economic conditions.
Young workers are typically not covered by unemployment insurance and are usually single,
which excludes them from typical welfare programs, such as Temporary Aid for Needy
Family.
    Beyond our substantive contributions to this literature, our paper provides a novel method-
ological approach with two key advantages that will be helpful to researchers studying this
phenomenon who seek to go beyond smaller longitudinal data sets that may not have suffi-
cient precision for this type of analysis. First, our approach allows bias from selection and
measurement error due to endogenous migration and education decisions. Second, it allows
for the harnessing of much larger cross-sectional data sets as long as information on state of
birth is used. The approach constructs the relevant unemployment rate for each birth cohort
and state-of-birth cell on which our main analysis is based by properly weighting and ag-
gregating current state unemployment rates using average state migration rates and average
cohort education rates.
    Finally, our results provide a useful practical contribution to the literature by analyzing
persistent effects of the local environment during youth and early adulthood. These effects,
among others, have received recent attention in studies of intergenerational transmission of
income and the role of neighborhood effects based on rich longitudinal data (e.g., Chetty
et al. 2016; Chetty and Hendren 2018).8 Our findings suggest that labor market mobility
may be sufficiently low and idiosyncratic that the state of residence after entry into the labor
market (or state of birth) approximates the characteristics of the initial location at the time
of entry into the labor market sufficiently well on average. These findings confirm earlier
results of Card and Krueger (1992), which find mobility adjustments do not affect results of
the earnings effects of school characteristics, as well as the evidence from Autor et al. (2014),
which shows that local trade shocks do not lead to significant migration to less affected areas.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our empirical
approach, our data, and how we assess whether the cross-sectional data can be successfully
used to estimate the long-term effect of initial conditions. Section 3 summarizes the effect
of initial unemployment rates on the socio-economic outcomes we study, including annual
earnings, hourly wages, employment, program receipt, and health insurance coverage. Sec-
tion 4 concludes.
   8
   Another related literature analyzes the effects of local economic conditions on fertility (Currie and
Schwandt (2014)).




                                                   5
2     Empirical Approach and Data

We seek to extend the existing literature that focuses on college graduates by studying the
effect of entering the labor market in a recession for more disadvantaged groups in the labor
market. To do so, we use data from repeated cross-sections in the March Current Population
Survey (CPS), the Decennial Census, and the American Community Survey. This approach
has several advantages in our context. It allows us to work with much larger samples and
hence enables us to study the responses of smaller subgroups, such as nonwhites or low-
educated workers. The data cover a longer time period thereby allowing us to analyze the
effects of entering the labor market for all graduating cohorts from 1976 to 2015. This is
the first paper to do so in the United States, and it is only possible due to the use of cross-
sectional data. In addition, information in the March CPS data allow us to analyze additional
outcomes that are particularly relevant for lower-income workers.
    Working with cross-sectional data has drawbacks as well, all of which we address di-
rectly. An important limitation is that we neither know the actual state nor the exact timing
of entry into the labor market. Moreover, both state and time of labor market entry might be
endogenous if people respond to local recessions by moving into other states or by postpon-
ing graduation. In what follows, we will start with a hypothetical ideal regression that does
not suffer from endogeneity or measurement issues. In Section 2.2, we discuss how one can
proxy for the state and year of graduation in the data given this ideal empirical model, and
which biases may arise from this specification. In Section 2.3, we develop an approach that
accounts for these biases in the Census and ACS data.

2.1   The Ideal Regression

The ideal regression would relate different outcomes such as labor income at different years
of experience to the economic conditions (eci0 ) an individual i faced at her or his labor
market entry.

                                yi,t = ↵ +   e eci0   +   e   + ✏i,t                       (1)

where e are experience fixed effects. The coefficients e represent deviations from the
typical experience profile resulting from differences in local labor market conditions. A
causal interpretation of the coefficient estimates for e requires that the economic conditions
at labor market entry are uncorrelated with other determinants of the respective outcome.
This equation can be derived from economic models relating wages and employment to

                                              6
local labor market conditions (e.g., Blanchflower and Oswald (1994)). To implement the
equation, we have to choose a level aggregation for the appropriate labor market. For our
analysis, we follow the majority of the literature and use annual state-level unemployment
rates.

2.2    Mincerian Specification

Our main analysis is based on CPS data that provide detailed individual-level information
on labor market outcomes. However, the CPS does not report the year when an individual
completed her education, nor the state where she entered the labor market. We use as a
proxy the “Mincerian” graduation year, i.e. the sum of the year of birth, plus 6, plus the
years of reported education. The state of labor market entry is proxied by the state of current
residence, which is the only state identifier reported in the CPS.
    For our baseline specification, we follow the literature (e.g., Oreopoulos et al. (2012)
(henceforth OWH)) and work with a cell-based model that aggregates the outcome at the
level of current state of residence (s), year of graduation (g), calendar year (t), and education
groups (d). Working with the cell-level data is sufficient because we do not use control
variables varying at the individual level, and it allows us to work close to our main source of
variation coming from local unemployment rates. We regress the average, cell-level outcome
on the relevant initial unemployment rate, and control for year of graduation, state, and year
fixed effects:

                       ȳs,g,t,d = ↵ +    e us,g   +   e   +   s   +   g   + ✓t + ⇡ d + ✏s,g,t                (2)

where us,g is the unemployment rate in the state of current residence s at the “Mincerian”
year of graduation g.9 e refers to years of potential experience (years since graduation) and
t to the calendar year. We additionally include education group fixed effects ⇡d . In contrast
to previous work, our analysis includes all educational groups in one specification given that
state-cohort-level variation in educational attainment could be a confounding factor. Notice
that we do not include the current state unemployment rate in our main results; therefore
  e captures the effect of graduating in a recession, given the regular subsequent evolution

of the local labor market conditions.10 To properly represent population-level relationships,
   9
      For ease of reference, in some cases we will refer to the implied year of entry as a graduation cohort (even
though in some cases individuals do not literally graduate), and to the unemployment rate in the implied year
of entry as ’graduation unemployment rate’. Similarly, if we refer to ’state’ without further clarification, the
state of current residence is intended.
   10
      The effect of the initial unemployment rate consists of its own direct effect, plus the weighted effect of


                                                           7
the cell-level observations are weighted by the corresponding cell sizes. Standard errors
are clustered at the level of graduation year by state to account for cohort-specific serial
correlation in labor market outcomes.
    Given the included fixed effects, the coefficient vector e captures deviations from the
typical experience profiles related to cohort-state-specific variation in the unemployment
rate at labor market entry that are uncorrelated with contemporaneous nation-wide shocks.
However, the specification does not account for cohort-state specific variation driven by
endogenous graduation timing and migration that might bias our estimates.
    Endogenous graduation timing. Our baseline specification treats the time of labor
market entry (proxied by years of education plus 6) as exogenous. But people might pro-
long their educational attainment in order to avoid unfavorable conditions at entry or end
their education prematurely in order to benefit from good labor market conditions. Such
endogenous timing of labor market entry attenuates our estimates towards zero if it is uni-
formly distributed among new labor market entrants. If there is selection into timing, the bias
can go either way. For example, if those with higher potential earnings are better in timing
their labor market entry, then we would tend to overstate the effects of initial labor market
conditions.11
    Endogenous migration before and after graduation. In the CPS data we proxy for
the state of graduation using the current state of residence. However, in response to a local
recession around the time of labor market entry, people might migrate into other states that
are less affected. Such directed migration would lead to an attenuation bias in our data, as the
migrants from poorly performing states would be erroneously assigned the better economic
conditions in their new state of residence. If there is selection in who tends to leave in
response to adverse economic conditions, the bias could go either way. We tested for such
selection effects with balancing regressions that use the racial or gender composition as a
dependent variable in our Web Appendix (Section IV), and found numerically small effects
(Pei et al., 2018).
    Undirected migration after graduation. People might migrate independently of lo-
cal labor market circumstances (“undirected” migration). The implied mismeasurement of
subsequent unemployment rates correlated with it (see OWH for a more detailed discussion). In comparing two
cohorts with different initial conditions, this captures the full difference in life-time earnings due to adverse
labor market entry. Results controlling for the current unemployment rate are shown in the Web Appendix,
Section XI.
   11
      We can test for the presence of endogenous timing by regressing a cohort’s share of high school and college
graduates on the unemployment rate at age 18. Selection into timing can additionally be explored by looking
at the racial or gender composition of these graduation cohorts. These results are shown in the Web Appendix
(Section III and Section IV, respectively).


                                                       8
initial labor market conditions would lead to attenuation bias, too, though it would be less
strong than in the case of endogenous migration. However, in both cases the bias worsens
over time as the share of migrants accumulates within graduation cohorts and the current
state of residence becomes an increasingly poor proxy for the state of graduation.

2.3    Double-Weighted Specification

We explore the role of these potential biases in the Decennial Census (henceforth “Census”)
and ACS data by comparing the Mincerian specification we estimate based on CPS data to
a double-weighted specification that is not affected by endogenous timing or migration. The
Census and ACS do not only report the state of residence but also individuals’ state of birth.
We use this information to construct a proxy for the graduation-year unemployment rate that
relies on individuals’ state of birth and year of birth. Because these characteristics are fixed,
they cannot be affected by labor market conditions around graduation.12
    In particular, we separately estimate average migration rates at different ages and educa-
tion shares, which are then use to construct a double-weighted average unemployment rate
for each graduation year.13 This double-weighted measure provides a proxy for the typical
exposure of a cohort to economic conditions across the United States and across different
potential graduation years that is independent of a cohort’s actual migration or graduation
timing.14
    To implement this approach, we first estimate migration shares mA      b,s as the average share
of cohorts in our sample born in state b that live in state s at ages A =16, 18, 20, 22. Note that
we only use state-specific average migration rates (i.e., state fixed effects in the underlying
regression model of individual-level migration indicators) rather than migration rates of a
specific birth cohort (state-cohort fixed effects) which could be driven by an endogenous
response to contemporaneous labor market conditions. Next, we estimate average graduation
shares eA
        b,c , indicating the share of sample cohorts born in state b in year c who graduate at age
  12
      This approach is based on synthetic cohorts (Deaton, 1985) and a further development of Currie and
Schwandt (2014), who link maternal life cycles to unemployment rates using mothers’ own state and year of
birth.
   13
      The underlying assumption is that migration rates are similar across education groups. While this is not
borne out in typical studies of migration, given low average migration rates it makes little difference in our
analysis.
   14
      To account for endogenous migration, we could simply match people to the graduation year unemployment
rate in their state of birth. However, this would imply a mismatch for those who migrated before graduation,
leading to attenuation bias. For example, in the 2000 Census, about 20% of 18-year-olds live outside their
state of birth. This attenuation is likely to be more dramatic than the one caused by random migration after
graduation because migration rates are much higher during the first two decades of people’s lives than during
the following two.


                                                      9
A =16, 18, 20, 22+. To predict graduation shares, we regress cohort-state-specific shares on
state fixed effects and country-wide cohort fixed effects. We then obtain eAb,c by adding state
and cohort fixed effects, such that, again, we take out the potentially endogenous cohort-by-
state variation. The double-weighted (DW) average graduation year unemployment rate is
then given by:15

                                                X           50
                                                            X
                                     uDW
                                      b,c   =        eA
                                                      b,c           mA
                                                                     b,s us,c+A                            (3)
                                                A           s=1

    Because we are averaging both across locations and graduation years, this adjustment
procedure reduces the amount of variation available for the estimation of our effects of inter-
est. As a consequence, coefficients based on the double-weighted unemployment rate will be
estimated less precisely. More important, however, such estimates will be free of potential
bias.
    Endogenous migration or timing in response to a local recession are not contained in
the double-weighted unemployment rate, as it is constructed using only state averages over
time and national averages across periods, but not state-period variation. Moreover, because
the cohorts are assigned their graduation state based on their state of birth—a fixed char-
acteristic— the double-weighted unemployment rate is not affected by state-cohort-specific
migration after graduation.16
    We regress earnings and income in the Census and ACS data on the double-weighted
unemployment rate using the following specification:

                          ȳ b,c,a = ↵ +       DW
                                            a ub,c   +      a   +    b   +   c   + ✓t + ✏c,b,a             (4)

   Because the double-weighted unemployment rate is predicted at the cohort level, this
approach requires collapsing the data by state and year of birth instead of state and year of
graduation. This means we restrict our sample to U.S. natives and track effects over cohorts’
age rather than experience profiles. The indices b, c, a, and t refer to the birth state, birth
  15
      For example, assume cohorts born in California have a typical outmigration to Nevada of 20% by age 18
and of 25% by age 22. Also assume that 60% get 12 years of education, while the remaining 40% getting 16
years of education. High-school and college graduates for, say, the 1980 California-born cohort would enter
the labor market in 1998 and 2002, respectively. The double-weighted average graduation-year unemployment
rate for the 1980 California-born cohort would then be: 0.8 ⇤ 0.6 ⇤ uCA                     NV
                                                                        1998 + 0.2 ⇤ 0.6 ⇤ u1998 + 0.75 ⇤ 0.4 ⇤
u2002 + 0.25 ⇤ 0.4 ⇤ u2002 .
  CA                    NV
   16
      In contrast, the actual mean unemployment rate at entry into the labor market for a given birth cohort
(c) and state of birth (b) would depend on cohort-specific mobility and graduation rates (indicated by an
asterisk), potentially leading to biases if migration responds to initial economic conditions: E(us,g |b, c) =
P ⇤A P50
             s=1 mb,s,c us,c+A .
                    ⇤A
   A eb,c



                                                         10
year, age, and calendar year; hence , , and ✓ are the coefficients on a full set of age, birth
state, birth cohort and calendar year fixed effects, respectively.
    Our main approach is to compare the results of our main specification in Equation (2)
based on the CPS and the results in Model (4) based on the Decennial Census and ACS. If
the results are similar, this indicates that migration and timing of graduation are not problems
in our sample, and we proceed with (2), a specification that can be used in the rich CPS data.
    An alternative approach is to use the double-weighted unemployment rate as an instru-
ment for the actual endogenous unemployment rate a cohort faces at graduation, proxied by
the “Mincerian” rate in Equation (2). We provide the 2SLS results from such instrumental
variable regressions, which include the full set of fixed effects contained both in Equations
(2) and (4). Since the estimates of Equation (2) are simply the “reduced form” estimates,
the 2SLS effectively rescales our main results by the regression coefficients of the first stage
regression of the “Mincerian” on the double-weighted unemployment rate.
    Figure 1 plots the Mincerian and the double-weighted graduation year unemployment
rates across our sample cohorts for four large states. Since the double-weighted rate is con-
structed at the level of birth year and birth place, there is only one double-weighted rate for
each birth cohort in a given state (thick solid red line). However, there is a large number
of different Mincerian rates for each birth cohort (blue circles), due to labor market entry
at different ages and migration across states. The thin solid black line shows the average
Mincerian rate for each cohort, weighted by the size of each graduation age x state cell. The
key difference between the average Mincerian and average the double-weighted rate is that
the latter accounts for endogenous migration and graduation timing. The fact that the two
solid lines follow each other closely suggests that the bias arising from such endogenous
responses in the simple Mincerian specification are unlikely to be very large.17

2.4      Sample Restrictions and Summary Statistics

State-level unemployment rates are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics only since
1976. Therefore we exclude individuals who graduated before 1976 when using the actual
graduation year and individuals who were born before 1960, i.e., age 16 before 1976, when
using the double-weighted unemployment rate (which is based on the unemployment rates
cohorts face at age 16 and above). The CPS data we use is from the Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (ASEC) fielded in March. Our last year of data is 2016. We confine
the CPS analysis to individuals between ages 16 and 40. In addition, we limit the analysis
  17
       Corresponding numbers are shown in the Web Appendix, Section II.


                                                    11
to individuals with no more than 15 years of potential experience (when using the actual
graduation unemployment rate) or are no older than age 33 (when using the double-weighted
unemployment rate). The sample for the double-weighted specification is further restricted
to individuals born in the United States.18 ,19
    Table 1 presents summary statistics for our main sample and lists the variables we an-
alyze. In addition to studying the effect of entering the labor market in a recession on log
annual earnings, we also examine the effect of an unlucky start on a range of other factors
related to employment, income, and the social insurance system. In particular, we study
the effects on wages and weeks worked, as well as the receipt of support from programs
such as SNAP, unemployment insurance, and welfare, as well as the use of Medicaid and
receipt of health insurance more generally. To assess the incidence of initial labor market
shocks on resources available to individuals, we also study the effects on household income,
a more comprehensive measure that should reflect both labor earnings as well as income
received from social insurance programs and spousal earnings. These outcomes are of par-
ticular relevance for less-advantaged workers and might provide mediating factors for the
effects on other outcomes analyzed in the recent literature such as mortality (e.g., Schwandt
and Von Wachter (2018)).
    The upper part of Table 1 shows expected differences in earnings, hourly wages, house-
hold income, and labor supply across groups. These differences help to underscore that
nonwhites and lower-educated workers in particular have a substantially different average
career outlook than college graduates on whom the existing literature has focused.20 The
bottom part of Table 1 confirms that these less-advantaged groups also benefit in particular
  18
      For a more detailed description of sample construction, see the Web Appendix (Section I). The main CPS-
based results include foreign-born individuals, as these are part of the US labor market. Excluding the foreign
born has no bearing on our findings (see the Web Appendix, Section V).
   19
      Given the CPS does not contain information on timing of entry into the labor market, we infer the year of
entry into the labor market with the year in which the potential experience of an individual is equal to zero.
This leaves some ambiguity in particular for young individuals without a high school degree, who might be still
attending school and have not actually entered full-time into the labor market. This should not be a problem for
our main estimates, since they measure the differential effect on earnings and employment from the baseline
development with potential experience. Since individuals that are still in school should not be affected, our
main findings for the group of high school dropouts are likely to be based on individuals that have already
entered the labor market. To assess directly whether there may be a contribution from students holding summer
jobs, whose earnings presumably could be affected by the concurrent unemployment rate, we confirmed that
our findings are similar when we exclude from the analysis children without a high school degree that had less
than 13 weeks of employment (Web Appendix, Section IX).
   20
      It is worth noting that compared to earnings, the level of household income for high school dropouts is
inflated because some of these individuals are still living at home and household income likely refers to parental
income. Again, this should not be a problem for our main estimates, since they measure the differential effect
on earnings and employment from the baseline development with potential experience.


                                                       12
from social insurance programs such as SNAP or Medicaid. As has been documented else-
where, there have been ongoing differential trends in labor market outcomes, especially by
education groups. We control for those trends directly when we present separate estimates
by education group. Although we do not control for group-specific trends in our main spec-
ification, there is no evidence that these secular, nationwide trends strongly correlate with
cyclical fluctuations in local labor market conditions at graduation.


3     The Effect of Entering the Labor Market in a Recession on Socio-
      economic Outcomes

3.1     The Effect on Earnings for the Full Sample: Baseline Estimates and Sensitivity

3.1.1    Baseline Estimates

Figure 2 shows the effects of the initial unemployment rate on log annual earnings in the
first 15 years in the labor market. The figure displays the coefficients e on the interaction of
dummies for potential experience with the unemployment obtained from estimating Equation
2 for the entire sample of labor market entrants. The point estimates with standard errors for
five experience groups are shown in Table 2. The results clearly show, as expected, that
earnings at labor market entry fall when the local unemployment rate rises. The effects are
substantial: for a three-point rise in the unemployment rate—roughly the typical increase
from peak to trough of the business cycle—the point estimates in Table 2 suggest an initial
reduction of earnings by approximately 11%. This effect only slowly declines with time
spent in the labor market. The reduction is still significantly different from zero 10 years
after graduation (a reduction of 2.6% for a three-point rise in initial unemployment rates),
but then fades to zero as shown in Figure 2.
     These estimates confirm previous findings mostly based on college graduates and for
more narrow time periods. Our results tend to be somewhat larger than previous studies.
While the estimates are difficult to compare because of differences in cohorts and time peri-
ods included, the study by OWH is most comparable because it also includes a broad number
of cohorts covering multiple recessions. Focusing on college graduates, OWH find an initial
earnings loss of approximately 6% for a three-point rise in the local unemployment rate that
fades over time. For U.S. college graduates during the severe 1980s recession, Kahn (2010)
finds somewhat larger estimates. According to our estimates, a one-point rise in the initial
unemployment rate reduces cumulated earnings by approximately 20% of average annual


                                              13
earnings in the sample (summing the coefficients in Table 2 and scaling for the number of
experience years they represent). Hence, a recession—roughly corresponding to a three-
point rise in the unemployment rates—would lead to a reduction of cumulated earnings by
approximately 60% of average annual earnings, a substantial effect. Relative to total earn-
ings in the first ten years of the labor market, the effect is approximately 6%.21 The fact that
our findings tend to be somewhat larger is likely due to the fact that we include in our anal-
ysis more vulnerable groups than are typically studied, something we return to in Section
3.3. Before turning to that, we first use our double-weighted unemployment rate measure to
show that these effects are not due to the fact that we are using cross-sectional data.
    It is worth noting that our estimates on the effect of initial unemployment rates on annual
earnings are likely to be underestimates of the actual total effect. This is because as further
discussed below we find that the overall rate of employment declines temporarily due to a
high initial unemployment rate. This leads to two sources of under-estimation of the true loss
in earnings due to initial labor market conditions. Our estimates exclude workers that have
zero earnings and hence do not count the losses deriving from longer spells of nonemploy-
ment. In addition, given we find that negative employment effects tend to be strongest for
lower-educated individuals, a model of monotone selectivity into employment based on, say,
underlying skill would suggest that the resulting sample selection bias is positive. In other
words, individuals with the lowest earnings potential are less likely to work as a result due to
the initial shocks, biasing the result towards zero. We have assessed the potential effect for
our estimates based on log annual earnings by imputing a low earnings amount, confirming
that our estimates likely understate the true loss by a moderate but non-negligible amount
(see Web Appendix, Section VII).

3.1.2   Correcting for Interstate Mobility and Endogenous Labor Market Entry

In Section 2.3 we describe the biases that can arise from interstate migration and graduation
timing and how they can be corrected using the Decennial Census and ACS data. Figure
3 shows how these corrections affect our baseline estimates. The red triangles show the
CPS estimates for annual earnings as in Figure 2. The blue squares show that the baseline
specification results in very similar estimates in the Census/ACS data.
    For the third set of estimates in Figure 3, the solid black line without markers, we use
respondents’ state of birth instead of state of residence as a proxy for the state of gradua-
  21
    These numbers are upper bounds because the fact that experience profiles are increasing implies that
percentage losses earlier in a career receive a lower weight in an appropriately weighted total.



                                                  14
tion. As explained above, this specification is not affected by any endogenous or random
migration after graduation, but there is likely attenuation due to migration before gradua-
tion. The resulting estimates are attenuated by about 20% in the first years after graduation
in comparison with the baseline specification, as one would expect given a pre-graduation
migration rate of about 20%. The difference between estimates fades at higher experience
years, as accumulative migration after graduation attenuates the baseline estimates but not
those based on the state of birth.
     Finally, the hollow green markers show estimates based on the double-weighted unem-
ployment rate, which corrects for migration (both before and after graduation) as well as for
endogenous labor market entry. The effect profile is shown over age instead of experience,
as the double-weighted unemployment rate is constructed at the level of year and state of
birth. The adjusted effects seem a bit more noisy, likely due to the adjustment-induced re-
duction in the amount of identifying variation. But despite the loss in precision, effects are
very similar to the baseline specification in the first years of age / experience plotted in the
figure. And in line with a slight attenuation of the baseline specification due to accumulative
random migration after graduation, the adjusted effects are somewhat stronger in later years.
Overall, these results suggest that in our baseline specification, any bias due to endogenous
timing of labor market entry and interstate migration is very limited. This conclusion is in
line with the close correspondence of the Mincerian and the double-weighted unemployment
rate shown in Figure 1.
     Figure 4 shows results from an instrumental variables (IV) specification that uses the
double-weighted unemployment rate as an instrument for the endogenous “Mincerian” rate.
The red triangles, blue squares, and hollow green markers repeat the two baseline specifi-
cations and the double-weighted specification from the previous figure, respectively. Note
that the double-weighted specification represents the reduced form in the IV setting. The
first stage regression of the “Mincerian” on the double-weighted unemployment rate is 0.7
with a t-statistic of 24. The thick solid black line in Figure 4 shows the IV estimate and it
is very similar to the other specifications. Our main takeaway is that these different specifi-
cations can be used interchangeably given the limited role of endogenous graduation timing
and interstate migration. With this in mind, we return to the CPS analysis that is based on
the “Mincerian” specification.




                                              15
3.2     The Effect on Other Outcomes for the Full Sample

3.2.1    Effects on Weeks Worked and Wages

The CPS data allow us to decompose the earnings effect into an effect stemming from a
reduction in the number of annual weeks worked, a reduction in usual hours worked per
week, and a reduction in hourly wages (calculated by dividing total annual earnings last year
by approximate total annual hours in the survey week, a common procedure). The results,
shown in Figure 5, indicate some interesting patterns. First, exposure to high unemployment
rates at labor market entry leads to a precisely estimated persistent reduction in hourly wages
lasting all 15 experience years included in the analysis. While the effect after 10 years in
the labor market is small, clearly an unlucky initial start depresses earnings even for those
individuals obtaining a job. Given that these estimates are based on a potentially positively
selected group of individuals who found jobs, they may understate the true reduction in
earnings capacity for unlucky entrants. Second, we find non-negligible effects on weeks
worked that are concentrated in the first five years after labor market entry. Finally, we find
a smaller but surprisingly persistent reduction in usual hours worked. An examination of the
point estimates shown in Table 2 show that about two-thirds of the effect on annual earnings
we find in the first three years is driven by a reduction in total hours worked (weeks worked
times usual hours). This drops to 50% in experience years 4 to 5. In contrast, two-thirds of
the longer-term effect of adverse initial labor market entry on annual earnings is driven by a
reduction in hourly wages.
    It is worth noting that these findings are based on using the log of weeks worked last year
as an outcome, and hence do not count the loss in labor supply arising because of nonem-
ployment spells lasting the entire survey year. We have separately analyzed the incidence of
zero employment in the survey year (i.e., zero weeks worked). For added context, we also
compared it to the incidence of employment, unemployment, and rate of being out of the
labor force during the survey week. The results, shown in the Web Appendix (Section VI),
confirm that entering the labor market when local unemployment rates are high depresses
employment for about 5 to 6 years, including a rise in the incidence of longer-term nonem-
ployment spells.22
  22
     Interestingly, for all of our most of these longer spells appear to be related to exits from the labor force
rather than unemployment. This is not surprising given self-reported unemployment is often associated with
receipt of unemployment insurance benefits, for which many unlucky young labor market participants do not
yet qualify because of a lack of earnings history.




                                                      16
3.2.2   Effects on Social Welfare and Total Income

Figure 2 shows the effect of a high initial unemployment rates on the log of family income.
There is a clearly visible negative and persistent effect of initial labor market conditions that
is precisely estimated even ten years into the labor market. However, the impact is smaller
than for annual earnings, especially in the first years after labor market entry. A cumulation
of the coefficients in Table 2 implies that the lifetime effect of a three-point rise in the initial
unemployment rate is roughly 30%, about half the effect of earnings discussed in Section
3.1.1.
    Transfers from the social insurance system, such as SNAP or welfare payments, account
for one source of difference. We exploited the available information in Annual Social Eco-
nomic Supplement to the March CPS to directly assess the effect of initial unemployment
rates on receipt of transfer income. The results are shown in Figure 5 and Table 3. We find
a persistent increase in the probability of receiving of SNAP benefits, but no effect for other
outcomes, such as unemployment insurance, receipt of Earned Income Tax Credits, or wel-
fare receipt (not shown). This confirms that unemployment insurance in particular does little
to smooth adverse initial conditions in the labor market for young workers, partly because of
lack of eligibility and limited duration and partly because a substantial portion of the effect
goes through persistent reductions in wages.
    While the point estimates of the effect on SNAP benefits appear small, they are precisely
estimated even up to 10 years after labor market entry. Relative to the average fraction of
the sample receiving SNAP benefits, the effect is non-negligible. For a three-point rise in
unemployment rates, the initial effect is about a 1.5 percentage point rise (a 15% rise with
respect to the mean in Table 1) and the cumulated effect over ten years is approximately 3.7
points. Given that about 10% of individuals receive SNAP benefits, and 23% of Americans
report to have received benefits at some point, these are substantial effects. We also analyzed
the effect of initial unemployment rates on the amount of benefits received among SNAP
recipients (not shown). We find that in the first 4 to 5 years after entry, income from SNAP
benefits rose by a precisely estimated 2–3%. This has the potential to explain a substantial
part of the difference between labor earnings and household income shown in Figure 2.23
  23
     Given these magnitudes line up well, we did not separately analyze the potential insurance stemming from
a rise in spousal earnings.




                                                     17
3.2.3    Effects on Health Insurance

As health insurance receipt was chiefly tied to employment throughout most of the period
under study, the employment effects we find can imply a loss in private health insurance
coverage. Based on the ASEC, we can analyze receipt of private health insurance, avail-
ability of any health insurance, and receipt of Medicaid as separate outcomes. As expected,
we see in Table 3 that exposure to a high initial unemployment rate leads to a reduction in
the incidence of private health insurance. Consistent with our findings on the reduction in
employment, the effect fades after about four to five years in the labor market. In contrast,
the losses in overall access to health insurance are concentrated in the first couple of years
after labor market entry. The difference is explained by a persistent rise in the incidence of
receiving Medicaid, shown in Figure 5. As shown in Table 3, this effect is significantly dif-
ferent from zero for about 7 years after labor market entry. The point estimates are small but
have to be compared against the average of 10% in Medicaid receipt in our sample (see Ta-
ble 1). Scaling the coefficient again by 3, suggests labor market entry in recessions increases
probability of receiving Medicaid by about 12% relative to the baseline.
    We have also analyzed the effect on family outcomes, such as marital status, childbear-
ing, single parenthood, or living with parents. In contrast to other studies suggesting that
increasing unemployment rates delay household formation, we find no effect of initial un-
employment rate on marriage or childbearing. However, results shown in the Web Appendix
(Section VIII) suggest there is an increase in the incidence of individuals living with their
parents. This rise only lasts for four to five years after entry, suggesting that individuals move
into a place of their own once they have found stable employment.24

3.3     The Effect on Earnings, Employment, and Wages by Education, Race, and Gen-
        der

Figure 7 and Table 2 show the effects of initial unemployment rates on annual earnings and
family income by gender and by whites versus nonwhites. The results for men and women
are qualitatively quite similar, with the exception of the effects in the first years after labor
market entry. Initially, men experience both larger losses in earnings and in family income.
Turning to race, the losses in annual earnings for nonwhites are substantially larger than for
whites, especially in the first five years in the labor market. As shown in Figure 9, this dif-
ference is mainly driven by greater employment losses for nonwhites. In contrast, the effect
  24
     While these results are precisely estimated for the full sample, there was no sufficient precision to replicate
it by demographic or education groups.


                                                        18
on household income is quite comparable, suggesting that social insurance mechanisms help
to buffer the bigger effects for nonwhites, something which we turn to below.
    Considering Figure 9, it is remarkable how, despite some differences in the initial effect,
all considered groups experienced persistent losses in hourly wages. In contrast, the tem-
porary losses in employment (as measured by weeks worked last year) are somewhat more
disparate across groups. In particular, men appear to experience a more persistent reduction
in employment, and nonwhites experience the largest losses. Yet, after five years in the labor
market, these effects have completely faded.
    Figure 8 shows that there are substantial differences in the effect of adverse initial con-
ditions by education groups. Middle educated workers—those with high school or some
college—experience patterns comparable to that for the full sample shown in Figure 2. In
contrast, college graduates show markedly smaller and shorter-lived effects on annual earn-
ings. The size of the effect is about half of that of the full sample and more similar in
magnitude to effects found for college graduates in Canada by OWH: they are somewhat
smaller than findings by Kahn (2010) for college graduates entering during the severe 1982
recession. The largest effects we find are the initial losses in annual earnings experienced
by high school dropouts. These average a 5% reduction over the first three years and then
converge in a similar fashion as the effect for those with a high school degree. The results
are substantial losses in cumulated earnings for this group. Not surprisingly, government
transfers play a particularly important role in delivering a more muted impact on income for
high school dropouts, something we return to below.
    As shown in Figure 10 to an important degree, the differences in earnings losses re-
sult from differences in employment losses. high school dropouts experience substantial
employment reductions, whereas college graduates essentially experience no significant em-
ployment reduction. In contrast, again all groups experience reductions in hourly wages
lasting at least 10 years into the career. As shown in Table 5, even for workers with at least
a college degree or with some college, the reduction is statistically significantly different
from zero 10 years after labor market entry. Interestingly, while reduced weekly hours is
a phenomenon relevant for all demographic and education groups, there is little noticeable
variance in the effect of adverse initial labor market conditions.




                                              19
3.4     The Effect on Other Outcomes by Education, Race, and Gender

3.4.1    Welfare Effects by Demographic Groups

Figure 11 shows the impact of initial unemployment rates on our two key variables intended
to capture the role of the social insurance system—receipt of SNAP and Medicaid—by de-
mographic groups. Women have a slightly higher rate of initial receipt of SNAP, and this
may contribute to their lower income losses, but the difference is relatively small. However,
we see a large difference in the propensity to receive SNAP benefits by race groups. In the
first five years, nonwhites have an increased probability of receiving SNAP benefits of one
percentage point (Table 3). At a mean receipt of 18% in our population, that 3-point rise in
unemployment rates leads to a 15% increase relative to the mean. For whites, the effect is 0.4
and 0.3 points in years 1–3 and 2–5 respectively. For a 3-point recession, this implies approx-
imately an 11% effect relative to the mean (8%). Interestingly, for all demographic groups,
conditional on receiving SNAP benefits, the increase in the amount is relatively similar (not
shown).
     We also assessed the effect on other potential sources of transfer income. Although we
did not find precisely estimated effects for either men or both race groups, we found a non-
negligible rise in the amount of unemployment insurance income received for women.
     Overall, despite the increased probability of receiving SNAP benefits and its effect on
income, entering the labor market during slack labor markets has a significant effect on
poverty rates. Figure 13 shows that poverty rates rose persistently for the first 5 years after
labor market entry—and in some cases even up to nine years after—for all demographic
groups, an effect that was largest for blacks. The effects are non-negligible: relative to the
mean poverty rates for the different demographic groups in our age ranges shown in Table 1,
the effects are in the range of 10–15%.
     Figure 11 also shows the rise in the incidence of receipt of Medicaid by demographic
groups. There are little discernible differences by gender, with relatively short-lived effects.
The same is true for whites. In contrast, for nonwhites, the figure and table show precisely
estimated larger increases lasting 10 years into the labor market. A 3-point rise in the initial
unemployment rate is predicted to trigger a rise of approximately 1.5 points initially (an
effect of about 10% relative to the mean, see Table 1) and a rise of approximately one point
thereafter.
     The Medicaid results relate to the coverage by health insurance more generally. Table 3
shows that there is a steep loss in private health insurance concentrated in the first 2 years in


                                               20
the labor market for whites and both genders (with men suffering slightly larger losses) and
in the first 4 years for nonwhites. Due to the increased probability of receiving Medicaid, the
effect on having any health insurance shown in the Web Appendix (Section X) is substan-
tially muted for women and nonwhites and reduced for men and whites as a whole. Hence,
it appears Medicaid is successful at providing a partial buffer against the temporary loss in
employer-provided health insurance.

3.4.2   Welfare Effects by Four Education Groups

Figure 12 and Table 1 show the effect of initial unemployment rates on receipt of SNAP
benefits and Medicaid by education groups. The results are quite clear. Labor market en-
trants with some college or more do not appear to experience an increase in the receipt of
these social insurance programs due to adverse initial labor market conditions. Labor market
entrants with 12 years of education experience a precisely estimated but moderate increase
in the probability of obtaining these programs lasting up to 7 years after labor market en-
try. In contrast, high school dropouts experience substantial increases in the probability of
receiving SNAP that, albeit declining somewhat over time, lasts up to 15 years into the labor
market. This suggests that the effects for broader groups discussed so far are mainly driven
by responses for lower-skilled workers. The amounts received are higher initially and then
decline somewhat for college dropouts, but the changes with experience are not precisely
estimated (see the Web Appendix, Section X).
    When considering unemployment insurance benefit receipt, we found relatively impre-
cisely estimated effects for high school dropouts in the first couple of years after labor market
entry, but no effects for any of the other groups.
    Taken together, the results on SNAP benefits and household income suggest that social
insurance mechanisms do buffer the effect of adverse conditions at initial labor market entry.
However, the insurance is imperfect. As shown in Figure 14, poverty rates rise persistently
for both high school graduates and high school dropouts. Given typical poverty rates in our
sample of a bit over 20% (Table 1), the estimates imply a rise in poverty rates of approx-
imately 15% relative to the average poverty rate during a moderate recession. It would be
25% in a larger downturn with a five point rise in unemployment rates, such as the Great
Recession.
    Figure 12 and Table 1 also show the effect on Medicaid. Again, as expected, there is
no increase in the probability of receiving Medicaid by labor market entrants with some
college or more. In contrast, less-educated labor market entrants see a persistent increase in


                                               21
Medicaid receipt following an adverse labor market entry. Relative to mean Medicaid receipt
for the lowest education group (20.5%, Table 1), the effect is approximately 5–10%.
    Again, these pattern are connected to health insurance availability more generally (re-
sults shown in the Web Appendix, Section X). Interestingly, temporary losses in employer-
provided health insurance are concentrated among high school graduates and those entrants
with some college; in contrast, neither high school dropouts nor college graduates experience
a reduction. As a result, high school graduates can partly rely on Medicaid to help buffer
the temporary loss of employer-provided health insurance, whereas those with some college
cannot.
    Overall, it appears that persistent increases in the receipt of SNAP benefits and Medicaid
help those young labor market entrants that are most affected by adverse initial labor market
conditions—nonwhites and high school dropouts, and to some degree high school graduates.
The buffer appears most successful for access to any health insurance, which appears to de-
cline only in the immediate years after graduation when employment losses are most severe.
In contrast, the rise in transfer payments cannot prevent a temporary but long-lasting rise
in poverty, which reflects the large and persistent earnings losses that these less-advantaged
groups experience upon graduating during recessions.


4   Conclusion

Economists and policy makers alike have long been concerned about whether young work-
ers entering the labor market during a recession suffer permanent consequences from their
initial bad luck. While this question has been studied extensively for male college gradu-
ates, less advantaged workers such as lower-educated workers, nonwhites, and women have
received less attention. To be able to study the long-term effects for these smaller groups,
we have introduced a new approach to deal with selective migration and labor market entry
that exploits information on place of birth available in the Decennial Census and the Amer-
ican Community Survey. This approach allowed us to exploit cross-sectional data from the
Current Population Survey, which spans over 4 decades, to study the effect of adverse initial
conditions for multiple groups of workers. Our data did not only allow us to study workers
that are at higher risk of lasting adverse consequences. The data also allowed us to analyze
whether the adverse effects on earnings are buffered by the social insurance system for these
less-advantaged workers.
    We confirm that all labor market entrants experience persistent reduction in earnings, em-
ployment, and wages from entering the labor market in a recession that last at least 10 years.

                                             22
We show these effects are substantially larger for less-advantaged workers, in particular high
school dropouts and nonwhites, but also for high school graduates. The losses in earnings
we find are partly offset by increases in the receipt of SNAP benefits for the least advantaged
groups, reducing the impact on the reduction in household income. Nevertheless, our results
imply that entering the labor market leads to persistent increases in poverty.
    Overall, these findings help to complete the picture of persistent consequences of cycli-
cal conditions for young workers. It becomes increasingly apparent that adverse early labor
market conditions affect all groups in the population and influence many aspects of individ-
ual workers’ socio-economic outcomes. These findings highlight several important and as of
yet open questions. We know relatively little so far as to the sources of the persistent reduc-
tion in employment and wages that we and others document. An important source of wage
losses for college graduates appears to be a reduction in employer quality (Oreopoulos et al.,
2012). This is consistent with the fact that employment fluctuations are more pronounced at
higher paying employers (e.g, Kahn and McEntarfer, 2014), leading to cyclical downgrading
of labor (e.g., McLaughlin and Bils, 2001). Similar forces are likely to be present for lower-
skilled labor, who are at the bottom of the job ladder. Another important question concerns
the longer-term consequences of adverse initial labor market conditions. Gibbons and Wald-
man (2006), for example, hypothesize that worse occupational outcomes and human capital
accumulation makes these workers more vulnerable to future economic shocks. In contrast,
findings by Schmieder and Von Wachter (2010) suggest that below-average wages as a re-
sults of adverse initial conditions may reduce the chance of future layoff. Vulnerability or
resilience may also be present in long-term health outcomes. The study of these and other
questions must be postponed until data with additional information in career outcomes and
longer time ranges are available.




                                              23
References

Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer, “Cashier or consultant? Entry
  labor market conditions, field of study, and career success,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  2016, 34 (S1), S361–S401.

Autor, David H, David Dorn, Gordon H Hanson, Jae Song et al., “Trade adjustment:
  Worker-level evidence,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1799–1860.

Blanchflower, David G. and Andrew J. Oswald, “Estimating a Wage Curve for Britain
  1973-1990,” Economic Journal, 1994, 104 (426), 1025–1043.

Card, David and Alan B Krueger, “Does school quality matter? Returns to education and
  the characteristics of public schools in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy,
  1992, 100 (1), 1–40.

Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren, “The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational
 mobility I: Childhood exposure effects,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133
 (3), 1107–1162.

  , , and Lawrence F Katz, “The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods on children:
  New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experiment,” The American Economic
  Review, 2016, 106 (4), 855–902.

Currie, Janet and Hannes Schwandt, “Short-and long-term effects of unemployment on
 fertility,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2014, 111 (41), 14734–14739.

Cutler, David M, Wei Huang, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “When does education matter?
 The protective effect of education for cohorts graduating in bad times,” Social Science &
 Medicine, 2015, 127, 63–73.

Deaton, Angus, “Panel data from time series of cross-sections,” Journal of Econometrics,
  1985, 30 (1-2), 109–126.

Elsby, Michael WL, Donggyun Shin, and Gary Solon, “Wage adjustment in the Great Re-
  cession and other downturns: Evidence from the United States and Great Britain,” Journal
  of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (S1), S249–S291.




                                            24
Gardecki, Rosella and David Neumark, “Order from chaos? The effects of early labor
 market experiences on adult labor market outcomes,” Industrial and Labor Relations Re-
 view, 1998, 51 (2), 299–322.

Gibbons, Robert and Michael Waldman, “Enriching a theory of wage and promotion dy-
  namics inside firms,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2006, 24 (1), 59–107.

Giuliano, Paola and Antonio Spilimbergo, “Growing up in a Recession,” The Review of
  Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 787–817.

Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas L. Miller, and Jessamyn Schaller, “Who suffers during reces-
 sions?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (3), 27–48.

Kahn, Lisa B, “The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college in a
 bad economy,” Labour Economics, 2010, 17 (2), 303–316.

   and Erika McEntarfer, “Employment cyclicality and firm quality,” 2014. NBER Work-
  ing Paper 20698, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Maclean, Johanna Catherine, “The health effects of leaving school in a bad economy,”
 Journal of Health Economics, 2013, 32 (5), 951–964.

McLaughlin, Kenneth J and Mark Bils, “Interindustry mobility and the cyclical upgrading
 of labor,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2001, 19 (1), 94–135.

Murphy, Kevin M and Finis Welch, “Empirical age-earnings profiles,” Journal of Labor
 economics, 1990, 8 (2), 202–229.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Till Von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz, “The short-and long-term ca-
 reer effects of graduating in a recession,” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics, 2012, 4 (1), 1–29.

Oyer, Paul, “Initial labor market conditions and long-term outcomes for economists,” The
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (3), 143–160.

  , “The making of an investment banker: Stock market shocks, career choice, and lifetime
  income,” The Journal of Finance, 2008, 63 (6), 2601–2628.

Pei, Zhuan, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Hannes Schwandt, “Poorly measured confounders
  are more useful on the left than on the right,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
  2018, 0 (0), 1–12.

                                            25
Rothstein, Jesse and Robert G Valletta, “Scraping by: Income and program participation
  after the loss of extended unemployment benefits,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Man-
  agement, 2017, 36 (4), 880–908.

Schmieder, Johannes F and Till Von Wachter, “Does wage persistence matter for em-
  ployment fluctuations? Evidence from displaced workers,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (3), 1–21.

Schwandt, Hannes and Till Von Wachter, “Mortality Profiles of Unlucky Cohorts: Effects
  of Entering the Labor Market in a Recession on Longevity,” 2018. Working paper, UCLA.

Speer, Jamin D., “Wages, hours, and the school-to-work transition: The consequences of
  leaving school in a recession for less-educated men,” The BE Journal of Economic Analy-
  sis & Policy, 2016, 16 (1), 97–124.

Sullivan, Daniel and Till Von Wachter, “Job displacement and mortality: An analysis using
  administrative data,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1265–1306.

Topel, Robert H and Michael P Ward, “Job mobility and the careers of young men,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (2), 439–479.

Wachter, Till Von, “Job displacements in recessions: An overview of long-term conse-
 quences and policy options,” in “Reconnecting to Work: Policies to Mitigate Long-Term
 Unemployment and Its Consequences,” ed. L.D. Appelbaum. Kalamazoo: W.E. Upjohn
 Institute for Employment Research, 2012.

   and Stefan Bender, “In the right place at the wrong time: The role of firms and luck in
  young workers’ careers,” The American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1679–1705.




                                           26
Figure 1: Mincerian and Double-Weighted graduation year unemployment rates across
four states




      Notes: The Mincerian graduation year unemployment rate (blue circles) refers
      to the unemployment rate in the current state of residence at the “Mincerian”
      year of graduation (the sum of the year of birth, plus 6, plus the years of re-
      ported education). The double-weighted graduation year unemployment rate
      (red line) refers to the average unemployment rate across cohorts’ typical grad-
      uation ages and across the states to which cohorts typically migrate before
      graduation. See sections 2.2 and 2.3 for further details. There is only one
      double-weighted unemployment rate for each birth cohort, but several Min-
      cerian rates given different graduation times and migration to different states.
      Rates above 13 and below 3 are omitted in order to preserve a transparent scale.




                                            27
Figure 2: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Log Annual
Earnings and Household Income for Full Sample
    Effect on log earnings/income
                                    0
                                    −.01
                                    −.02
                                    −.03
                                    −.04




                                           1   3         5      7      9      11              13    15
                                                         Years since Graduation
                                                   Annual Earnings        Annual Household Income


                         Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                         data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                                     28
Figure 3: Adjusting for Migration and Graduation Timing in Decennial Census and
American Community Survey Data
                             .02
      Effect on log earnings
    −.04    −.02      0




                           1 [19]               5 [23]         9 [27]        13 [31]
                                                Years since Graduation [Age]
                                    CPS, Mincerian (baseline)           Census, Mincerian
                                    Census, using state of birth        Census, Double−Weighted [by age]


              Notes: The CPS baseline results are based on the ASEC Supplement to CPS
              from 1976 to 2016. The Census results are based on the 1980/1990/2000 De-
              cennial Censuses and the ACS from 2001 to 2015. The Mincerian graduation
              year unemployment rate refers to the unemployment rate in the current state of
              residence at the “Mincerian” year of graduation (the sum of the year of birth,
              plus 6, plus the years of reported education). The double-weighted graduation
              year unemployment rate refers to the average unemployment rate across co-
              horts’ typical graduation ages and across the states to which cohorts typically
              migrate before graduation. See sections 2.2 and 2.3 for further details.




                                                                   29
Figure 4: Using the Double-Weighted Average Graduation Year Unemployment Rate
as Instrumental Variable for State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry
                               .02
        Effect on log earnings
    −.06 −.04 −.02        0




                             1 [19]              5 [23]         9 [27]        13 [31]
                                                 Years since Graduation [Age]
                                      CPS, Mincerian (baseline)        Census, Mincerian
                                      Census, Double−Weighted          Double−Weighted as IV for baseline


              Notes: The CPS baseline results are based on the ASEC Supplement to CPS
              from 1976 to 2016. The Census results are based on the 1980/1990/2000 Cen-
              suses and the ACS from 2001 to 2015. The Mincerian graduation year unem-
              ployment rate refers to the unemployment rate in the current state of residence
              at the “Mincerian” year of graduation (the sum of the year of birth, plus 6, plus
              the years of reported education). The double-weighted graduation year unem-
              ployment rate refers to the average unemployment rate across cohorts’ typical
              graduation ages and across the states to which cohorts typically migrate before
              graduation. See sections 2.2 and 2.3 for further details.




                                                                  30
Figure 5: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Employment
and Wages
                            0
    Effect on log outcome
                            −.005
                            −.01
                            −.015
                            −.02




                                    1   3       5      7      9      11            13    15
                                                Years since Graduation
                                            Hourly Earnings        Usual Hours Worked
                                            Weeks Employed


                   Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                   data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                              31
Figure 6: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on SNAP Benefits
and Medicaid for Full Sample
                                           .006
    Effect on fraction receiving welfare
                                           .004
                                           .002
                                           0
                                           −.004 −.002




                                                         1   3   5      7      9      11        13   15
                                                                 Years since Graduation
                                                                   Medicaid        Foodstamps


                              Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                              data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                                              32
          Figure 7: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Earnings and
          Income by Demographic Groups


                                                              Male                                                    Female
Effect on log income
                       −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                      −.06−.04−.02 0 .02
                                            1      3 5 7 9 11 13 15                                        1   3  5     7   9 11 13 15
                                                   Years since Graduation                                      Years since Graduation

                                                            White                                                    Non−white
 −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                      −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                 1               3  5     7   9 11 13 15                                   1   3  5     7   9 11 13 15
                                                 Years since Graduation                                        Years since Graduation

                                                           Annual Earnings            Annual Household Income

                                                Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                                                data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                                                    33
          Figure 8: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on on Earnings
          and Income by Education Groups


                                                       <12 years of schooling                                       12 years of schooling
Effect on log income
                       .02




                                                                                         .02
                       −.06 −.04 −.02 0




                                                                                         −.06 −.04 −.02 0
                                          1        3       5       7   9     11 13 15                       1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                                       Years since Graduation                                       Years since Graduation


                                                   13−15 years of schooling                                         16+ years of schooling
 .02




                                                                                         .02
 −.06 −.04 −.02 0




                                                                                         −.06 −.04 −.02 0




                               1               3       5       7       9    11 13 15                        1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                                   Years since Graduation                                           Years since Graduation


                                                                           Earnings      Household Income

                                              Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                                              data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                                                        34
          Figure 9: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Employment
          and Wages by Demographic Group
Effect on log outcome




                                                           Male                                                 Female
                        −.03−.02−.01 0




                                                                                   −.03−.02−.01 0
                                         1      3 5 7 9 11 13 15                                    1   3  5     7   9 11 13 15
                                                Years since Graduation                                  Years since Graduation

                                                         White                                                 Non−white
 −.03−.02−.01 0




                                                                                   −.03−.02−.01 0




                               1              3  5     7   9 11 13 15                               1   3  5     7   9 11 13 15
                                              Years since Graduation                                    Years since Graduation

                                                          Hourly Earnings                           Usual Hours Worked
                                                          Weeks Employed

                                             Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                                             data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                                                 35
          Figure 10: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Employment
          and Wages by Education Groups
Effect on log outcome




                                                 <12 years of schooling                              12 years of schooling
                        .02




                                                                                 .02
                        0




                                                                                 0
                        −.04 −.02




                                                                                 −.04 −.02
                                    1        3       5       7   9   11 13 15                1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                                 Years since Graduation                              Years since Graduation


                                             13−15 years of schooling                                16+ years of schooling
 .02




                                                                                 .02
 0




                                                                                 0
 −.04 −.02




                                                                                 −.04 −.02




                             1           3       5       7       9   11 13 15                1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                              Years since Graduation                                 Years since Graduation


                                                         Hourly Earnings                     Usual Hours Worked
                                                         Weeks Employed

                                        Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                                        data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                                                36
           Figure 11: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on SNAP Ben-
           efits and Medicaid by Demographic Groups


                                                              Male                                                        Female
Effect on welfare
                       −.005 0 .005.01.015




                                                                                      −.005 0 .005.01.015
                                             1     3 5 7 9 11 13 15                                         1   3  5     7   9 11 13 15
                                                   Years since Graduation                                       Years since Graduation

                                                             White                                                       Non−white
 −.005 0 .005.01.015




                                                                                      −.005 0 .005.01.015




                                 1                3  5     7   9 11 13 15                                   1   3  5     7   9 11 13 15
                                                  Years since Graduation                                        Years since Graduation

                                                                       Medicaid                             Foodstamps

                                                 Notes: Results are based on the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                                                    37
        Figure 12: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on SNAP Ben-
        efits and Medicaid by Education Groups


                                        <12 years of schooling                         12 years of schooling
Effect on welfare
                    .02




                                                                        .02
                    .01




                                                                        .01
                    0




                                                                        0
                    −.01




                                                                        −.01
                           1        3       5       7   9   11 13 15           1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                        Years since Graduation                         Years since Graduation


                                    13−15 years of schooling                           16+ years of schooling
 .02




                                                                        .02
 .01




                                                                        .01
 0




                                                                        0
 −.01




                                                                        −.01




                      1         3       5       7       9   11 13 15           1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                    Years since Graduation                             Years since Graduation


                                                            Medicaid           Foodstamps

                               Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                               data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                                       38
Figure 13: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Incidence of
Poverty by Demographic Groups
                              .01
    Effect on fraction poor
                              .005
                              0
                              −.005




                                      1   3   5      7      9      11           13        15
                                              Years since Graduation
                                                  Male             Female
                                                  White            Non−white


                    Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                    data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                          39
Figure 14: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Incidence of
Poverty by Demographic Groups
                              .015
    Effect on fraction poor
                              .01
                              .005
                              0
                              −.005




                                      1   3   5        7          9        11      13     15
                                                  Years since Graduation
                                              Less than 12                 Equal to 12
                                              Between 13 and 15            Over 15


                    Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (equation 2), using
                    data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016.




                                                           40
Table 1: Sample Statistics for Cohorts of Workers Entering the Labor Market from 1976 to 2015 with One to 15 Years of Potential Labor Market
Experience
                                                     Full            Men      Women          White        Non-        Less than                       16 or
                                                    Sample                                                White       12 Years 12 Years     13-15
                                                                                                                                                      More
                                                                                                                         of        of      Years of
                                                                                                                                                     Years of
                                                                                                                      Schooling Schooling Schooling Schooling

Average Annual Earnings Last Year                   $ 18,343     $ 22,125     $ 14,492      $ 19,115     $ 15,349     $ 4,143         $ 13,999     $ 17,065     $ 34,750
Aveerage Hourly Earnings Last Year                  $       13   $       14   $        12   $       13   $       13   $           8   $       10   $       12   $       20
Average Household Income Last Year                  $ 57,415     $ 59,481     $ 55,311      $ 59,764     $ 48,313     $ 46,995        $ 46,951     $ 56,744     $ 77,701
Average Weeks Worked Last Year                          34.54        37.21        31.81         35.73        29.90        16.93           35.32        37.50        42.91
Average Usual Weekly Hours in Survey Week               37.91        40.01        35.51         38.01        37.48        30.45           38.27        37.27        41.17
Employed in Survey Week                              0.69          0.73         0.65          0.71         0.60         0.38            0.70         0.73         0.85
Fraction Receiving SNAP (Food Stamps)                0.10          0.08         0.12          0.08         0.18         0.20            0.13         0.07         0.02
Average Value SNAP Benefits                        $ 2,306       $ 2,209      $ 2,369       $ 2,135      $ 2,581      $ 2,591         $ 2,200      $ 2,098      $ 1,783
Fraction with Any Health Insurance                      0.75         0.72         0.79          0.77         0.71         0.68            0.67         0.76         0.88
Fraction with Private Insurance                         0.67         0.67         0.67          0.70         0.56         0.49            0.56         0.70         0.87
Fraction Receiving Medicaid                             0.10         0.07         0.13          0.08         0.17         0.21            0.12         0.08         0.02
Notes: Data from ASEC Supplement Current Population Survey. Potential labor market experience is defined as age minus years of completed schooling
minus 6. Year of labor market entry is the implied calendar year after the year of completion of highest level of schooling starting from age 6. All dollar
values are deflated by the CPI with base year 2000. See text for further details.




                                                                                  41
Table 2: Effects of State Unemployment Rates at Labor Market Entry on Earnings,
Income, Wages, and Employment for Cohorts Entering in 1976 to 2015 for the Full
sample, by Gender, and by Race
              Experience
Variable                 Full Sample          Men          Women          White       Non-White
                Group
Log Annual         1-3         -0.0380        -0.0428       -0.0324       -0.0375       -0.0436
Earnings                      (0.0023)       (0.0031)      (0.0029)      (0.0024)      (0.0060)
                   4-5         -0.0250        -0.0263       -0.0223       -0.0230       -0.0401
                              (0.0024)       (0.0028)      (0.0033)      (0.0025)      (0.0057)
                   6-7         -0.0117        -0.0118       -0.0101       -0.0126       -0.0105
                              (0.0023)       (0.0030)      (0.0031)      (0.0025)      (0.0056)
                  8-10         -0.0090        -0.0094       -0.0084       -0.0105       -0.0087
                              (0.0022)       (0.0026)      (0.0032)      (0.0022)      (0.0057)
Log                1-3         -0.0178        -0.0211       -0.0144       -0.0176       -0.0171
Household                     (0.0017)       (0.0020)      (0.0021)      (0.0018)      (0.0034)
Income             4-5         -0.0118        -0.0116       -0.0115       -0.0124       -0.0128
                              (0.0017)       (0.0022)      (0.0022)      (0.0018)      (0.0044)
                   6-7         -0.0076        -0.0078       -0.0070       -0.0078       -0.0110
                              (0.0017)       (0.0022)      (0.0021)      (0.0017)      (0.0044)
                  8-10         -0.0044        -0.0037       -0.0045       -0.0049       -0.0084
                              (0.0017)       (0.0020)      (0.0023)      (0.0016)      (0.0045)
Log Hourly         1-3         -0.0139        -0.0154       -0.0125       -0.0149       -0.0138
Wages                         (0.0013)       (0.0018)      (0.0017)      (0.0014)      (0.0033)
                   4-5         -0.0127        -0.0143       -0.0101       -0.0123       -0.0177
                              (0.0015)       (0.0020)      (0.0020)      (0.0016)      (0.0038)
                   6-7         -0.0074        -0.0075       -0.0067       -0.0083       -0.0058
                              (0.0014)       (0.0019)      (0.0017)      (0.0015)      (0.0036)
                  8-10         -0.0060        -0.0063       -0.0065       -0.0070       -0.0050
                              (0.0013)       (0.0017)      (0.0019)      (0.0014)      (0.0036)
Log Weeks          1-3         -0.0150        -0.0174       -0.0113       -0.0129       -0.0230
Worked                        (0.0014)       (0.0018)      (0.0020)      (0.0014)      (0.0038)
                   4-5         -0.0063        -0.0067       -0.0055       -0.0050       -0.0147
                              (0.0013)       (0.0016)      (0.0020)      (0.0013)      (0.0034)
                   6-7         -0.0017        -0.0026       -0.0003       -0.0012       -0.0035
                              (0.0013)       (0.0016)      (0.0019)      (0.0013)      (0.0032)
                  8-10         -0.0008        -0.0008       -0.0004       -0.0008       -0.0029
                              (0.0012)       (0.0014)      (0.0018)      (0.0012)      (0.0030)

Notes: Data from ASEC Supplement Current Population Survey. Regressions control for fixed
effects for potential labor market experience, calendar year, year of graduation, state of current
residence, and three education groups.


                                                42
Table 3: Effects of State Unemployment Rates at Labor Market Entry on Receipt of Food
Stamps, Health Insurance, and Poverty for Cohorts Entering in 1976 to 2015 for the Full
sample, by Gender, and by Race
               Experience
Variable                  Full Sample         Men          Women          White       Non-White
                 Group
Incidence of       1-3         0.0053         0.0050        0.0055        0.0038        0.0111
Receipt of                    (0.0005)       (0.0006)      (0.0007)      (0.0005)      (0.0016)
SNAP/Food          4-5         0.0038         0.0026        0.0049        0.0027        0.0093
Stamps                        (0.0006)       (0.0007)      (0.0008)      (0.0006)      (0.0017)
                   6-7         0.0022         0.0022        0.0020        0.0017        0.0062
                              (0.0006)       (0.0008)      (0.0008)      (0.0006)      (0.0016)
                  8-10         0.0011         0.0003        0.0015        0.0006        0.0056
                              (0.0006)       (0.0007)      (0.0008)      (0.0005)      (0.0017)
Incidence of       1-3         0.0056         0.0065        0.0048        0.0046        0.0096
Poverty                       (0.0006)       (0.0007)      (0.0008)      (0.0006)      (0.0014)
                   4-5         0.0033         0.0031        0.0032        0.0029        0.0062
                              (0.0007)       (0.0009)      (0.0009)      (0.0007)      (0.0018)
                   6-7         0.0013         0.0012        0.0011        0.0015        0.0023
                              (0.0006)       (0.0008)      (0.0009)      (0.0006)      (0.0018)
                  8-10         0.0014         0.0011        0.0013        0.0012        0.0047
                              (0.0006)       (0.0007)      (0.0008)      (0.0006)      (0.0016)
Incidence of       1-3         0.0041         0.0037        0.0044        0.0036        0.0054
Medicaid                      (0.0006)       (0.0006)      (0.0007)      (0.0006)      (0.0015)
Receipt            4-5         0.0012         0.0016        0.0005        0.0009        0.0030
                              (0.0007)       (0.0008)      (0.0009)      (0.0007)      (0.0018)
                   6-7         0.0014         0.0006        0.0018        0.0014        0.0027
                              (0.0007)       (0.0007)      (0.0009)      (0.0007)      (0.0017)
                  8-10         0.0009         -0.0002       0.0015        0.0008        0.0035
                              (0.0006)       (0.0006)      (0.0009)      (0.0006)      (0.0017)
Incidence of       1-3         -0.0085        -0.0096       -0.0074       -0.0079       -0.0102
Receipt of                    (0.0009)       (0.0012)      (0.0012)      (0.0010)      (0.0019)
Private            4-5         -0.0019        -0.0016       -0.0023       -0.0019       -0.0046
Health                        (0.0012)       (0.0016)      (0.0014)      (0.0012)      (0.0025)
Insurance          6-7         -0.0008        -0.0016       0.0000        -0.0011       -0.0021
                              (0.0010)       (0.0014)      (0.0012)      (0.0011)      (0.0020)
                  8-10         0.0006         0.0005        0.0007        0.0002        -0.0011
                              (0.0009)       (0.0012)      (0.0012)      (0.0009)      (0.0019)

Notes: Data from ASEC Supplement Current Population Survey. Regressions control for fixed
effects for potential labor market experience, calendar year, year of graduation, state of current
residence, and three education groups.


                                                43
Table 4: Effects of State Unemployment Rates at Labor Market Entry on Earnings,
Income, Wages, and Employment for Cohorts Entering in 1976 to 2015 by Education
Groups

                                      Less than              13-15 Years 16 or More
              Experience                         12 Years of
Variable                 Full Sample 12 Years of                 of        Years of
                Group                             Schooling
                                      Schooling               Schooling   Schooling
Log Annual         1-3         -0.0380        -0.0494       -0.0362       -0.0314       -0.0182
Earnings                      (0.0023)       (0.0056)      (0.0035)      (0.0037)      (0.0038)
                   4-5         -0.0250        -0.0259       -0.0265       -0.0284       -0.0140
                              (0.0024)       (0.0094)      (0.0036)      (0.0044)      (0.0037)
                   6-7         -0.0117        -0.0178       -0.0169       -0.0102       -0.0028
                              (0.0023)       (0.0092)      (0.0039)      (0.0038)      (0.0033)
                  8-10         -0.0090        -0.0121       -0.0107       -0.0110       -0.0061
                              (0.0022)       (0.0074)      (0.0035)      (0.0037)      (0.0032)

Log                1-3         -0.0178        -0.0256       -0.0205       -0.0124       -0.0028
Household                     (0.0017)       (0.0030)      (0.0030)      (0.0029)      (0.0031)
Income             4-5         -0.0118        -0.0148       -0.0133       -0.0125       -0.0117
                              (0.0017)       (0.0052)      (0.0029)      (0.0031)      (0.0025)
                   6-7         -0.0076        -0.0075       -0.0111       -0.0067       -0.0094
                              (0.0017)       (0.0060)      (0.0029)      (0.0030)      (0.0027)
                  8-10         -0.0044        0.0018        -0.0060       -0.0024       -0.0108
                              (0.0017)       (0.0051)      (0.0027)      (0.0028)      (0.0029)
Log Hourly         1-3         -0.0139        -0.0122       -0.0165       -0.0156       -0.0094
Wages                         (0.0013)       (0.0037)      (0.0020)      (0.0021)      (0.0025)
                   4-5         -0.0127        -0.0069       -0.0150       -0.0138       -0.0126
                              (0.0015)       (0.0051)      (0.0023)      (0.0023)      (0.0025)
                   6-7         -0.0074        -0.0053       -0.0113       -0.0076       -0.0046
                              (0.0014)       (0.0050)      (0.0026)      (0.0026)      (0.0023)
                  8-10         -0.0060        -0.0023       -0.0090       -0.0047       -0.0056
                              (0.0013)       (0.0043)      (0.0022)      (0.0024)      (0.0021)
Log Weeks          1-3         -0.0150        -0.0282       -0.0112       -0.0063       -0.0024
Worked                        (0.0014)       (0.0040)      (0.0020)      (0.0020)      (0.0017)
                   4-5         -0.0063        -0.0135       -0.0060       -0.0072       0.0009
                              (0.0013)       (0.0062)      (0.0020)      (0.0027)      (0.0014)
                   6-7         -0.0017        -0.0100       -0.0031       -0.0004       0.0017
                              (0.0013)       (0.0062)      (0.0018)      (0.0019)      (0.0014)
                  8-10         -0.0008        -0.0075       -0.0006       -0.0017       -0.0001
                              (0.0012)       (0.0048)      (0.0018)      (0.0018)      (0.0013)

Notes: Data from ASEC Supplement Current Population Survey. Regressions control for fixed
effects for potential labor market experience, calendar year, year of graduation, state of current
residence, and three education groups.


                                                44
Table 5: Effects of State Unemployment Rates at Labor Market Entry on Receipt of Food
Stamps, Health Insurance, and Poverty for Cohorts Entering in 1976 to 2015 by
Education Groups
                                       Less than              13-15 Years 16 or More
               Experience                         12 Years of
Variable                  Full Sample 12 Years of                 of       Years of
                 Group                             Schooling
                                       Schooling               Schooling Schooling
Incidence of       1-3         0.0053         0.0109        0.0052        0.0009        0.0003
Receipt of                    (0.0005)       (0.0012)      (0.0009)      (0.0008)      (0.0004)
SNAP/Food          4-5         0.0038         0.0106        0.0039        0.0038        0.0007
Stamps                        (0.0006)       (0.0022)      (0.0011)      (0.0013)      (0.0005)
                   6-7         0.0022         0.0125        0.0024        0.0008        -0.0003
                              (0.0006)       (0.0026)      (0.0011)      (0.0010)      (0.0004)
                  8-10         0.0011         0.0065        0.0010        0.0002        -0.0001
                              (0.0006)       (0.0024)      (0.0011)      (0.0009)      (0.0004)
Incidence of       1-3         0.0056         0.0088        0.0078        0.0014        -0.0001
Poverty                       (0.0006)       (0.0012)      (0.0011)      (0.0011)      (0.0009)
                   4-5         0.0033         0.0081        0.0047        0.0026        0.0007
                              (0.0007)       (0.0024)      (0.0012)      (0.0012)      (0.0008)
                   6-7         0.0013         0.0048        0.0033        0.0001        0.0003
                              (0.0006)       (0.0027)      (0.0012)      (0.0011)      (0.0007)
                  8-10         0.0014         0.0036        0.0028        0.0006        0.0010
                              (0.0006)       (0.0023)      (0.0010)      (0.0010)      (0.0007)
Incidence of       1-3         0.0041         0.0062        0.0045        0.0008        0.0003
Medicaid                      (0.0006)       (0.0013)      (0.0011)      (0.0009)      (0.0005)
Receipt            4-5         0.0012         0.0046        0.0027       -0.0010        0.0003
                              (0.0007)       (0.0021)      (0.0013)      (0.0011)      (0.0006)
                   6-7         0.0014         0.0099        0.0012        -0.0001       0.0002
                              (0.0007)       (0.0024)      (0.0012)      (0.0012)      (0.0006)
                  8-10         0.0009         0.0072        0.0018        -0.0005       0.0005
                              (0.0006)       (0.0022)      (0.0011)      (0.0009)      (0.0005)
Incidence of       1-3         -0.0085        -0.0098       -0.0135       -0.0067       0.0001
Receipt of                    (0.0009)       (0.0018)      (0.0018)      (0.0017)      (0.0016)
Private            4-5         -0.0019        0.0015        -0.0060       -0.0022       -0.0022
Health                        (0.0012)       (0.0030)      (0.0020)      (0.0022)      (0.0015)
Insurance          6-7         -0.0008        -0.0038       -0.0032       0.0009        -0.0007
                              (0.0010)       (0.0029)      (0.0018)      (0.0019)      (0.0014)
                  8-10         0.0006         0.0012        -0.0016       0.0020        -0.0011
                              (0.0009)       (0.0024)      (0.0015)      (0.0016)      (0.0013)

Notes: Data from ASEC Supplement Current Population Survey. Regressions control for fixed
effects for potential labor market experience, calendar year, year of graduation, state of current
residence, and three education groups.


                                                45
                        Web Appendix

Unlucky Cohorts: Estimating the Long-Term Effects of Entering the
 Labor Market in a Recession in Large Cross-Sectional Data Sets

                        Hannes Schwandt
            Northwestern University, SIEPR, and CEPR

                         Till von Wachter
                University of California Los Angeles
                             and NBER




                                 46
                          Table of Contents
I.     Sample Construction
II.    Relation Between Double Weighted and Actual Unemployment Rate
III.   Effect of Initial Unemployment Rate on Educational Attainment
IV.    Balancing Figures: Effect of Initial Unemployment Rate on Sample Composition
V.     Main Results Only Including on U.S. Born Individuals
VI.    Effect of Initial Unemployment Rate on the Extensive Margin: Employment,
       Unemployment, and Not In the Labor Force
VII.   Treatment of Zero Earnings When Calculating Log Earnings Losses
VIII. Effect of Initial Unemployment Rate Incidence of “Living at Home”
IX.    Treatment of Low Labor Force Attachment for Individuals Possibly Enrolled in
       Secondary School
X.     Effect of Initial Unemployment Rate on Additional Outcomes
XI.    Main Results Controlling for the Local Unemployment Rate




                                       47
I)     Sample Construction

Current Population Survey. The sample for the analysis based on the Current Population
Survey was constructed as follows. We took the ASEC (March) supplements to the CPS for
the years from 1976 to 2016. We kept individuals ages 19 to 33. We calculated a comparable
measure of years of education in all years using standard conversion of degrees into years of
schooling starting in 1994. We calculate four broad education groups in standard fashion:
less than high school (years of education smaller than 12); with a high school (years of
education equal to 12); some college (years of education between 13 and 15); college or
more (years of education equal to 16 or more).
We then calculate potential experience as described in the text (age minus years of education
minus six) and further constrain potential experience to be between 1 and 15. The year of
labor market entry is defined as year of birth plus years of education plus six. To have a
minimal amount of observations for each cohort, we keep individuals graduating from 1976
to 2015, and analyze earnings occurring in calendar years 1979 to 2016. We drop individuals
with invalid observations on education. In our sensitivity analysis, we further drop the
foreign born, but they are included in the main results.
The hourly wage is calculated combining reported annual earnings in the previous calendar
year with an estimate of total annual hours worked last year. Annual hours worked last year
are estimated by multiplying reported total number of weeks worked in the last calendar year
with the reported usual hours worked in the survey week. We drop observations with missing
information on either annual earnings, annual weeks worked, or hours worked last week. For
our analysis of benefits, we only include those observations that are non-missing for that
particular benefit.

Decennial Census and American Community Survey (ACS). We replicate the sample
restrictions from the CPS analysis in the Decennial Census and the ACS as closely as
possible, using the 5% samples of the Census years 1980, 1990, and 2000, and the ACS years
2001 to 2015. The Census years 1980 and 1990 are weighted by a factor 10 relative to the
years 2000-2015, to account for the fact that the decennial Census years without adjacent
ACS data represent an entire decade of labor market experience. Weighting the 1980 and
1990 years the same as the years 2000-2015 leads to greater deviations from the CPS sample
in terms of summary statistics. However, the overall pattern of estimated effects is not
impacted by the choice of relative weights (see Appendix Figure 1 and Appendix Table 1 on
the next page).

We keep individuals ages 19 to 33 who graduated between 1976 and 2015. For the Mincerian
baseline regressions we include native and foreign-born individuals. For specifications that
define graduation cohorts based on individuals’ state of birth, such as the double-weighted
specification, we restrict the sample to U.S.-born individuals. Potential experience is
calculated the same way as in the CPS data (see above). Income refers to respondents’ total
pre-tax wage and salary income for the previous year.




                                           48
Appendix Figure 1: Comparison of baseline estimates using different weights for Census
      years 1980 and 1990, relative to the 2000 Census and the 2001-2015 ACS




                                         49
II)   Relation Between Double Weighted and Actual Unemployment Rate




                                50
  III)   Balancing Figures: Effect of Initial Unemployment Rate on Sample
         Composition

Appendix Figure 2: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on a Race
       Dummy (Taking the Value of 1 if the Individual is Black) for Full Sample




Appendix Figure 3: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on a Race
      Dummy (Taking the Value of 1 if the Individual is White) for Full Sample




                                        51
Appendix Figure 4: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on a
 Gender Dummy (Taking the Value of 1 if the Individual is Male) for Full Sample




Appendix Figure 5: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
      Educational Attainment (Log Years of Education) for Full Sample




                                      52
IV)   Effect of Initial Unemployment Rate on Educational Attainment




                                 53
 V)    Main Results Only Including on U.S. Born Individuals

Appendix Figure 6: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Log
              Annual Earnings for Cohorts Born in the US after 1991




  Appendix Figure 7: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
          Employment and Wages for Cohorts Born in the US after 1991




                                       54
Appendix Figure 8: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on SNAP
                 and Medicaid for Cohorts Born in the US after 1991




   Appendix Figure 9: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
   Earnings and Income by Education Group for Cohorts Born in the US after 1991




                                        55
VI)   Effect of Initial Unemployment on the Extensive Margin:
      Employment, Unemployment, and Not In the Labor Force (NILF)
Appendix Figure 10: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
                                   Employment
                                         .01
          Effect on Employment
                                         .005
                                         0
                                         −.015 −.01 −.005




                                                            1                3            5      7      9      11                                                                      13    15
                                                                                          Years since Graduation
                                                                                    Employed          Not in Labor Force
                                                                                    Unemployed        Zero Weeks Worked Last Year




Appendix Figure 11: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
                 Employment Status by Broad Education Class
        Effect on Employment




                                                                    <12 years of schooling                                                                        12 years of schooling
                               −.02−.01 0 .01 .02




                                                                                                           −.02−.01 0 .01 .02




                                                        1       3       5       7     9   11 13 15                                         1              3        5       7       9   11 13 15
                                                                    Years since Graduation                                                                    Years since Graduation
                                                                                                          Effect on Employment




                                                                13−15 years of schooling                                                                          16+ years of schooling
         −.02−.01 0 .01 .02




                                                                                                                                 −.02−.01 0 .01 .02




                                         1                  3       5       7        9    11 13 15                                                    1       3        5       7   9    11 13 15
                                                                 Years since Graduation                                                                           Years since Graduation


                                                                            Employed             Not in Labor Force
                                                                            Unemployed           Zero Weeks Worked Last Year




                                                                                                     56
Appendix Figure 12: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
                  Employment Status by Demographic Group



        Effect on Employment




                                                                                      Effect on Employment
                                                               Male                                                                         Female



                               −.02−.01 0 .01 .02




                                                                                                             −.02−.01 0 .01 .02
                                                    1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15                                                          1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15
                                                        Years since Graduation                                                        Years since Graduation
        Effect on Employment




                                                                                      Effect on Employment
                                                               White                                                                       Non−white
                               −.02−.01 0 .01 .02




                                                                                                             −.02−.01 0 .01 .02
                                                    1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15                                                          1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15
                                                        Years since Graduation                                                        Years since Graduation

                                                             Employed        Not in Labor Force
                                                             Unemployed      Zero Weeks Worked Last Year




                                                                                 57
   VII) Treatment of Zero Earnings When Calculating Log Earnings Losses

  Appendix Figure 13: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
Annual Earnings for Full Sample; Nonemployed Individuals Included with Small Earnings
                                        Level
                                            .02
            Effect on log Annual Earnings
                                            0
                                            −.02
                                            −.04
                                            −.06




                                                   1   3         5      7      9      11               13    15
                                                                 Years since Graduation
                                                           Annual Earnings        Annual Adjusted Earnings


   Appendix Figure 14: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
   Annual Earnings by Education Class; Nonemployed Individuals Added with Small




                                                                             58
                                                                                        Earnings Level

Effect on Log Outcome                                          <12 years of schooling                                               12 years of schooling
                          −.08−.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                                   −.08−.06−.04−.02 0 .02
                                                   1       3       5       7   9   11 13 15                                 1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                                               Years since Graduation                                               Years since Graduation


                                                           13−15 years of schooling                                                 16+ years of schooling
 −.08−.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                                   −.08−.06−.04−.02 0 .02

                                      1                3       5       7       9   11 13 15                                 1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                                           Years since Graduation                                                   Years since Graduation


                                                                       Annual Earnings             Adjusted Annual Earnings




                                                                                              59
 Appendix Figure 15: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
Annual Earnings by Demographic Group; Nonemployed Individuals Added with Small
                                   Earnings Level
       Effect on log Earnings




                                                                                       Effect on log Earnings
                                                                Male                                                                           Female
                                −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                                                −.06−.04−.02 0 .02
                                                     1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15                                                            1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15
                                                         Years since Graduation                                                          Years since Graduation
       Effect on log Earnings




                                                                                       Effect on log Earnings
                                                                White                                                                         Non−white
                                −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                                                −.06−.04−.02 0 .02
                                                     1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15                                                            1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15
                                                         Years since Graduation                                                          Years since Graduation

                                                              Annual Earnings          Adjusted Annual Earnings




                                                                                  60
VIII) Effect of Initial Unemployment Rate on Incidence of “Living at
      Home”

Appendix Figure 16: Effect of State Unemployment Rate on Fraction of Individuals
                    Recorded as Child in Household in CPS
                                   .008
        Effect on Living at Home
                                   .006
                                   .004
                                   .002
                                   0
                                   −.002




                                           1   3   5      7      9      11   13   15
                                                   Years since Graduation




                                                        61
   IX)   Treatment of Low Labor Force Attachments for Individuals Possibly
         Enrolled in Secondary School

   Appendix Figure 17: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
Annual Earnings; Excluding Earnings of Individuals with less than 13 Weeks Worked Last
    Year That Could Arise from Summer Jobs of Youth Still Enrolled in High School
                                          0
          Effect on log Annual Earnings
                                          −.01
                                          −.02
                                          −.03
                                          −.04




                                                 1   3         5      7      9      11              13     15
                                                               Years since Graduation
                                                         Annual Earnings        Censored Annual Earnings




                                                                           62
  Appendix Figure 18: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
Annual Earnings by Education Class; Excluding Earnings of Individuals with less than 13
Weeks Worked Last Year That Could Arise from Summer Jobs of High School Students
        Effect on log Outcome                                    <12 years of schooling                                             12 years of schooling
                                −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                                       −.06−.04−.02 0 .02
                                                     1       3       5       7   9     11 13 15                             1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                                                 Years since Graduation                                             Years since Graduation


                                                             13−15 years of schooling                                               16+ years of schooling
         −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                                       −.06−.04−.02 0 .02


                                          1              3       5       7       9     11 13 15                             1   3    5     7     9   11 13 15
                                                             Years since Graduation                                                 Years since Graduation


                                                                                     Earnings          Censored Earnings




                                                                                                  63
  Appendix Figure 19: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on
 Annual Earnings by Demographic Group; Excluding Earnings of Individuals with less
than 13 Weeks Worked Last Year That Could Arise from Summer Jobs of High School
                                       Students
       Effect on log Earnings




                                                                                       Effect on log Earnings
                                                                Male                                                                           Female
                                −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                                                −.06−.04−.02 0 .02
                                                     1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15                                                            1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15
                                                         Years since Graduation                                                          Years since Graduation
       Effect on log Earnings




                                                                                       Effect on log Earnings
                                                                White                                                                         Non−white
                                −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                                                                                −.06−.04−.02 0 .02




                                                     1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15                                                            1   3 5 7 9 11 13 15
                                                         Years since Graduation                                                          Years since Graduation

                                                              Annual Earnings          Adjusted Annual Earnings




                                                                                  64
X)   Effect of Initial Unemployment Rate on Additional Outcomes




                                65
66
XI)   Main Results Controlling for the Local Unemployment Rate




                                 67
68
