                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE ROLE OF PARENTAL WEALTH AND INCOME IN FINANCING CHILDREN'S
               COLLEGE ATTENDANCE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

                                        V. Joseph Hotz
                                      Emily E. Wiemers
                                      Joshua Rasmussen
                                     Kate Maxwell Koegel

                                      Working Paper 25144
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25144


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2018




This research and the Roster and Transfers Module in the 2013 Wave of the PSID were funded by
grant P01AG029409 from the National Institute on Aging. We thank Joe Altonji, Breno Braga,
Rajashri Chakrabarti, Jim Heckman, Arnaud Maurel, Adam Kapor, Lance Lochner, participants
in seminars at Brown, University of Western Ontario and UCLA, and those at 2016 Population
Association of America and Society of Labor Economists Meetings and the PSID Conference on
“New Directions in Study of Intergenerational Transfers,” the HCEO Conference on “Human
Capital Formation and Family Economics,” the New York Fed Bank Conference on “Higher
Education Financing & Costs and Returns of Higher Education,” and the 2017 Southern
Economics Association Meetings for comments on earlier drafts of this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by V. Joseph Hotz, Emily E. Wiemers, Joshua Rasmussen, and Kate Maxwell Koegel.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Parental Wealth and Income in Financing Children's College Attendance and
Its Consequences
V. Joseph Hotz, Emily E. Wiemers, Joshua Rasmussen, and Kate Maxwell Koegel
NBER Working Paper No. 25144
October 2018
JEL No. I21,I22,I23

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper examines the influence of parental wealth and income on children's college attendance
and parental financing decisions, graduation, and quality of college attended, and whether
parental financing affects the subsequent indebtedness of parents and children. We find that
higher levels of parents' wealth and income increase the likelihood that children attend college
with financial support relative to not attending college, and that parental wealth increases the
likelihood that children graduate from college. We show descriptive evidence that parental
support for college increases the subsequent level of housing debt that parents hold but does not
reduce student debt for children.

V. Joseph Hotz                                  Joshua Rasmussen
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Box 90097                                       Department of Economics
Duke University                                 Durham, NC 27708
Durham, NC 27708-0097                           United States
and NBER                                        joshua.rasmussen@duke.edu
hotz@econ.duke.edu
                                                Kate Maxwell Koegel
Emily E. Wiemers                                213 Social Sciences Building
Department of Economics                         419 Chapel Drive, Box 90097
100 Morrissey Blvd                              Durham, NC 27708-0097
Boston, MA 02125                                kate.maxwell@duke.edu
emily.wiemers@umb.edu
1     Introduction

    Parents have long been a primary source of financial support for their children’s post-
secondary education with some estimates suggesting that parents cover over 30% of college
costs.1 In this paper we analyze the role that parental resources play in whether children at-
tend college and whether parents provide financial support, the quality and cost of the college
they attend, and whether they graduate, and the implications of college financing decisions for
subsequent levels of parental and student debt. The dramatic increases in the costs of a college
education in the U.S over the past 30 years2 have challenged the ability of parents and children
to finance a college degree and decisions about college financing may have long-run impacts on
the financial circumstances of both parents and children.

    Previous research has focused on the impact of parental resources on their children’s college
attendance. Earlier work found little evidence that parental income had an independent effect
on the likelihood of young adults attending college, especially after accounting for children’s
ability and academic preparation (Cameron and Heckman, 1998, 2001; Keane and Wolpin, 2001;
Cameron and Taber, 2004). But, more recent research documents that the relationship between
parental income and the college attendance decisions of children has changed over time, with
parental income more likely to be predictive of children going to college, even after controlling
for the ability and/or academic preparation of children (Belley and Lochner, 2007; Lochner and
Monge-Naranjo, 2011, 2012).

    Other studies have examined the impact of parental wealth, most notably housing wealth, on
college attendance and other outcomes for young adults (Belley and Lochner, 2007; Lovenheim,
2011; Lovenheim and Reynolds, 2013). Lovenheim (2011) finds that increases in housing wealth
during a child’s teenage years increase the probability that the child attends college and that
these effects are larger after 2000 when home equity loans became more common. Lovenheim
and Reynolds (2013) show that among children who go to college, increases in parental housing
   1
     Based on a survey of college students and their parents in 2017, parents cover 31% of the cost of their child’s
college costs, second only to costs covered by scholarships and grants (35%) (SallieMae, 2017).
   2
     Since 1987-88, published college tuition costs (tuition & fees), adjusting for inflation, have increased an
average of 8.8% per year in public 4-year institutions, 4.4% in non-profit private 4-year universities, and 4.0%
in public 2-year colleges (College Board, 2017).



                                                         1
wealth increase the likelihood of their child attending a flagship public university and that
children from low-income families are more likely to complete college. Finally, Cooper and
Luengo-Prado (2015) show that children of homeowners who live in areas where house prices
increased during a child’s teenage years are more likely to enroll in college and attend higher
ranked colleges, though they are not more likely to graduate.

       The premise underlying these papers, and the models of parents’ investment in their child-
ren’s human capital in the presence of credit constraints that motivate them, is that parents use
their resources – both income and wealth – to finance their children’s college attendance (Keane
and Wolpin, 2001; Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 2011, 2012). There also is a sizable literature
on the importance of student loans3 and grants-in-aid4 in funding college education. It is also
well-documented that the debt that students accumulate while attending college persists long
after they complete or stop attending college and affects their subsequent labor market choices
(Rothstein and Rouse, 2011) and their ability to finance housing and other activities (Mezza
et al., 2015; Cooper and Wang, 2014; Bleemer et al., 2017).

       However, much less is known about how parents’ financing of their children’s education
affects the subsequent financial situations of parents and children, especially with respect to their
respective indebtedness. Two notable exceptions are Lochner, Stinebrickner and Suleymanoglu
(2018) who show that parental financial transfers reduce student debt repayment problems
in the Canada Student Loan Program, and, Faber and Rich (forthcoming) who show that
commuting zones that experienced increases in the rate of college attendance had increases in
home foreclosures in subsequent years. Both of these papers highlight important interactions
between parental financial support for college and subsequent financial outcomes of both parents
and children.

       We address three related issues concerning parent’s investments in their children’s human
capital and the consequences of how these investments are financed. First, we examine how both
parental income and wealth, as measured by housing wealth, affect the likelihood that children
   3
     Since 2004, the share of undergraduate students who have taken federal subsidized and unsubsidized student
loans has increased from 28% in the 2004-05 academic year to 36% in 2014-15, with a decreasing share of students
only having subsidized loans (College Board, 2015).
   4
     In terms of such grants, in 2015, colleges and universities provide 41% of such aid, 37% from federal sources,
14% from employers and private sources, and 8% coming from state governments (College Board, 2015).


                                                        2
go to college and how this investment is financed. This issue is similar to that addressed in
Lovenheim (2011) and Lovenheim and Reynolds (2013), who examine the effects of housing
wealth on whether or not their child attends college and whether they attend the flagship
university in their state-of-residence. We extend this analysis to examine how both housing
wealth and parental income affect not just the attendance decision but also whether parents
help pay for their child to go to college. This extension provides an explicit analysis of the link
between parental resources and the educational decisions of children that is implied by earlier
work. And, we also extend the previous literature by analyzing the effect of both parental wealth
and income on college attendance and financing decisions which we show to be important.

    Second, we examine the effect of parental housing wealth and income on the likelihood that
children graduate from college and the cost or quality of the college children attend. It is well-
documented that while college attendance has increased in the U.S., graduation rates have not
(Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2010; Bound and Turner, 2011). And graduation rates are
quite low; among individuals who began seeking a bachelor’s degree at a 4-year institution in
the U.S. in the fall of 2009, only 59% completed that degree within 6 years (McFarland et al.,
2017). Thus, it is important to assess whether higher levels of parental wealth and income not
only increase the likelihood that children attend college but also graduate from college.5 In
addition, there is a sizable literature on differential returns aross the type of college students
attend, including 4-year versus 2-year institutions (Kane and Rouse, 1995), public versus private
colleges (Scott, Bailey and Kienzl, 2006) and, more generally across measures of college quality
including the selectivity of admissions and quality of faculty (Black and Smith, 2004, 2006;
Black, Smith and Daniel, 2005; Dillon and Smith, 2017a). Accordingly, we examine whether
parental wealth and income improves the “quality” of college that children attend.

    Third, we consider the consequences of the parental financing decision for the subsequent
debt of parents and children. As noted above, a great deal of attention has been paid to the rising
levels of student loan debt and its subsequent consequences in young adulthood, irrespective
of whether students complete a degree. But parents, too, take on debt to help finance their
   5
     We note that previous work using the PSID by Cooper and Luengo-Prado (2015) find that increases in
parental housing wealth increase the income of children as adults, has not found any effects of parental wealth
on college completion.



                                                      3
child’s college education6 – often in the form of home equity loans using their housing wealth as
collateral – and their debt also is likely to persist well after the child has completed college. While
taking on debt to finance a college education may be an efficient way of financing college costs
in the presence of well-functioning capital markets, it does expose borrowers to the repayment
risks arising from uncertain future income streams and/or unanticipated fluctuations in the
value of their collateral. In examining how parental decisions to help finance their children’s
college education affects their and their children’s later indebtedness, we ask whether parental
financial support for college reduces students’ debt even as it increases their own.

    To address these three issues, we use data from the 2013 Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) and the Roster and Transfers Module which obtained information from all parents in the
PSID on the financial help (transfers) they provided to each of their adult children for education
and on the educational attainment of each adult child (Schoeni et al., 2015). We also exploit
the data collected in the PSID on family wealth and debt, especially with respect to the value
of the family’s home and what they owe in debt on mortgages, and the debt of their children,
especially in the form of student loan debt.

    A key issue is the extent to which parental resources, either in the form of income or housing
wealth, have a causal impact on college attendance and financing decisions, or on the subsequent
financial situations of parents and their children. For example, an association between parental
housing wealth and children’s college attendance and financing may simply reflect sorting across
families with respect to unobserved parental preferences for higher education and their own
earnings capacity as well as the earlier investments in and unobserved traits (e.g., abilities) of
children. To address this issue, we construct measures of changes in local housing and labor
market conditions to use as instruments for parental housing wealth and income at various
points in their life cycles, as well as the income of their children in early adulthood. This
strategy extends previous work (Lovenheim, 2011; Lovenheim and Reynolds, 2013; Cooper and
Luengo-Prado, 2015) which uses data on local housing conditions to measure the effects of
housing wealth on college attendance decisions.7 The detailed geographic information included
   6
     Based on the 2017 survey cited in footnote 1, 27% of students’ college costs were financed by loans, with
30% taken by parents and 70% by the student.
   7
     Our approach is also in the spirit of the literature on the effects of changes in wealth and income on household
consumption. See, for example, Paiella and Pistaferri (2017), Browning, Gørtz and Leth-Petersen (2013), and


                                                         4
in the PSID makes it possible to incorporate data on local labor and housing markets to identify
plausibly exogenous changes in parental resources and examine the effect of these changes in
parental income and wealth on transfers parents make to fund their children’s college education.
At the same time, we note that obtaining causal effects of whether or not parents finance their
children’s college education on the subsequent indebtedness of both parents and children is more
challenging, even with the instrumenting strategy described above. As a result, we view the
findings we present below as suggestive – rather than definitive – of the causal links between
parental financing decisions and subsequent indebtedness.

   We find that increases in parents’ income and wealth increase the likelihood of children
attending college through the mechanism of parental transfers. But, increases in parental income
have a larger effect on college attendance than increases in parental wealth. In contrast, increases
in parental wealth increase the likelihood that children graduate from college but we find no effect
of increases in parental income on college graduation. We find evidence that the importance of
parental wealth on college graduation is explained by parent’s obtaining home equity loans when
their child starts college. We find that neither parental income or wealth affects indicators of
the type (e.g., 4-year vs. 2-year or private vs. public) or the quality of colleges children attend
though sample sizes are reduced in these specifications due to data availability. Finally, we find
suggestive evidence that parental financing of college increases parents’ subsequent indebtedness
and but little evidence that it reduces their children’s student debt.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the PSID data
and the samples and measures we use in our analyses. In Section 3, we consider the effect of
parental income and wealth in children’s college attendance and parental financing decisions.
In Section 4, we examine how parental income and wealth affects the likelihood of their child
graduating from college and the quality and type of school the child attends. Finally, in Section
5, we consider the correlation between children’s college attendance and parental financing
Carroll, Otsuka and Slacalek (2011) for analyses of the effects of changes in housing wealth on consumption.
Though we do not use changes in housing wealth and income as explanatory variables, we do use changes in
wealth and income from sources that are less likely to be endogenously determined as a way to identify the
effects of housing wealth and income on college attendance and financing decisions. Unlike the literature on
the effects of changes in wealth and income on consumption, which pays particular attention to distinguishing
between permanent and transitory changes in wealth and income, we do not attempt to explicitly disentangle
these effects in our analysis.



                                                     5
decisions and the subsequent indebtedness of parents and their children. We offer concluding
comments in Section 6.




2     The PSID Data

    The PSID began with a sample of roughly 18,000 people in approximately 5,000 household
units in 1968. All individuals in households recruited into the PSID in 1968 are said to have the
PSID gene. Individuals who are born to or adopted by someone with the PSID gene acquire the
gene themselves and are recruited to become members of the PSID sample for the rest of their
lives. This genealogical design implies that the study provides data on a sample of extended
families at each wave. The extended family in the PSID is incomplete because some children
(particularly stepchildren and children who have left the PSID sample), and some parents (for
example in-laws without the PSID gene) are not included in the sample. The 2013 Roster and
Transfers Module was designed to complete the parent-adult child information in the PSID and
to describe the transfers that parents and adult children make to one another.



2.1    The 2013 PSID Roster and Transfers Module

    We use the Roster and Transfers Module of the 2013 PSID in which respondents (PSID
heads and spouses) are asked to list and describe their adult children and stepchildren age 18
and older, as well as their parents, stepparents, and in-laws (including in-laws from long-term
cohabiting relationships) and to report about financial and time transfer to and from their
parents and adults children. Importantly for our purposes, parents report about the age and
educational attainment of their adult children and about financial transfers for school they have
given to each of their children since the age of 18. Both whether assistance was provided and
the amount of assistance is included in the module. Respondents report about relationships
and transfers with coresident and non-coresident children (see Schoeni et al. (2015) for a more
complete description of the module).




                                               6
2.2     Samples

    Our sample starts with the parents and adult children reported in the 2013 Roster and
Transfers Module. We are interested in two points in the lives of these adult children: the year
in which the child turns 18 when decisions about college are made, and the year in which the
child turns 24 when some of the consequences of financing college can be observed.

    To create our main sample, we find the year in which the child turned 18 using the birth year
in the Childbirth and Adoption History augmented by age reported in the Roster and Transfers
Module. Using the Parent ID file augmented with the relationship information in the Roster
and Transfers Module, we link each child with his or her father and mother. Because we need to
determine the parents’ housing wealth and household income at this point in the child’s life, we
restrict our sample of parent-child pairs to those in which the parents were present as a head or
wife of the PSID in the year this child was age 18.8 We also require that the year in which the
child turned 18 is after 1997 (which corresponds to children in birth cohorts beginning in 1979)
since some of the data elements we need in our analyses are only available starting in 1997.9 We
further restrict our sample to those parents who were homeowners when the child was age 18,
because of our focus on the effects of parental housing wealth on children’s college attendance
and financing decisions.10 Finally, following Lovenheim (2011) we trim the top 1% of changes in
house prices prior to the child turning 18 which removes 14 parent-child pairs. After all of these
sample selections, we have a sample of N = 2,868 parent-child pairs with which to estimate the
effect of parental wealth on college attendance and parental transfers for college.

    To examine the consequences of college attendance and financing decisions on educational
and financial outcomes, we examine the parent-child pairs in our main sample in the year in
which the child turns 24. This limits the sample to parent-child pairs in which the child turned
   8
     If the parents are not a PSID head or wife in the year in which the child turns 18 we go back one year at a
time until the child age 13 at which point we drop the child-parent pair.
   9
     The housing price measure from Zillow which we used to construct a measure for changes to local housing
markets had inadequate geographic coverage prior to this period.
  10
     This restriction reduces our sample by approximately 35%. While not included in the paper, we estimated
versions of the empirical models described below that included parents who were not homeowners at the time
their child(ren) were age 18, adjusting for the fact that we could not estimate the effects of their home equity but
could estimate the effects of their income on the college and financing decisions for their children. The resulting
estimates of the effects of parental income on these decisions when one included non-homeowning parents were
similar to those we present below based on homeowning parents.


                                                         7
18 prior to 2009.11 For the outcome of parental debt, this restriction yields a sample size of
2,580 for housing debt and 2,571 for non-housing debt that includes credit card debt, and auto
loan debt. For the outcome of college completion, we further limit the sample to children who
attended college which yields a sample size of 1,418 parent-child pairs.

       Measures of college quality and child indebtedness are only available for two subsamples of
children: (a) those who are a PSID head or wife by age 24 or (b) those who are members of their
parents’ household at age 24 but are interviewed as part of the Transition to Adulthood (TA)
study. The TA study has followed children in the PSID’s Child Development Study (CDS) as
they become adults. The TA study includes questions about which college children attended
as well as information on income and debt. Using these two sources of data, we construct a
total sample of 1,756 adult children with which to analyze their non-housing debt at age 24
and 1,196 with which to analyze student loan debt at that age. We have a smaller sample of
children to analyze student debt at age 24 because the PSID only started asking about this
source of debt separately in 2011. For the outcomes of college cost and quality, we further limit
the sample to children who attended college and whose college can be linked to the data from
the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) Integrated Postsecondary Education Data
System (IPEDS) database which yields a sample size of 856 for tuition and 854 for four-year
degree status. Public/private status of the college and our measure of college quality which we
construct from the IPEDS data are only available for children who attend a four-year college
which limits our sample to 704 for public/private college status, and 705 for college quality.

       Table 1 provides a summary of the sizes of these various samples that we use in our analysis
below. In Appendix A, we also present descriptive statistics of the demographic characteristics
of the parents and children, measured at the time the children were age 18, of the sample of the
2,866 parent-child pairs used in our analysis of college education decisions.
  11
    If the relevant data are not available for the child or parent in the year in which the child is age 24 we go
back one year at a time until the child is age 22 and forward one year at a time until the child is 27.




                                                       8
2.3       Measures

       Below we describe how we construct the various measures used in our analyses. In later
sections, we provide summary statistics.

College Attendance and Graduation: We measure college attendance and college graduation
using the Roster and Transfers data. We consider a child to have attended college if the parents
report in the Roster and Transfers data that the child has attended some college or has a
college degree. This measure is somewhat different from the previous literature (Lovenheim,
2011; Lovenheim and Reynolds, 2013; Cooper and Luengo-Prado, 2015) which uses the annual
PSID data to determine enrollment. The benefit of the measure from the Roster and Transfers
data is that is considerably easier to identify students who enroll in but do not complete college.
This is important to understanding the potential difference in effects of attending vs. graduating
from college. We measure college graduation by a parental report that the child’s highest level
of educational attainment is college graduate or more.

Financial Transfers for College: Parents are considered to have given a financial transfer to a
child for educational expenses if they report having done so in the long-term transfers question
in the Roster and Transfers Module. We eliminate the small number of cases in which parents
report that their child has educational attainment below “some college” and report having given
a transfer for post-secondary educational expenses. We measure the amount that parents report
giving to their child in 2013$.12

College Cost and Quality: We link responses from the main PSID interview or the TA study on
the college attended to measures of college cost and quality available from the National Center
for Education Statistics (NCES) Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS)
database. We obtain the annual tuition costs for a full-time student at that institution in the
  12
     We note that the decision to measure the amount of transfers in 2013$ is not straightforward. Though
parents were asked the question on amounts of transfers in 2013, it is not clear whether the reported amounts
in terms of current dollars or the dollar value(s) at the time the transfers were made. We have re-run our
specifications of regressions for the effects of parental housing wealth and income on the amount of transfers
given to support a child’s college education under either of these two assumptions about parental reporting.
While the magnitudes of the corresponding coefficients differed, none of the inferences we make below were
affected. Accordingly, we only present results under the assumption that parents reported the amounts of these
transfers in current (2013) dollars.



                                                      9
year they would have started college. In doing so we use the state of residence of the parent
at that time to determine whether children would have paid in-state or out-of-state tuition at
any public institutions.13 For college quality we use three separate measures. First, we measure
whether the institution grants 4-year degrees. Second, we use whether a child attended a private
university, where we restrict our attention to students who attend a 4-year university. Finally,
we use the college quality index used in Black and Smith (2004), Black, Smith and Daniel (2005),
Black and Smith (2006), Dillon and Smith (2017a), and Dillon and Smith (2017b).14 The index
is based on the following measures of colleges’ selectivity and resources: college’s mean SAT or
ACT scores; percent of applications rejected; average salary of faculty involved in instruction;
and the undergraduate faculty-student ratio.15 The index is the first principal component of
these four indicators of college quality measured in 2008.16

Parental Housing Wealth and Income: Over the entire span of the PSID, heads of households
or their proxy are asked whether they are a homeowner and, if they are, to provide an estimate
of the value of their home and the remaining balance, if any, on their home mortgages and/or
home equity loans. Mortgage debt includes all primary and secondary mortgages, along with
home equity loans and lines of credit on the individual’s primary residence. Then, we define an
estimate of the parents net home equity as the reported market value of their home less any
remaining mortgage balances. Parental income is measured by total family income reported in
the annual PSID family data.

Parental and Child Indebtedness: We consider several forms of indebtedness for both parents
and their children. For parents, we consider mortgage debt, the sum of all their primary and
secondary mortgages along with home equity loans, and all other non-housing debt, including
outstanding credit card and medical debt, as well as other outstanding loans. These measures
are obtained in the PSID wealth module which has been included in every survey since 1997.
For children, we examine debt in the form of outstanding student loans, as well as total other
  13
     We use in-state tuition if the parents resided in the same state as the institution in the year the child turned
18, and out-of-state tuition otherwise.
  14
     We thank Nora Dillon and Jeff Smith for providing us with the latest version of these quality indices for
4-year and 2-year colleges in the U.S.
  15
     These dimensions of quality for colleges in the U.S. are obtained from the Integrated Post-Secondary Edu-
cation Data System (IPEDS) and college rankings by U.S. News & World Report.
  16
     The particular version of college quality index we use takes on values from −9 to +9 and is constructed to
have a mean of 0 across all of 4-year colleges and universities in the U.S.


                                                         10
non-housing debt. Student loan debt is obtained from the TA survey and from the PSID wealth
module after 2011. Total non-housing debt is measured in the TA survey and in the PSID
wealth module.




3     Effects of Parental Wealth & Income on Children’s
      College Attendance and Its Financing

    In this section we examine children’s college attendance decisions and parents’ role in helping
to finance their children’s choices. In particular, we are interested in how changes in parents’
wealth and income affect these choices. We begin by defining the notation for college attendance
and parental financing thereof as well as parental income and housing wealth and discussing the
empirical distributions of parental wealth and income across college attendance and financing
decisions in our sample. We then describe our econometric strategy for estimating the causal
impact of parental wealth and income on the decision of children to attend college and the
decision of parents to help pay for it and discuss our empirical findings.


3.1     Modeling Children’s College and Parental Financing Choices

    We define the following variables to characterize the college attendance and parental finan-
cing decisions for the j th child of the ith parent when the child is age 18:

                           
                           1, if child j of parent i did not enroll in college,
                           
      EduF in0ij,18j =                                                                         (1)
                           0, otherwise.
                           




                       
                       1, if child j of parent i enrolled in college & parents didn’t help pay,
                       
    EduF in1ij,18j   =                                                                       (2)
                       0, otherwise.
                       



                                                 11
and

                         
                         1, if child j of parent i enrolled in college & parents did help pay,
                         
      EduF in2ij,18j   =                                                                    (3)
                         0, otherwise.
                         



where EduF in0ij,18j + EduF in1ij,18j + EduF in2ij,18j = 1.

   Conditional on EduF in2ij,18j = 1, we can measure the amount of financial help parent
i provided to child j in support of the child’s college attendance. Denote this amount as
CollT ransij,18j .

   Table 2 shows the distribution of EduF in. In our sample, 44% of children do not enroll in
college, 30% enroll but do not receive financial help from parents and 26% enroll in college with
a transfer from a parent. The mean amount of the transfer is $7,800.

   As noted above, we focus on how parental housing wealth and parental income influence
these decisions. To begin, we characterize the housing measures we construct from the PSID
data. Let M ktV alueimt18,j denote the parents’ estimated market value of their home (measured
in 2013 dollars) located in market m (which is in state s) in the year in which child j was age 18
(t18j ). Further, let M ortBalimt18j denote the remaining balances on parents’ home mortgages
and home equity loans as of year t18j , again in 2013$. Then, we define an estimate of the parents
(net) home equity as:


      Himt18j = M ktV alueimt18j − M ortBalimt18j .                                            (4)



   Let Yimt18j denote the parent i’s total household income in year t18j when they were residing
in local labor market m.

   In Table 3 we display how parental housing wealth, Himt18j , and annual income, Yimt18j , differ
by college attendance and parental financing decisions. The patterns of parental net equity and
income across college attendance and financing decisions are predictable. The parents of children



                                                12
who attend college without financial support have $21,200 [= $50, 200 − $29, 000] more in net
home equity and $22,300 [= $75, 100 − $52, 800] more in income when their child is age 18
compared to the parents of children who do not attend college. The parents of children who
attend college with financial support have $63,400 more in net home equity and $45,200 more
in income than those whose children attend college without parental financial help.

   To model parental-child college and financing decisions, let the utility/payoff for EduF inkij,18j
               ∗
be denoted by Ukijm,18j
                        and assume that choice k = 0 is the base category. The payoff functions
for parent i of child j made when the child is age 18 are given by:


    Ukijm,18j = λUk0 + λUk1 Himt18j + λUk2 Yimt18j + λUk3 X ij + λUk4 M mt18j + φUkt18j + δks
                                                                                           U
                                                                                              + εUkijm,18j , (5)


for k = 0, 1, 2, where the Himt18j and Yimt18j are defined above, X ij is a vector of demographic
characteristics of parents i and their j th child, M mt18j is a vector of time-varying characteristics
of location m in year t18j , φt18j and δs are year and state-of-residence fixed effects, respectively,
and εkijm,18t are choice-specific unobserved parent and child traits.

   We include in X ij a set of demographic characteristics including the age, marital status,
race, and education of the parent. Also included are a set of variables describing the family
structure of the child’s household at age 18 including whether the household is headed by a
single-female, the number of children in the household under age 16, whether there is a child
in the household who is less than five years older than child j, whether there is a child in the
household who is less than five years younger than child j, and the gender of child j. (See
Appendix A for the list of these variables and their sample means.)

   We include in M mt18j the average weekly wage and employment rate in market m in year
t18j , where the latter variables are taken from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
(QCEW). We use a share-weighting approach to make the average weekly wage more accurately
reflect the labor market teenage workers would face if they do not attend college. We use
the Current Population Survey to calculate the composition of industries that teenagers are
employed in nationally in each year and apply these weights to local industry-specific wages.
We also control for the college-wage premium for younger workers directly. Following Lovenheim


                                                      13
and Reynolds (2013) we use data from the Current Population Survey to calculate the college-
wage premium for young workers in the state, s, in which market m is located in year t18j as the
ratio of hourly wages of 25 - 40 year olds with a bachelor’s degree (BA) to the hourly wages of 25
- 40 year olds whose highest level of educational attainment is a high school diploma. We also
include the college - associate degree wage premium calculated as above but using individuals
with an associate’s degree as the comparison group. As long as high-skilled labor demand is not
highly localized, these state-level measures control for the demand for high-skilled vs. low-skilled
labor for younger workers.

   We characterize the optimal college/financing choice for child j, k † , as follows:


      ki† = arg max Ukijm,18j , k = 0, 1, 2.                                                    (6)
                 k



Assuming that the random variable, εUkijm,18j , has a Type II extreme value distribution and
assuming that we treat Himt18j and Yimt18j as exogenous to child j’s college enrollment and
parental financing decisions, it follows that the model of the college attendance and its financing
choice can be estimated as a multinomial logit model.

   As noted in the Introduction, the assumption that Himt18j and Yimt18j are exogenous is a
strong one. Accordingly, we wish to allow for the potential endogeneity of these two variables in
the estimation of the payoff functions in (5). To deal with the endogeneity of Himt18j and Yimt18j ,
we use a control function estimator (Blundell and Powell, 2003) applied to the multinomial logit
specification (Petrin and Train, 2010; Wooldridge, 2014). This estimator can be implemented
in two stages. In the first stage, we regress the endogenous variables Himt18j and Yimt18j on
exogenous regressors, including the exogenous variables, X ij and M mt18j in (5) and year and
state-of-residence fixed effects, as well as a vector of instrumental variables, Z imt18j (which we
define in the next section) to account for the endogeneity of Himt18j and Yimt18j . That is, these
first-stage regressions are:



      Himt18j = π H              H          H            H       H    H
                  1 Z imt18j + π 2 X ij + π 3 M mt18j + φt18j + δs + νimt18j ,                  (7)

      Yimt18j = π Y1 Z imt18j + π Y2 X ij + π Y3 M mt18j + φYt18j + δsY + νimt
                                                                           Y
                                                                               18j
                                                                                   ,            (8)


                                                    14
                                                                              H             Y
One then retrieves the residuals from these regressions, which we denote as νbimt 18j
                                                                                      and νbimt 18j
                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                            H
respectively. In the second stage, we estimate a multinomial logit model where we include νbimt18j

      Y
and νbimt 18j
              as additional regressors, with separate coefficients, in the payoff functions in (5). To
                                      H             Y
account for the estimation error in νbijmt18j
                                              and νbijmt18j
                                                            and the quasi-ML nature of estimation
in the second stage, we adjust the estimation of the variance-covariance matrix of the λs as
characterized in Wooldridge (2014). We use bootstrap to calculate these standard errors.

   Finally, conditional on EduF in2 = 1, we can estimate the impacts of parental housing wealth
and household income on the amount of the parents’ transfer, CollT ransimt18j . Mimicking the
specification of payoffs in (5), we estimate the following OLS regression:


   CollT ransimt18j = λT0 + λT1 Himt18j + λT2 Yimt18j + λT3 X ij + λT4 M mt18j + φTt18j + δm
                                                                                           T
                                                                                             + εTimt18j (9)


where all of the control variables are the same as described above but we use MSA level fixed
effects for urban residents and state level fixed effects for rural residents instead of state-level
fixed effects. To account for the potential endogeneity of Himt18j and Yimt18j in (9), we employ an
instrumental variables estimator (2SLS), using the same vector of instruments, Z imt18j , used in
the control function estimator of the parameters in the payoff functions in (5) which we describe
next.


3.2     Instrumental Variables: Changes in Local Housing Prices & Wa-
        ges

   As noted above, we seek to instrument for parent’s housing wealth, Himt18j , and income,
Yimt18j , in the estimation of the payoff functions for the college education and financing choices
parents make for their jth child. In this section, we describe the variables we use as instruments
(Z) in our analyses and how they are constructed.

   We use changes in local housing market prices and changes in labor market wages as our
instruments. In particular, we construct measures of the change in the parents’ housing wealth
and parental income immediately before child j reaches age 18 to serve as instrumental variables
for parental housing wealth and income in the estimation of our college attendance and financing



                                                   15
models and our estimation of the effects of these decisions on subsequent educational outcomes
described in Section 4. In spirit of the approach in Lovenheim and Reynolds (2013), we use
changes in market-level measures of average housing values in the local market in which parents
resided in the year in which the child was age 16, i.e., in year t16j . We use lagged values of
changes in local market conditions for two reasons.

   First, we want to to avoid the possible endogenous decision that parents may make to move
to a different locality (market) at the time of their child’s college decision, possibly to improve
either their ability to finance the costs of college, e.g., they sell a more expensive home, take
the equity from that home to pay for college and move to a less expensive home, or to reduce
the cost of the college their child may attend, e.g., moving closer to a college or to a state that
charges lower tuition.

   Second, one might expect that parents base their assessment of whether they can use the
equity in their home as collateral for a loan to pay for their children’s college education (via a
home equity loan, for example) based on any changes in local housing values one or two years
prior to the actual decision, rather than based on what happens to housing values in the year
when their child would be going to college. We note that this strategy of using changes in local
housing values a few years prior to the child’s college decision is similar to the one used by
Lovenheim (2011) and Lovenheim and Reynolds (2013) in their studies of the effects of parental
housing wealth on children’s decisions to attend college. Finally, we note that we use the same
strategy when constructing measures of the changes in local labor market conditions that may
be expected to affect their personal income.

   More precisely, our instrument for changes in local housing values is constructed as follows.
For the locality, m, in which parents reside in year t16,j , we obtain housing price indices, HP Imt ,
from external data sources to construct the percentage change in local housing values. Where
possible, i.e., where we have data on local housing prices, we define the local housing market at
the zip code level and, where possible, we use housing price indices constructed by Zillow. For
zip codes where a Zillow price index is not available in year t16,j , we use the Zillow index for the
county in which the parents/child reside in that year. When a price index is not available for the
parents’ county of residence, we use the price index of the MSA- or state-of-residence. Finally,


                                                 16
for some years and locations in which the parents in our data reside in markets not covered
by Zillow data, we make use of the housing price index constructed by the Federal Housing
Finance Agency (FHFA) as our measure of HP Imt . With the resulting indices, we construct
the percentage change in this index over a 4-year period centered on year t16j ,

        HPI mt18j − HPI mt14j
                                   .                                                         (10)
                HPI mt14j

We note that by using percentage changes in housing price indices, HPI mt , rather than simple
changes, we minimize any problems of non-comparability of the Zillow and FHFA housing price
indices.17 We then “scale” this percentage change by the net home equity the parents report in
year t16t to form our housing market instrument:

                                       HPI mt18j − HPI mt14j
                                                                  
        ∆HP Imt18j ≡ Himt16j                                           .                     (11)
                                                 HPI mt14j

We note that we found that trimming the changes affects the precision of our results.

      For our instrumental variable for local labor market conditions, we use data from the QCEW
to obtain the average annual wages in each county, m, in each year, t. We then construct average
wages by county-of-residence of parents for the years around when their child was age 16, i.e.,
                                                                   P
t16j . We denote these average wage measures by W mt . We then construct the percentage changes
in these average wages, i.e.,

           P             P
        W mt18j − W mt14j
                 P
                             ,                                                               (12)
               W mt14j

and scale it by parent’s annual income in year t16,j to construct the following instrumental
variable:

                                 W P               P
                                               − W mt14j 
          P                            mt18j
        ∆Wmt18j
                     ≡ Yimt16j                 P
                                                          .                                  (13)
                                         W m,t14j

                                                                       P
Thus, our vector of instruments is given by Z imt18j ≡ (∆HP Imt18j , ∆Wmt18j
                                                                             ). The statistics for
 17
      We trimmed these changes when they were exceedingly large in absolute value.


                                                              17
tests of the joint significance of the instruments for both parental net equity and income are in
Appendix Table B.1.) and indicate sufficiently strong instruments.


3.3      Empirical Results

    Table 4 presents the results of estimating (5) and (9). For the college choice and financing
models, (5), we show estimates of the marginal effects of parental net equity (H) and income (Y )
on children’s college choices (EduF in0, EduF in1 and EduF in1) for the unadjusted multinomial
logit specification as well as those for our preferred estimates based on the control function
estimator. For the models of amounts conditional on a transfer, (9), we present OLS and 2SLS
coefficient estimates for H and Y .

    In Panel A of Table 4, we present estimates of the marginal effects of parents net (home)
equity when their child was age 18 (Himt18j ) and parents’ annual income at that age (Yimt18j )
for the unadjusted multinomial logit specification. A $10,000 increase in home equity decreases
the likelihood that the child does not attend college by 0.39 percentage points, increases the
likelihood that they attend college but with no parental transfer by 0.03 percentage points and
increases the likelihood that they go to college and their parents provide financial help by 0.36
percentage points, with the first and the last of these effects being statistically significant at least
the 10% level. Similarly, a $10,000 increase in parents’ annual income decreases the likelihood
that the child does not attend college by 1.96 percentage points, increases the likelihood that
they attend college but with no parental transfer by 0.85 percentage points and increases the
likelihood of the child going college and receiving financial help from their parents by 1.11
percentage points, with all three of these effects being being statistically significant at the 1%
level.

    In Panel B of Table 4 we account for the potential endogeneity of parental home equity and
income on these choices. We find that a $10,000 increase in parental housing wealth increases
the likelihood of attending college with a parental transfer by 0.58 percentage points. The effect
of a $10,000 increase in income is over twice as large, increasing the likelihood of attending
college with a parental transfer by 1.69 percentage points and decreasing the likelihood of not
attending college by 2.14 percentage points, with both of these effects being precisely estimated.


                                                  18
       In order to compare the effects of parents’ net home equity and income on comparable terms,
we compute estimates of the elasticities for these variables. For our preferred control function
estimates, the elasticity of parental income with respect to not going to college is -0.374 and
for going to college and receiving financial help is 0.500. In contrast, for parents’ net housing
equity the elasticities are much smaller at (-0.046 and 0.128, respectively).18

       Our estimates of the effects of parental housing wealth (H) on the likelihood of a child
attending college – here measured as the negative value of the estimates of H on not attending
college – are consistent with and quite similar in magnitude to those in Lovenheim (2011),
although only the multinomial logit estimates are statistically significant. Furthermore, we
find that increases in parental income (Y ) increase the likelihood of attending college – again
measured as the negative of the effects on not attending college – which is consistent with
the findings in Belley and Lochner (2007); Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011), and Lochner
and Monge-Naranjo (2012). Moreover the latter effects are statistically significant for both our
multinomial and control function specifications. But, as discussed above, our findings make
clear that the mechanism through which parental income and wealth affect college attendance
is through their effects on the the likelihood that parents choose to help finance their child’s
education. Furthermore, the effects of H and Y on the college and transfer choice (EduF in2)
are statistically significant for both the multinomial logit and control function specifications,
while the effects of both of these variables on the college but no parental transfer small and not
statistically significant for our preferred control function specification.

       The estimated effects of parental home equity and parental income on the amount of parental
transfers for their children’s college education, for both OLS and 2SLS, are found in Panel C
of Table 4. Ignoring the endogeneity of parental home equity and income, the OLS results
indicate that a $10,000 increase in net home equity would increase the amount of parental
financial support by an average of $316, while a comparable increase in parents’ income would
increase the average amount transferred by $769. In our preferred 2SLS specification, we find
that a $10,000 increase in home equity increases parental transfers by only $205 and this effect is
no longer statistically significant. However, we find that increases in parental income now have
  18
    These elasticities are evaluated at the means of both the probabilities of EduF in0 and EduF in2 and Yimt18j
and Himt18j found in Table 2.


                                                      19
a much larger effect on the amount of parental transfers, with a $10,000 increase in parental
income resulting in an average increase in parental transfers $1,510, with the latter effect being
precisely estimated. Translating these effects of parental home equity and income on parental
financial support for their children going to college to elasticities, we again find that the elasticity
for net home equity is fairly small (0.151) while the elasticity with respect to parental income
is sizable (1.489).

    Taken together these results strongly suggest that both parental wealth and parental income
are important in determining both the likelihood of their children attending college and, impor-
tantly, their parents helping to finance it. But, that the effects of changes in parental income on
college attendance and financing decisions are larger than similar changes in parental wealth.
One important difference between our work and prior work on the role of housing wealth in
college attendance decisions is the time period that we analyze. Lovenheim (2011) focused on
the years between 2000 and 2005 when house prices were growing rapidly and home equity lines
of credit were plentiful. In contrast, we include both an earlier period (1997 - 1999), and, more
importantly, the later period (2006 - 2013) in which house prices fell or were largely stagnant
and home equity lines of credit became increasingly difficult to obtain. Changes in the ability
to access home equity lines of credit have played a role in explaining the relative importance of
income in college attendance and financing decisions. When home equity lines of credit become
more difficult to access, parental income may have become a more likely source for financing
large consumption expenses like their children’s college educations. It is also possible that fa-
mily income became more important in the ability to access credit in the aftermath of the Great
Recession which would exacerbate the importance of income for being able to provide financial
assistance for college. We return to this issue below in the discussion of our results for college
graduation.


4     Effects of Parental Wealth & Income on College Gra-
      duation and Costs & Quality of Colleges Attended

    In the preceding section, we found that parental income, more so than parental home equity,
increases the likelihood that children attend college and that this effect is largely driven by


                                                  20
the fact that parental income increases the likelihood and the amount of financial help parents
provide for sending their children to college. We next examine whether parental wealth and
income affect the likelihood that children graduate from college and the quality of the college
they attend.


4.1    Modeling Children’s College Attainment & Quality

   As noted in Section 2.3, we use information on completed schooling reported in the 2013 PSID
Roster and Transfers Module to form measures of whether each child j of parent i that attended
college at age 18 graduated from college – which we denote by dummy variable Gradij,18j . We
obtain the annual tuition costs for a full-time student at that institution in the year they would
have started college — which we denote by the variable T uitionij,18j . We measure whether
the institution was a 4-year college or university – denoted by the variable 4Y rCollij,18j – and
whether it was a private institution – denoted by the dummy variable P rivateij,18j . We denote
the quality index described in Section 2.3 by Qualityij,18j .

   In Table 5, we display the mean values for these measures of the college attributes described
above. One can see that all of the measures of college attainment and quality are greater for
children attending college with parental financial support compared to those attending without
it. This is especially true for the college quality index (Qualityij,18j ), which increases from 0.07
for college attended by children who did not receive financial help from their parents to 0.49 for
those that did.

   We examine how parental income and parental housing wealth affect college quality using
changes in parental income and wealth in the years before a child turns 18 as instruments
for income and housing wealth. These specifications mirror those on college attendance and
financing decisions in Section 3.3 estimating regressions of the following form:

                                                  O            O                         q
 CollOutqij,18j = λO    O            O                                      O       O
                   q0 +λq1 Himt18j +λq2 Yimt18j +λq3 X ij18j +λq4 M mt18j +φqt18j +δqm +εij,18j , (14)



for CollOutq = Grad, T uition, 4Y rColl, P rivate and Quality and where φO          O
                                                                         qt18j and δqm are

year and the parents’ county fixed effects, respectively. The vector, X ij18j , used in (14) is the


                                                 21
same as the one used in equations (5) and (7) through (9) except that also includes a dummy
variable for whether the child has become a head or wife in a PSID household by age 24. This
extra variable controls for the source of data from which college information is obtained (PSID
main interview versus Transition to Adulthood).19

       Finally, to account for the potential endogeneity of Himt18j and Yimt18j in (14), we again
                                                                              P
employ a 2SLS estimator for (14), using the two instruments, ∆HP Imt18j and ∆Wmt 18j
                                                                                     , that
were defined in Section 3.2 and used in the control function estimation of college choices and
parental financing decisions and the amount of parental financial support provided to their child.


4.2       Empirical Results

       In Panel A of Table 6 we present the estimates of the effects of parental net housing equity
(Himt18j ) and income (Yimt18j ) on whether child j graduates from college as well as the various
indicators of the quality of the college. OLS estimates are presented in in columns (1) and (3)
and 2SLS estimates in columns (2) and (4) for these outcomes outcomes. We first consider the
results for whether the child graduates from college, displayed in Panel A of Table 6. We find
evidence that parent’s net equity at the time of the college decision increases the probability that
their child graduates from college. But, in contrast to our findings on college attendance, we do
not find any effect of family income on college graduation once we control for the endogeneity
of family income.

       The results on graduation show an interesting contrast between how parental resources when
a child is age 18 affect college enrollment versus college graduation. We find that both parental
income and parental wealth when a child is 18 increase the likelihood of attending college but
only parental wealth when a child is 18 increases the likelihood of graduating from college.

       One possible explanation for these contrasting results is that increases in parental income
  19
     As noted in Section 2.2, if adult children have become a head or wife of a PSID household by age 24, their
data can be drawn from the PSID main interview and is, in principle, available for all of the years, t24j , that
we analyze. In contrast, if adult child j does not become a head of wife of a PSID household by 2013 – the
year of the last wave of the PSID used in our analyses – we use data about the characteristics of the college
child j attended from the PSID Transition to Adulthood sample. But this latter sample is only available for
more recent (calendar) years. Thus, including this extra dummy variable in (14) allows us to account potential
differences across these two different sources of data used to determine the dependent variables, T uitionij,18j ,
4Y rCollij,18j , P rivateij,18j and Qualityij,18j .


                                                       22
when their child is 18 can finance their child’s college enrollment but may not be sufficient, on
average, to cover the full costs of attaining a degree. In contrast, parents who experience an
increase in housing wealth can secure loans, such as a home equity loan, which can be used to
finance their child’s entire college career. These loans are common, almost 12% of parents in
our sample had such a loan when their child was age 18.

       To explore this possibility, we examine the effect that parents having a home equity loan
when their child was 18 has on the likelihood of their child graduating from college over and
above parental wealth (H) and income (Y ) (results not shown in Table 6). Adding this indicator
variable to the regression in (14) for Grad as the outcome, we find that having a home equity
loan at the time the child is age 18 increases the likelihood that the child graduates from college
by 8.6 percentage points.20 These results suggest that home equity loans are an important
channel though which parents are able to continue to provide financial support throughout
their child’s college years. Combined with the larger effect of parental income than parental
wealth on college attendance, the results suggest that increases in family income change choices
about college only at a short lag length, whereas wealth effects are more enduring.

       In Panels B and C of Table 6, we present OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of parental
net equity and income on the various attributes of the college the children attended, starting at
age 18. Looking first at the effects of parental home equity on the various attributes and types of
colleges attended, we find the effects to be very small. For example, a $10,000 increase in parental
net equity would result in the child going to a college that is only slightly more expensive, ranging
from $99 based on OLS estimates to $112 based on the 2SLS estimates. (Recall from Table
5 that the average annual tuition of college attended is $9,682.) Similarly, a $10,000 increase
in parents’ home equity would increase the probability of attending a private college by 0.2
percentage points (based on OLS) and would reduce it by 0.7 percentage points (based on
2SLS). Furthermore, none of the effects of parental home equity are precisely estimated. With
respect to the effects of parental income on the tuition, types and quality of the college attended,
  20
     We also estimate a specification in which we treat having a home equity loan at age 18 as an additional
endogenous variable, using a set of squared changes in local home prices and local labor markets and their
interactions as additional instruments, and find that in this specification, having a home equity loan when
the child is 18 also increases the likelihood of graduation. The results for this augmented specification of the
likelihood of a child graduating from college are found in Table C.1.



                                                      23
none of the other estimated effects of parental are precisely estimated, with the exception of
the OLS estimated effects on the quality of college children attended. Furthermore, increases
in parental income seem to have relatively negligible effects whether their children go to a more
expensive school, one that is private or one that is of higher quality.

    The lack of precision in the estimates of the effects of parental home equity and income
may be due, in part, to the smaller sample sizes used to estimate the effects found in Table 6
compared the likelihood of graduation in Panel A of Table 6. The samples used to estimate
the effects presented in Panels B and C of Table 6 are almost half of those used to estimate
the effects for college graduation in Panel A. Although we note in Appendix Table B.1 that the
first-stage results are slightly above the conventional cutoff value.

    In summary, it appear that increases in parental wealth do result in statistically significant
but small increases the likelihood that children will graduate from college. Our finding for the
likelihood of graduation is notable, since Cooper and Luengo-Prado (2015) did not detect any
effects of parental housing wealth on college graduation, despite the fact that parental housing
wealth appears to increase the labor earnings of their adult children. One reason for the greater
precision of our results is that we use the better measure of the educational attainment of
children available in the 2013 Roster and Transfers data. At the same time, our findings do not
clearly indicate that greater parental income (or housing wealth) decidedly alters the likelihood
of their child attending a more expensive college, a private one, or a more highly ranked one,
although the smaller sample sizes used to estimate these effects may have contributed to latter
null findings.


5     Consequences of Parental Financing Decisions for Pa-
      rents’ and Child’s Subsequent Indebtedness

    Finally, we provide evidence of the consequences of decisions about attending college and
parental financing on levels of debt parents and children hold after the college years. In what
follows we outline our strategy for estimating these relationships, explicitly examining whether
children who attend college and their parents end up accumulating more debt, whether parental



                                                24
financial support for college leaves parents with more debt, and whether such support reduces
the amount of debt children accumulate.


5.1    Modeling the Effects of College/Financing Choices on Later Fi-
       nancial Debt of Parents and Adult Children

   Let Debtnhtaj denote the debt of household n where n = i for the parent household and
n = j for the child household, of type h, measured in year taj when child j is age a. We choose
a = 24 as six-years after enrollment decisions and when financing for higher education is largely
complete. For parents, we consider mortgage debt (M ortBalit24j ), and all other non-housing
debt (OthDebtit24j ), both measured when the child is age 24 (t24j ). For children, we examine
debt in the form of outstanding student loans (StudentDebtjt24j ), as well as total non-housing
debt (OthDebtjt24j ), both measured in t24j .

   In Table 7, we display the mean values of mortgage and total non-housing debt for parents
and student loan and other non-housing debt for children at age 24. Parents, on average, have
$69,500 in mortgage debt and $13,400 in other debt when their child is age 24. Parents whose
child did not attend college have much lower levels of debt: $45,400 in mortgage debt and only
$8,400 in other debt. Parents of children who did attend college but did not provide financial
help hold higher debt balances: $59,400 in mortgage debt and $13,500 in other debt. Finally,
parents who helped finance their child’s college education have much higher amounts of both
types of debt: $100,100 in outstanding mortgage debt and $18,000 in other debt.

   At age 24, children, on average, hold $12,300 in student debt and the same amount in total
non-housing debt. Those children who did not attend college, not surprisingly, hold almost
no student loan debt, $2,200 (presumably because of other education-related expenses) and
$8,000 in total non-housing debt. Children who attended college but received no help from
their parents hold only somewhat more debt than the average child, but a good deal more than
their counterparts who did not attend college: $15,000 in other debt and $16,800 in outstanding
student loans. Finally, among those children who went to college and got financial help from
their parents, their debt levels were slightly, but only slightly, lower than those who went to
college without parental help: $13,200 in total non-housing debt and $16,900 in student debt,


                                                25
the same as those who had no help from parents. These levels of student debt are very similar
to those estimated by Andreski, Kreisman and Schoeni (2015) who show that the estimates
of student loans from the PSID TA study are similar to those in the National Postsecondary
Student Aid Survey.

      These descriptive findings suggest that parents may shelter their college-going children from
some, although not most, of their post-college debt. At the same time, parents who help finance
their children’s college education may end up with more debt of their own, especially mortgage
debt. In the next section, we outline an estimation strategy to assess whether these latter
descriptive results are causal.

      The specifications we use to examine the effect of whether a child went to college and whether
parents helped finance college on the subsequent indebtedness of parents and their children differ
from those in Sections 3 and 4. Here we focus on the direct effect of college attendance and
parental financing decisions on the additional amount of debt parents and children accumulate.
As we describe below, this requires some additional controls and creates new challenges for
identifying causal relationships.

      More precisely, let Attendij be an indicator variable equal to 1 if child j of parent i attends
college and zero otherwise,21 and define AttendF inij to be the indicator variable equal to 1 if
child j attends college and parent i provides funds to finance it and zero otherwise,22 We are
interested in the effects of these variables on parents’ and children’s debt when the child reaches
age 24 in year t24j , net of other factors. More precisely, for parents we seek to estimate the
following specification for two sources of debt:



                      P      P              P                  P
        Debthit24j = βnh0 + βh1 Attendij + βh2 AttendF inij + βh3 Yimt24j

                         +β Ph4 X it24j + φPht24j + δhm
                                                     P
                                                        + uPhit24j .                            (15)



for Debth = M ortBal, OthDebt, Yimt24j is the parents’ income in year t24j , X it24j is a vector of
 21
      Attendij = 1 if either EduF in1ij = 1 or EduF in2ij = 1 and equals zero otherwise.
 22
      That is, AttendF inij = EduF in2ij .



                                                        26
parent i’s characteristics in that year, M mt24j are the corresponding characteristics for parents’
location m at t24j and φPt24j and δsP are year and the parents’ county fixed effects, respectively.
Included in X it24j are the same characteristics described in Section 3.1 where all time-varying
covariates are measured in year t24j instead of year t18j used in our previous analyses. In addition,
we include non-housing wealth of the parent at age 24, the value of the home measured at age
18, and parental income at age 24.

   Similarly, for the children at age 24, for parents we seek to estimate the following specification
for their two sources of debt:



                    C      C              C                  C
      Debthjt24j = βnh0 + βh1 Attendij + βh2 AttendF inij + βh3 Yjmt24j

                        +β C             C        C     C
                           h4 X jt24j + φht24j + δhm + uhjt24j .                                  (16)



for Debth = OthDebt, StudentDebt, Yjmt24j is child j’s income in in year t24j , X nt24j is a vector
of child j’s characteristics at child age 24, and φC         C
                                                   t24j and δs are year and the child’s state-of-

residence fixed effects, respectively. Included in X nt24j are all of the characteristics of the parent
described in Section 3.1 where all time-varying covariates are measured in year t24j , along with
an indicator variable for coresidence with a parent, an indicator variable if the child is married
in year t24j , an indicator variable for whether the child is a head of household in year t24j , and
family income of the child at age 24.

   Below, we present estimates of the effects of Attend and AttendF in in specifications in (15)
and (16) using ordinary least squares (OLS). But, it is reasonable to presume that parents’ and
children’s income when the child is age 24, Yimt24j that is included in (15) and Yjmt24j in (16),
respectively, are likely to be endogenous, especially given that these variables are contempora-
neous with when we assess parents’ and children’s levels of debt. Furthermore, the decisions
concerning whether a child went to college but parents did not help finance it (Attendij = 1)
or parents did help finance it (AttendF inij = 2) may be correlated with the unobserved factors
that make up uPhit24 and uC
                          hit24 in these debt specifications. This would be the case if the unob-
                    j            j

served determinants of the college and parental financing choices accounted for in the payoff



                                                    27
functions in (5), made when the child was age 18, and those in (15) and (16) are common across
time and/or were serially correlated.

       To account for the potential endogeneity of parents’ and children’s income when the child
is age 24 in the debt regressions, we follow the strategy we used to instrument parental income
at age 18 in the college choice and financing specifications discussed in Section 3.2 and define
                                                                 P
as a new instrumental variable the local labor market variable ∆Wmt24j
                                                                       , which is defined in the
              P
same way as ∆Wmt 18j
                     for the market, m, in which person n (n = i for parents and n = j for
children) resides in year t24j . We also define an additional instrument which which measures the
distance child j was from the nearest a four-year public college in their county m when child j
was age 18.23

       A plausible set of instruments for Attend and AttendF in in (15) and (16) would be to use
the local market variables, ∆HP Imt18j and ∆Wmt18j , measured at t18j , that were used to instru-
ment Hjmt18j and Yjmt18j in the control function estimator of the college enrollment and transfers
decisions, and the 2SLS estimation of the amount of the transfer and the graduation and college
                                                              P
quality outcomes. We employed these instruments, along with ∆Wmt 24j
                                                                     and Dist4Y rP ubijm ,
to instrument for Attend, AttendF in and Yjmt24j in a 2SLS estimation of the specifications in
(15) and (16). But, the first stage results for both Attend and AttendF in in these specificati-
ons indicated very weak instruments, with the test statistics for the joint significance of these
instruments for Attend and AttendF in never being greater than 9.8 and most of never being
greater than 5.0. In contrast, and as reported in Appendix Table B.2, the first stage estimates
for Yjmt24j using these same instruments produced test statistics greater than 22. Accordingly,
in the analysis below, we report 2SLS results for the estimation of (15) and (16) in which we
only account for the endogeneity of Yjmt24j . Because of this, we take care not to over-interpret
the 2SLS results presented below.
  23
    Using PSID geocode data on the location of their parents’ residence at that age and geocoded data from
IPEDS on the location of all public universities, we constructed the variable, Dist4Y rP ubijm , as the distance,
in miles, to the nearest four-year public university. A comparable measure was used in Card (1995) and others
as an instrument for schooling in the estimation of the returns to schooling.




                                                       28
5.2    Empirical Results

   Panel A of Table 8 presents the results of estimating the specification for parental debt in
equation (15). We show estimates from OLS specifications in which college attendance and
financing is taken as exogenous and from 2SLS specifications in which we instrument for the
effects of parental income in year t24j . In these tables, we only display the effects of children
attending college (Attend) and whether parents helped finance their child’s college education
(AttendF in) on parent levels of debt when their child was age 24. With respect to parents
mortgage debt, both the OLS and the 2SLS results indicate that parents who provide children
with a financial transfer for college have more outstanding mortgage debt six years after their
child entered college, i.e., when their child is age 24, relative to parents whose child did not
attend college. The OLS and 2SLS results indicate that parents who help finance their child’s
college attendance have more mortgage debt, $15,930 based on the OLS results and $15,920 with
the 2SLS. Furthermore, both of these effects are precisely estimated. And, parents whose child
attends college without receiving a financial transfer from parents do not hold more mortgage
debt than parents whose child did not attend college.

   Panel A also includes estimates the effect of a child’s college attendance and parental finan-
cing on the amounts of non-housing debt parents hold in year t24j . For both the OLS and the
2SLS results, we find that having a child who attends college increases parental non-housing
debt when their child is age 24 relative to having a child who does not attend college ($3,460
with OLS and $3,420 with 2SLS), although these increases are much smaller than those for
mortgage debt. Both of these effects are precisely estimated. With respect to the additional
effect of parents helping to finance college (AttendF in), we find small positive effects on other
debt, but neither the OLS or 2SLS estimates are statistically significant. As a result, one can-
not reject the hypothesis that this source of debt does not differ between parents who provide
financial transfers to their children to attend college those who do not.

   In Panel B of Table 8 we present estimates of the effects of college attendance and parental
financial support on the debt levels held by children at age 24. With respect to both the OLS
and 2SLS results, we find that children who attend college (Attend) have substantially higher
student loan ($14,430 based on OLS and $14,290 with 2SLS) and other forms of debt ($10,470

                                               29
with OLS and $10,420 with 2SLS) than children who do not attend college and these effects are
precisely estimated. In contrast, children whose parents help to finance their college education
do not hold less student debt or other forms of debt than children who attend college without
parental financial support. These results suggest that there is not necessarily a reduction in
student debt when parents provide financial support for college. One reason we may find similar
levels of student debt among children whose parents finance and do not finance college is that
students whose parents provide financial support for college are more likely to graduate and thus
they pay for more total years of schooling. But, as noted at the end of the previous section, one
must be cautious in interpreting these findings for the effects of college attendance and parental
financing on parents’ and children’s subsequent levels of debt as causal, given that they do not
account for the potential endogeneity of either Attend and AttendF in our 2SLS results.


6     Conclusion

    This paper examines the influence of parental housing wealth and income on college atten-
dance and parental financial support for college and on college graduation rates and quality
of college attended. It also examines the ramifications of these decisions on the subsequent
indebtedness of parents and children. We use data from the PSID, especially data in the 2013
Roster and Transfers Module on the incidence and amounts of parental financial support for
college. We instrument for the potential endogeneity of parental housing wealth and income
with changes in parents’ local housing and labor market conditions to generate causal estimates
of the effect of parental housing wealth and income on educational outcomes. We find that
increases in parental income and wealth increase the likelihood of children attending college,
largely because it increases parental provision of financial support. The effect of an increase in
parental income on college enrollment is larger than the effect of an increase in parental wealth.
But, parental wealth increases graduation rates, while parental income does not seem to have
an effect on college graduation. We find that the effect of parental wealth on college graduation
is related to parents taking out home equity loans which appear to have a large effect on the
likelihood that a child graduates from college. We also find suggestive evidence that the decision
to provide financial support for a child’s schooling increases levels of parental mortgage debt.



                                               30
In contrast, students who attend college with financial support from parents do not have lower
levels of student and other debt later in life than children who attend college without financial
support.

   These findings fill gaps in prior research by establishing that the mechanism through which
increases in parental income and wealth affect college attendance is indeed through parental
financial transfers. Our findings also complement recent work suggesting an increasingly impor-
tant role for parental income in college attendance decisions. And, we provide the new evidence
based on PSID data that the likelihood of children graduating from college increases with higher
levels of parental wealth, likely due to the more complete data on children’s college attainment
gathered in the Roster and Transfers Module in the 2013 wave of the PSID. Finally, though
our results about debt are more descriptive, they do indicate that parents who provide finan-
cial transfers to their children take on additional debt of their own. The increases in parental
debt as a result of college financing decisions may simply reflect an efficient way to fund college
tuition. Alternatively, this increase in parental debt may represent an intergenerational shifting
of debt incurred with children going to college, one that represents a burden on parents that
may adversely affect their later-life consumption or other measures of well-being. This is an
important avenue for future research especially in light of the large increases in college tuition
and in levels of student debt in recent years.




                                                 31
References
Andreski, Patricia, Daniel Kreisman, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2015. “Comparing Esti-
 mates of Student Loans Measured in the PSID-TAS with the National Postsecondary Student
 Aid Survey.” PSID Technical Series Paper #15-02.

Belley, Philippe, and Lance Lochner. 2007. “The Changing Role of Family Income and
 Ability in Determining Educational Achievement.” Journal of Human Capital, 1(1): 37–89.

Black, Dan, and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2004. “How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of
  College Quality? Evidence from Matching.” Journal of Econometrics, 121(1): 99–124.

Black, Dan, and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2006. “Estimating the Returns to College Quality with
  Multiple Proxies for Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3): 701–728.

Black, Dan, Jeffrey A. Smith, and Kermit Daniel. 2005. “College Quality and Wages in
  the United States.” German Economic Review, 6(3): 415–443.

Bleemer, Zachary, Meta Brown, Donghoon Lee, Katherine Strair, and Wilbert
  van der Klaauw. 2017. “Echoes of Rising Tuition in Students’ Borrowing, Educational
  Attainment, and Homeownership in Post-Recession America.” Federal Reserve Bank of New
  York Staff Report No. 820, New York.

Blundell, Richard, and James L. Powell. 2003. “Endogeneity in Nonparametric and Semi-
  parametric Regression Models.” In Advances in Economics and Econonometrics: Theory and
  Applications, Eighth World Congress Volume. , ed. M. Dewatripont, L.P. Hansen and S.J.
  Turnovsky, 312–357. Cambridge University Press.

Bound, John, and Sarah Turner. 2011. “Dropouts and Diplomas: The Divergence in Col-
 legiate Outcomes.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education. Vol. 4, , ed. Eric Hanushek,
 Stephen Machin and Ludger Woessmann, 573–613. Elsevier B. V.

Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2010. “Why Have College
 Completion Rates Declines? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate
 Resources.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2: 129–157.

Browning, Martin, Mette Gørtz, and Søren Leth-Petersen. 2013. “Housing Wealth and
 Consumption: A Micro Panel Study.” The Economic Journal, 123(568): 401–428.

Cameron, Stephen, and Christopher Taber. 2004. “Estimation of Educational Borrowing
 Constraints using Returns to Schooling.” Journal of Political Economy, 112: 132–182.

Cameron, Stephen, and James J. Heckman. 1998. “Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic
 Selection Bias: Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males.” Journal of Political
 Economy, 106: 262–333.

Cameron, Stephen, and James J. Heckman. 2001. “The Dynamics of Educational Attai-
 nment for Black, Hispanic, and White Males.” Journal of Political Economy, 109: 455–99.



                                             32
Card, David. 1995. “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Returns
 to Schooling.” In Aspects of Labour Market Behaviour: Essays in Honor of John Vanderkamp.
 , ed. Louis N. Christofides, E. Kenneth Grant and Robert Swidinsky, 201–221. University of
 Toronto Press.

Carroll, Christopher D., Misuzu Otsuka, and Jiri Slacalek. 2011. “How Large are
 Housing and Financial Wealth Effects? A New Approach.” Journal of Money, Credit and
 Banking, 43(1): 55–79.

College Board. 2015. “Trends in Student Aid 2015.” trends.collegeboard.org.

College Board. 2017. “Trends in Student Aid 2017.” trends.collegeboard.org.

Cooper, Daniel, and Christine Wang. 2014. “Student Loan Debt and Economic Outcomes.”
 Unpublished manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Cooper, Daniel, and Maria José Luengo-Prado. 2015. “House Price Growth when Child-
 ren are Teenagers: A Path to Higher Earnings?” Journal of Urban Economics, 86: 54–72.

Dillon, Eleanor W., and Jeffrey Andrew Smith. 2017a. “Determinants of the Match
 between Student Ability and College Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1): 45–66.

Dillon, Eleanor W., and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2017b. “The Consequences of Academic Match
 between Students and Colleges.” CESIfo Working Paper No. 6344.

Faber, Jacob W., and Peter M. Rich. forthcoming. “Financially Overextended: College
  Attendance as a Contributor to Foreclosures During the Great Recession.” Demography.

Kane, Thomas J., and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 1995. “Labor-Market Returns to Two- and
 Four-Year College.” American Economic Review, 85(3): 600–614.

Keane, Michael, and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2001. “The Effect of Parental Transfers and Bor-
 rowing Constraints on Educational Attainment.” International Economic Review, 42: 1051–
 1103.

Lochner, Lance J., and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. 2011. “The Nature of Credit Con-
  straints and Human Capital.” American Economic Review, 101(6): 2487–2529.

Lochner, Lance J., and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. 2012. “Credit Constraints in Educa-
  tion.” Annual Review of Economics, 4(1): 225–256.

Lochner, Lance, Todd Stinebrickner, and Utku Suleymanoglu. 2018. “Parental Sup-
  port, Savings and Student Loan Repayment.” NBER Working Paper 24863.

Lovenheim, Michael F. 2011. “The Effect of Liquid Housing Wealth on College Enrollment.”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 29(4): 741–771.

Lovenheim, Michael F., and C. Lockwood Reynolds. 2013. “The Effect of Housing Wealth
  on College Choice: Evidence from the Housing Boom.” Journal of Human Resources, 48(1): 1–
  35.


                                            33
McFarland, J., B. Hussar, C. de Brey, T. Snyder, X. Wang, S. Wilkinson-Flicker, S.
 Gebrekristos, J. Zhang, A. Rathbun, A. Barmer, F. Bullock Mann, and S. Hinz.
 2017. The Condition of Education, 2017. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for
 Education Statistics.

Mezza, Alvaro A., Daniel R. Ringo, Shane M. Sherlund, and Kamila Sommer. 2015.
 “On the Effect of Student Loans on Access to Homeownership.” Board of Governors, Federal
 Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-010, Washington.

Paiella, Monica, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2017. “Decomposing the Wealth Effect on Consump-
 tion.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(4): 710–721.

Petrin, Amil, and Kenneth Train. 2010. “A Control Function Approach to Endogeneity in
 Consumer Choice Models.” Journal of Marketing Research, XLVII: 3–13.

Rothstein, Jesse, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2011. “Constrained after College: Student
 Loans and Early-Career Occupational choices.” Journal of Public Finance, 95: 149–163.

SallieMae. 2017. “How America Pays for College 2017.” Sallie Mae Bank.

Schoeni, Robert F., Suzanne M. Bianchi, V. Joseph Hotz, Judith A. Seltzer, and
  Emily E. Wiemers. 2015. “Intergenerational Transfers and Rosters of the Extended Family:
  A new substudy of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.” Longitudinal and Life Course
  Studies, 6(3): 319–330.

Scott, Marc, Thomas Bailey, and Greg Kienzl. 2006. “Relative Success? Determinants
  of College Graduation Rates in Public and Private Colleges in the U.S.” Research in Higher
  Education, 47(3): 249–279.

Stock, James H., and Douglas Staiger. 1997. “Instrumental Variables Regression with
  Weak Instruments.” Econometrica, 65(3): 557–586.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2014. “Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Estimation and Tests for Non-
 linear Models with Endogenous Explanatory Variables.” Journal of Econometrics, 182: 226–
 234.




                                            34
                                      Table 1. Sample Sizes

    Samples                                                                                         N
    Parent-Child Pairs for Analyses of:
      Child’s College Choices (EduF in0, EduF in1, EduF in2) & Amount of Transfer 2,866
      Whether Child Graduated from College                                        1,418
      College Tuition Costs, Conditional on Attending                               856
      Whether Child attended 4-year College, Conditional on on Attending            854
      Whether attended Private College, Conditional on attending 4-Yr College       704
      College Quality Index, Conditional on attending 4-Yr College                  705
    Parent-Child Pairs when Child at age 24 for Analyses of: 1
      Parents’ Mortgage Debt                                                                    2,580
      Parents’ ‘Other’ Debt                                                                     2,571
      Children’s ‘Other’ Debt                                                                   1,756
      Children’s Student Loan Debt                                                              1,196
1
  Data on the debt of children at or near when they are age 24 is obtained from either the regular PSID
survey or from the the Transition to Adulthood (TA) survey which covers children who are age 18 or older
regardless of whether they have become the head of their own household.




                                                  35
Table 2. Child’s College Enrollment Choices & Paren-
tal Transfers for College among Homeowning Parents &
College-Age Children in PSID, 1997-20151

       Variable                                  Mean
       Child’s College Enrollment Choices:
       Child does not enroll (EduF in0)           0.44
       Child enrolls, no transfer (EduF in1)      0.30
       Child enrolls, transfer (EduF in2)         0.26
       Amount of Transfer (CollT rans)2          $0.78
   1
    Statistics weighted using PSID family weights.
   2
    Conditional on those students who attended college at
   age 18. Dollar amount is in 10K of 2013$.




                            36
Table 3. Parents’ Net Equity, Parental Income by College Attendance and
Parental Financing when Child was Age 181

                                                   EduF in0      EduF in1    EduF in2
                                         Full                    (Coll, but   (Coll &
                                        Sample     (No Coll)    No Transfer) Transfer)
    Parents’ Net Equity (Himt18j )        $5.73         $2.90            $5.02       $11.36
    Parents’ Income (Yimt18j )            $7.69         $5.28            $7.51       $12.03
1
    Statistics weighted using PSID family weights. Dollar amounts are in 10K of 2013$.




                                              37
Table 4. Marginal Effects of Changes in Wealth and Income on College & Financing
Choices and Amount of Financing1

                     College and Financing Choices:                       Amount of Transfer:
                EduF in0          EduF in1           EduF in2
                                  (Coll, but          (Coll &
                (No Coll)        No Transfer)        Transfer)             OLS               2SLS2
    Variable       (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)
    Panel A. Schooling and Financing Choice, Multinomial Logit
    Himt18j    −0.0039*        0.0003        0.0036***
                (0.0021)      (0.0015)      (0.0012)
    Yimt18j    −0.0196***      0.0085***     0.0111***
                (0.0032)      (0.0028)      (0.0026)
    N                                        2.651
    Panel B. Schooling and Financing Choice, Control Function 2
    Himt18j    −0.0035       −0.0022         0.0058**
                (0.0051)      (0.0045)      (0.0028)
    Yimt18j    −0.0214***      0.0045        0.0169***
                (0.0056)      (0.0046)      (0.0045)
    N                          2.645
    Panel C. Transfer Amounts, OLS and 2SLS
    Himt18j                                                              0.0316***          0.0205
                                                                        (0.0118)           (0.0199)
    Yimt18j                                                              0.0769***          0.1510***
                                                                        (0.0162)           (0.0357)
    R2                                                                   0.400              0.375
    N                                                                    2.551              2.551
1
  Standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
 The explanatory variables included in these regressions are as follows: characteristics of parents
when child was 18 (age, marital status, family structure, education, sex, race), sex of child, average
weighted wage rates for young people, employment rate when the child was 18, the high school and
college wage premium, year fixed effects, and state fixed effects.
2
  The variables Himt18j and Yimt18j were treated as endogenous in the control function and 2SLS
                                                                P
specifications and were instrumented with ∆HP Imt18j and ∆Wmt      18j
                                                                       . See Section 3.2 for a description
of these instruments.




                                                   38
Table 5. College Graduation, Annual Tuition, Types of College and College Quality1

                                                             EduF in1                 EduF in2
                                              Full  Attended (Coll, but                (Coll &
    Variable                                 Sample College No Transfer)              Transfer)
    Graduated from College (Grad)2              0.27         0.40              0.37       0.43
    Annual Tuition (T uition)2                             $9,608            $7,776    $10,924
    Attended 4-Year College (4Y rColl)2                      0.82              0.76       0.87
    Attended Private College (P rivate)3                     0.33              0.31       0.35
    College Quality Index (Quality)3                         0.33              0.07       0.49
1
  Statistics weighted using PSID family weights. Tuition amounts are in 2013$.
2
  Conditional on those students who attended college at age 18.
3
  Conditional on those who attended a 4-year college at age 18.




                                                39
Table 6. Effects of Parents’ Home Equity and Family Income on
Probability of Child Graduating from College & the Quality of the
College their Children Attended1

                   OLS             2SLS2            OLS             2SLS2
    Variable       (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
    Panel A.    Graduate from College: 2
    Himt18j       0.000       0.011*
                 (0.002)     (0.005)
    Yimt18j       0.004*      0.006
                 (0.002)     (0.004)
    R2            0.291       0.266
    N             1,322       1,322
    Panel B.    Annual Tuition Costs 2          Attended 4-Year College 2
    Himt18j     99.943*    112.302                0.003      −0.001
               (51.204)   (148.424)              (0.002)      (0.005)
    Yimt18j     19.887        4.892             −0.001         0.003
               (63.967)   (164.709)              (0.003)      (0.006)
    R2           0.397        0.397               0.288        0.280
    N             786          786                 793          793
    Panel C.   Attended Private College 3         College Quality Index 3
    Himt18j       0.002      −0.007                0.015      −0.024
                 (0.003)      (0.009)             (0.010)       (0.026)
    Yimt18j     −0.002         0.002               0.020*        0.037
                 (0.003)      (0.007)             (0.011)       (0.035)
    R2            0.300        0.283               0.343         0.304
    N              653          653                 640           640
1
  Standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
 The explanatory variables included in these regressions are as follows: charac-
teristics of parents when child was 18 (age, marital status, family structure,
education, sex, race), sex of child, average weighted wage rates for young pe-
ople, employment rate when the child was 18, whether the child is a head or
wife at age 24, the high school and college wage premium, year fixed effects,
and county fixed effects.
2
  The variables Himt18j and Yimt18j were treated as endogenous in the 2SLS
                                                                     P
specifications and were instrumented with ∆HP Imt18j and ∆Wmt          18j
                                                                           . See
Section 3.2 for a description of these instruments.
2
  Conditional on those students who attended college at age 18.
3
  Conditional on those who attended a 4-year college at age 18.




                                      40
Table 7. Parents’ & Child’s Debt when Child Age 24, by College Attendance
and Financing Decisions1

                                                     EduF in0     EduF in1      EduF in2
                                           Full                   (Coll, No      (Coll &
    Variable                              Sample     (No Coll)    Transfer)     Transfer)
    Parents’ Debt:
      Mortgage Debt (M ortBal)              $6.95         $4.54        $5.95       $10.01
      Other Debt (OthDebt)                  $1.34         $0.84        $1.35        $1.80
    Child’s Debt:
      Other Debt (OthDebt)                  $1.23         $0.80        $1.50         $1.32
      Student Debt (StudentDebt)            $1.26         $0.22        $1.68         $1.69
1
    Statistics weighted using PSID family weights. All debt amounts are in 10K of 2013$.




                                              41
    Table 8. Effects of Child’s College Attendance and Parental Financing on Parents’
    and Child’s Indebtedness when Child is Age 241

                                                    OLS           2SLS2         OLS           2SLS2
    Variable                                        (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)
    Panel A. Parents’ Debt: 3                        Mortgage Debt                 Other Debt
    No College (base category)

    Attends College (Attend)            -0.602   -0.604                       0.346**        0.342**
                                        (0.466)  (0.467)                     (0.163)        (0.155)
    Attends with Financing (AttendF in) 1.593*** 1.592***                     0.235          0.800
                                        (0.568)  (0.533)                     (0.184)        (0.695)
      2
    R                                    0.468    0.486                       0.231          0.231
    N                                    2,270    2,270                       2,268          2,268
    Panel B. Child’s Debt: 4                      Student Loan Debt                Other Debt
    No College (base category)

    Attends College (Attend)             1.443*** 1.429***                    1.047*** 1.042***
                                        (0.211)   (0.193)                    (0.247)   (0.244)
    Attends with Financing (AttendF in) -0.116    -0.102                     -0.307    -0.307
                                        (0.334)   (0.306)                    (0.225)   (0.211)
      2
    R                                    0.286     0.285                      0.108     0.108
    N                                    1,152     1,152                      1,587     1,587
1
  Standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. All debt amounts are in 10K of
2013$.
2
  The variables Parental Income in year t24j (Yimt24,j ) for Panel A specifications and Child’s Income
in year t24j (Yjmt24,j ) for Panel B specifications were treated as endogenous in the 2SLS specifications
                                                   P         P
and were instrumented with ∆HP Imt18j , ∆Wmt         18j
                                                         , ∆Wmt24j
                                                                   and Dist4Y rP ubijm . See Sections 3.2
and 5.1 for descriptions of these instruments.
3
  The explanatory variables included in Panel A regressions are as follows: characteristics of parents
when child was 24 (age, marital status, family structure, education, sex, race), sex of child, non-equity
wealth of the parent when the child is 24, value of home at 18, year fixed effects, and county fixed
effects.
4
  The explanatory variables included in Panel B regressions are as follows: characteristics of parents
when child was 14 (age, marital status, family structure, education, sex, race), sex of child, whether
the child is a head or wife at age 24, whether the child is married by 24, year fixed effects, and county
fixed effects.




                                                   42
Appendix A      Descriptive Statistics for Demoographic Cha-
                racteristics of Parents and their Children

         Table A.1. Characteristics of Homeowning Parents &
         College-Age Children in PSID, 1997-20151

             Variable                                                Mean
             Parent Characteristics when Child was Age 18:
             Parent married/cohabiting                      0.70
             Parent HH Headed by Male                       0.82
             Number of children under 16 in parent HH       0.87
             Age of parent House Head                      45.58
             Parents Non-White                              0.29
             Parent’s Education:
              High school or less                           0.21
              Some College                                  0.51
              College graduate                              0.28
             Child Characteristics:
             Sex of child (male=1)                                   0.48
             Year child turned 182                                2004.50
         1
             Statistics weighted using PSID family weights.
         2
             The range of years in which children turned age 18 is 1998–2015.




                                          43
Appendix B                F-Tests for Weak Instruments in First-Stage
                          Regressions for Control Function and IV
                          Estimators

   Below we provide statistics for F-tests of the joint significance of the instrumental variables
in the first-stage regressions for the control function and 2SLS estimators used in the various
analyses presented in the paper. In the Table below, we indicate the tables to which the test
statistics of the first-stage regressions correspond and the instrumental variables used in these
regressions. We note that F-test statistics with values less than 10 for first-stage regressions are
considered evidence of weak instruments (Stock and Staiger, 1997).

            Table B.1. F-Tests of Joint Significance of Instruments in First Stage
            Regressions1

            Dependent Variable:      Yimt18,j        Himt18,j         Yimt18,j          Himt18,j

            First Stage Regressions for Results in Table 4:
                                  Coll. Choice & Financing                Amt. Transferred
            F-test                 20.34          73.53                17.16       64.05
              2
            R                      0.361          0.524                0.459       0.573
            First Stage Regressions for Results in Table 6:
                                     Graduate from College 2
            F-test                 61.30          35.02
              2
            R                      0.558          0.573
                                      Annual Tuition Costs 2          Attended 4-Year College 2
            F-test                   44.24        11.89               43.80        12.04
            R2                       0.611        0.636               0.610        0.637
                                     Attended Private College 3        College Quality Index 3
            F-test                   27.95        12.83                28.28       12.65
            R2                       0.624        0.635                0.623       0.635
        1
         The instruments used in all of these regressions and for which the F-tests apply are:
                          P
        ∆HP Imt18j and ∆Wmt 18
                               .
                                 j
        2
          These regressions are for children who attended college at age 18.
        3
          These regressions are for children who attended a 4-year college at age 18.




                                                    44
Table B.2. F-Tests of Joint Significance of Instruments
in First Stage Regressions

    Dependent Variable:                                       Ynmt24 1

    First Stage Regressions for Results in Panel A of Table 8:2
    Parents’ Mortgage Debt at t24j
    F-test                                                     22.36
    R2                                                         0.789
    Parents’ Other Debt at t24j
    F-test                                                     22.18
    R2                                                         0.789
    First Stage Regressions for Results in Panel B of Table 8:3
    Child’s Student Loan Debt at t24j
    F-test                                                    124.60
    R2                                                         0.849
    Child’s Other Debt at t24j
    F-test                                                    181.30
    R2                                                         0.811
1
  The n subscript for Ynmt24 = i for parents and = j for child.
2
  The instruments used in the parents’ debt regressions and for
                                                  P           P
which the F-tests apply are: ∆HP Imt18j , ∆Wmt      18j
                                                        , ∆Wmt  24j
                                                                    and
Dist4Y rP ubijm .
3
  The instruments used in the child’s debt regressions and for
                                                  P           C
which the F-tests apply are: ∆HP Imt18j , ∆Wmt      18j
                                                        , ∆Wmt  24j
                                                                    and
Dist4Y rP ubijm .




                                  45
Appendix C                 Parents’ Home Equity Loans when Child
                           Age 18 and their Impact on College Gra-
                           duation

   In this Appendix, we present an alternative version of the results for whether a parents’
child graduated from college in Panel A of in Table 6 in which we include an indicator variable
for whether the parents had a home equity loan when their child wage age 18 to the OLS and
2SLS regressions. (This indicator variable, HEquityLoanimt18j , is equal to 1 if the parent had a
home equity loan when child j was age 18 and equal to 0 otherwise.) The results are displayed
in Table C.1.

                     Table C.1. Effects of Parents’ Home Equity, Fa-
                     mily Income, and Whether Parent had Home Equity
                     Loan when Child was Age 18 on Whether Child Gra-
                     duated from College, for College Attendees1

                                                         OLS            2SLS2
                          Variable                       (1)             (2)
                          Himt18j                    0.0007            0.0153**
                                                    (0.0021)          (0.0076)
                          Yimt18j                    0.0043*         −0.0032
                                                    (0.0021)          (0.0085)
                          HEquityLoanimt18j          0.0627            1.3499*
                                                    (0.0405)          (0.8533)
                          R2                         0.292
                          N                           1,322             1,322
                      1
                        Standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
                      * p < 0.1.
                       The explanatory variables included in these regressions are
                      as follows: characteristics of parents when child was 18 (age,
                      marital status, family structure, education, sex, race), sex of
                      child, average weighted wage rates for young people, employ-
                      ment rate when the child was 18, whether the child is a head
                      or wife at age 24, the high school and college wage premium,
                      year fixed effects, and county fixed effects.
                      2
                        The variables Himt18j , Yimt18j and HEquityLoanimt18j
                      were treated as endogenous in the 2SLS specificati-
                                                                               P
                      ons and were instrumented with ∆HP Imt18j , ∆Wmt           18
                                                                                    ,
                                                                                   j
                                     P
                      ∆HP Imt18j × ∆Wmt18
                                          , (∆HP Imt18j )2 , and (∆Wmt
                                                                    P
                                                                      18
                                                                         )2 .
                                             j                                j




                                                    46
