NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STATE DEPENDENT EFFECTS OF MONETARY POLICY:
THE REFINANCING CHANNEL
Martin Eichenbaum
Sergio Rebelo
Arlene Wong
Working Paper 25152
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25152

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018

We thank Adrien Auclert, Martin Beraja, David Berger, Francesco Bianci, Luigi Bocola, Christoph
Boehm, Daniel Greenwald, Erik Hurst, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Moritz Lenel, Monika Piazzesi, Mikkel
Plagborg-Moller, Martin Schneider, Chris Tonetti, Joe Vavra and Mark Watson for their comments,
and Jose Alvarez and Laura Murphy for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25152.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Martin Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

State Dependent Effects of Monetary Policy: the Refinancing Channel
Martin Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong
NBER Working Paper No. 25152
October 2018, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. E52,G31
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how the impact of monetary policy depends on the distribution of savings from
refinancing mortgages. We show that the efficacy of monetary policy is state dependent, varying
in a systematic way with the pool of potential savings from refinancing. We construct a
quantitative dynamic life-cycle model that accounts for our findings and use it to study how the
response of consumption to a change in mortgage rates depends on the distribution of savings
from re financing. These effects are strongly state dependent. We also use the model to study the
impact of a long period of low interest rates on the potency of monetary policy. We find that this
potency is substantially reduced both during the period and for a substantial amount of time after
interest rates renormalize.
Martin Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu
Sergio Rebelo
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Finance
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and CEPR
and also NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu

Arlene Wong
Department of Economics
Princeton University
192A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
arlenewong@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

In the U.S., most mortgages have a fixed interest rate and no prepayment penalties.
The decision to refinance depends on the potential savings relative to the refinancing
costs. In this paper, we study how the impact of monetary policy depends on the
distribution of savings from refinancing the existing pool of mortgages. We show that
the efficacy of monetary policy is state dependent, varying in a systematic way with
the pool of savings from refinancing.
We construct a quantitative dynamic life-cycle model that highlights new trade-offs
in the design of monetary policy. These results are interesting to the extent that our
model is a credible representation of the data. Our model has a number quantitative
properties that lend support to its credibility. First, it is consistent with the lifecycle dynamics of home-ownership rates, consumption of non-durable goods, household
debt-to-income ratios and net worth. Second, it accounts for the probability that a
mortgage is refinanced conditional on the potential savings from doing so. Third, and
most importantly, the model accounts quantitatively for the state-dependent nature
of the effects of monetary policy on refinancing decisions that we document in our
empirical work.
We use our model to study how the impact of a decline in interest rates on consumption depends on the distribution of mortgage rates. One simple measure of the
average savings from refinancing is the average gap between outstanding mortgages and
current mortgage rates. When this gap is equal to the average value in the data, a 25
basis point drop in the mortgage rate leads to a 0.5 percent rise in consumption. In
contrast, when this gap is one standard deviation above the mean, then consumption
rises by 0.9 percent. So, our model implies strong state dependency in the response of
consumption to a fall in mortgage rates.
We also use our model to study how the potency of monetary policy is affected by
the history of interest rates. In response to the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve

1

kept interest rates low for an extended period of time. The potential benefits of this
policy are widely understood (see e.g. Woodford (2012) and McKay, Nakamura and
Steinsson (2016)). Our model points to a potentially important cost: it reduces the
potency of monetary policy during the period of low interest rates as well as during the
renormalization period and its aftermath. The size of these effects is substantial. In
our model-based experiments, when interest rates are below their steady-state values
for six years, monetary policy is less potent for up to two years after renormalization.
Our empirical results are closely related to contemporaneous, independent work by
Berger, Milbradt, Tourre, and Vavra (2018). We view their work as complementary to
ours. In contrast to these authors, we use a quantitative life-cycle model to study the
impact of a lengthy period of low interest rates on the efficacy of monetary policy.
We build on Wong (2020) who studies how the impact of monetary policy shocks on
consumption varies by age and mortgage decisions. She finds that mortgage decisions,
including refinancing, are a key determinant of why consumption responses to monetary
policy shocks vary by age. Our contributions relative to Wong (2020) are two-fold.
First, we document and model the state-contingent nature of refinancing decisions and
its implications for the efficacy of monetary policy. Second, we focus on how the history
of interest rates affects the potency of monetary policy. In pursuing these objectives,
we must overcome the challenge of allowing for state-dependent effects of monetary
policy in a structural model. The basic issue is that to make their decisions people
must form expectations about future income, mortgage rates, house prices, and rental
rates. The stochastic processes for these variables are state dependent, so our model
solution technique must accommodate this dependency.
Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3 describes the data used in our analysis. Section 4 discusses our measures of
potential savings from refinancing. Our basic empirical results are contained in Section
5. We present our quantitative life-cycle model of housing, consumption and mortgage decisions in Section 6. In Section 7, we show that our model can account for the
2

state-dependent effects of monetary policy that we document in our empirical work. In
addition, we use the model to study the state-dependent effects of monetary policy on
consumption. Section 8 uses our model to study how the potency of monetary policy is
affected by an extended period of low interest rates and by a fall in refinancing costs.
Section 9 provides some conclusions.

2

Related literature

Our paper relates to four strands of literature. The first strand is a classic literature on
the effect of changes in interest rates on mortgage refinancing. Dunn and McConnell
(1981) develop a theoretical model for pricing mortgage-backed securities that takes
into account the effect of refinancing on the prices, risks and expected returns of such
securities. In an early empirical contribution, Green and Shoven (1986) use a proportional hazard model to estimate the reduction in the probability of prepayment of
fixed-rate mortgages associated with interest rate changes. Schwartz and Torous (1989)
extend the Green and Shoven (1986) analysis to include the effects of seasoning, lagged
refinancing rates, heterogeneity in borrowers, and seasonal effects. They use the resulting model to study the effect of prepayment on the valuation of mortgage-backed
securities. Recent contributions to this literature study the distribution of mortgage
rates across borrowers and emphasizes the role of transaction costs and inattention in
explaining refinancing decisions. Examples include Andersen et al. (2015) and Bhutta
and Keys (2016). In this paper, we extend the existing literature by studying how the
distribution of mortgage rates generates state dependency in the effects of monetary
policy.
The second strand of the literature is a large body of empirical work that studies
consumption and refinancing responses to interest rate changes. This literature shows
that households increase their expenditures when they reduce their mortgage payments
and engage in cash-out refinancing (see, Beraja et al. (2018) and the references therein).

3

In this paper, we extend the existing literature by showing that the effects of interest
rate changes on refinancing and real outcomes depend on the distribution of mortgage
rates. This type of state dependency differs from the state dependency based on loanto-valuation constraints or home equity emphasized by Beraja et al. (2018).
Because young households tend to be borrowers, while old households tend to invest
in long-term bonds, monetary policy has potentially important distributional effects.
So our paper is related to a third strand of the literature on the distributional effects
of inflation (see Doepke and Schneider (2006) and Doepke, Schneider and Selezneva
(2018) and the references therein). In contrast to these papers, we focus on the statedependent effects of monetary policy, and how these effects are shaped by past interest
rate decisions made by the Federal Reserve.
The fourth strand of literature focuses on the role of the mortgage market in the
transmission of monetary policy. Iacovello (2005), Garriga, Kydland and Sustek (2017)
and Greenwald (2018) model the transmission mechanism using a representative borrower and saver model. In contrast, we use a heterogenous agent, life-cycle model that
features transaction costs and borrowing constraints. Our model is related to work
by Rios-Rull and Sanchez-Marcos (2008), Iacovelo and Pavan (2013), Auclert (2017),
Berger, Guerrieri, Lorenzoni, and Vavra (2017), Garriga and Hedlund (2017), Guren,
Krishnamurthy, and McQuade (2017), Guren, McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2018),
Kaplan, Violante and Mittman (2017), Kaplan, Violante and Moll (2018), and Wong
(2020)).
Finally, our work is related to a recent literature that stresses the importance of
mortgage refinancing as a key channel through which monetary policy affects the economy. This literature discusses why the efficacy of monetary policy depends on the
state of the economy because of supply-side considerations. For example, authors like
Greenwald (2018) emphasize the importance of loan-to-value ratios and debt servicingto-income ratios. Other authors focus on the effect of changes in house prices on the
ability of households to refinance their mortgages. For example, Beraja, Fuster, Hurst,
4

and Vavra (2018) show that regional variation in house-price declines during the Great
Recession created dispersion in the ability of households to refinance.
In contrast to the previous literatures, we focus on reasons why the efficacy of
monetary policy depends on the state of the economy because of demand-side considerations, i.e. households’ desire to refinance their mortgages. We certainly believe that
supply-side constraints were important in the aftermath of the financial crisis. But we
also think that demand-side considerations were important prior to the crisis and will
become increasingly important as credit markets return to normal.

3

Data

Our empirical work is primarily based on Core Logic Loan-Level Market Analytics,
a loan-level panel data set with observations beginning in 1995. In our benchmark
analysis, we end the sample in 2007. This decision is motivated by the widespread view
that credit constraints were much more prevalent during the financial crisis period than
in the preceding period (see e.g. Mian and Sufi (2014) and Beraja et al. (2018)).
The Core Logic data includes borrower characteristics (e.g. FICO and ZIP code)
and loan-level information.1 The latter includes the principal of the loan, the mortgage
rate, the loan-to-value ratio (LTV), and the purpose of the loan (whether it refinances
an existing loan or finances the purchase of a new house). There is no information on
the purpose of a small fraction of the loans (5 percent). We compute the fraction of
mortgages refinanced as the ratio of mortgages that are refinanced to the total number
of mortgages outstanding. This measure is conservative in the sense that some of
the loans whose purpose is unknown to us could have been used to refinance existing
mortgages.
For each borrower, we obtain county-level demographic information including age
structure, share of employment in manufacturing, lender competitiveness, measures of
1

FICO is the acronym for the credit score computed by the Fair Isaac Corporation.

5

home-equity accumulation, educational attainment, unemployment, and per capita income. Appendix A contains a description of these variables. We also obtain county-level
housing permits from the Census Building Permits Survey and county-level unemployment rates from the Current Population Survey.
We use the Freddie Mac Single Family Loan-Level dataset to study cash-out refinancing, defined as instances in which households increase the loan balance when they
refinance. Cash-out refinances are identified by the Freddie Mac loan-purpose flag.
These data are available since 1999.
Throughout, we confine our analysis to fixed-rate 30-year mortgages. Our results
are robust to considering mortgages of different maturities. Figure 1 displays the level
and first differences of the fraction of mortgages that are refinanced and the fraction of
refinanced mortgages that are cash-out.
We obtain aggregate time-series variables, including forecasts of unemployment,
inflation and GDP from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. We obtain time-series
of the Federal Funds Rate, house price and rental rates, and income per capita from the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Finally, we obtain measures of expected inflation
from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. Nominal variables are converted to real
variables using the consumer price index.

4

Measuring the potential savings from refinancing

A key variable in our analysis is the potential savings that a household would realize
by refinancing its mortgage at the current mortgage rate. Potential savings depend
on a variety of factors, including old and new mortgage interest rates, outstanding
mortgage balances and the precise refinancing strategy that a household pursues. In
general, it is impossible to construct a simple, non-parametric summary statistic of
these potential savings. Our benchmark measure is the average interest-rate gap. This
measure is based on the difference between the current and alternative mortgage rate

6

that household i could refinance at.
We compute the average, across households, of time-t interest-rate gaps between
new and old loan as:

nt
 old

1 X
At =
rit − ritnew .
nt i=1

(1)

Here, ritnew is the interest rate at time t for a new 30-year conforming mortgage for the
same FICO and region as the original mortgage. The variable nt denotes the number
of mortgages outstanding at time t. At is a real variable, since it is based on the
difference between two nominal interest rates. A virtue of At is that it doesn’t impose
any assumptions about the household’s refinancing decision. The downside is that it
abstracts from relevant information such as outstanding balances or the characteristics
of the new mortgage (e.g. duration and fixed versus variable interest rates).
The new mortgage rate depends on borrower characteristics, including FICO and
region. We group FICO scores into the following bins: below 600, 600−620, 620−640,...
,...,760−780, and greater than 780. We condition on the household’s region to take into
account the possibility that mortgage rates vary by region, say because of differences
in income or house price growth.2 We also considered versions of ritnew that condition in
a non-parametric way on additional variables such as the loan-to-valuation ratio or the
mortgage balance. Adding these measures does not significantly improve the ability of
ritnew to fit the distribution of interest rates across new borrowers.
The annualized unconditional quarterly mean and standard deviation of At is −14
basis points and 70 basis points, respectively. The distribution of the interest rate
gap varies considerably over time. To make this point concrete, Figure 2 displays the
distribution of interest-rate gaps in 1997.Q4 and 2000.Q4. These dates correspond to
local turning points in the average real mortgage rate. The fraction of households with
positive savings and the average savings is much higher in 1997.Q4 than in 2000.Q4.
2

As a practical matter, we find that our results are robust to not conditioning on the household’s
region. This finding is consistent with Hurst, Keys, Seru and Vavra (2016) who find little evidence of
spatial variation in mortgage rates.

7

In Appendix C3, we consider three alternative measures of the savings from refinancing. The first is the fraction of mortgages with a positive interest-rate gap. The
second is based on the average present value of savings from pursuing a simple refinancing strategy. The third is based on the fraction of loans above a time-varying threshold
for refinancing, defined in Agawal, Driscoll and Laibson (2013). Our results are robust
to using these alternative measures.
The average cross-sectional dispersion in the average rate gap is 1 percent. In
Appendix B, we report the correlation between the average rate gap and observable
characteristics (unemployment rate, per capita income, share of college educated, home
equity accumulation, median age, manufacturing share, and share of males in the population). Other things equal, the average rate gap is higher in areas with a higher
unemployment rate and it is a decreasing function of per capita income, the share of
the population that is college educated and the amount of home equity accumulation.

5

Empirical results

In this section, we study how the impact on refinancing activity of a change in the
mortgage rate depends on the average savings from refinancing. We report basic correlations based on ordinary least squares (OLS) in Appendix D. Here, we implement
an instrumental-variable (IV) strategy for measuring the marginal effect of a drop in
mortgage rates on the fraction of loans that are refinanced. Our main results are that
this marginal effect is state dependent as is the impact of a fall in interest rates on
economic activity.

5.1

State dependency and refinancing activity

We begin by considering the regression:
c
ρct+4 = β0 X c + β1 ∆RtM + β2 ∆RtM × Act−1 + β3 Act−1 + β4 Zt−1 + β5 Zt−1
+ ηtc .

8

(2)

Here, ρct+4 is the fraction of mortgages refinanced in county c between quarters t and
t + 4, X c is a vector of county fixed effects, and ∆RtM denotes the percentage fall
in our measure of the mortgage rate.3 The variable Act−1 is the average interest-rate
gap for mortgages in county c at time t − 1. The vector Zt−1 denotes a set of timevarying controls. Motivated by results in Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) we include
as controls the average forecast of the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) for the
following variables: real GDP growth (two year ahead), the civilian unemployment rate
(two years ahead), and the CPI inflation rate (one and two years ahead). The variable
c
Zt−1
includes the following county-level controls: the unemployment rate, average log-

change in real home equity, one-year lag of the refinancing rate, median age, share of
employment in manufacturing, share of college educated and a Herfindahl index of the
mortgage sector.4 We include the latter index, developed in Scharfstein and Sunderam
(2013), to capture any variation in pass through by region, induced by time variation
in competition across counties. We cluster the standard errors at the county level.
The coefficient β1 measures the effect of a change in mortgage rates on refinancing
rates when Act−1 is zero. The coefficient β2 measures how the effect of an interest rate
change depends on the level of Act−1 . Identification of β1 and β2 comes from both
cross-sectional and time-series variation in the response of refinancing to interest rate
changes.5
We estimate regression (2) using two instruments for ∆RtM that exploit exogenous
changes in monetary policy.6 The instruments are based on high-frequency movements
3

If the mortgage rate falls by 25 basis points, ∆Rt = 0.25. Defining ∆Rt as the fall in the interest
rate, instead of the interest rate change makes the regression coefficients easier to interpret.
4
Our results are robust to including as additional controls the fraction of mortages in county c that
have adjustable rates and the interaction of this variable with the monetary policy shock.
5
In practice, most of the variation in refinancing rates comes from time-series variation in interest
rates. One way to see this result is to regress the rate of refinancing in county c at time t on time and
county fixed effects. County fixed effects account for less than 20 percent of the variation in refinancing
rates.
6
It is difficult to give a causal interpretation to the OLS-based estimates of β1 and β2 because
of potential endogeneity bias caused by any omitted variable that affects both mortgage rates and
savings from refinancing. For example, suppose that during a recession more people are unemployed

9

in the Federal Funds futures rate and the two-year Treasury bond yield in a small
window of time around Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) announcements.7
In the case of the Federal Funds futures, the monetary policy shock is defined as:
εt =

D
(yt+4+ − yt−4− ) .
D−t

(3)

Here, t is the time when the FOMC issues an announcement, yt+4+ is the Federal Funds
futures rate shortly after t, yt−4− is the Federal Funds futures rate just before t, and
D is the number of days in the month. The term D/(D − t) adjusts for the fact that
Federal Funds futures contracts settle on the average effective overnight Federal Funds
rate. We consider a 60-minute window around the announcement that starts 4− = 15
minutes before the announcement. This narrow window makes it highly likely that
the only relevant shock during that time period (if any) is the monetary policy shock.
Following Cochrane and Piazessi (2002) and others, we aggregate the identified shock
to construct a quarterly measure of the monetary policy shock. This aggregation relies
on the assumption that shocks are orthogonal to economic variables in that quarter.
The standard deviation of the implied monetary policy shock is 12 basis points.
In Appendix C2, we report our empirical analysis when we measure a monetary
policy shock using the 2-year Treasury yield:
εt = yt+4+ − yt−4− .
Instrumental variable results. We begin by providing evidence that monetarypolicy shocks are a strong instrument for changes in mortgage rates. First, we show that
monetary policy shocks significantly affect mortgage rates. To this end, we estimate via
and therefore less willing to incur the fixed costs associated with refinancing. Also, suppose that the
recession occurred because the Fed raised interest rates. Then, ∆RtM and ∆RtM × Act−1 would be
positively correlated with ηtc creating a downward bias in β1 and β2 .
7
This approach has been used by Kuttner (2001), Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005), Cochrane
and Piazessi (2002), Nakamura and Steinsson (2018), Gorodnichenko and Weber (2015), and Wong
(2020), among others.

10

OLS the contemporaneous change in the 30-year mortgage rate after a one percentage
point monetary policy shock. Our point estimate is 60 basis points with a standard
error of 28 basis points. Taking sampling uncertainty into account, this estimate is
consistent with those of Gertler and Karadi (2015, Table 1), which range from 17 to 48
basis points, depending on the set of instruments used to identify the monetary shock.
Second, we estimate the following first-stage regressions:
∆RtM = α0 + α1 εt + α2 εt × Act−1 + η1t ,
∆RtM Act−1 = γ0 + γ1 εt + γ2 εt × Act−1 + η2t .
Table 1 reports our first-stage regression estimates. The F test for the joint significance
of the regression coefficients is greater than ten. This result is consistent with the view
that policy shocks are strong instruments. We also perform the Stock-Yogo (2005) test
for the null hypothesis of weak instruments. The test statistic is 79.5, which firmly
rejects the null of weak instruments.
Panel A of Table 2 reports results based on estimating regression (2). We cluster the standard errors at the county level. The estimated values of β1 and β2 are
statistically significant at the one percent significance level. Estimated parameters on
controls are reported in Appendix C3. That appendix also documents the robustness
of the estimated value of β1 to including various lagged values of the refinancing rate
in our empirical specification. Appendix D contains the analogue of Panel A of Table
2 generated using OLS.
To interpret the coefficients in Panel A of Table 2, suppose that all independent
variables in regression (2) are initially equal to their time-series averages and that
the average interest-gap is initially equal to its mean value of −14 basis points. The
unconditional average share of loans that is refinanced is 7.9 percent. The estimates in
Panel A of Table 2 imply that a 25 basis point drop in mortgage rates raises the share of
loans that is refinanced to 8.0 percent.8 Now, suppose that the drop in mortgage rates
8

This value is given by 7.9% + 0.25 × (β1 + β2 × −0.14) = 8.0%.

11

occurs when the average interest-rate gap is equal to 56 basis points. The latter is the
mean value of −14 basis points plus one standard deviation (70 basis points). Then,
a 25 basis points drop in mortgage rates raises the share of loans that is refinanced
to 12.6 percent.9 So, the marginal impact of a one standard-deviation increase in the
average interest-rate gap is 4.7 percent. This effect is large relative to the average
annual refinancing rate, 7.9 percent.
Figure 3 reports the impulse response function of the fraction of mortgages refinanced to a 50 basis point drop in the mortgage rate. We compute this function for
two cases corresponding to whether the average interest-gap is initially equal to −14
basis points or to 56 basis points. Panel A shows that in the first case there is a weak
response of refinancing to the interest rate cut. Panel B shows that in the second case
there is a persistent rise in refinancing activity over a two-year period.
A natural question is whether there is substantial variation over time in the impact
of mortgage rate reductions on refinancing rates. To answer this question we use the
estimated version of regression (2) to calculate the effect of a 50 basis points reduction
in the mortgage rate on the refinancing rate at each point in time in our sample. The
solid line in Figure 4 plots this effect and the dashed lines correspond to the 95 percent
confidence interval (computed using the delta method). There is substantial variation
in the potency of monetary policy through the refinancing channel. This effect was most
potent in 1998 and 2003 and least potent in 1995 and 1999. These dates correspond
to periods in which the average rate gap is high and low, respectively. We discuss our
model’s implication for these effects in Section 5.
As a robustness test, we also included in regression (2) interaction terms of the form
c
∆Rtm Zt−1
. These results are reported in Appendix C3. The implied estimates of β2

are statistically indistinguishable from those reported in Panel A of Table 2. The fact
that including the interaction terms does not change the estimated elasticities implies
that the state dependency that we highlight is distinct from other potential mechanisms
9

This value is given by 7.9% + 0.25 × (β1 + β2 × 0.56) = 12.6%.

12

explored in the literature. These mechanisms include, for instance, differential responses
in refinancing to a decline in mortgage rates due to differences in competitiveness of the
local lending market. It is also distinct from state dependency related to cross-county
variation in the value of home equity.

5.2

Cash-out refinancing

In this subsection, we use the Freddie Mac data on single-family loans to study how
cash-out refinancing responds to changes in mortgage rates. Cash-out refinancing occurs
when the balance of the new mortgage is higher than that of the old mortgage. Mian
and Sufi (2014) show that households predominantly use this type of refinancing to
increase their consumption. So, cash-out refinancing plays an important role in the
determining the effects of changes in interest rates on consumption.
We run a version of regression (2) in which the dependent variable is the fraction
of total loans with cash-out refinancing in county c between quarters t and t + 4. Panel
B of Table 2 reports our results. Both β1 and β2 are significant at the one-percent
significance level. To interpret these coefficients, suppose that all independent variables
in regression (2) are initially equal to their time-series averages and that the average
interest-gap is initially equal to its mean value of −14 basis points. The estimates
in Panel B of Table 2 imply that a 25 basis point drop in mortgage rates raises the
share of loans with cash-out refinancing by 1.2 percent. Now suppose that the drop in
mortgage rates occurs when the average interest-rate gap is 56 basis points. Then, a 25
basis point drop in mortgage rates raises the share of loans with cash-out refinancing
by 4.3 percent. So, the marginal impact of a one standard deviation increase in the
average interest-rate gap is 3.1 percent. This effect is large relative to the average
annual cash-out refinancing rate, 5.5 percent.
We also estimate a version of regression (2) in which the dependent variable is the
log change in the balance of mortgages with cash-out refinancing. Panel C of Table
2 reports our results. To interpret these coefficients, suppose that all independent
13

variables in regression (2) are initially equal to their time-series averages and that
the average interest-gap is initially equal to its mean value of −14 basis points. The
estimates in panel C of Table 2 imply that a 25 basis points drop in mortgage rates
raises the balance of the mortgages with cash-out refinancing by 5.2 percent. Now
suppose that the drop in mortgage rates occurs when the average interest-rate gap is
56 basis points. Then, a 25 basis point drop in mortgage rates raises the balance of the
mortgages with cash-out refinancing by 8.9 percent. So, the marginal impact of a one
standard deviation increase in the average interest-rate gap is 3.8 percent. The median
mortgage balance in 2007 was roughly $123, 000. It follows that a 3.8 percent increase
in mortgage balance translates into equity extraction of roughly $4, 700, a substantial
amount of cash that becomes available for consumption.

5.3

Refinancing and economic activity

We now study how a change in mortgage rates affects economic activity. To be clear,
we are not the first to establish that changes in mortgage rates induced by monetary
policy shocks affect economic activity. We are simply establishing that these effects are
state dependent.
Our first measure of economy activity is the county-level unemployment rate. Our
second measure is the number of county-level permits required for new, privately-owned
residential buildings. This series, produced by the Census Building Permits Survey
since 2000, is of particular interest to us because it is the only component of the Conference Board’s leading indicator index available at the county level. We aggregate
these monthly data to a quarterly frequency.
We begin by considering a regression where the dependent variable is the change in
the unemployment rate between quarter t and t + 4:
∆Unemploymentt,t+4 = θ0 X c + θ1 ∆RtM + θ2 ∆RtM × Act−1 + θ3 Act−1 + ηtc .

(4)

Table 3 reports our IV estimates obtained using the instruments discussed in Section
14

4.1. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. The point estimate of θ1 is
statistically significant at a 10 percent level while θ2 is statistically significant at the 1
percent level. To interpret the point estimates, suppose that all independent variables in
regression (5) are initially equal to their time-series averages. Our estimates imply that
a 25 basis point drop in mortgage rates lowers the unemployment rate by 0.6 percent.
Suppose that the drop in mortgage rates occurs when the average interest-rate gap
is equal to 56 basis points. Then a 25 basis point drop in mortgage rates lowers the
unemployment rate by 1.8 percent. So, the marginal impact of a one standard deviation
increase in the average interest-rate gap is 1.2 percent.
We now consider a version of the regression where the dependent variable is the
year-on-year quarterly log-change in new building permits:
∆ log Permitst,t+4 = θ0 X c + θ1 ∆RtM + θ2 ∆RtM × Act−1 + θ3 Act−1 + ηtc .

(5)

Table 3 reports our IV estimates. Both θ1 and θ2 are statistically significant at a 1
percent significance level. To interpret the point estimates suppose that all independent
variables in regression (5) are initially equal to their time-series averages. The estimates
in column 2 imply that a 25 basis point drop in mortgage rates raises the percentage
change in new permits to 17.0. Now suppose that the drop in mortgage rates occurs
when the average interest-rate gap is equal to 56 basis points. Then a 25 basis points
drop in mortgage rates raises the percentage change in new permits to 23.6 percent. So,
the marginal impact of a one standard deviation increase in the average interest-rate
gap is 6.6 percent. This effect is large relative to a one standard deviation change in
housing permits (26 percent).
Overall, we view the results of this section as providing strong support for two
hypotheses. First, the effect of a change in the interest rate on refinancing activity
is state dependent. When measures of the average gains from refinancing are high, a
given fall in the interest rate induces a larger rise in refinancing activity. Second, the
effect of a change in the interest rate on economic activity, as measured by new housing
15

permits or the rate of unemployment, is state dependent in a similar way. This finding
is consistent with the results in Di Maggio, Kermani, Keys, Piskorski, Ramcharan, Seru,
and Yao (2017). These authors show that households who experience a drop in monthly
mortgage payments increase their car purchases. It is also consistent with results in
Berger, Milibrandt, Tourre and Vavra (2018) who show that there is a state-dependent
rise in auto registrations when interest rates fall.

6

A life-cycle model

To analyze the state-dependent effects of monetary policy, we use a life-cycle model
with incomplete markets, short-term borrowing constraints, refinancing costs, and loanto-value constraints on mortgages. Our model generalizes the framework in Wong
(2020) to allow for state dependency in the aggregate state process for the interest rate,
income, house prices and rental rates. This generalization allows us to incorporate
state-dependent feedback effects of monetary policy shocks on aggregate variables.
We use the model for three purposes. First, we quantify the structural factors that
drive the state-dependent effects of monetary policy. Second, we estimate the statedependent effect of an exogenous change in the interest rate on consumption. Third, we
study how the potency of monetary policy is affected by a long period of low interest
rates.
It is evident that there is a great deal of heterogeneity across households in their
propensity to refinance in response to an interest rate cut. One way to capture that
heterogeneity is to allow for a great deal of heterogeneity in unobserved fixed costs
of refinancing. An alternative is to model that heterogeneity in refinancing behavior
as reflecting demographics, initial asset holdings and idiosyncratic income shocks. We
choose the second strategy to minimize the role of unobservable heterogeneity. An
advantage of this approach is that it is consistent with the positive correlation between
consumption growth and refinancing decisions at the household level. This correlation is

16

important for generating a response of aggregate consumption to interest rate changes.10
Households. The economy is populated by a continuum of people indexed by j. We
think of the first period of life as corresponding to 25 years of age. Each person can
live up to 60 years. The probability of dying at age a is given by 1 − πa . Conditional
on surviving, people work for 40 years and retire for 20 years. The upper bound on a
person’s life is 85 years (T = 85).
The momentary utility of person j who is a periods old at time t is given by:
1−σ
cαjat h1−α
−1
jat
ujat =
, σ > 0.
1−σ
Here, cjat and hjat denote the consumption and housing services of person j who is a
periods old at time t. People derive housing services from either renting or owning a
house. Renters can freely adjust the stock of rental housing in each period. To buy
a home of size h, households pay a transaction cost Φnew h. To refinance an existing
mortgage, homeowners pay a lump-sum transaction cost Φrefi .11 The stock of housing
depreciates at rate δ.
Upon death, the wealth of person j who is a periods old at time t, Wjat , is passed
on as a bequest. If a person has an outstanding mortgage upon death, the house is sold
to pay the mortgage and the remainder of the estate is passed on as a bequest. Person

1−σ
j derives utility B Wjat
− 1 / (1 − σ) from this bequest. Here B is a positive scalar.
The presence of a bequest motive allows the model to be consistent with the fact that
many people die with large amounts of assets (see e.g. Huggett (1996) and De Nardi
and Yang (2014)). More importantly, this motive helps the model generate the fall in
consumption and house downsizing that we observe in data for older consumers. The
10

Recent work that emphasizes the correlation between household consumption and interest rate
changes for understanding the behavior of aggregate consumption includes Auclert (2017), Kaplan,
Violante and Moll (2018), and Wong (2020).
11
See DeFusco and Mondragon (2018) for evidence that fixed costs, including closing costs and
refinancing fees, are important determinants of refinancing decisions.

17

reason is that, as people get older, the bequests receive a higher weight in the utility
function relative to consumption and housing.
Income processes. The time-t labor income of person j who is a periods old at time
t, yjat , is given by:
log(yjat ) = χa + ηjt + φa log(Yt ).

(6)

Here, χa and ηjt are a deterministic age-dependent component and a stochastic, idiosyncratic component of yjat , respectively. We assume that
ηjt = ρη ηjt−1 + εηt ,
where |ρη | < 1 and εηt is a white noise process with standard deviation, ση . The variable
Yt denotes aggregate real income. The term φa captures the age-specific sensitivity of
yjat to changes in aggregate real income.
As in Guvenen and Smith (2014), we assume that a person receives retirement
income that consists of a government transfer. The magnitude of this transfer is a
function of the labor income earned in the year before retirement.
Mortgages. Home purchases are financed with fixed-rate mortgages. An individual
j who enters a mortgage loan at age a in date τ , pays a fixed interest rate Rjaτ and
makes a constant payment Mjaτ . The mortgage principal evolves according to:
bj,a+1,t+1 = bjat (1 + Rjaτ ) − Mjaτ .
Mortgages are amortized over the remaining life of the individual. So, the maturity of
a new loan for an a-year old person is m(a) = T − a. The fixed interest rate Rjaτ is
m(a)

equal to rτ

, which is the time-τ market interest rate for a mortgage with maturity

m(a).
The mortgage payment, Mjaτ , is given by:
Mjaτ = Pm(a)
k=1

bjaτ
(1 + Rjaτ )−k

18

.

(7)

If a person refinances or buys a new house at time t, the new mortgage rate is given by
the current fixed mortgage rate:12
Rjat = rτm(a) .
Bond holdings. A person can invest in a one-year bond that yields an interest rate
rt . The variable sjat denotes the time-t bond holdings of person j who is a years old at
time t. Bond holdings have to be non-negative, sjat ≥ 0.
Loan-to-value constraint. At the time of origination, the size of a mortgage loan
must satisfy the constraint:
bjat ≤ (1 − φ)pt hjat .
Here, pt is the time-t price of a unit of housing and φpt hjat is the minimum down
payment on a house.
State variables. The state variables in our model are z = {a, η, K, S}. Here, a, η,
and K denote age, idiosyncratic labor income, and asset holdings, respectively. The
vector K includes short-term asset holdings (s), the housing stock (hown for homeowners, zero for renters), the mortgage balance (b for homeowners, zero for renters), and
the interest rate (R) on an existing mortgage. Finally, S denotes the aggregate state
of the economy which consists of the logarithm of real output, y, the logarithm of real
housing prices, p, the real interest rate on short-term assets, r, and the logarithm of
economy-wide average positive savings from refinancing, A. We assume that S is a
stationary stochastic process (see Section 6.2).
Mortgage interest rate and rental rates. It is difficult for traditional asset pricing
models to account for the empirical properties of mortgage interest rates, rental rates
12

In practice, U.S. mortgage rates can depend on the size of the loan. For example, jumbo mortgages
(loans sizes that exceed the maximum guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) have higher interest
rates than non-jumbo mortgages. To simplify, we abstract from this feature in our analysis.

19

and housing prices (see Piazzesi and Schneider (2016)). For this reason, we assume
that these variables depend on the aggregate state of the economy via functions that we
estimate. This approach allows the model to be consistent with the empirical properties
of these variables.
The mortgage interest rate, rtm , is given by
m
m
rtm = am
0 + a1 rt + a2 yt .

(8)

This formulation captures, in a reduced-form way, both the term premia and changes
in risk premia that arise from shocks to the aggregate state of the economy.13
The real rental rate is given by:
log(prt ) = α0 + α1 rt + α2 yt + α3 pt .

(9)

Value functions. We write people’s maximization problems in recursive form. To
simplify notation, we suppress the dependence of variables on j, a and t. Denote by
V (z)rent , V (z)purchase , V (z)own & refi , and V (z)own & no refi the value functions associated
with renting, purchasing, owning a home and refinancing, and owning a home and not
refinancing, respectively. A person’s overall value function, V (z), is the maximum of
these value functions:

V (z) = max V (z)rent , V (z)purchase , V (z)own & refi , V (z)own & no refi .

(10)

A renter maximizes
V (z)rent

"
#
0 1−σ

W
−
1
= max
u c, hrent + βE πa V (z 0 ) + (1 − πa )B
,
c,hrent ,s0
1−σ

(11)

subject to the budget constraint,
c + s0 + pr hrent = y + (1 − δ)phown + (1 + r)s − b(1 + R),
13

(12)

In practice, mortgage rate can vary with loan size. For computational reasons, we abstract from
this issue in our analysis.

20

and the borrowing constraint on short-term assets,
s0 ≥ 0.
The discount rate and the probability of survival are denoted by β and πa , respectively.
h
i
0 1−σ
The term B W
− 1 / (1 − σ) represents the utility from bequests. The terms
(1 − δ)phown and b(1 + R) in equation (12) take into account the possibility that the
renter used to be a home owner. The renter’s housing stock and mortgage debt are
both zero:
0

h own = b0 = 0.
A household who decides to purchase a new home maximizes:
"
V (z)purchase =

max

c,s0 ,h0 own ,b0

u (c, h0own ) + βE πa V (z 0 ) + (1 − πa )B

W

0

1−σ

−1

#

1−σ

,

subject to the budget constraint
c + s0 + ph0own − b0 = y + (1 − δ)phown + (1 + r)s − b(1 + R) − Φnew hown ,
the borrowing constraint on short term assets,
s0 ≥ 0,
and the minimal down payment required on the mortgage,
b0 ≤ (1 − φ)ph0own .
The new mortgage interest rate is given by:
R0 = r m .
A homeowner who does not refinance his mortgage maximizes:
"
own & no refi

V (z)

own

= max
u (c, h
0
c,s

0

(1 − δ)) + βE πa V (z ) + (1 − πa )B

W

0

1−σ

1−σ

−1

#
,
(13)

21

subject to the budget constraint,
c + s0 = y + (1 + r)s − M ,
the law of motion for the mortgage principal
b0 = b(1 + R) − M ,
and the short-term borrowing constraint
s0 ≥ 0.
Since the person doesn’t refinance, the interest rate on his mortgage remains constant
R0 = R.
The mortgage payment is given by equation (7).
A homeowner who refinances, maximizes:
"
V (z)own & refi =

max

c,s0 ,h0 own ,b0

u (c, h0own ) + βE πa V (z 0 ) + (1 − πa )B

W

0

1−σ

−1

1−σ

#
,

subject to the budget constraint
c + s0 + ph0own − b0 + Φrefi = y + (1 − δ)phown + (1 + r)s − b(1 + R),
the borrowing constraint on short-term assets,
s0 ≥ 0,
and the minimal down payment required on the mortgage,
b0 ≤ (1 − φ)ph0own .
The new mortgage interest rate is given by:
R0 = r m .
The problem for a retired person is identical to that of a non-retired person, except
that social security benefits replace labor earnings.
22

6.1

Calibration

Our parameter values are summarized in Table 4. We set σ = 2 and choose B, β,
and α to target key moments of the savings and asset-holding profiles. These moments
include the average home ownership rate, the liquid wealth-to-income ratio for workingage households, and the share of wealth held by older households (aged 65+) from the
2007 Survey of Consumer Finances. The idiosyncratic-income parameters ρη and ση
are chosen to match the annual persistence and standard deviation of residual earnings
in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. The deterministic, age-specific vector χa is
chosen to match average log earnings by age estimated by Guvenen et al. (2015). We
choose φa to match the correlation between real aggregate income per capita and agespecific earnings in the Current Population Survey. The house depreciation rate, δ, is
chosen to be consistent with the average ratio of residential investment to the residential
stock from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. We set φ so that, in line with Landvoigt,
Piazzesi and Schneider (2015), the minimum mortgage downpayment is 20 percent. We
m
m
estimate the parameters of the processes for mortgage rates (am
0 ,a1 , and a2 in equation

(8)) and and rental rates (α0 , α1 , α2 , and α3 in equation (9)). We discuss the empirical
fit of these processes in Section 6.2.
Recall that we think of the first period of life as 25 years of age. Age-dependent
survival probabilities are given by the U.S. actuarial life-expectancy tables and assume
a maximum age of 85. Assets and income in the first period are calibrated to match
average assets and income for persons of ages 20 to 29 in the 2004 Survey of Consumer
Finances. Mortgage rates are calibrated using the mortgage rate in the beginning of
the sample.
We set the fixed cost of refinancing, Φrefi , equal to $2, 100 (2 percent of median
house price) to match the average quarterly fraction of new loans (4.5 percent). This
value is consistent with the range of costs provided in the Federal Reserve’s “Consumer

23

Guide to Mortgage Refinancings” and with the evidence in LaCour-Little (2000).14 The
fixed costs of refinancing include the appraisal fee, the inspection fee, and the attorney
review fee. We set the transaction cost of buying a new home, Φnew , equal to 5 percent
of the house price. This value is consistent with empirical evidence as well as the values
used in the literature.15

6.2

The evolution of the aggregate states

To solve their decision problem, people must form expectations about their future
income, mortgage rates, house prices, and rental rates. Because of its partial equilibrium
nature, our model does not imply a reduced-form representation for these variables. It
seems natural to assume that people base their expectations on a time-series model
that has good forecasting properties.
Recall that we model the mortgage rate with maturity m as a function of rt and yt
(see equation (8)). We estimate this function using OLS. Table 5 reports our estimates.
Figure 5 shows that the estimated version of equation (8) does a very good job at
accounting for the time-series behavior of the 30-year mortgage rate over the period
1989-2008.
It is hard for traditional asset-pricing models to account for the empirical relation
between rental rates and housing prices (see, e.g., Piazzesi and Schneider (2016)). So,
we model the real rental rate as a linear function of rt , yt and pt (see equation (9)). We
estimate this function using the national house price and rent indices obtained from the
Federal Reserve Bank Dallas. Figure 6 shows that the estimated version of equation
(9) does a very good job at accounting for the time-series behavior of the logarithm of
the house price-to-rent ratio over the period 1989-2008.
We estimate a suite of quarterly time-series models for the aggregate-state vector
14

https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/refinancings
See Diaz and Luengo-Prado (2012), Berger et al. (2018), and Zillow’s home guide (2018) at
https://www.zillow.com/sellers-guide/closing-costs-for-sellers.
15

24

St = {log(rt ), log(yt ), log(pt ), log(At )}. We eliminate from consideration models with
explosive dynamics and judged the remaining models balancing parsimony and the
implied average (over time and across variables) root-mean-square-error (RMSE) of
one-year-ahead forecasts. Parsimony is important for the computational tractability of
our structural model.
We settled on the following model for quarterly changes in St :
∆St = B0 + B1 ∆St−1 + B2 ∆ log(rt−1 )at−1 + ut .

(14)

Here, B1 is a 4 × 4 matrix, B0 and B2 are 4 × 1 vectors, and ut is a 4 × 1 Gaussian disturbance. The variable at−1 is the logarithm of economy-wide average positive savings
from refinancing at time t − 1, log(At−1 ).
Appendix E reports the average RMSE for the alternative models that we considered. These models include specifications with up to two lags of ∆St and ∆ log(rt−1 )at−1 .
In addition, we included cross products of all the variables in different combinations
as well as squares and cubes of the different variables. We also considered different
moments of various measures of the gains from refinancing. For example, we replaced
at with average savings (in levels), median savings, average interest-rate gap, logarithm
of average positive interest-rate gap, median of the interest-rate gap, fraction of mortgages with positive savings, and standard deviation of savings. To conserve on space
we do not report these results.
None of the RMSEs associated with the alternative specifications was smaller, taking
sampling uncertainty into account, than the RMSE associated with specification (14).
Specification (14) did have a statistically significant smaller RMSE than many of the
alternatives.
Table 6 reports point estimates and standard errors for B1 and B2 associated with
specification (14). The coefficients in B2 are statistically significant at the one percent
level for log(rt ) and log(pt ) and at the 5 percent level for at .
A natural question is whether the inclusion of at and ∆rt−1 at−1 in specification
25

(14) helps reduce the RMSE for the three aggregate variables. log(rt ), log(yt ), and
log(pt ). Simply adding at to a linear VAR for log(rt ), log(yt ), and log(pt ), reduces the
average RMSE for log(rt ), log(yt ), and log(pt ) in a modest but statistically significant
way (from 0.0298 to 0.0258). Adding the interaction term ∆rt−1 at−1 results in an even
more modest, but statistically significant reduction, in the average RMSE for log(rt ),
log(yt ), and log(pt ).
We compute the impulse response of St to a monetary policy shock implied by (14)
as follows. First, the shocks ut are regressed on the monetary-policy shock. Second,
we compute the impact of a monetary-policy shock on log(rt ), log(yt ), log(pt ), and
log(At ). Figure 7 displays the associated impulse response functions for a one-standarddeviation shock to monetary policy. We see that an expansionary monetary policy shock
is associated with a persistent rise in income and house prices as well as a decrease in
average positive savings from refinancing.
Recall that our model abstracts from growth. To solve the model, we set the constant vector, B0 , in (14) to zero and work with the implied VAR for the level of the
variables. This procedure is equivalent to estimating the VAR using data that have
been demeaned. We approximate this VAR with a Markov chain using the procedure
described in Appendix F. A key property of the Markov chain is that the implied
impulse response functions to a monetary policy shocks are stationary.

7

Empirical performance of the model

We now compare our model with the data along a variety of dimensions. Model statistics
are computed using simulated data generated as follows. We start the simulation in
1994, assuming that people have the distribution of assets, liabilities and mortgage rates
observed in the data. We feed into the model the realized values of log(rt ), log(yt ), and
log(pt ) for the period 1995-2007. We simulate the idiosyncratic component of income,
yjat , for each household in our model.

26

Given the estimated VAR, the housing Sharpe ratio implied by the model is 2.46.16
This value is similar to the Sharpe ratio implied by the NIPA Fixed Asset Tables 2.1,
line 68 for the 1994-2007, which is 2.53.
One possible concern is that our model abstracts from the idiosyncratic shocks to
home prices emphasized by Landvoigt, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2015). Incorporating
idiosyncratic risk into the model would greatly increase the computational complexity
of our analysis. To assess the robustness of our results to more volatile house prices,
we increase the volatility house-price shocks by 50 percent. Our main results regarding
the state-dependent nature of monetary policy are robust to this perturbation. More
volatile house prices make housing a riskier asset and deter home ownership. However,
that volatility does not have a first-order effect on refinancing decision.

7.1

Life-cycle dynamics.

Consider the model’s ability to account for how the behavior of U.S. households evolves
with age. Figure 8 displays home-ownership rates, as well as the logarithm of nondurable consumption, the ratio of debt to net wealth, and household net wealth. The
model does a reasonably good job at accounting for these moments of the data. Notably
home ownership rates rise with age and stabilize when people reach their 40s, both in
the model and the data.
To understand the mechanisms that underlie dynamics of home-ownership, it is
useful to consider a simplified analysis of the cost of owning versus renting.17 The net
benefit of owning a home is given by:


prt
pt+1 − pt
bt
bt
Φnew hown
+ Et
− rt 1 −
− rtm − δ − rt
.
pt
pt
pt
pt
pt

(15)

The first term in equation (15) is the savings from not paying rent, which we express
as a fraction of the house price, prt /pt . In our sample, prt /pt is on average 7.7 percent.
16
17

Returns to housing in the model are computed as log [(prt + pt+1 − pt ) /pt ].
See Diaz and Luengo-Prado (2012) for a review of the literature on the user cost of owning a home.

27

The second term in this expression is the expected real rate of housing appreciation.
In our calibration, Et (pt+1 − pt ) /pt is on average one percent per year. The third term
is the opportunity cost of the down payment, 1 − bt /pt on a house. The fourth term
is the mortgage payment on the house, where rtm denotes the average mortgage rate.
We estimate that the average value of rt and rtm in our sample is 3.5 percent and 6.5
percent, respectively. The fifth term, δ, is the rate of depreciation of the housing stock.
We assume that δ is three percent per annum. The last term in equation (15) is the
fixed cost of buying a house as a percentage of the house price. One difference between
renting and buying not captured by equation (15) is that renters can freely vary the
amount of housing services they purchase while home owners have to pay a fixed cost
to change the size of their house.
A number of observations follow from equation (15). First, other things equal, the
higher is the rental-price ratio and the expected real rate of housing appreciation, the
more attractive it is to own rather than rent a house. Second, other things equal, the
less expensive is the house (i.e. the lower is pt ) the larger is the negative impact of a
fixed cost on the desirability of purchasing a home (rt Φnew hown /pt ). Third, other things
equal, the higher the down payment a household can make, the more attractive it is to
own a home. To see this effect, it is convenient to rewrite the sum of the opportunity
cost of the down payment and the mortgage payment, rt (1 − bt /pt ) + (bt /pt ) rtm as:
rt +

bt m
(r − rt ) .
pt t

(16)

The first term (rt ), is the opportunity cost of purchasing a home without a mortgage.
The second term, is the additional interest costs associated with buying a home with a
mortgage of size b, which requires paying the spread (rtm − rt ). From the second term,
it is clear that, other things equal, the bigger is the mortgage the less desirable it is to
buy a home.
With these observations as background, consider again Figure 8. The model implies
that home ownership rates rise as people get older. This result follows from the fact
28

that, on average, income rises as a person ages, peaking between 45 and 55 years of age.
As income rises, people want to live in bigger homes, which reduces the impact of fixed
costs on the desirability of purchasing a home (rt Φnew hown /pt ). Also, as income rises,
people can afford bigger down payments on those homes, which, as we just discussed,
reduces the user cost of owning a home. Taken together, both forces imply that home
ownership should on average rise until people are 55. Thereafter, home ownership
rates roughly stabilize. However, many elderly homeowners downsize. They sell their
old homes and use the proceeds to buy smaller homes which they eventually leave as
bequests.
From Figure 8, we also see that household debt declines with age. This fact reflects
two forces. First, people pay down their mortgages over time reducing their debt.
Second, elderly people who are downsizing have small mortgages. Finally, household
net wealth rises on average with age, as people pay off their mortgages and save for
bequests.
Figure 8 also shows that non-durable consumption rises until people reach ages
45 to 55 and then falls. The rise results from two forces. First, people face borrowing constraints which prevent them from borrowing against future earnings. Second,
most households have an incentive to save so they can make a down payment on their
mortgage. The fall in non-durable consumption after age 55 reflects the presence of a
bequest motive. As people age, the weight of expected utility from leaving bequests
rises relative to the weight of utility from current consumption. When we reduce B,
the parameter that controls the strength of the bequest motive, consumption becomes
smoother.

7.2

Refinancing and the interest-rate gap

In the data, the average annual refinancing rate is 7.9 percent with a standard deviation
of 4 percent. In the model, the average annual refinancing rate is 7.5. So, taking sampling uncertainty into account, the model does a good job of accounting for the average
29

refinancing rate. The model is also consistent with the fraction of new mortgages issued
in each period.18 This fraction is 25 percent both in the model and the data.
Figure 9 plots the fraction of loans that are refinanced as a function of the interestrate gap faced by people in the economy. We display these statistics both for the data
and the model. The data-based statistics are computed as follows. We bin all the loans
according to the interest-rate gap ranges indicated in the figure. For every bin, we
calculate the fraction of loans that were refinanced. Figure 9 displays these fractions.
The model-based statistics are computed as follows. The initial distribution of age,
assets, mortgage debt and mortgage rates is the same as the actual distribution in 1994.
We assume there are 100, 000 households in the model economy and draw idiosyncratic
shocks for each of these people. At each point in time, we feed in the actual values of the
aggregate state of the economy from 1995 to 2007 for rt , yt , and pt . We use the model to
construct time series for at , the logarithm of economy-wide average positive savings from
refinancing. People use this variable to form expectations for future aggregate states
using the estimated version of equation (14). At every point in time, from 1995 to 2007,
the model generates a distribution of interest-rate gaps and refinancing decisions. So,
we are able to compute the same moments that we estimated from the data. As can
be seen from Figure 9, the model does reasonably well at accounting for the data.
Andersen et al. (2015) and the references therein show that some agents do not refinance their fixed-rate mortgage when market rates fall below their locked-in mortgage
rate. This phenomenon emerges more strongly at the top end of the rate gap. We could
accommodate this “burnout” phenomenon by introducing heterogeneity in refinancing
costs. However, this additional complexity seems unlikely to change our insights into
the state-dependent nature of monetary policy because relatively few loans exhibit the
burnout phenomenon. For example, the fraction of initial mortgages in our sample that
18

New mortgages include refinancing of existing mortgages and mortgages issued to people who buy
a new home. This pool of people includes people who were renters, new cohorts who enter the housing
market, and people who upgrade or downgrade the size of their house.

30

are never prepaid is 0.3 percent.

7.3

State dependency of refinancing decisions

We now assess the ability of the model to account for the state-dependent nature of
the effects of monetary policy on refinancing decisions. Using data simulated from
the model, we estimate the following regression using the monetary policy shock as
instrument:
ρt+4 = β0 + β1 ∆RtM + β2 ∆RtM × Aj,t−1 + β3 Aj,t−1 + ηt .

(17)

This regression is a version of regression (2) without county fixed effects.19 Table 7,
panel A reports the model-based and data-based estimates of β1 and β2 . The data
estimates are reproduced from panel A of Table 2. The model does quite well at
accounting for the regression results. Taking sampling uncertainty into account, the
model- and data-based estimates are not significantly different from each other.
Another way to assess the implications of the model is to calculate the effect of a
50 basis points reduction in the mortgage rate on the refinancing rate at each point in
time. Our results are displayed in Figure 4 along with the regression-based estimates
of these effects. Taking sampling uncertainty into account, the model does reasonably
well at tracking the regression-based estimates. Even in periods where the model does
less well, its implications are only a few basis points outside the confidence interval.
We also compute the time series of four cross-sectional moments for the interest rate
gap in the data and the model: the top 25 percentile, the median, the mean, and the
bottom 25 percentile. The time-series correlation between these moments in the model
and the data is 75 percent, 60 percent, 85 percent, and 62 percent, respectively.
19

To make the model regressions comparable with the data regressions we include a one-year lag of
the refinancing rate.

31

7.4

State dependency of mortgages for new home purchases

It is of interest to ask whether the model accounts for the response of purchases of
new homes to an exogenous change in mortgage rates. To this end, we run a version of
regression (2) on data simulated from the model. The dependent variable is the fraction
of new mortgages used to purchase a new home relative to the number of outstanding mortgages. Table 7, panel C reports our results. Both regression coefficients are
statistically significant at the one-percent level. Also, there is strong evidence of state
dependency in the response of new home purchases to changes in mortgage rates.
To interpret these coefficients, suppose that all the independent variables in the
regression are initially equal to their time-series averages and that the average interestgap is initially equal to its mean value of −14 basis points. The estimates in column
1 of Panel C of Table 7 imply that a 25 basis points drop in mortgage rates raises
the fraction of loans for new purchases by 3.5 percent. Now suppose that the drop in
mortgage rates happens when the average interest-rate gap is equal to 56 basis points.
Then, a 25 basis points drop in mortgage rates raises the fraction of loans for new
purchases to 6.1 percent. So, the marginal impact of a one standard-deviation increase
in the average interest-rate gap is 2.6 percent.
Column 2 of Table 7, panel C shows that the regression coefficients implied by our
model are consistent with the empirical patterns discussed above. However, the model
somewhat understates the direct impact of a change in mortgage rates and overstates
the state dependency of new home purchases.

7.5

Endogenous versus exogenous sources of state dependency

Our model implies a non-linear representation of the data which involves state dependency. So, our theory compels us to estimate a VAR that allows for state dependency.
The VAR which we use to compute agents’ expectations is an exogenous source of state
dependency. But the model embodies other strong, endogenous sources of state depen-

32

dency. The most important of these sources is the presence of fixed costs of refinancing
or getting a mortgage for a new home.
To substantiate these claims, we shut down the exogenous state-dependence in the
VAR by setting the relevant coefficients to zero. We then re-solve the model using the
resulting linear VAR and re-calculate the statistics reported in Table 7. The results are
reported in column 3 of that Table. Consider the regression results for the fraction of
loans that are refinanced. From panel A, we see that the coefficient on the interaction
term (∆Rt × Average Rate Gap) declines by roughly 40 percent. So, 40 percent of the
state dependence comes from the VAR and 60 percent is generated endogenously by the
model. Roughly similar results hold for the fraction of loans that are cash-refinanced
(panel B) and the fraction of loans for home purchases (panel C). Taken together these
results demonstrate that it is quantitatively important to allow for state dependency in
the VAR. At the same time, most of the state dependency is endogenously generated
by the structural model.

8

Model implications

In this section, we use our model to study the state-dependent effects of a fall in
interest rates on consumption and how the potency of monetary policy depends on the
past behavior of interest rates.

8.1

State-dependent effects of a fall in interest rates on consumption

We now use model-simulated data to estimate the effect of an exogenous change in the
interest rate on the annual change in the logarithm of consumption for household j
(cjt ):
cjt+1 − cjt = βj0 + β1 ∆RtM + β2 ∆RtM × At−1 + β3 At−1 + ηtc .

33

(18)

The coefficients in this regression are estimated using the monetary shocks as instruments. Table 8 shows the effect of a 50 basis points fall in interest rates. The total
effect on consumption of an exogenous change in mortgage rates is 2.84 percent. The
direct effect (β1 ∆RtM ) is 0.84 percent. The state dependent effect (β2 ∆RtM × average
interest-rate gap) is 2.00 percent.20
To understand the mechanisms that underlie these effects, we estimate regression
(18) for two separate groups: households that have positive liquid assets (sjt > 0)
and households that do not have positive liquid assets (sjt ≤ 0). We call the first
group of households unconstrained and the second group constrained. Forty percent
of households are, on average, constrained in our model. This fraction is consistent
with the results in Kaplan, Violante and Weidner (2014). More than 80 percent of the
constrained households are home owners. These households correspond to what Kaplan,
Violante and Weidner (2014) call wealthy hand-to-mouth consumers. The total effect
on consumption of an exogenous change in mortgage rates is 4 and 0.63 percent for
constrained and unconstrained households, respectively. So, the consumption response
is predominantly driven by the constrained households. We obtain similar results when
we define constrained (unconstrained) households as having less (more) liquid assets
than two weeks of income.
Roughly 80 percent of the households who refinance engage in cash-out refinancing.
This value is in line with the evidence presented by Chen, Michaux, and Roussanov
(2020). Using a conservative estimate based on conforming mortgages, these authors
argue that, over the period 1993-2010, on average about 70 percent of refinanced loans
involve cash-out.
In response to a one-percent decline in mortgage rates, households who engage in
cash-out refinancing in our model increase their loan balances by 27.7 percent. This
20

Very little of the consumption response to mortgage rate changes is driven by the associated
changes in house prices. We establish this result by computing the response of consumption to a
change in mortgage rates keeping house prices constant. The implied consumption response is similar
to that obtained when we do allow house prices to change.

34

effect is broadly consistent with the empirical estimates of Bhutta and Keys (2016).21
To assess the model’s implications for the state-dependent nature of cash-out refinancing, we use model-simulated data to estimate a version of regression (17) using
monetary policy shocks as instruments. Here, the dependent variable is the fraction
of total loans with cash-out refinancing. Our results are reported in Table 7, panel B.
Comparing columns II in panels A and B, we see that in the data the state-dependent
effect of an interest rate cut on refinancing and cash-out refinancing is about the same.
The model captures, qualitatively, the state-dependent nature of cash-out refinancing,
i.e. the larger are potential savings, the larger is the response of cash-out refinancing
to an interest rate cut.
Our model abstracts from the effects of refinancing decisions on bank owners. If
those owners are constrained and the profits of the bank rise or fall one to one by the
amount that consumers save by refinancing, the refinancing channel has no aggregate
effect on consumption. However, it is natural to assume that bank owners behave like
unconstrained households. Under this assumption, the negative effect of refinancing on
the consumption of bank owners is much smaller in absolute value than the positive
effect on the consumption of constrained households.22 As a result, the overall effect
of refinancing on aggregate consumption is positive. To explore the potential size of
this effect we do a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation. We compute the change
in consumption implied by a permanent-income-style calculation by multiplying the
present value of total savings from refinancing by the steady-state risk-free rate (3.5
percent). We subtract this value from total consumption. This adjustment has a
negligible impact with the growth rate of consumption falling by less than 0.01 percent.
It is possible that lenders respond to a fall in their income by reducing the flow
of credit to borrowers. The precise way in which interest rates and the quantity of
21

Using Equifax data, these authors estimate that, in response to a one-percent decline in mortgage
rates, households who engage in cash-out refinancing increase their loan balances by 23 percent.
22
The negative effect on U.S. consumption of the decline in profits due to refinancing is mitigated
by the fact that some of stock shares of U.S. banks are owned by foreigners.

35

credit change adjust depends on monetary policy, the nature of financial frictions and
whether the economy is open or closed. For example, in an open economy like the U.S.,
international capital flows could adjust to compensate for any decline in the flow of
credit from domestic lenders to domestic borrowers.
Finally, we do not explicitly model the wealth effects of duration risk on mortgage
investors. This risk is embedded in the mortgage rates that we use to estimate equation
(8). In solving the model, the mortgage rate that people face and their expectations
of future mortgage rates reflect changes in the duration-risk premia arising from the
state of the economy. So, even though we don’t explain those premia, we do account
for them when solving the model.
8.1.1

The importance of life-cycle dynamics

Life-cycle dynamics play an important role in our quantitative results. To illustrate this
role, we consider an alternative version of the model with no income life-cycle dynamics.
Unlike in our benchmark model, young people have no systematic incentive to borrow
against future income. As a result, mortgage balances are smaller and fewer people are
financially constrained. So, the gains from refinancing are smaller.
In this alternative economy, both the direct and state-dependent effect of monetary
policy on refinancing are smaller. The direct effect of a change in mortgage rates
as measured by β1 (the coefficient on ∆RtM in equation (2)) drops from 0.06 in the
benchmark model to roughly zero. The state dependent effect as measured by β2 (the
coefficient on ∆RtM × average interest-rate gap in equation (2)) drops from 0.232 to
0.088. We obtain similar results for the fraction of loans that are cash-out refinanced.

8.2

State dependency and the potency of monetary policy

In this subsection, we provide intuition for the state-dependent effects of monetary
policy in our model by comparing the impact of a given interest rate cut in different

36

scenarios. We then use our model to quantify an important cost of prolonged lowinterest rate periods.
8.2.1

Model experiments

In all of the experiments considered in the subsection the model economy starts in
steady state, i.e. the aggregate state variables have been constant and equal to their
unconditional means. However, people have been experiencing ongoing idiosyncratic
shocks to their income.
The three paths that we consider are displayed in Figure 10. At each point in
time, people form expectations about aggregate states according to the Markov-chain
approximation to the demeaned level representation of the aggregate states associated
with (14). Our results are summarized in Panel A of Table 9.
In the first scenario, we consider the effect of an interest rate cut when the economy
starts in steady state and remains there until period four. In period five, we feed an
interest-rate shock into the model that generates a 50-basis point fall in the interest
rate. We refer to this scenario as the benchmark scenario. From row (i) of Table 9,
Panel A we see that 16 percent of people refinance in the impact period of the shock and
aggregate consumption increases 1.7 percent. There are two reasons why these effects
are so large. First, all existing homeowners with a mortgage have a positive rate gap
after the interest rate cut because they obtained their mortgages at the steady-state
mortgage interest rate. Second, people expect the interest rate to revert to the mean,
so period seven is a good time to refinance.
In the second scenario, the central bank steadily raises interest rates starting in
period one until they peak in period four. The central bank then cuts the interest rate
by 50 basis points in period five. From row (ii) of Table 9, Panel A we see that only
9 percent of households refinance in the impact period of the shock and there is only
a 0.3 percent rise in consumption. The reason for these small effects is that only 31
percent of people face a positive interest-rate gap in period five. These are the people
37

who entered new mortgages despite rising interest rates due to life-cycle considerations
or idiosyncratic income shocks.
In the third scenario, the central bank steadily lowers interest rates starting in
period one until they trough in period four. The central bank then cuts interest rates
by 50 basis points in period five. From row (ii) of Table 9, Panel B we see that in this
scenario, 13 percent of people refinance in the impact period of the shock and there is
a 0.6 percent rise in consumption. The consumption effect is smaller than in the first
scenario because a subset of people refinanced as interest rates declined and engaged
in cash-out refinancing. Those people are generally not liquidity constrained in period
seven.23
These results show that, in our model, the current impact of monetary policy
through the refinancing channel depends on the past actions of the Fed. The fundamental reason is that those actions affect the distribution of potential savings from
refinancing.
8.2.2

A downside of long periods of low interest rates

Here we use our model to quantify an important cost of keeping interest rates low for
a long period of time: it makes monetary policy less powerful for an extended period
thereafter.
We begin by addressing the question: after rates have been normalized, when does
monetary policy regain its initial potency? To address this question we consider the
paths displayed in Figure 11. In all of these cases, the economy starts from steady state
and the interest rate falls from 3.5 percent to 1 percent for four periods. The interest
rate then normalizes back to 3.5 percent. The difference between the cases is that t
periods after the normalization, t ∈ {1, 2, 3}, the interest rate falls by 50 basis points.
Results are reported in Table 10. From this table we see that aggregate consumption
23

The average interest rate is a key determinant of when households refinance. When they do so,
it is often optimal to take advantage of the new loan and cash out. Because of the fixed costs of
refinancing, it is not in general optimal to refinance just to cash out.

38

rises by 0.8, 0.8 and 2.3 percent for t = 1, 2, and 3, respectively. So the sooner the
interest rate cut after normalization occurs, the smaller is its impact. For reference,
recall that aggregate consumption rises by 1.7 percent if the interest rate falls by 50
basis points in the benchmark scenario where the economy is in steady state. So, the
potency of an interest rate cut is substantially reduced for the first two years after the
interest rate is normalized.
The key factor driving this result is that fewer people face a positive interest-rate
gap when the interest rate is cut relative to the benchmark scenario. Many people
face a negative-rate gap because they entered mortgages at rates that were lower than
the steady-state mortgage rate. So fewer people have an incentive to refinance their
mortgages in period seven than in the benchmark scenario.
Over time, people enter new loans in response to life-cycle-related income changes
and idiosyncratic-income shocks. So, the share of people with a mortgage rate equal to
the steady-state rate increases over time. That increase in turn implies that a larger
fraction of people have a positive-rate gap after a 50 basis points rate cut. The potency
of an interest rate cut rises over time. According to Table 10, it takes roughly three
years for monetary policy to have the same effect on consumption as in the benchmark
case.
Consistent with the post-normalization results, our model also implies that monetary policy is less potent when interest rates are low. To illustrate this point, suppose
that starting from steady state, the interest rate falls from 3.5 percent to 1 percent for
five periods.24 Then, in period seven, the interest rate falls by an additional 50 basis
points (not shown on the Figure). According to our model, only 5 percent of people
refinance in the impact period of the shock and there is only a 0.8 percent rise in consumption. These modest effects contrast sharply with the effect of an interest rate fall
24

As above, we model changes in interest rates via sequences of interest rate shocks. In all cases,
agents form expectations about aggregate states according to the Markov-chain approximation to the
demeaned level representation of the aggregate states associated with equation (14).

39

in the benchmark scenario where 16 percent of people refinance in the impact period
of the shock and there is a 1.7 percent rise in consumption.
What can policy makers do to deal with the potency problem? One possibility is
to take advantage of the nonlinear response of consumption to a fall in the interest
rate. Recall that a 50 basis point interest rate cut in the first period after interest rates
normalize leads to a 1.7 percent rise in consumption. Suppose instead that the interest
rate fell by 100 basis points. Then consumption would rise by 2.8 percent. This increase
is roughly the same if, starting from steady state, the interest rate falls by 100 basis.
These results suggest that policy makers can deal with the potency problem in one
of two ways. If they cut interest rates by relatively small amounts, e.g. 50 basis points,
then they wait until policy regains the same impact as in the steady state. However,
if they are prepared to cut interest rates by large amounts, e.g. 100 basis points, the
potency problem is not an issue as long as monetary policy is not constrained by the
effective lower bound (ELB).
There is considerable debate about the importance of the ELB. For example, Debortoli, Gali, and Gambetti (2020) argue that the ELB was not a binding constraint
in the aftermath of the financial crises. The conventional view (e.g. Eggertsson (2003),
Eggertsson and Woodford (2004), and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011)) is
that the ELB does constrain monetary policy. Swanson and Williams (2014) argue that
the ELB was not binding before 2011 but did constrain monetary policy thereafter. Kiley and Roberts (2017) argue that the ELB will be binding 30 to 40 percent of the time
in the future. To the extent that the ELB is a constraint on monetary policy, it would
be difficult for the Fed to lower rates by large amounts after a prolonged period of low
interest rates.

40

9

Conclusion

This paper provides evidence that the efficacy of monetary policy is state dependent,
varying in a systematic way with the pool of savings from refinancing. We construct
a quantitative life-cycle model of refinancing decisions that is consistent with the facts
that we document.
Our model points to an important cost of fighting recessions with a prolonged period
of low interest rates. Such a policy reduces the potency of monetary policy in the
period after interest rates are normalized. So, if the economy is affected by a negative
shock during that period, policy makers will have less ammunition at their disposal to
counteract the effects of that shock. This observation raises the conundrum: should
monetary policy makers use their ammunition to fight an ongoing recession or the next
one?

10

References

Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, and David Laibson, 2013, “Optimal Mortgage Refinancing: A Closed Form Solution,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 45, 591—622.
Andersen, S., Campbell J., Nielsen K., and Ramadorai T. “Inattention and Inertia
in Household Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage Market,” National Bureau
of Economic Research working paper No. 21386, 2015.
Auclert, Adrien “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel,” manuscript,
Stanford University, 2017.
Beraja, Martin, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra “Regional Heterogeneity and the Refinancing Channel of Monetary Policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018.
Berger, David, Guerrieri, Veronica, Lorenzoni, Guido and Vavra, Joseph, 2017.
“House Prices and Consumer Spending.” The Review of Economic Studies, 85(3),
pp.1502-1542.
41

Berger, David, Konstantin Milbradt, Fabrice Tourre, and Joseph Vavra (2018),
“Mortgage Prepayment and Path-Dependent Effects of Monetary Policy,” manuscript,
Northwestern University.
Bhutta, Neil and Benjamin J. Keys. 2016. “Interest Rates and Equity Extraction
during the Housing Boom.” American Economic Review 106 (7):1742–1774.
Chen, Hui, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov. “Houses as ATMs: mortgage
refinancing and macroeconomic uncertainty.” The Journal of Finance 75, no. 1 (2020):
323-375.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. “When is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?.” Journal of Political Economy 119, no. 1 (2011):
78-121.
Cochrane, John H., and Monika Piazzesi. ”The fed and interest rates-a highfrequency identification.” American Economic Review 92, no. 2 (2002): 90-95.
Debortoli, Davide, Jordi Gali-, and Luca Gambetti. “On the Empirical (Ir) relevance
of the Zero Lower Bound Constraint.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 34, no. 1 (2020):
141-170.
DeFusco, Anthony A. and John Mondragon “No Job, No Money, No Refi: Frictions
to Refinancing in a Recession,” manuscript, Northwestern University, 2018.
De Nardi, Mariacristina and Fang Yang “Bequests and Heterogeneity in Retirement
Wealth,” European Economic Review, Elsevier, vol. 72(C), pages 182-196, 2014.
Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, Benjamin J. Keys, Tomasz Piskorski, Rodney
Ramcharan, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao. “Interest Rate Pass-through: Mortgage rates,
Household Consumption, and Voluntary Deleveraging.” American Economic Review
107, no. 11 (2017): 3550-88.
Diaz, Antonia, and J. Luengo-Prado, Maria. 2012. “The user cost, home ownership
and housing prices: Theory and evidence from the US.” International Encyclopedia of
Housing and Home, 228-234.
Diaz, Antonia and Maria J. Luengo-Prado “The User Cost, Home Ownership and
42

Housing Prices: Theory and Evidence from the U.S.” in Smith, S.J.; Elsinga, M.;
Fox-O’Mahony, L.; Ong, S.E.; Wachter, S. (editors) The International Encyclopedia of
Housing and Home, Elsevier (2012).
Diep, Peter, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, Scott Richardson, 2017, “Prepayment Risk and
Expected MBS Returns,” NBER Working Paper No. 22851
Doepke, Matthias, and Martin Schneider. “Inflation and the Redistribution of Nominal Wealth.” Journal of Political Economy 114, no. 6 (2006): 1069-1097.
Doepke, Matthias, Martin Schneider, and Veronika Selezneva. ”Distributional Effects of Monetary Policy,” manuscript, Northwestern University, 2018.
Dunn, Kenneth B., and John J. McConnell. “Valuation of GNMA Mortgage-backed
Securities.” The Journal of Finance 36, no. 3 (1981): 599-616.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. “Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,”
Brookings papers on economic activity 2003, no. 1 (2003): 139-233.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford. “Policy Options in a Liquidity Trap.
” American Economic Review 94, no. 2 (2004): 76-79.
Garriga, C. and Hedlund, A., 2017. Mortgage Debt, Consumption, and Illiquid
Housing Markets in the Great Recession. FRB St. Louis Working Paper, (2017-30).
Garriga, Carlos, Finn E. Kydland, and Roman Šustek. ”Mortgages and monetary
policy.” The Review of Financial Studies 30, no. 10 (2017): 3337-3375.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and
Economic Activity.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7.1 (2015): 44-76.
Gilchrist, Simon, David López-Salido, and Egon Zakrajšek. “Monetary policy and
real borrowing costs at the zero lower bound.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, no. 1 (2015): 77-109.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Michael Weber. ”Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence
from the Stock Market.” American Economic Review 106, no. 1 (2016): 165-99.
Green, Jerry, and John B. Shoven. 1986. The Effects of Interest Rates on Mortgage
Prepayments. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 18, no. 1: 41-59.
43

Greenwald, Daniel “The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission,” manuscript, Sloan School of Management, MIT, 2016.
Guren, A.M., Krishnamurthy, A. and McQuade, T.J., 2018. Mortgage Design in an
Equilibrium Model of the Housing Market (No. w24446). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Guren, A.M., McKay, A., Nakamura, E. and Steinsson, J., 2018. Housing Wealth
Effects: The Long View (No. w24729). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson. “The Sensitivity of Longterm Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic
Models.” American Economic Review 95, no. 1 (2005): 425-436.
Guvenen, Fatih, and Anthony A. Smith. 2014. “Inferring Labor Income Risk and
Partial Insurance from Economic Choices.” Econometrica, 82(6): 2085–2129.
Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2015. “What Do
Data on Millions of U.S. Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Risk?” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20913.
Huggett, Mark, ”Wealth Distribution in Life-cycle Economies”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, Volume 38, Issue 3, December 1996, Pages 469-494.
Hurst, Erik, Keys, Benjamin, Seru, Amit and Vavra, Joseph, “Regional Redistribution Through the U.S. Mortgage Market”, American Economic Review, 2016, 106(10),
2982-3028.
Iacoviello, M., 2005. House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in
the Business Cycle. American Economic Review, 95(3), pp.739-764.
Iacoviello, M. and Pavan, M., 2013. Housing and Debt over the Life Cycle and Over
the Business Cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(2), pp.221-238.
Khandani, Amir E., Andrew W. Lo, and Robert C. Merton, 2013, “Systemic Risk
and the Refinancing Ratchet Effect”, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 29-45.
Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman and Giovanni L. Violante “The Housing Boom and
Bust: Model Meets Evidence,” manuscript, Princeton University, 2017.
44

Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll and Gianluca Violante “Monetary Policy According
to HANK,” American Economic Review, 108(3), 697-743, 2018.
Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante & Justin Weidner, 2014. “The Wealthy
Hand-to-Mouth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol 2014(1), pages 77-138.
Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts. ” Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate
World.“Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2017, no. 1 (2017): 317-396.
Kuttner, Kenneth N. ”Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from
the Fed Funds Futures Market.” Journal of Monetary Economics 47, no. 3 (2001): 523544.
LaCour-Little, Michael. “The Evolving Role of Technology in Mortgage Finance.”
Journal of Housing Research (2000): 173-205.
Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider. 2015. “The Housing
Market(s) of San Diego.” American Economic Review, 105(4): 1371-1407.
McKay, A., Nakamura, E. and Steinsson, J., 2016. “The Power of Forward Guidance
Revisited,” American Economic Review, 106(10), pp.3133-58.
Mian Atif, Kamelesh Rao and Amir Sufi “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
and the Economic Slump” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 1687-1726
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014. “House Price Gains and U.S. Household Spending
from 2002 to 2006.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers
20152.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson “High Frequency Identification of Monetary NonNeutrality: The Information Effect. ” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3), 12831330, August 2018.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2016): “Housing and Macroeconomics,” Handbook
of Macroeconomics, 2, 1547–1640.
Rios-Rull, J.V. and Sanchez-Marcos, V., 2008 “An Aggregate Economy with Different Size Houses,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3), pp.705-714.
Scharfstein, David and Adi Sunderam, “Market Power in Mortgage Lending and
45

the Transmission of Monetary Policy,” 2013 NBER working paper 19156.
Schwartz, Eduardo S. and Walter N. Torous 1989. “Prepayment and the Valuation
of Mortgage-Backed Securities.” Journal of Finance 44(2), pp. 375-392.
Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear
IV regression. In Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor
of Thomas Rothenberg, ed. D. W. K. Andrews and J. H. Stock, 80–108. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower
Bound on Medium-and Longer-Term Interest Rates.” American Economic Review 104,
no. 10 (2014): 3154-85.
Woodford, M., 2012 “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-rate Lower
Bound.” In Proceedings-Economic Policy Symposium-Jackson Hole (pp. 185-288). Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Wong, Arlene. 2020 “Population Aging and the Transmission of Monetary Policy
to Consumption,” manuscript, Princeton University.

46

Tables and Figures
Table 1: First-stage estimates
First stage y-variable:

Ɛ(t)
Ɛ(t) x Average rate gap
F-statistic

∆R(t)
(I)

∆R(t) x A(t-1)
(II)

0.613***
(0.006)
0.135***
(0.009)
4,511

0.197***
(0.007)
0.109***
(0.011)
434

Notes: Regression equation (2), first-stage estimates based on futures shock. Standard errors are in
parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ give the significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

1

Table 2: State dependency of monetary policy and refinancing
(I)

Panel A: Fraction refinanced
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap
Panel B: Fraction cash-out refinanced
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap
Panel C: Change in balance, given cash-out refinance
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap

County Fixed Effects
SPF Controls
Additional county controls

0.040
(0.023)
0.266***
(0.076)
0.074***
(0.007)
0.176***
(0.027)
0.237***
(0.026)
0.215*
(0.132)
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The table reports the response to a decline in interest rates. It therefore reports the estimates
from regression equation (2), multiplied by -1. The IV is based on futures. Standard errors are in
parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ give the significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

2

Table 3: State dependency of monetary policy, unemployment and housing permits
Change in unemployment Housing permit growth
rate over the year
over the year

∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap

County Fixed Effects
SPF Controls
Additional county controls

(I)

(II)

-0.034*
(0.014)
-0.065***
(0.014)

0.248***
(0.043)
0.234***
(0.087)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The table reports the response to a decline in interest rates. It therefore reports the estimates
from regression equations (4) and (5), multiplied by -1. IV is based on futures. Standard errors are in
parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ give the significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

Table 4: Model parameter values
Parameters
σ
Coefficient of relative risk aversion
δ
Housing depreciation rate
φ
Collateral constraint
ρη
Persistency of idiosyncratic income process
ση
Variance of idiosyncratic income shock
α
Utility parameter
β
Discount rate
B
Bequest parameter

Notes: Table depicts parameter values. See text for more detail.

3

Value
2
3%
0.2
0.91
0.21
0.88
0.962
2

Table 5: Estimated Aggregate Process for Mortgage and Rental Rates

Variables
log yt
log rt

Regression with dependent variable
30-year rate t
log rental ratet
-3.475***
(0.168)
0.334***
(0.058)

log pt
constant

-0.030
(15.82)

0.843***
(0.119)
-0.002***
(0.001)
-0.022
(0.014)
3.187***
(0.488)

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ give the significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent levels. These are the estimated coefficients for equations (8) and (9). See text for more detail.

Table 6: Estimated Aggregate Process

Variables
log yt-1
log rt-1
log pt-1
log savingst-1
log savingst-1 x log rt-1

Regression with dependent variable
log yt
log rt
log pt
log savingst
-0.272** 0.401***
-0.006
(0.108)
(2.845)
(0.047)
0.071
0.900*** 0.295***
(0.108)
(0.051)
(0.002)
0.119*
0.055
0.788***
(0.075)
(2.114)
(0.070)
0.001
-0.002
0.011***
(0.006)
(0.142)
(0.008)
-0.073 -0.187*** -0.269***
(0.002)
(0.035)
(0.002)

-2.715
(0.147)
12.130
(0.147)
1.177
(1.710)
0.457*
(0.296)
-8.880**
(0.086)

Notes: Regression equation (15). Standard errors are in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ give the significance
at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. See text for more detail.

4

Table 7: State dependency of monetary policy and refinancing: Model vs Data
Data

Panel A: Fraction of loans that refinanced
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap
Panel B: Fraction of loans that are cash-out refi
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap
Panel C: Fraction of loans for home purchases
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap

Model
No stateBenchmark dependency
in VAR

0.040***
(0.023)
0.266***
(0.076)

0.060

0.103

0.232

0.139

0.074***
(0.007)
0.176***
(0.027)

0.061

0.103

0.232

0.139

0.162***
(0.014)
0.147***
(0.019)

0.120

0.067

0.160

0.077

Notes: The table reports the response to a decline in interest rates. It therefore reports the estimates
from regression equation (2), multiplied by -1. Standard errors are in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ give
the significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

5

Table 8: State dependency of monetary policy
Effect on refinancing:
Overall effect of a 50 bp expansionary shock
β1ΔRt
β2ΔRt times mean(ϕt)

4.63%
2.99%
1.65%

Effect on consumption:
Overall effect of a 50 bp expansionary shock
β1ΔRt
β2ΔRt times mean(ϕt)

2.84%
0.84%
2.00%

Notes: The table reports the response to a decline in interest rates. It therefore reports the estimates
from regression equation (2), multiplied by -1. See text for more detail.

Table 9: Alternative paths of monetary policy

Rate path prior to a 50bp cut

Average
Fraction with
rate gap positive rate gap,
before cut after rate cut

Effect on
Change in
refinancing consumption

Fraction ST
constrained

Panel A: Effects of Flat vs Rising History
(i) Flat at about 3.5%
(ii) Rising from 3.5% to 6.5% over 4 pds
Difference (i)-(ii)

0.00%
-0.60%
0.60%

100%
31%
69%

16%
9%
7%

1.7%
0.3%
1.4%

0.68
0.72
-0.04

Panel B: Effects of Flat vs Falling History
(i) Flat at about 3.5%
(ii) Falling from 3.5% to 1% over 4 pds
Difference (i)-(ii)

0.00%
0.44%
-0.44%

100%
100%
0%

16%
13%
3%

1.7%
0.6%
1.1%

0.68
0.60
0.08

Notes: Alternative paths of monetary policy. See text for more detail.

6

Table 10: Alternative paths of monetary policy

Rate path prior to a rate cut

Reloading Effect with 50bp cut
(a) Benchmark case: continuously flat at
3.5% prior to a 50bp rate cut

Fraction with
Average
Change in
positive rate Effect on
rate gap
refinancing consumption
gap, after
before cut
rate cut

Fraction ST
constrained

0.00%

100%

16%

1.7%

68%

(b) 3.5% cut to 1% for 4 pds, rise for 3 pds
to 3.5%, flat at 3.5% for 1 pd

-0.19%

87%

5%

0.8%

69%

(c) 3.5% cut to 1% for 4 pds, rise for 3 pds
to 3.5%, flat at 3.5% for 2 pds

-0.11%

89%

6%

0.8%

72%

(d) 3.5% cut to 1% for 4 pds, rise for 3 pds
to 3.5%, flat at 3.5% for 3 pds

-0.09%

89%

19%

2.3%

72%

0.00%

100%

19%

2.8%

73%

-0.19%

87%

18%

2.8%

70%

Reloading Effect with 100bp cut
(e) Benchmark case: continuously flat at
3.5% prior to a 100bp rate cut
(f) 3.5% cut to 1% for 4 pds, rise for 3 pds
to 3.5%, flat at 3.5% for 1 pd

Notes: Alternative paths of monetary policy. See text for more detail.

7

Figure 1: Time Series of the Refinancing Rate
(a) Refinancing Rate

(b) Change in Refinancing Rate
Change in Refinancing Rate

Core Logic Data

Core Logic Data

0

-.05

.02

% loans refi
.04

% loans refi
0

.06

.05

.08

Level of Refinancing Rate

1994q1

1997q3

2001q1

2004q3

2008q1

1994q1

1997q3

2001q1

2004q3

2008q1

(c) Share of Refinancing With Cash-Out

(d) Change in Share of Refi With Cash-Out

Fraction of Refinances that Resulted in Cash-Out
Freddie Mac Data

Differences in the Fraction of Refinances that Resulted in Cash-Out
Freddie Mac Data

100%

25%
20%

90%

15%
80%

10%
5%

70%

0%
60%

-5%
-10%

50%

-15%

40%
30%

-20%
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

-25%

2007

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Notes: Panels (a) and (b) depicts the time series of the refinancing rate (fraction of loans that were
refinanced in that quarter) and the quarterly change in the refinancing rate, respectively. Panels (c)
and (d) depicts the time series of the share of refinanced loans that involved a balance increase (i.e.
cash-out) and the quarterly change in this share, respectively.

8

Figure 2: Distribution of interest rate gaps in 1997q4 and 2000q4

0

.05

.1

.15

Interest Rate Gap (Existing Rate - New Rate)

-4

-2

0

2

1997

4

2000

Notes: The figure depicts the distribution of interest-rate gaps across borrowers. The interest-rate gap
is defined as the difference between the existing mortgage rate and the current market rate. See text
for more details.

Figure 3: Cumulative Refinancing Rate in Response to a 50bp Mortgage Rate Cut
(a) Rate gap = 0

(b) Rate gap = 50bps

0.2

0.2

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0

-0.05

-0.05

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Notes: The figure depicts the cumulative response function of refinancing to a 50 bp decline in mortgage
rates. Panel A shows the response if the initial average rate gap is zero. Panel B shows the response
if the initial average rate gap is instead 50 basis points.

9

Figure 4: Effect on the Refinancing Rate of a 50bp cut, at each point in time

Figure 5: Time series of fitted and actual mortgage rates
30-year Mortgage Rate
8
7

Actual

Fitted

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

Notes: The figure depicts the fitted and actual mortgage rate data. See text for more details.

10

Figure 6: Time series of fitted and actual house price to rent ratios

Log House Price to Rent Ratio

4.7
4.6

Actual
Fitted

4.5
4.4
4.3
4.2
4.1
1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

Notes: The figure depicts the fitted and actual house price to rental ratios. See text for more details.

Figure 7: Impulse response function of aggregate variables

Notes: The figure depicts the impulse response function to a 1 sd interest rate shock. See text for
details.

11

Figure 8: Life-cycle moments

Notes: The figure depicts the fitted and actual life-cycle moments. See text for more details.

Figure 9: Refinancing, given the interest-rate gap
0.5
Model

Data

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0-0.5%

0.5-1%

1-2%

>2%

Rate gap

Notes: The figure depicts propensity to refinance for each given interest-rate gap in the data and the
model. See text for more details.

12

Figure 10: Alternative interest rate paths
Alternative rate paths prior to rate cut

7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%

0

1

2

3

4

5

Notes: The figure depicts three alternative interest rate paths, starting at steady state. See text for
more details.

Figure 11: Alternative interest rate paths
4.0%

t=1 t=2 t=3
3.5%
3.0%
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
Periods after
normalization

0.5%
0.0%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Notes: The figure depicts three alternative interest rate paths, starting at steady state. See text for
more details.

13

Appendix
A

County Data Description

In this section, we describe our data sources and the construction of the county-level
demographic variables used in our analysis.
For each county, we obtain the median age and the share of the population with
a college degree from the Census, the unemployment rate and share of employment in
manufacturing from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and per-capita income from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis.
We measure lender competitiveness using the Hirschman-Herfindahl Index computed
across mortgage lenders within the county.1 This measure is also used in Scharfstein
and Sunderam (2016). The index is constructed using data from HMDA (the Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act).
We consider two measures of home values. Our first measure is the average home
price accumulation over the life of the mortgage. We compute real house prices using
the consumer price index. We then compute the log difference between the current
home price and the value of the house at origination.
The median sale price of homes comes from two sources. We have monthly houseprice data from the Global Financial Data Real Estate database from 1975 to present.
The home prices are based on information from Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae. For
house prices prior to 1975, we use regional data from the U.S. Bureau of the Census
and U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The two different data series
have very similar trends in the overlapping post-1975 period.
We use individual data on home equity to compute the average level of home equity.
For each loan, we compute home equity (price minus the balance). We then winsorize
the top and bottom 1 percent of the home equity values to abstract from outliers.
Finally, we take an average across all loans within the county, weighted by loan balance.

B

Average Rate Gaps and County Characteristics

In this section, we show how the average rate gap varies over time and across counties.
We also show how the average rate gap correlates with observable county-level characteristics (unemployment rate, per capita income, share of college educated, home equity
accumulation, median age, manufacturing share, and share of males in the population).
1

We thank David Berger for sharing these data with us.

1

Table 1: Average Rate Gap and County Characteristics
Time FE
County FE
R-squared
Variables:

Yes
Yes
0.738
(I)

Yes
No
0.5432
(II)

No
Yes
0.1866
(III)

Unemployment rate
Per capita income

No
No
0.0546
(IV)
0.0818***
(0.010)

Share colleged educated
Home equity accumulation
Median age
Manufacturing share
Share male

No
No
0.0257
(V)

-0.3566***
(0.020)

No
No
0.0119
(VI)

-0.5863***
(0.050)

No
No
0.0042
(VII)

-0.5117***
(0.060)

No
No
0.0004
(VIII)

0.0909*
(0.040)

No
No
0.0001
(XIV)

0.0003
(0.000)

No
No
0.0001
(X)

0.2296
(0.410)

The table below reports the estimated coefficient from regressing the average rate gap
on the observable characteristic. Standard errors are given in parenthesis.

C
C.1

Robustness
Alternative moments

This section reports estimates of the state dependent effects of monetary policy using
three alternative moments of the distribution of potential savings: the present value of
potential savings, the fraction of loans with positive savings, and the spread of the existing mortgage rate relative to the threshold interest rate proposed by Agarwal, Laibson
and Driscoll (2013). We find that the effects of a change in mortgage rates is state
dependent, varying with the values of these alternative moments of the distribution.
First, we consider an alternative measure of the potential savings from refinancing
based on the present value of savings from pursuing the following simple refinancing
strategy: the existing loan is refinanced with a FICO-specific 30-year fixed-rate mortgage and the new loan is repaid over the remaining life of the mortgage being refinanced.
To simplify the notation, we suppress the dependence of the interest rate on FICO score
and region.
Consider a 30-year mortgage with a fixed interest rate rold that was originated at
T − 30 and matures at time T . The loan is repaid with fixed payments which we denote

2

by Paymentold . These payments are given by:
BalanceT −30 =

30
X
Paymentold
k=1

(1 + rold )k

.

If the person refinances at the beginning of time t, before the mortgage payment is
due, the balance owned on the old loan is given by the present value of the remaining
payments:
T
X
Paymentold
.
Balancet =
(1 + rold )(k−t)
k=t
The balance of the new mortgage is the same as that of the old mortgage. The new
mortgage payment is computed assuming that the mortgage is paid off over a 30-year
period:
30
X
Paymentnew
Balancet =
.
(1 + rnew )k
k=1
The present value of savings associated with this refinancing strategy is:
#
" T
X Paymentold − Paymentnew
BalanceT
−
,
Savingst =
new )(k−t)
new )T −t
(1
+
r
(1
+
r
k=t

(1)

where BalanceT is the balance of the refinanced mortgage at time T . We can rewrite
equation (1) as:
" T
#
X Paymentold
Balancet + Savingst =
.
new )(k−t)
(1
+
r
k=t
This equation shows that if the household chooses its new mortgage so that the new
mortgage payment is equal to the old mortgage payment, it can cash out Savingst . They
do so by borrowing Balancet +Savingst , and using Balancet to pay the old mortgage.
With this strategy, the household takes out a mortgage loan that is larger than the
existing mortgage loan and receives the difference between the two loans in cash.
We convert our nominal measures of potential savings into real terms using the
Consumer Price Index (base year 1999). We construct this measure of savings for every
mortgage at time t. We then compute the average level of savings at time t. We denote
the average level of savings across mortgages by A2t :
nt
1 X
A2t =
Savingsit .
nt i=1

3

(2)

The unconditional quarterly mean and standard deviation of the average savings from
refinancing are −294 and 2, 424 dollars, respectively.
We now discuss the estimates of regression (2) obtained for the case where Act−1 is
the average of savings from refinancing. Here, both β1 and β2 are significant at the one
percent level. To interpret these coefficients, suppose that all the independent variables
in regression (2) are initially equal to their time-series averages and that average of
savings are initially equal to its mean value of −$294. Our estimates in column 2 of
Panel A of Table 2 imply that a 25 basis points drop in mortgage rates raises the share
of loans refinanced by about 7.2 percent. Now suppose that the drop in mortgage rates
happens when the average savings from refinancing is equal to $2, 130, which is the
mean value of (−$294) plus one standard deviation ($2, 424). Then, the refinancing
rate rises to 10.4 percent. So, the marginal impact of a one standard-deviation increase
in the average savings from refinancing is 2.5 percentage points.
Panels B and C of Table 2 consider two additional alternative moments of refinancing
savings: the fraction of loans with positive savings, and the spread of the existing
mortgage rate relative to the threshold interest rate proposed by Agarwal, Laibson and
Driscoll (2013). We again find that the effects of a change in mortgage rates is state
dependent, varying with the values of these alternative moments of the distribution.

C.2

Instrumenting with the 2-year Treasury Yield

This section provides additional estimates of the state dependent effects of monetary
policy. In the main text, we instrumented for the response to a change in mortgage rate
using high-frequency changes in the Federal Funds futures rate. Here, we show that
the results are robust to instrumenting using the high-frequency changes in the 2-year
Treasury yield within a 60-minute window around the Fed’s announcement. Changes in
the 2-year Treasury yield have been used as measures of monetary shocks by Gertler and
Karadi (2015) and Gilchrist et al. (2015). Table 3 reports our estimates of regression
specification (2), using the high-frequency changes in the 2-year Treasury yield as an
instrument for changes in the mortgage rate. The estimated state dependent effects of
monetary policy obtained using this alternative instrument are very similar to those
reported in Tables 1 of the main text.

C.3

Additional county-level controls

In this section, we show that our estimates of the state dependent nature of the effects of
monetary policy are robust to the inclusion of interactions between county-level controls
and the change in mortgage rates. These estimates, reported in Table 4 below, are
4

Table 2: State dependency of monetary policy and refinancing
Refinancing over the year

OLS
(I)

Panel A
∆R(t)

IV
(II)

0.045*** 0.081***
(0.005)
(0.017)
0.021** 0.028**
(0.004)
(0.009)

∆R(t) x Average savings
Panel B
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Fraction positive rate gap

-0.022
(0.033)
0.140**
(0.058)

-0.004
(0.063)
0.183*
(0.111)

Panel C
∆R(t)

0.118*** 0.253***
(0.030)
(0.088)
∆R(t) x Spread of old rate to ADL 0.069**
0.163*
threshold
(0.028)
(0.089)
County Fixed Effects
SPF Controls
Additional county controls

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Estimates from regression (2). IV is based on futures. Standard errors are in parentheses. 10,
5, and 1 percent significance levels are denoted by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ , respectively.

5

Table 3: State dependency of monetary policy and refinancing
(I)

Panel A: Fraction refi
∆R(t)

0.094***
(0.011)
0.224**
(0.181)

∆R(t) x Average rate gap
Panel B: Fraction cash-out refi
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap
Panel C: Change in balance, given cash-out refi
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap

County Fixed Effects
SPF Controls
Additional county controls

0.125***
(0.015)
0.138***
(0.022)
0.280***
(0.059)
0.253***
(0.067)
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Estimates from regression (2). IV based on changes in the 2-year Treasury yield. Standard
errors are in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ give significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

6

Table 4: State dependency of monetary policy and refinancing

(I)

(II)

coefficient std error coefficient std error
∆R(t) x Average rate gap(t-1)

0.266*** (0.076) 0.562*** (0.181)

∆R(t) x Average savings(t-1)
∆R(t) x Home equity(t-1)

0.605

(0.584)

∆R(t) x House price change(t-1)

-0.229

(0.171)

∆R(t) x Unemployment rate(t-1)

-0.030

(0.016)

∆R(t) x Median age(t-1)

-0.001

(0.003)

∆R(t) x Manufacturing share(t-1)

0.008*

(0.003)

∆R(t) x Share college(t-1)

0.155

(0.154)

∆R(t) x ARM share(t-1)

-0.004

(0.176)

∆R(t) x Herfindahl index(t-1)

0.023

(0.026)

County Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

County interaction controls

No

Yes

Notes: Estimates from regression (2). For comparison, we report the coefficients from Table 1 in the
main text in this table’s columns I and II. Column III is the estimated effects when we include the
county demographics interacted with the change in mortgage rates. Standard errors are in parentheses.
∗ ∗∗
, , and ∗∗∗ give significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

similar to those in Table 1, in the main text. The fact that including interaction terms
does not change the estimate elasticities implies that the state dependency that we
highlight is distinct from other potential mechanisms explored in the literature. These
mechanisms include, for instance, differential responses in refinancing to a decline in
mortgage rates due to differences in competitiveness of the local lending market. It is
also distinct from state dependency related to variation in the value of home equity
across counties.

D

OLS results

The table below reports the OLS results corresponding to Table 2 of the main text.
7

Table 5: State dependency of monetary policy and refinancing
(I)

Panel A: Fraction refi
∆R(t)

0.041***
(0.005)
0.096**
(0.023)

∆R(t) x Average rate gap
Panel B: Fraction cash-out refi
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap
Panel C: Change in balance, given cash-out refi
∆R(t)
∆R(t) x Average rate gap

County Fixed Effects
SPF Controls
Additional county controls

0.070***
(0.003)
0.073***
(0.005)
0.137***
(0.012)
0.045*
(0.025)
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The table reports the response to a decline in interest rates. It therefore reports the estimates
from regression equation (2), multiplied by -1. Standard errors are in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ give
the significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

8

E

Model aggregate process

In our model, we assume that the aggregate state variables (log of aggregate income,
log of house prices, and log of the real interest rate) evolve according to the vector
autoregression process described in Equation (16), Section 6.2:
4St = B1 4St−1 + B2 4 log (rt−1 ) at−1 + ut
where B1 is a 4 × 4 matrix, B2 is a 4 × 1 vector, and ut is a Gaussian disturbance.
We now provide evidence that the process does well relative to other specifications,
in terms of the root-mean-squared error (RMSE). Table 6 below shows that none of
the RMSE associated with the alternative specifications is smaller, taking sampling
uncertainty into account, than the RMSE associated with specification (16). At the
same time, specification (16) does have a statistically significant smaller RMSE than
many alternative specifications.
The standard errors are computed as follows. We draw a set of coefficients from the
joint distribution of estimated coefficients. We use the set of coefficients to construct
one-step-ahead forecasts and compute the RMSE. We repeat these two steps for 100,000
draws of coefficients, and then compute the standard error of the RMSE.
Table 6: Root-mean-squared forecasting errors of regressions
Regression

RMSE

SE

4St = B1 4St−1 + B2 4rt−1 at−1 + ut

0.233

0.035

4St = B1 4St−1 + ut

0.221

0.004

4St = B1 4St−1 + B2 4St−2 + ut

0.293

0.008

4St = B1 4St−1 + B2 4St−1 at−1 + ut

0.309

0.099

St = St−1 + B1 St−1 At−1 + ut

0.258

0.066

9

F

Model computation

To solve the model numerically, we implement the following procedure. First, we reformulate the choice variables to rectangularize the problem and simplify computational
issues that arise from the endogenous mortgage constraint. The problem is reformulated
in terms of the leverage ratio, defined as
qjat = bjat /pt hjat ≥ 0.
We solve the budget constraint for consumption and replace consumption in the utility
function. The choices variables are therefore sjat , hjat , 1(rent)jat , 1(adjust)jat , qjat . We
discretize the idiosyncratic income variable yjat . We simulate the quarterly process for
the aggregate state vector, St , to obtain the annual probability transition matrix for
St . We discretize St using the Rouwenhorst method. There are 32 grid points for St
and two grid points for yjat . The value functions (V own & noadjust (zjat ), V own & adjust (zjat )
and V rent (zjat )) are approximated as multilinear functions in the states,
where zjat =


[St , yjat , assetsjat ]. There are four endogenous states assetsjat = sjat , hojat , bjat , rjat .
We use 10 knots for bjat , sjat , and hojat , and 5 knots for rjat . The knots are spaced
more closely together near the constraints for bjat and sjat . The value functions are
interpolated between knots.
The model is solved via backward induction from the final period of life. At each
age and each case, the optimal policies are computed using a Nelder-Meade algorithm,
comparing the value functions for each of the three cases (to rent, to own a home and
adjust the mortgage, to own a home and not adjust the mortgage) to generate the
overall policy function.
To estimate the regression used in our empirical section with data simulated from
the model, we proceed as follows. The model is initialized with the same distribution of
wealth and mortgage rates for 1994, obtained from the Survey of Consumer Finances
and the Core Logic database. We then feed the actual path for house prices, aggregate
income, and interest rates for the period 1994-2007. Each cohort faces the historical
path for the state variables, as well as the realized aggregate state variables. Given their
individual and aggregate states, they make their consumption, mortgage, housing, and
savings decisions. Given the observed decisions and states, we estimate the regression
used in our empirical work and compare our model-based estimates with the empirical
estimates.

10

