                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE IMPACT OF INSURANCE EXPANSIONS ON THE ALREADY INSURED:
                THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT AND MEDICARE

                                          Colleen M. Carey
                                            Sarah Miller
                                          Laura R. Wherry

                                        Working Paper 25153
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25153


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2018




We are grateful to Shooshan Danagoulian, Andrew Goodman-Bacon, Neale Mahoney, Victoria Perez,
and several anonymous referees for helpful comments. We would also like to thank Pat Barnes, Clint
Carter, and John Sullivan for their assistance in accessing the restricted data used in this project at
the Michigan and UCLA Federal Statistical Research Data Centers. Any opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the National
Center for Health Statistics or the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that
no confidential information is disclosed. In addition, Wherry benefited from facilities and resources
provided by the California Center for Population Research at UCLA, which receives core support
(R24-HD041022) from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development. This research was approved by the University of Michigan IRB (Protocol HUM00103265)..
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Colleen M. Carey, Sarah Miller, and Laura R. Wherry. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Insurance Expansions on the Already Insured: The Affordable Care Act and
Medicare
Colleen M. Carey, Sarah Miller, and Laura R. Wherry
NBER Working Paper No. 25153
October 2018, Revised April 2020
JEL No. H51,I1,I11

                                             ABSTRACT

Some states have not adopted the Affordable Care Act (ACA) Medicaid expansions due to concerns
that the expansions may impair access to care and utilization for those who are already insured. We
investigate such negative spillovers using a large panel of Medicare beneficiaries. Across many subgroups
and outcomes, we find no evidence that the expansions reduced utilization among Medicare beneficiaries,
and can rule out all but very small changes in utilization or spending. These results indicate that the
expansions in Medicaid did not impair access to care or utilization for the Medicare population.


Colleen M. Carey                            Laura R. Wherry
Department of Policy Analysis and ManagementUniversity of California at Los Angeles
Cornell University                          1100 Glendon Avenue, Suite 850, Room 859
MVR Hall, Room 298                          Los Angeles, CA 90024
Ithaca, NY 14853                            lwherry@mednet.ucla.edu
and NBER
colleenmariecarey@gmail.com

Sarah Miller
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
mille@umich.edu




A supplemental appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25153
The Impact of Insurance Expansions on the Already Insured: The
               Affordable Care Act and Medicare

                   By Colleen M. Carey, Sarah Miller, and Laura R. Wherry∗


           Some states have not adopted the Affordable Care Act (ACA) Medicaid
          expansions due to concerns that the expansions may impair access to care
          and utilization for those who are already insured. We investigate such
          negative spillovers using a large panel of Medicare beneficiaries. Across many
          subgroups and outcomes, we find no evidence that the expansions reduced
          utilization among Medicare beneficiaries, and can rule out all but very small
          changes in utilization or spending. These results indicate that the expansions
          in Medicaid did not impair access to care or utilization for the Medicare
          population.

          JEL: I11 (Analysis of Health Care Markets), I13 (Health Insurance, Public
          and Private), H51 (Government Expenditures and Health)


   Many states have opted not to expand Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care
 Act (ACA), even though the federal government will pay for a high share of expansion
 costs, and despite evidence that these expansions substantially improve insurance coverage,
 health, and access to care for low-income individuals.
   One rationale offered for not implementing the eligibility expansions is that they may
 strain already-overburdened health care providers and result in worse care for those who
 are already insured. In particular, many predicted that a surge in demand for primary care
 under the ACA coverage expansions would exacerbate a national shortage in the primary
 care workforce.1 The effects of insurance expansions on use of care are well documented,
 with sizable increases in health care utilization associated with insurance coverage, at
 least in the short-term. Thus, if physicians are unable to accommodate the new demand
 for health services, the Medicaid expansions may drive up wait times and worsen health
 care access for the already insured. These concerns may be especially acute in areas
 that experienced health professional shortages prior to the expansions, or areas where the
 increase in Medicaid eligibility is particularly large.
   ∗
       Carey: Department of Policy Analysis and Management, Cornell University, colleen.carey@cornell.edu.
Miller: Ross School of Business, University of Michigan, mille@umich.edu. Wherry: David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, lwherry@mednet.ucla.edu We are grateful to Shooshan
Danagoulian, Andrew Goodman-Bacon, Neale Mahoney, Victoria Perez, and several anonymous referees
for helpful comments. We would also like to thank Pat Barnes, Clint Carter, and John Sullivan for their
assistance in accessing the restricted data used in this project at the Michigan and UCLA Federal Statistical
Research Data Centers. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily represent the views of the National Center for Health Statistics or the U.S. Census Bureau.
All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. In addition, Wherry
benefited from facilities and resources provided by the California Center for Population Research at UCLA,
which receives core support (R24-HD041022) from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development. This research was approved by the University of Michigan IRB (Protocol
HUM00103265).
     1
       For example, analyses in Huang and Finegold (2013) and Hofer et al. (2011) forecasted the need for
4,000 to 7,000 additional physicians in the primary care workforce to meet increased demand under the ACA.
                                                     1
    Concerns about such “negative spillovers” for the already insured population are not un-
 founded. Recent research in economics predicts that not only would the ACA expansions
 generate such spillovers, but that they would be large. McInerney et al. (2017) exam-
 ine pre-ACA Medicaid expansions to non-elderly adults and find they caused substantial
 reductions in care, particularly among beneficiaries eligible for both Medicare and Medi-
 caid coverage (i.e., the “dually eligible”). Estimates from McInerney et al. (2017) imply
 that expansions as large as those seen under the ACA would reduce medical spending
 among dually-eligible beneficiaries by nearly 20 percent in expansion states. Glied and
 Hong (2018) similarly document large negative spillovers on the Medicare population re-
 sulting from Medicaid coverage expansions; their estimates predict reductions in physician
 services spending among Medicare beneficiaries of about 6.5 percent in expansion states,
 with substantially larger reductions predicted in lower income areas where the increase in
 coverage was large.2
    The robust evidence documenting that Medicaid coverage results in substantial increases
 in the utilization of medical care among its recipients lends further credence to these
 concerns. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) actuarial report states
 that 9.1 million newly eligible adults enrolled in Medicaid in 2015 (Centers for Medicare
 and Medicaid Services, 2016a). Estimates from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment
 imply that these newly-enrolled individuals will demand slightly more than 2 additional
 office visits, resulting in about 19.7 million additional office visits demanded in their first
 year of coverage. If visits with Medicaid patients were substituted for visits with Medicare
 patients one-for-one, we would expect about 0.73 fewer visits for each Medicare beneficiary
 living in expansion states during that year. If such negative spillovers are concentrated on
 disadvantaged populations, such as the dually eligible or those living in low income areas,
 these effects could be considerably larger.
    This paper provides the first evidence on whether the ACA coverage expansions gener-
 ated these expected negative spillovers in utilization for the already insured. Our research
 design compares changes in the utilization of Medicare beneficiaries in states that did and
 did not expand Medicaid. Medicare beneficiaries in the two groups of states had very
 similar utilization patterns prior to the expansion, but beneficiaries in expansion states
 were exposed to significantly larger demand shocks as a result of the ACA. Medicare ben-
 eficiaries are an ideal population in which to examine the possibility of negative spillovers:
 Medicare beneficiaries have high health needs, and may therefore be more sensitive to
 issues related to provider availability, and the Medicare program itself experienced little
 change at the time of the Medicaid expansions.3 We observe the utilization of a panel of
 nearly 4 million Medicare beneficiaries between 2008 to 2015, ensuring adequate power to
 detect even very small negative spillovers.

   2
     See Section V and Appendix Section A for more discussion of these calculations.
   3
     There were several changes to Medicare in the ACA implemented over the sample period but these
changes were national in scope, differed in timing from the Medicaid expansions, and are not expected
to affect Medicaid expansion states differently than non-expansion states. Specifically, the ACA altered
payment formulas for both fee-for-service and Medicare Advantage to slow the pace of spending growth;
initiated a number of payment demonstrations in fee-for-service Medicare, including the Accountable Care
Organization model introduced in 2013; enhanced Part D benefits by gradually closing the “coverage gap”
between 2011 and 2020; and eliminated cost-sharing for preventive services and an annual wellness visit
starting in 2011.
                                                   2
  We focus our attention on the utilization of primary care services, motivated in part
by concerns about the adequacy of the primary care workforce to meet increased demand
under the ACA. According to the National Ambulatory Medicare Care Survey, Medicare
beneficiaries represent about 25 percent of the patients of a typical primary care physician
and about 67 percent of physicians who treat Medicare beneficiaries also see Medicaid
and uninsured patients, suggesting that substitution between these patient groups may be
relevant for these physicians. Existing research confirms that, in states that implemented
the ACA Medicaid expansions early, primary care physicians were particularly affected,
and increased the number of Medicaid patients they saw by 10 percent in the first year
following the policy (Bhole and Curto, 2016). Furthermore, at the time of the Medicaid
expansions, primary care services were reimbursed at parity between Medicare and Med-
icaid. Services with equal reimbursement are of special interest because our theoretical
model predicts that utilization of such services should fall among the already-insured with
the onset of the Medicaid expansions. We adapt the model described by Sloan et al. (1978)
to our setting to show how health care providers would respond to a Medicaid coverage
expansion accompanied by parity in reimbursement rates, as occurred with the ACA for
primary care services. Under reimbursement parity, providers who supply equally prof-
itable patients with visits on a first-come, first-serve basis can be expected to see fewer
Medicare beneficiaries and more Medicaid beneficiaries when an expansion occurs. We
therefore focus on services for which the ACA increased Medicaid fees to the Medicare
level; it is exactly these types of services for which we would expect the crowding out of
Medicare beneficiaries to be the most likely.
  In contrast to the concerns that have been expressed by policymakers and the media,
we find a tightly-bounded null effect of coverage expansions on primary care utilization.
Our difference-in-differences model implies no difference in the utilization of primary care
services after the expansions occurred among Medicare beneficiaries in expansion and non-
expansion states. Our estimates for the effect on the quantity of primary care visits is
positive in sign and close to zero. The 95 percent confidence interval bounds the effect
at a decline of less than one-third of a visit, a 2.9 percent change relative to the 9.4 such
visits Medicare beneficiaries have on average per year. The worst case scenario of a one-
to-one substitution between Medicaid and Medicare patients is easily ruled out by this
lower bound. Since providers may have privileged existing patients over new patients, we
also examine new patient visits among Medicare beneficiaries, and find a similarly precise
zero. We are able to reject reductions in new primary care visits larger than 0.7 percent.
Event studies for these outcomes show parallel trends in the variables prior to expansion,
supporting the assumption that underlies our difference-in-differences model.
  These null results extend to several Medicare subpopulations that we hypothesize are
most likely to experience negative spillovers. First, we examine dually-eligible Medicaid-
Medicare beneficiaries who we expect are more likely to be treated by the same providers
as the Medicaid expansion population. In addition, evidence from pre-ACA state Medi-
caid expansions for low-income adults indicates that negative spillovers were concentrated
among this group (McInerney et al., 2017). Second, we examine Medicare beneficiaries
who reside in high-impact zip codes that had low incomes and high rates of uninsurance
prior to the ACA expansions; we show that these zip codes experienced larger demand
shocks. Third, we examine Medicare beneficiaries residing in counties designated as Health
                                             3
 Provider Shortage Areas (HPSAs), where we expect that access to providers is especially
 likely to be impaired. Last, we examine whether the effects of the expansion differ among
 sick and healthy subsamples that we construct based on the presence of diagnostic codes
 in the pre-period. We expect that negative spillovers may be found either among the
 sick, with much higher health care demand, or the healthy, if health providers concentrate
 unavoidable reductions on the healthy. Our null results are replicated across each of these
 subsamples, and again our large sample sizes allow us to reject meaningful effects. We
 also assess the robustness of our findings to different sample definitions and when focusing
 on states with the largest expansions, as measured by the share of the population gaining
 eligibility, but continue to find no evidence of negative spillovers.
    We also explore several other outcomes designed to characterize negative spillovers, if
 present. Our results indicate no change associated with Medicaid expansion in Medicare
 beneficiaries’ total number of physician services, number of days between physician ser-
 vices, number of services with a physician extender (such as a nurse practitioner), physician
 services expenditures, or total medical expenditures. We also assess survey evidence on
 access to care as reported by Medicare beneficiaries. We find no evidence of changes in ei-
 ther appointment availability or in-office wait times. Finally, we repeat the analysis using
 a synthetic control research design, but again find no evidence of differential utilization
 between expansion and non-expansion states.
    Thus, overall we present robust, well-identified, tightly-bounded evidence that the Med-
 icaid expansions did not lead to economically-meaningful utilization reductions in the
 Medicare population. Our findings have significant policy implications and suggest that
 the 14 states who have not yet expanded Medicaid may be able to do so without impair-
 ing access to care in the wider population. These findings are consistent with a recent
 study by Polsky et al. (2017) that finds no evidence of a change in the availability of
 appointments for primary care among the privately insured between 2012-2013 and 2016
 in a 10-state audit study. Our paper stands in contrast, however, to two previous analyses
 finding negative spillovers for Medicare beneficiaries following pre-ACA state Medicaid
 expansions for low-income adults (McInerney et al., 2017; Glied and Hong, 2018). In ad-
 dition, the 95 percent confidence intervals on our estimates allow us to rule out changes of
 the magnitude estimated in this previous work. Our findings of no negative spillovers are
 especially notable since the coverage expansions we study are large and sharp, compared
 to many pre-ACA state expansions.
    Finally, showing that the health care industry can accommodate Medicaid expansion
 without affecting Medicare utilization has implications for our understanding of the sec-
 tor’s industrial organization. There are several ways to explain our findings. There would
 be no negative spillovers in Medicare if the Medicaid expansion did not greatly increase
 the health care demand of those who gained coverage; however, a growing number of
 papers find that, indeed, the expansion population increased their service utilization.4 A
   4
     For example, Miller and Wherry (2017) and Simon et al. (2017) find the Medicaid coverage increases
are associated with increased use of some preventive services. Wherry and Miller (2016) find the expansions
associated with higher rates of physician office visits in the first year. Sommers et al. (2015) find that the
expansions were associated with increased reports of having a personal physician. Ghosh et al. (2017) find the
expansions are associated with increased use of prescription drugs. In their study of pre-ACA expansions to
a similar population in Oregon, Finkelstein et al. (2012) and Baicker et al. (2013) document sizable increases
in health care utilization, including primary and preventive care.
                                                      4
 second explanation is that the increase in demand was met with the assistance of mid-level
 providers, such as physician assistants and nurse practitioners. States have expanded the
 scope-of-practice for these providers over time, granting them greater autonomy in patient
 care (Gadbois et al., 2015).5 While we find no change in the care supplied to Medicare
 beneficiaries by mid-level providers, such providers may have primarily supplied care to
 the newly-insured Medicaid beneficiaries. Thirdly, while our model predicts that doctors
 should be indifferent between Medicaid and Medicare beneficiaries when reimbursement
 rates are identical, there may be non-pecuniary aspects of treating Medicaid patients that
 make them less attractive (e.g., additional paperwork or lags in payments, see Gottlieb
 et al., 2018a) or additional financial benefits to treating Medicare patients (further dis-
 cussed in Section II). Finally, it may be the case that physicians reduced access to care
 for other groups, such as the uninsured or self-pay patients, in order to see more Medicaid
 patients (see, e.g., Chen, 2017). These types of negative spillovers would not be captured
 in our analysis of the Medicare population.

                                      I.   Previous Literature

   Given concerns over provider constraints affecting access to care, a number of recent
 studies have examined whether expanded insurance coverage has negative effects on the
 already-insured. Most closely related to our study, two separate papers examine expan-
 sions in state Medicaid programs prior to the ACA and find evidence of negative spillovers
 for Medicare beneficiaries. McInerney et al. (2017) use a simulated eligibility approach
 to examine the effects of changes in state eligibility rules for non-elderly adults in the
 2000s. The authors find that increased Medicaid eligibility leads to reductions in total
 spending and health care utilization among dually-eligible Medicare beneficiaries, but do
 not find similar effects for non-duals. The authors find no evidence of adverse health ef-
 fects for dual beneficiaries on mortality or measures of self-reported health. Also using a
 simulated eligibility approach, Glied and Hong (2018) find significant reductions in office-
 based Medicare spending and surgical discharges associated with increased state Medicaid
 eligibility for parents. The authors also find evidence of decreases in Medicare utilization
 associated with increased demand from the privately insured driven by changes in firm
 size composition.6 Finally, the authors examine whether there are changes in physician
 behavior or patient experience associated with insurance expansion. They find little ev-
 idence that changes in coverage rates affect physician labor supply or income, wait time
 for appointments, or patient satisfaction, but do find evidence of fewer annual physician
 visits for Medicare patients in areas with more insurance expansion. Surprisingly, despite
 receiving fewer physician visits per year, avoidable hospitalizations decrease for Medicare
 patients in these areas.
   Prior work on insurance expansions under Massachusetts health care reform finds mixed
   5
      In prior work, Buchmueller et al. (2016) find evidence that dental demand shocks after expanded Med-
icaid coverage were accommodated in part by supply increases by mid-level providers. Carrillo and Feres
(2018) provide further evidence that physicians and nurses may be close substitutes for the provision of some
services in their study of physician supply policy in Brazil.
    6
      He et al. (2015) have similar findings using changes in county unemployment rates. They find that
inpatient care for Medicare patients rises with county unemployment rates, especially among providers with
a greater share of privately insured patients.
                                                     5
evidence on effects for the Medicare population. Bond and White (2013) find a modest
decrease in the number of primary care visits per Medicare beneficiary in zip codes with
high rates of uninsurance prior to reform, or those with the largest expected demand
shocks. The authors do not find, however, any change in the proportion of beneficiaries
with at least one primary care visit. Joynt et al. (2015) find no evidence of reductions in
the number of office visits, quality of office-based care, or total cost of care for chronically
ill Medicare patients. In addition, Joynt et al. (2013) find no evidence of an increase
in preventable hospitalizations among Medicare beneficiaries, even in areas with larger
insurance expansion.
   Studies of spillover effects in the context of other types of public insurance expansions
are also less clear in their predictions. Garthwaite (2012) finds that pediatricians decreased
their labor supply in response to the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) expan-
sions, demonstrating a potential pathway for reduced utilization among already-insured
children. He and White (2013) also find a decrease in pediatrician work hours associated
with CHIP expansions. In contrast, Chen (2017) finds that physicians increase their to-
tal hours of care supplied in response to Medicaid eligibility expansions, and Chen et al.
(2018) suggest that CHIP reauthorization led pediatricians to pursue further training and
accept private practice positions (relative to hospital employment). White (2012) finds no
evidence of a change in the use of physician services following CHIP expansions among
children who do not themselves gain coverage, but does find positive spillovers associated
with an increase in physician reimbursement fees. In the context of the dental indus-
try, Buchmueller et al. (2016) find that Medicaid coverage of dental benefits results in
modestly higher wait times in offices and for appointments. The authors find this effect
is concentrated, however, in states with more restrictive policies regarding the scope of
practice for dental hygienists, suggesting that the availability of mid-level providers might
be important in determining spillovers.
   Finally, Baker and Royalty (2000) study an expansion in Medicaid prenatal eligibility
that was accompanied by increased provider fees. The authors find that the expansions
increased utilization among poor patients but that this increase occurred in public settings
rather than private physician practices. This suggests that any spillovers for the already-
insured might be minimal or limited to those patients using certain providers.

                                         II.   Model

  Our predictions about the impact of the ACA Medicaid expansions on Medicare enrollees
are adapted from the widely-used model of Sloan et al. (1978). This model assumes that
providers face a downward sloping demand curve for private patients and a fixed unit
price for treating Medicaid and Medicare patients. Previous research (e.g., Decker, 2009;
Hahn, 2013) shows that the reimbursement rate for Medicare is, in general, substantially
higher than that of Medicaid. We depict graphically in panel A of Figure 1 what a
marginal revenue curve for providers might look like in such a model: some portion of the
marginal revenue curve is downward sloping (corresponding to the private market), and at
some point it intersects with the fixed Medicare reimbursement rate for that service. The
Medicare reimbursement rate is represented by the first (higher) horizontal portion of the
marginal revenue curve. At some point, a provider might have served all of her Medicare
customers and again begins to take on private patients. As marginal revenue continues to
                                               6
 decrease with quantity, the private marginal revenue curve may intersect with the (lower)
 Medicaid reimbursement rate.
    Providers differ in their production functions. Some providers, such as those represented
 by the curve MC-1 in the figure, exhibit a high-cost, low quantity style in which they see
 relatively few patients but charge a high per-visit fee. These providers profit-maximize
 when they see a mix of Medicare and private patients, but do not see Medicaid patients.
 Other providers, such as those represented by MC-2 and MC-3, have lower marginal costs
 and lower per-visit fees, and provide a larger number of visits. These providers see a mix
 of Medicaid, Medicare, and privately-insured patients. Only the lowest cost providers,
 depicted as MC-3, will see all available Medicaid patients; MC-3’s marginal patient is a
 lower-paying, uninsured patient.
    First, we consider the case where Medicaid coverage is expanded but the fees paid by
 Medicaid for medical services remain lower. This is represented by the extension of the
 Medicaid portion of the marginal revenue curve by the dotted line in panel A. In the
 absence of a fee bump, only providers like MC-3 are affected. After the expansion, these
 providers substitute low-paying, non-publicly insured patients for Medicaid patients. In
 this case, Medicare patients are completely unaffected by the coverage expansion.
    Next, consider the case where Medicaid coverage is expanded and there is parity in fees
 between Medicare and Medicaid. We depict such a case in panel B of Figure 1. In this case,
 the marginal revenue curves of all providers are affected, all providers are now indifferent
 between seeing a Medicare and a Medicaid patient, and Medicaid patients are substituted
 for lower-paying non-public patients at the margin. In this scenario, existing patients,
 including both patients covered by Medicare and those already insured by Medicaid, may
 find themselves replaced, at least to some extent, by newly-insured Medicaid patients.7
    Thus, this model of provider production implies that expansions in Medicaid may not
 affect access or utilization in Medicare for the majority of health care services where
 Medicare reimbursement exceeds Medicaid reimbursement. However, the providers of
 services with fee parity (primary care services) may begin providing more services to
 newly-insured Medicaid beneficiaries (for example, see Alexander and Schnell, 2017). In
 this scenario, Medicaid patients may be substituted for Medicare patients, which should
 manifest in lower utilization of primary care services among Medicare beneficiaries in
 states with Medicaid expansions.8




   7
      Note that this may be offset somewhat since affected physicians will provide more visits in response
to the higher marginal reimbursement rate; however, the size of this increase in the quantity supplied will
depend on the shape of the marginal cost curve.
    8
      For ease of presentation, we assume zero crowd-out of higher-paying, private insurance coverage under
expanded Medicaid in the two scenarios described here. The presence of this type of crowd-out would not
change the predictions of these models regarding negative spillovers for the Medicare population. We still
only arrive at a prediction of decreased utilization under the fee-parity scenario, although it may be offset by
an increase in the supply of services to Medicare patients by some physicians if Medicaid crowds-out private
coverage for patients in private plans with reimbursement that exceed Medicare levels. These physicians
would also decrease the total quantity of services they provide. See discussions in McInerney et al. (2017)
and Garthwaite (2012).
                                                       7
                       A.    Implications for the ACA Medicaid Expansions

   The predictions from this model are directly relevant to the policy environment sur-
 rounding the ACA Medicaid eligibility expansions. To address concerns about provider
 willingness to participate in the expansions, the ACA required states to raise Medicaid
 primary care payment rates to Medicare levels in 2013 and 2014, referred to as the “Med-
 icaid primary care fee bump.” Therefore, fee parity was in effect for primary care services
 during the first year of Medicaid expansion in 2014.9
   Because of the magnitude of the Medicaid expansions, it is reasonable to expect a
 change in providers’ marginal patient as suggested by the model. First, as described
 in the Introduction, the ACA expansions were associated with economically-meaningful
 increases in service demand from the newly insured (Ghosh et al., 2017; Miller and Wherry,
 2017; Simon et al., 2017; Sommers et al., 2015; Wherry and Miller, 2016). In addition,
 the ACA expansions were as large as, if not larger than, the earlier expansions studied in
 related empirical work (Glied and Hong, 2018; McInerney et al., 2017). We examine in
 subanalyses four situations where the demand shock for providers was especially large. We
 examine zip codes where the ACA expansions were particularly large, as well as geographic
 areas where the health care industry has little or no excess capacity. We also examine
 dually-eligible beneficiaries, who are more likely to share providers with the low-income
 adults gaining coverage under the expansion. Finally, we consider a subset of states where
 the change in eligibility due to the expansion was particularly large.
   However, there are also many ways in which provider behavior may differ from what
 is predicted here. Providers may serve Medicaid patients out of a charity motive (e.g.
 Glied and Hong, 2018), or be unable to perfectly implement the market segmentation
 described in the model. In that case, the Medicaid expansion may crowd out Medicare
 beneficiaries’ utilization of all services, not just services with fee parity. On the other hand,
 established patient relationships may lead providers to favor Medicare patients even when
 the reimbursement rates are equal. To address this concern, we examine new patient visits
 among Medicare beneficiaries; after the ACA expansions, Medicare beneficiaries seeking
 care from a new provider should have been directly in competition with newly-insured
 Medicaid beneficiaries.
   Still, providers may have continued to prefer Medicare beneficiaries even for new patient
 visits if there were additional benefits not captured in the service reimbursement rate. One
 example would be higher administrative burdens associated with Medicaid reimbursement
 (e.g. Gottlieb et al., 2018b). Additionally, some physicians may have received bonus
 payments for services to Medicare patients under a primary care incentive program in
 effect between 2011 and 2015. Under this program, qualifying primary care physicians
 received a quarterly payment equal to 10 percent of Medicare’s payments for a subset of
 primary care services. However, a national survey indicated that only half of primary care
 physicians were aware of the program, with just one-quarter reporting receiving a bonus
 payment (Andrews, 2015). In addition, Chen et al. (2018) find little evidence of physician
   9
     The policy expired after 2014. At least fifteen states and the District of Columbia elected to extend
the fee bump into 2015 and continue to pay increased primary care fees (Tollen, 2015). This means that 7
of the 29 expansion states still had this policy in effect during 2015, the second year of Medicaid expansion.
Since fee parity was not fully in effect in 2015, in our robustness checks we re-estimate the models using
data through 2014 only, the year in which we predict the negative spillovers would be largest.
                                                      8
 response to the incentive program.
   Furthermore, this model does not allow providers to consider the expected future rev-
 enue from different patients based on their characteristics. For instance, providers may not
 want to establish relationships that will become less lucrative after the end of Medicaid
 reimbursement parity. Or, providers may continue to favor Medicare patients if their ex-
 pected health care needs (and therefore, expected revenue) surpass those of newly eligible
 Medicaid patients. For this reason, we also examine changes in utilization separately for
 healthy and sick Medicare beneficiaries.
   Finally, it is possible that the provider supply curves are flat enough to fully accom-
 modate the increase in demand. If this were true, we would expect to see an increase
 in physician hours after Medicaid expansion or other practice changes; we are unaware
 of any evidence on this question in the context of the ACA Medicaid expansions. One
 possible change in practice behavior that could accommodate the demand increase is an
 increase in the use of mid-level providers, such as physician assistants or nurse practition-
 ers, to provide primary care services. We are able to test for this empirically by examining
 whether there is an increase in Medicare visits with any services provided by non-MDs.

                                              III.       Data

                           A.   Coverage Impact of Medicaid Expansions

    We first replicate results already documented in several papers to establish that states
 that expanded Medicaid eligibility through the ACA experienced larger increases in insur-
 ance coverage than states that did not.10 To do so, we rely on the American Community
 Survey (ACS) for the years 2008-2015 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018). We use the restricted-
 use version, which contains approximately 50 percent more sample than the public-use
 version and gives us about 2.7 million non-elderly adults per year, or about 22 million
 respondents total.11 We apply the relevant survey weights in our analysis and use survey
 years 2008 through 2015 except where noted.
    We assess insurance coverage changes and, later, Medicare utilization in two geographic
 subsamples. The first subsample targets areas where the insurance expansions were likely
 the largest. Using the public-use 5-year ACS file for 2008-2012, we order zip codes by
 the fraction of the population that is both low income (in households with incomes under
 138 percent of the Federal Poverty Level) and uninsured, and define the top quartile as
 “high impact” zip codes (U.S. Census Bureau, 2016). The 1-year ACS only includes zip
 codes beginning in 2012, so we assess insurance coverage for this subsample over the years
 2012-2015. The second geographic subsample targets areas where the health care industry
 is thought to be operating at capacity or experiencing a supply shortfall. We define these
 areas using counties designated in 2010 as Health Professional Shortage Areas (HPSA) for
 primary care practitioners by the U.S. Health Resources and Services Administration12
  10
     Buchmueller et al. (2017), Simon et al. (2017), Sommers et al. (2015), Miller and Wherry (2017), Wherry
and Miller (2016), Miller et al. (2019), and others, all establish this fact.
  11
     Census disclosure restrictions require that we round sample sizes to the nearest 10,000.
  12
     2010 HPSA designations for each county are drawn from the 2015-2016 Area Health Resource File. We
consider a county to have HPSA designation if the entire county was indicated to be a geographically defined
HPSA.
                                                     9
 (Health Resources and Services Administration, 2016).

                              B.    Utilization of Medicare Beneficiaries

   We measure the health care utilization of Medicare beneficiaries from administrative
 Medicare claims data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for a
 20 percent random sample of enrollees observed from 2008 to 2015 (Center for Medicare
 and Medicaid Services, 2016).
   Our primary outcome is the utilization of primary care services, which is derived from the
 Part B (Carrier) file that records the provider and exact services associated with each claim
 using Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) codes. We characterize a
 service as “primary care” if it experienced increased reimbursement in Medicaid in 2013
 and 2014.13 These services are principally Evaluation and Management services, which
 are usually rendered in an office visit but can also include physician services rendered
 in a hospital. Our first measure is the total work-related Relative Value Units (RVUs)
 of primary care services received by each beneficiary each year. Each HCPCS code has
 a corresponding RVU value which we calculate using the physician fee schedule relative
 value files (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2016b). RVUs are the basis for
 Medicare billing and are designed to capture the resources that a service is expected to use;
 services for more complex patients that take longer are assigned more RVUs. If providers
 in expansion states spend less time with Medicare beneficiaries at each visit, this measure
 should capture that reduction in care.14 Our next measure is the number of primary care
 visits, which we measure as the number of Part B claims with primary care services. This
 measure should capture whether Medicare beneficiaries change their number of encounters
 with primary care providers.
   We also examine visits with reimbursement codes for new patient evaluation (HCPCS
 codes 99201-99205), a subset of primary care services. Providers operating at or near
 capacity may prioritize existing patient relationships; thus, Medicare beneficiaries may
 be more directly in competition with the newly-insured for new patient visits. In 2010,
 Medicare ceased payment for certain HCPCS codes (“consultation codes”) that previously
 included new patient visits; this policy change results in a doubling of the observed number
 of new patient visits identified using the HCPCS codes for new patient evaluation from
 2009 to 2010. We thus exclude 2008 and 2009 when analyzing this outcome to ensure a
 uniform variable definition.
   We also record the total number of physician services without requiring those services to
  13
      The affected codes in Medicare are HCPCS codes 99201-99499, 90460, 90461, 90471, 90472, and 90473
(Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, 2012). The increased reimbursement applies only to
qualifying providers, where qualification is based on specialty or on the affected codes accounting for more
than 60% of the provider’s Medicaid reimbursements. Since we do not have information on Medicaid claims,
we are unable to know whether providers who do not qualify via specialty meet the claims threshold. In
Medicare, if we define “qualifying provider” based on these codes accounting for at least 60% of the provider’s
Medicare reimbursements, the vast majority (82%) of affected services are provided by qualifying providers.
For this reason, we examine the utilization of all primary care services. However, we also consider the subset
of primary care services provided by this definition of qualifying providers as a robustness check in Appendix
Figure A11; results are very similar.
   14
      This interpretation assumes that there is no change in strategic billing by physicians in response to the
Medicaid expansion. While, we cannot rule out this possibility, we note that providers are subject to audits
to determine the accuracy of their Evaluation and Management coding.
                                                      10
 be related to primary care.15 Since the use of mid-level providers is a hypothesized pathway
 for supply expansion, we also examine the total number of services billed by non-MD
 providers (primarily nurse practitioners or physician assistants).16 In this administrative
 dataset, we do not observe the amount of time an individual waited for an appointment
 since requesting it. Instead, we use the number of days between observed physician services
 as a proxy for wait times. Finally, we examine spending, both to facilitate comparisons
 with previous work and to detect the presence of any downstream impacts of reduced
 access to primary care. Our first measure is overall expenditure on all services (inpatient,
 outpatient, and office-based; Medicare portion and cost-sharing); our second is expenditure
 on physician (i.e. Part B) services (Medicare portion and cost-sharing). Both measures
 are converted to real 2015 dollars using the Medical Services Consumer Price Index.

   These outcomes are available only for Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in traditional fee-
 for-service (FFS) Medicare; we do not observe utilization information among those enrolled
 in Medicare Advantage (MA). Medicare Advantage penetration rates differ dramatically
 across states, and are slightly higher (27%) in Medicaid expansion states than in non-
 expansion states (25%). Appendix Figure A9 assesses the presence of a differential trend
 in Medicare Advantage enrollment between expansion and non-expansion states prior to
 the ACA. We find that MA enrollment is falling slightly in the expansion states in the
 pre-period,17 potentially inducing compositional changes in our sample of fee-for-service
 enrollees. To avoid any influence on our estimates, we study a balanced panel of individuals
 who are present in the FFS sample for all eight years. The balanced panel is slightly older
 (1.5 years) than the unbalanced panel and underrepresents those in their mid-to-late 60s
 who join Medicare during the sample period.18



  15
      We refer to each claim in the Carrier file as a “physician service,” although in fact some claims may
represent laboratory, ambulance, or ambulatory surgical services. Similar to our primary care physician
measures, these services may also be rendered in the hospital setting.
   16
      Medicare reimburses services provided by non-MDs in two ways: direct billing (at 85% of the physician
payment rate) or “incident-to” billing. Non-MD services that are provided in certain circumstances may be
billed “incident-to” using the physician’s National Provider Identifier and qualify for the full rate. It is not
possible to identify services that are provided by a non-MD if they are billed “incident-to”(Buerhaus et al.,
2015; DesRoches et al., 2013; Perloff et al., 2016). Thus, our measure reflects only non-MD services that
are directly billed. Because a non-MD must direct bill services under certain circumstances (e.g., any new
medical issue that a patient brings up), we still expect our measure to capture greater utilization of non-MD
services.
   17
      The post-period coefficients among the dually eligible are the most concerning due to their large mag-
nitude. This increase is likely due to automatic enrollment in combined Medicaid-Medicare managed care
plans in nine states under a demonstration program called the Financial Alignment Initiative implemented
under the ACA. Enrollment in such plans is indistinguishable from Medicare Advantage enrollment in our
data. The states that implemented this program include four (CA, IL, MI, and OH) that expanded Medicaid,
three (SC, TX, and VA) which did not, and two (MA and NY) that we exclude from our sample because of
pre-existing high Medicaid eligibility. The differential enrollment in MA disappears if we drop these states.
   18
      In results available upon request, we examined utilization among repeated cross-sections of 67-69 year
old FFS beneficiaries in the years 2008-2015. We did not include 65 and 66 year olds in case those individuals
enter Medicare at different levels of health due to exposure to ACA coverage at ages before 65. In this popu-
lation we generally find that the Medicaid expansion did not affect the utilization of Medicare beneficiaries,
although in a few cases the analysis is inconclusive due to non-parallel trends in the pre-period.
                                                      11
                                C.   Subsample Analyses

  In addition to examining outcomes for the full Medicare FFS population, we also con-
sider several subsamples that may be more likely to experience spillover effects from the
Medicaid expansions. For these subsample analyses, we similarly require that the benefi-
ciaries are in the defined subgroup for all eight years of the 2008-2015 period in order to
be included in the analysis.
  The first such sample we consider is beneficiaries who are dually eligible for Medicare
and Medicaid, primarily low-income seniors and non-elderly adults with disabilities. This
population receives assistance from Medicaid to help pay for premiums and cost-sharing
for Medicare covered services. Given their low incomes, they may be more likely to be
affected by the ACA Medicaid expansions if they share neighborhoods and providers with
the low-income adults gaining Medicaid coverage.
  Next, we hypothesize that the increase in Medicaid coverage was particularly high in
“high-impact” zip codes with high rates of low-income uninsured individuals before the
ACA. Since spillovers would be expected to be largest where the demand shock from the
newly insured is largest, we assess the utilization of Medicare beneficiaries who reside in
these zip codes. In addition, the health systems in counties with a HPSA designation may
be particularly unable to expand supply. Medicare beneficiaries in such counties constitute
another geographic subsample.
  Finally, we divide the Medicare population into sick and healthy subsamples based on
the highest Charlson Comorbidity Index recorded for each individual in the pre-period
(since changes in utilization during the post period could change the presence of ICD
codes that underlie the Charlson Index). This index is based on the number of health
conditions recorded in an individual’s medical claims, with higher values indicating worse
health Charlson et al. (1987). Individuals with a Charlson Index of at most one during
2008-2013 are categorized as “healthy”; if supply-constrained providers can “triage” their
patients, utilization reductions may be most common among this population. On the
other hand, “sick” beneficiaries (those with a Charlson index of at least two in any pre-
period year) consume a disproportionate quantity of Medicare services and so may bear
the brunt of any service reductions. The distribution of the highest Charlson Index in the
pre-period is similar in expansion and non-expansion states and is reported in Appendix
Figure A10.
  Figure 2 describes our analytical samples in more detail. Panel A shows the number of
observations (person-years) of the full balanced sample and then each subsequent sample
for expansion and non-expansion states. Recall that each subsample is also balanced so the
number of individuals is the same in the pre- and post-periods. Our full sample contains
more than 29 million person-years. All samples are well represented in both expansion
and non-expansion states, with the high-impact zip codes somewhat more prevalent in the
non-expansion states and the HPSAs more concentrated in expansion states. Panels B-D
report the levels of our key outcomes for each subsample by expansion and non-expansion
status across the pre- and post-periods. Utilization generally climbs between the pre- and
post-periods, which is expected given the aging of our fixed panel. A typical Medicare ben-
eficiary has 9 primary care visits at which they receive 14 RVUs of primary care during the
pre-period. However, dually-eligible beneficiaries and beneficiaries with 2 or more chronic
                                            12
 diseases have 2-3 more primary care visits on average. This demonstrates that these clas-
 sifications indeed capture more clinically vulnerable subgroups with a higher demand for
 services. In contrast, we see lower usage of primary care services for beneficiaries living in
 high-impact zip codes or HPSA counties, which may reflect supply-side constraints.

                                      IV.     Empirical Model

                                       A.    Medicaid Expansion

   To document the impact of the Medicaid expansions on the use of care among Medicare
 beneficiaries, we estimate a difference-in-differences model. This approach better fits our
 context than the “simulated eligibility” methods used in other papers in this area since
 we look at expansions that occurred in states with a clearly defined before and after
 period, rather than gradual expansions rolled out over time. Comparing expansion and
 non-expansion states lets us evaluate whether pre-expansion trends differed across the
 expansion and non-expansion states.
   We use the below event-study model to assess the evolution of outcomes in expansion
 and non-expansion states both before and after expansion.
                                       " −2                       1
                                                                                     #
                                         X                        X
(1) Yist = βs + βt + Expansions ×             βy I(t − t∗s = y) +   βy I(t − t∗s = y) + ist .
                                              y=−6                      y=0


 Here, βs denotes state fixed effects and βt denotes year fixed effects. The variable Expansions
 equals 1 if individual i is living in one of the 24 states that opted to expand Medicaid
 eligibility in 2014 or 2015, and zero otherwise.19 Four states and D.C. that had previous
 expansions of Medicaid, or similar coverage, for adults with incomes up to 100% FPL
 before 2014 are excluded from the analysis.20 We would expect less of a demand shock in
 these states with generous pre-ACA Medicaid programs and, by excluding them, aim to
 increase our ability to detect negative spillovers under the ACA expansions. The remain-
 ing 21 states that did not expand Medicaid in 2014 or 2015 have values of zero for the
 Expansions variable. For the expansion states, indicator variables I(t − t∗s = y) measure
 the time relative to the implementation year, t∗s , of the expansion in each state. We group
 together y = −6 and y = −7 since only the 3 states expanding in 2015 have a nonzero
 value for y = −7. The standard errors are clustered at the state level.
   Our parameters of interest are estimates of βy that show how outcomes evolved in states
   19
      In our analyses, states that expanded Medicaid in 2014 are AR, AZ, CA, CO, CT, HI, IL, IA, KY,
MD, MI, MN, NJ, NM, NV, ND, OH, OR, RI, WA, and WV. Michigan implemented their expansion in
April 2014 with the remainder of states expanding in January 2014. States that we consider to have 2015
expansions are NH (implemented August 15, 2014), PA (January 1, 2015), and IN (February 1, 2015). We
do not consider AK to be a 2015 expander state given its late implementation date (September 1, 2015).
   20
      We excluded only those states that extended coverage to childless adults with incomes at least as high
as 100% FPL, with benefit packages that were comparable to Medicaid, and with open enrollment during
each year of the pre-period. Four states (DE, MA, NY, VT) met these criteria and were excluded from the
analysis. We also excluded DC, which took up the new ACA option to cover low-income adults in 2010. Our
results are unchanged if we instead include these five states. CA, CT, and MN were also early implementers
of the ACA expansions but did not fully expand eligibility to 138% FPL until January 1, 2014. See appendix
of Miller and Wherry (2017) for additional details and source information.
                                                     13
 that opted to expand Medicaid relative to those that did not, with the year immediately
 prior to expansion as the reference year. If coefficients on years prior to the Medicaid
 expansion (i.e., β−6 through β−2 ), are close to zero and not statistically significant, this
 provides support for the parallel trends assumption under our difference-in-differences
 estimation of the impact of the ACA. This indicates that, before the ACA, expansion and
 non-expansion states experienced similar trends in outcomes. Any estimated divergence
 in outcomes between the two groups of states during the post period (β0 and β1 ) are then
 attributed to the policy change.
   We next estimate a difference-in-differences (DID) model that examines the average
 change in outcomes following expansion in the expansion states compared to the nonex-
 pansion states.

(2)                    Yist = βs + βt + β0 Expansions × I(t − t∗s ≥ 0) + ist .

 This specification differs from the event study analysis in that it estimates the average
 change in outcomes during the entire post-period compared to the entire pre-period in the
 expansion states compared to the non-expansion states, rather than estimating changes
 relative to the year immediately prior to implementation.21

                                       B.    Additional Analyses

   In addition to the main analyses described above, we conduct several additional analyses
 to examine the robustness of our findings to alternative methods, samples, or measures of
 negative spillovers.
   First, for at least two outcomes, we find that the pre-period trends were meaningfully
 different in expansion and non-expansion states prior to the ACA expansions under our
 event study model. For this reason, and as an additional check on our findings under the
 DID model, we conduct a separate analysis using the synthetic control method described
 in Abadie et al. (2010). This approach forms a control unit by weighting the non-expansion
 states to closely resemble the expansion states in the pre-period, and then attributes any
 divergence in outcomes after implementation to the impact of the expansions. This method
 has been used in many settings, including the study of the ACA Medicaid expansions (Hu
 et al., 2018). Following previous studies, we group all expansion states into one aggregate
 treated unit. This method requires a common “pre-intervention” time period, so we
 restrict this analysis to the 21 states that expanded by April of 2014, following Hu et al.
 (2018). By weighting comparison units to match the treated unit, this approach aims to
 minimize differing pre-trends. Details on this approach are found in Appendix Section B.
   Next, we examine the sensitivity of our findings to different policy parameters. As de-
 scribed in Section II, Medicaid primary care reimbursements were set to Medicare levels
 in 2013 and 2014, but not all expansion states opted to extend this parity reimbursement
 policy through 2015. Our conceptual model predicts that negative spillovers are less likely
 to occur if Medicare reimbursement rates exceed those of Medicaid. For this reason, we
 have re-run our analyses evaluating spillovers through the first year of Medicaid expansion
  21
    Recent work by Goodman-Bacon (2018) suggests that DID models can be misleading if the treatment
timing varies across states and treatment changes the slope of the outcome variable. However, we demonstrate
in Appendix Section C that this is not a major concern in our setting.
                                                    14
 only (i.e. 2014), when Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement rates were equal for primary
 care services in all states. In addition, there is heterogeneity across states in terms of how
 the fee bump policy (in all years, 2013 through 2015) affected the dually eligible in prac-
 tice, depending on pre-existing state reimbursement policies for this population. Detailed
 information on these pre-existing state policies for duals and the implied changes under
 the ACA fee bump policy is difficult to locate.22 However, if these changes are correlated
 with state expansion status, this might affect our findings. For this reason, in Section V.C
 we also re-run the analyses excluding duals from each of the sample populations.
   We next examine whether there are spillovers for Medicare beneficiaries in the states
 with the largest Medicaid expansions. The increase in eligibility for Medicaid associated
 with the expansions varies across states based on what eligibility criteria were in place
 prior to the ACA. It may be possible that Medicare beneficiaries in the most affected
 states experienced negative spillovers, even though there were no spillovers associated
 with the expansions overall. We used information on pre-ACA eligibility rules from the
 Kaiser Family Foundation and data from the Current Population Survey to determine
 how large of an eligibility increase would be experienced in each state using a nationally
 representative sample of individuals. We then dropped expansion states whose eligibility
 changes were less than 10 percentage points.23 We also excluded Wisconsin from the pool
 of non-expansion states, because it enacted an ACA expansion “look alike” program at the
 same time the ACA expansions were implemented. This left us with a pool of expansion
 states that experienced eligibility changes of, on average, 23 percentage points, and a pool
 of non-expansion states that experienced eligibility changes of, on average, 2.5 percentage
 points from 2013 to 2014.
   Other studies have shown that individuals gaining health insurance coverage can have
 elevated short-run utilization due to pent-up demand for care (e.g. Lo et al., 2014; Miller
 and Wherry, 2017). To examine whether spillovers are more intense right after expansion
 or, alternatively, grow over time as more individuals take-up coverage, we examine changes
 in primary care utilization over half-year, rather than annual, intervals in additional anal-
 yses.
   Finally, because our administrative data do not have direct measures of wait times for
 care, we also rely on survey data to examine reports of delays in care associated with
 the Medicaid expansion. We use the restricted-use version of the 2008-2015 waves of the
 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), which contains state of residence information
 (National Center for Health Statistics, 2016).24 In each year, the NHIS questions a single,

   22
      Prior to the increase, providers in some states already received Medicare-level reimbursement for dually-
eligible beneficiaries, obtaining 80% of allowed charges from Medicare and 20% patient cost-sharing from the
state Medicaid program. However, many states did not pay the full 20% cost-sharing for the dually eligible,
or erected other administrative barriers to receiving the full payment (Medicaid and CHIP Payment and
Access Commission, 2015). Thus, the onset of the fee bump in 2013 had potentially varying impacts for the
dually eligible by state.
   23
      This led us to exclude CA, CT, HI, IA, IN, MD, and MN. For comparison’s sake, Glied and Hong
(2018) and McInerney et al. (2017) both discuss large Medicaid expansions as states with eligibility changes
of greater than 5 percentage points.
   24
      Although designed to be nationally representative, the NHIS sample is drawn from each state and D.C.
and, by pooling years of data, may be used to construct precise state-level estimates for most states (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019). In our context, this is unlikely to be a concern since we are
pooling states and years to estimate the average effect of Medicaid expansion for a group of 25 states.
                                                      15
 randomly-chosen adult from each surveyed household about delays in care due to long
 wait times. We use the responses among those 65 or older as an alternative measure of
 negative spillovers to Medicare beneficiaries.

                                             V.    Results

         A.   Medicaid Expansion States had Significantly Larger Coverage Increases

   We first show that states that expanded Medicaid eligibility through the ACA expe-
 rienced larger increases in insurance coverage than states that did not; as a result, it is
 reasonable to believe that Medicare beneficiaries that lived in these states were at higher
 risk of being crowded out of medical care.
   Figure 3 displays the event study coefficient estimates of Equation (1). Coverage in
 non-expansion states and expansion states evolved similarly during the years prior to
 the expansions but diverged starting in the first year of implementation, with increases
 in Medicaid coverage and decreases in uninsurance in expansion states relative to non-
 expansion states.
   The difference-in-differences coefficients are reported in Table 1. We find a statistically
 significant increase in Medicaid enrollment in expansion relative to non-expansion states
 of 4.2 percentage points. The increase in total insurance coverage is more modest, at 2.5
 percentage points. Among individuals living in the high-impact zip codes (Panel B), the
 estimated effects of the expansions are considerably larger as we expected: we observe
 an increase in Medicaid coverage of 10.7 percentage points and in insurance coverage of
 9 percentage points. Among those living in HPSA counties (Panel C), we see increases
 in Medicaid enrollment of 4.9 percentage points and decreases in uninsurance of 3.1 per-
 centage points. Thus HPSA counties have about-average ACA coverage expansions, but
 are expected to have supply constraints that might make negative spillovers for Medicare
 beneficiaries more likely.
   According to existing results in the literature, insurance coverage changes of this size
 could potentially result in large spillovers.25 For example, McInerney et al. (2017) find
 that a one percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility for nonelderly adults reduces
 average spending by 0.7 percent for all beneficiaries and 3.3 percent among the dually
 eligible. Assuming the take-up rate is approximately 70 percent (Buettgens and Kenney,
 2016), this implies that a 4.2 percentage point increase in Medicaid coverage would result
 in a decrease in spending of approximately 4.2 percent overall and by almost 20 percent
 among dually-eligible beneficiaries. The results in Glied and Hong (2018) imply that the
 2.5 percentage point increase in insurance coverage that we observe in expansion states
 would result in a 6.5 percent reduction in physician services spending among Medicare
 beneficiaries. If we extrapolate these estimates to changes in coverage observed in sub-state
 geographies, we could expect an over 23 percent decrease in physician services spending for
 beneficiaries in high-impact zip codes, where we observe a 9 percent increase in insurance
   25
      The measures of spending and the populations studied mentioned in this paragraph differ slightly from
those used in our analysis. However, we do not expect that these differences would lead one to anticipate
different effects in our context. Please see Appendix Section A for detailed information on the comparison
between these studies and our own.
                                                    16
coverage. In the next section, we directly test for such impacts on the utilization of
Medicare beneficiaries.

                 B.   Utilization in Expansion and Non-Expansion States


Primary Care Services. — In the previous section, we showed that Medicaid expan-
sion states had significantly larger coverage increases compared to non-expansion states.
Despite these coverage increases, we show in this section that Medicare beneficiaries’ uti-
lization of primary care services was not differentially affected in expansion states. We
focus on primary care services because at the time of the Medicaid expansion there was
parity in reimbursements for these services between the Medicare and Medicaid programs,
which implies a reduction in utilization among Medicare beneficiaries in our theoretical
model. We first present event studies validating the parallel trends assumption of a DID
model, and then show a formal pre-post DID coefficient.
   Our main results are demonstrated in Figure 4, which reports the event study coefficients
for all (Panel A) and several subsamples of Medicare beneficiaries for work-related RVUs
for primary care. To facilitate comparisons, we use the same y-axis scaling for every
sample, and a gray bar represents an increase or decrease of five percent of the mean of
that outcome for the sample. As may be seen in the Figure, the utilization of primary care
services among Medicare beneficiaries was similar in expansion and non-expansion states
prior to the ACA Medicaid expansions and exhibited no divergence after the expansions
were implemented. This finding holds in all six samples considered. Not only are post-
expansion event study coefficients not statistically significant, but they are very small in
magnitude.
   In Panel A of Table 2, we report the corresponding DID coefficients. We find no statis-
tically significant evidence of reductions in primary care RVUs associated with Medicaid
expansion for any of the samples. All coefficients are small relative to the mean of the
outcome; for example, our point estimate for the impact on the number of PCP RVUs
for all Medicare beneficiaries represents a 0.5 percent increase from the mean of 15.09
PCP RVUs per year. The largest point estimate we find, a reduction of 0.27 RVUs per
year for patients living in high-impact zip codes, is equivalent to less than one-fifth of
the RVUs required for a single 30-minute new patient office visit (which is paid at 1.42
RVUs) and represents only a 1.8 percent decline relative to the sample mean. Moreover,
our coefficients are precisely estimated. Evaluating the lower bound of the 95 percent CI
relative to the mean, we are able to rule out a decline in RVUs of more than 4.9 percent
in the full sample. Thus, despite the differential exposure of Medicare beneficiaries to the
largest coverage expansion since the introduction of Medicare and Medicaid, we can reject
all but very modest reductions in the utilization of these beneficiaries.
   Figures 5 and 6 present the results for the number of PCP visits and the number of new
patient visits. The number of visits is also an important measure of the quantity of care
supplied, although it does not capture some important characteristics of care, such as the
length of the visit, which are measured implicitly with RVUs. There is some suggestion
of a slight decrease in the number of PCP visits for the dually eligible and high-impact
zip code subsamples in the first year of expansion, which could be the result of a small
amount of pent-up demand among the expansion population. The estimates are only
                                             17
marginally significant at the 10 percent level, however, and are not significant during the
second expansion year. Importantly, the size of the reductions observed in the first year
after expansion are extremely small, representing less than a 1.4 percent reduction relative
to the mean number of primary care visits in these groups. We do not see any evidence
suggestive of a change in new patient visits.
  Panels B and C in Table 2 repeat the DID analysis for these two other measures of
primary care service utilization. The DID estimates are extremely small, representing less
than 1 percent of the mean for all but one of the group-outcome combinations, and all
estimates are statistically indistinguishable from zero. Overall, it appears that Medicare
beneficiaries have no problem obtaining primary care and new patient visits despite a likely
increase in the demand for new patient visits among the Medicaid expansion population.


Other Services. — Table 3 applies the same research design to a broader set of out-
comes. The corresponding event studies (in Appendix Figure A12-A14), are generally
supportive of the parallel trends assumption for the DID design. In Panel A, we demon-
strate that the Medicaid expansion was not associated with changes in the total number
of physician services among Medicare beneficiaries. Our point estimates suggest virtually
no effect, and the standard errors are small enough to rule out economically meaningful
impacts. The lower bound on our confidence interval for the dually eligible rejects de-
creases larger than 0.7 in the number of physician services, or a 2.7 percent decline for this
subgroup. In contrast, the estimates reported in McInerney et al. (2017) predict that a
Medicaid expansion the size of the ACA expansion would result in a reduction in medical
encounters of approximately 18.6 percent among duals.
   If providers’ schedules are crowded due to the newly insured, Medicare beneficiaries may
be asked to wait longer between physician services. The point estimates in Panel B of
Table 3 suggest decreases in this measure for all samples other than the dually eligible,
rather than increases that would suggest impediments to care. None of the estimates is
statistically significant. Under the 95% confidence intervals, the largest possible increase
in the days between physician services across samples is 1.4 percent among the dually
eligible, from 22.8 to 23.3 days.
   Panel C of Table 3 reports the effects of expansion on annual expenditures on physician
services among Medicare beneficiares. As with other outcomes, confidence intervals around
our estimates are small and always include zero. The lower bound of our confidence
intervals rules out reductions in physician service spending that range from 1.4 percent
(sick) to 3.8 percent (healthy) of the mean. We may compare these estimates to the
predicted decrease in physician service spending of 6.5 percent for Medicare beneficiaries
overall, and the 23 percent decrease for beneficiaries in high-impact zip codes described
earlier based on estimates from Glied and Hong (2018).
   There are two outcomes of potential policy interest where our event studies suggest
significant differences in trends between the expansion and non-expansion states. First,
we measure the share of services among Medicare beneficiaries provided by a non-MD
(i.e. mid-level) provider. As is apparent in Appendix Figure A15, there is a clear down-
ward trend in this outcome in expansion states over our time period. Similarly, overall
expenditures across all settings of care show a substantial upward trend in expansion
                                             18
 states in Appendix Figure A15.26 Since these event studies suggest the assumptions of
 the difference-in-differences model are not satisfied, we examine them using an alternative
 method in the next section.

                           C.    Alternative Specifications and Measures

 Synthetic Control Estimates. — We find little evidence of differential pre-trends
 in the event study analyses for most outcomes we consider. However, for at least two
 outcomes – the use of mid-level providers and overall expenditures – there is some visual
 evidence of differential pre-treatment trends for the expansion and non-expansion states.
 We, therefore, apply an alternative method that forms a synthetic control unit to resem-
 ble the expansion states during the pre-period, thereby avoiding differential pre-trends
 (Abadie et al., 2010). The results are reported and discussed in Appendix Section B. Con-
 sistent with the analysis presented in the previous section, we find no evidence of negative
 spillovers when we apply this method.

 Excluding 2015. — Our theoretical model predicts reductions for services with reim-
 bursement parity, thus motivating our focus on primary care services bumped to parity
 reimbursement in 2013 and 2014, and in some states in 2015. Since not all states extended
 the fee bump in 2015, we verify that our results hold for our key outcomes when we drop
 this year. Appendix Table A4 reports the DID coefficients for primary care RVUs, pri-
 mary care visits, and new patient visits for this analysis. The null hypothesis of no effect
 is never rejected and, as in Table 2, we can reject all but economically-small estimates.

 Excluding Dually Eligible. — As discussed in Section III, the increased reimburse-
 ment for primary care services may have affected utilization by the dually eligible in a
 manner that varies by state. We have no reason to expect that pre-fee bump polices, or
 the decision to extend the fee bump into 2015, are correlated with expansion status; in
 addition, we do not see any noticeable changes in 2013 relative to 2012, or 2015 relative to
 2014 in the utilization of primary care services among duals (Figure 4, Panel B). Still, in
 this section we repeat our analysis of primary care utilization for each of our subsamples
 excluding duals.
   Appendix Figures A17-A19 report the event studies for high-impact zip codes, HPSA
 counties, and the 0/1 and 2+ Charlson subsamples excluding duals. Non-duals comprise
 at least 71% of each of these subsamples, so we still have adequate sample size. The event
 studies do not suggest that the inclusion of the duals was masking a true spillover onto
 non-dually eligible Medicare beneficiaries. None of the difference-in-differences coefficients
 for these subsamples is significant at the 5% level (results available upon request).

 States with the Largest Eligibility Gains. — We next examine whether there
 is evidence of negative spillovers in states with the largest expansions in Medicaid. Ap-
 pendix Table A5 reports the difference-in-differences coefficients for primary care RVUs,
  26
    This trend persists even after adding a time-varying county-level control for the Medicare hospital wage
index. The reported event studies do not include this control.
                                                    19
primary care visits, and new patient visits when we examine only states with larger Med-
icaid expansions (defined as eligibility gains of more than 10 percentage points). Even
among these most affected states, we detect no evidence of negative spillovers, our point
estimates are small, and our confidence intervals allow us to reject even modest reductions
in utilization.

Estimates by Half-year Intervals. — By aggregating primary care utilization to
half-year intervals (rather than annual), we can look for evidence of dynamic treatment
effects – either larger spillovers to Medicare at first due to pent-up demand or increases in
spillovers to Medicare over time as more eligible individuals take-up Medicaid coverage.
In Appendix Figures A20-A22, we find that the treatment effects are essentially the same
throughout the post-period. Figure 3 showed a larger increase in Medicaid coverage in the
second year after expansion, so the finding of similar increases throughout the post-period
adds support to our main finding that there were no spillovers to Medicare beneficiaries.

Alternative Measures of Crowding. — We further supplement our analysis on
the use of care with survey-based measures on wait times. Our measures come from the
NHIS from 2008 to 2015. We limit the sample to individuals age 65 and older and exclude
those in early expansion states, consistent with the rest of our analysis.
   The alternative crowding measures are based on two questions in the NHIS related to
delays in care. The first question asks if the respondent delayed care due to an inability
to get an appointment. The second question asks if the respondent delayed care because
the time in the waiting room was too long. Figure 7 plots the event study coefficients
for these outcomes. There appear to be similar pre-trends across the expansion and non-
expansion states prior to the implementation of the ACA Medicaid expansions, and no
visible divergence following implementation. Table 4 shows the result from the DID model.
We detect no effect of the ACA Medicaid expansions on these measures of crowding. This
is consistent with our previous analysis documenting no change in the use of care among
Medicare beneficiaries.

                                    VI.    Discussion

  A robust literature shows that gaining Medicaid eligibility causes the newly-insured to
use more care. However, less is known about how physicians provide this care, given that
health care provider capacity is constrained in the short run. Visits for the newly-insured
may come from providers displacing existing patients, working longer hours, changing
practice styles to increase volume, or some combination of these three. Getting inside
this “black box” of the physician production function is difficult, in part due to data
limitations.
  The possibility that providers might be generating visits for the newly insured by dis-
placing existing patients has generated considerable concern among policymakers and is
one rationale states have given for foregoing the ACA Medicaid expansions. In this pa-
per, we show that a mixed economy model of provider supply predicts that Medicare
patients may become displaced as the result of the ACA Medicaid expansions, demon-
strating an economic reason underpinning the policy concern. We examine whether this
                                             20
type of negative spillover occurred in primary care utilization for Medicare beneficiaries,
since the ACA established equal primary care reimbursement for Medicaid and Medicare
beneficiaries. However, our empirical results show that no such displacement occurred and
our confidence intervals are small enough to rule out any economically meaningful effects.
These results hold across multiple subgroups and specifications. We therefore can rule out
one policy-relevant hypothesis about how primary care providers adjusted their supply to
serve the newly insured – it is clear that they did not displace Medicare patients.
  We note that our results contrast with those reported in analyses of previous Medicaid
expansions (Glied and Hong, 2018; McInerney et al., 2017), who find large effects of pre-
ACA Medicaid eligibility expansions on the use of care among Medicare beneficiaries,
including office-based medical care. Our analysis does not directly speak to why our
results differ. However, we speculate that it may be due to the fact that the ACA was
a highly salient, publicly-debated policy that was announced several years in advance.
Providers may have therefore been better able to anticipate the demand shock resulting
from the expansions and adjust their practice patterns in a way that resulted in minimal
disruption for existing patients.
  It is also possible that midlevel providers played an important role in meeting new
Medicaid-induced demand. Evidence from the state of Michigan shows no effects of ex-
pansion on primary care appointment availability, even in provider shortage areas, but an
increase in care by non-physician providers (Benitez et al., 2019). In addition, there was a
significant increase in job ads for both physician and non-physician positions following the
state’s expansion (Benitez et al., 2019). The expanded use of non-physicians in primary
care practices following the ACA has been elsewhere documented (e.g. Barnes et al., 2018).
Notably, state scope of practice laws for nurse practitioners and physician assistants have
also greatly expanded over time (Gadbois et al., 2015). These recent trends may be an
additional reason our results differ from prior work examining pre-ACA state Medicaid
expansions.
  Another possibility is more reliance on administrative staff and patient support occupa-
tions, such as technicians, therapists, and aides, to help physicians and other health care
professionals meet new demand. This would be consistent with growth in these types of
health care occupations observed in Massachusetts following state reform (Staiger et al.,
2011). Interviews with providers in that state also point to facility expansions and ex-
panded practice hours as approaches taken to serve a greater number of patients (Ku
et al., 2009). More work on the response of provider practice decisions to public health
insurance expansions is an important topic for future research.




                                             21
                                      REFERENCES

Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010). Synthetic control methods for compar-
 ative case studies: Estimating the effect of California’s tobacco control program. Journal
 of the American Statistical Association 105 (490), 493–505.

Alexander, D. and M. Schnell (2017). Closing the gap: The impact of the Med-
  icaid primary care rate increase on access and health. SSRN Working Paper
  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2987730.

Andrews, M. (2015). End of medicare bonus program will cut pay to primary care doctors.

Baicker, K., S. L. Taubman, H. L. Allen, M. Bernstein, J. H. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse,
  E. C. Schneider, B. J. Wright, A. M. Zaslavsky, and A. N. Finkelstein (2013). The ore-
  gon experiment - effects of medicaid on clinical outcomes. The New England Journal of
  Medicine 368 (18), 1713–1722.

Baker, L. C. and A. B. Royalty (2000). Medicaid policy, physician behavior, and health care
  for the low-income population. The Journal of Human Resources 35 (3), 480–502.

Barnes, H., M. R. Richards, M. D. McHugh, and G. Martsolf (2018). Rural and nonrural
  primary care physician practices increasingly rely on nurse practitioners. Health Affairs 37,
  908–914.

Benitez, J., V. Perez, and R. Tipirneni (2019). Did michigan’s medicaid expansion deteriorate
  access to primary care? Indiana University Working Paper.

Benitez, J. A., R. Tipirneni, V. Perez, and M. M. Davis (2019). Does primary care provider
  supply influence medicaid acceptability? Medical Care 57 (5), 348–352.

Bhole, M. and V. Curto (2016). Early aca medicaid expansions: Impacts on enrollment and
  access. SSRN https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstracti d = 2849224.

Bond, A. M. and C. White (2013). Massachusetts coverage expansion associated with re-
  duction in primary care utilization among Medicare beneficiaries. Health Services Re-
  search 48 (6), 1826–1839.

Buchmueller, T., Z. Levinson, H. Levy, and B. Wolfe (2017). Effect of the Affordable Care
  Act on racial and ethnic disparities in health insurance coverage. American Journal of
  Public Health 106 (8), 1416–1421.

Buchmueller, T., S. Miller, and M. Vujicic (2016, November). How do providers respond
  to changes in public health insurance coverage? Evidence from adult Medicaid dental
  benefits. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (4), 70–102.

Buerhaus, P., C. M. DesRoches, R. Dittus, and K. D. and (2015). Practice characteristics
  of primary care nurse practitioners and physicians. Nursing Outlook 63 (2), 144–153.

Buettgens, M. and G. Kenney (2016). What if more states expanded Medicaid in 2017?
  Changes in eligibility, enrollment, and the uninsured. Urban Institute In Brief.
                                              22
Carrillo, B. and J. Feres (2018). Provider supply, utilization, and infant health: Evidence
  from a physician distribution policy. Forthcoming, American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy.
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2016). 2008-2015 20% master beneficiary sum-
  mary file and fee-for-service claims (research-identifiable claims). Last Accessed September
  2019.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2019). About the national health interview
  survey. Website: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/about nhis.htm.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2016a).             2016 acutarial re-
  port.          Accessed    at     https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-
  Systems/Research/ActuarialStudies/Downloads/MedicaidReport2016.pdf .
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2016b).                 Pfs relative
  value    files.            https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-
  Payment/PhysicianFeeSched/PFS-Relative-Value-Files.html.
Charlson, M. E., P. Pompei, K. L. Ales, and C. R. MacKenzie (1987). A new method of
 classifying prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal studies: Development and validation.
 Journal of Chronic Diseases 40 (5), 37383.
Chen, A. (2017).       Do the poor benefit from more generous Medicaid policies.
 https://sites.google.com/site/alicechenecon/research.
Chen, A., A. T. Lo Sasso, and M. R. Richards (2018). Supply-side effects from public
 insurance expansions: Evidence from physician labor markets. Health Economics 27 (4),
 690–708.
Chen, A. J., A. J. Graves, M. J. Resnick, and M. R. Richards (2018). Does spending more
 get more? health care delivery and fiscal implications from a medicare fee bump. Journal
 of Public Policy Analysis and Management 37, 706–731.
Decker, S. (2009). Changes in Medicaid physician fees and patterns of ambulatory care.
  Inquiry 46, 291304.
DesRoches, C. M., J. Gaudet, J. Perloff, K. Donelan, L. I. Iezzoni, and P. Buerhaus (2013).
  Using Medicare data to assess nurse practioner-provided care. Nursing Outlook 61 (6),
  400–407.
Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. Newhouse, H. Allen,
  and K. Baicker (2012). The oregon health insurance experiment: Evidence from the first
  year. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1057–1106.
Gadbois, E. A., E. A. Miller, D. Tyler, and O. Intrator (2015). Trends in state regulation
 of nurse practitioners and physician assistants, 2001 to 2010. Medical Care Research and
 Review 72, 200–219.
Garthwaite, C. (2012, August). The doctor might see you now: The supply side effects of
 public health insurance expansions. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (3),
 190–215.
                                              23
Ghosh, A., K. Simon, and B. Sommers (2017). The effect of state Medicaid expansions on
 prescription drug use: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act. NBER Working Paper.
Glied, S. and K. Hong (2018). Health care in a multi-payer system: Spillovers of health care
  service demand among adults under 65 on utilization and outcomes in Medicare. Journal
  of Health Economics 60, 165–176.
Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018). Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing.
 NBER Working Paper No. w25018.
Gottlieb, J., A. H. Shapiro, and A. Dunn (2018a). The complexity of billing and paying for
 physician care. Health Affairs 37 (4), 619–626.
Gottlieb, J. D., A. H. Shapiro, and A. Dunn (2018b). The complexity of billing and paying
 for physician care. Health Affairs 37, 619–625.
Hahn, Y. (2013). The effect of Medicaid physician fees on take-up of public health insurance
  among children in poverty. Journal of Health Economics 32 (2), 452–462.
He, D., M. McInerney, and J. Mellor (2015). Physician responses to rising local unemploy-
  ment rates: Healthcare provision to Medicare and privately insured patients. Journal of
  Health Economics 40, 97–108.
He, F. and C. White (2013). The effect of the children’s health insurance program on
  pediatricians’ work hours. Medicare Medicaid Research Review 3 (1), E1–E32.
Health Resources and Services Administration (2016). Area health resource file. Last Ac-
  cessed September 2019.
Hofer, A. N., J. M. Abraham, and I. Moscovice (2011). Expansion of coverage under the
  patient protection and Affordable Care Act and primary care utilization. The Milbank
  Quarterly 89 (1), 69–89.
Hu, L., R. Kaestner, B. Mazumder, S. Miller, and A. Wong (2018). The effect of the Afford-
 able Care Act Medicaid expansions on financial well-being. Journal of Public Economics.
Huang, E. S. and K. Finegold (2013). Seven million Americans live in areas where demand for
 primary care may exceed supply by more than 10 percent. Health Affairs 32 (3), 614–621.
Joynt, K., D. Chan, J. Zheng, E. Orav, and A. Jha (2015). The impact of Massachusetts
  health care reform on access, quality, and costs of care for the already insured. Health
  Services Research 50 (2), 599–613.
Joynt, K. E., D. Chan, E. J. Orav, and A. K. Jha (2013). Insurance expansion in Mas-
  sachusetts did not reduce access among previously insured Medicare patients. Health
  Affairs 32 (3), 571–578.
Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (2012).                  Increasing
 Medicaid primary care fees for certain physicians in 2013 and 2014:              A
 primer on the health reform provision and final rule.                Available at
 https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/8397.pdf.
                                             24
Ku, L., E. Jones, B. Finnegan, P. Shin, and S. Rosenbaum (2009). How is the primary care
 safety net faring in Massachusetts?
Lo, N., D. H. Roby, J. Padilla, X. Chen, E. N. Salce, N. Pourat, and G. F.
  Kominski (2014).      Increased service use following medicaid expansion is mostly
  temporary: Evidence from california’s low income health program. Available at
  http://healthpolicy.ucla.edu/publications/Documents/PDF/2014/DemandP BF IN AL1 0−
  8 − 14.pdf.
McInerney, M., J. M. Mellor, and L. M. Sabik (2017, August). The effects of state Medicaid
 expansions for working-age adults on senior Medicare beneficiaries. American Economic
 Journal: Economic Policy 9 (3), 408–38.
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (2015). Effects of Medicaid Coverage
 of Medicare Cost Sharing on Access to Care. macpac.gov.
Miller, S., S. Altekruse, N. Johnson, and L. Wherry (2019). Medicaid and mortality: New
 evidence from linked survey and administrative data. NBER Working Paper No. 26081.
Miller, S. and L. Wherry (2017). Health and access to care during the first 2 years of the
 ACA Medicaid expansions. New England Journal of Medicine 376, 947–956.
National Center for Health Statistics (2016). 2008-2015 national health interview survey.
  Last Accessed September 2019.
Perloff, J., C. M. DesRoches, and P. Buerhaus (2016). Comparing the cost of care provided to
  Medicare beneficiaries assigned to primary care nurse practitioners and physicians. Health
  Services Research 51 (4), 1407–1423.
Polsky, D., M. Candon, B. Saloner, D. Wissoker, K. Hempstead, G. M. Kenney, and
  K. Rhodes (2017). Changes in primary care access between 2012 and 2016 for new patients
  with Medicaid and private coverage. JAMA Internal Medicine 177 (4), 588–590.
Simon, K., A. Soni, and J. Cawley (2017). The impact of health insurance on preventive care
  and health behaviors: evidence from the first two years of the ACA Medicaid expansions.
  Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.
Sloan, F., J. Mitchell, and J. Cromwell (1978). Physician participation in state Medicaid
  programs. Journal of Human Resources 13, 211–245.
Sommers, B., M. Gunja, K. Finegold, and T. Musco (2015). Changes in self-reported insur-
  ance coverage, access to care, and health under the Affordable Care Act. JAMA 341 (4),
  366–374.
Staiger, D. O., D. I. Auerbach, and P. I. Buerhaus (2011). Health care reform and the health
  care workforce. The New England Journal of Medicine 365 (12), e24.
Tollen, L. (2015). Health policy brief: Medicaid primary care parity. Health Affairs.
U.S. Census Bureau (2016). 5-year 2008-2012 acs zip code characteristics. Downloaded from
  American FactFinder https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml.
                                             25
U.S. Census Bureau (2018). 2008-2015 american community survey one year files. Last
  Accessed September 2019.
Wherry, L. and S. Miller (2016). Early coverage, access, utilization, and health effects of the
 Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansions: A quasi-experimental study. Annals of Internal
 Medicine 164 (12), 795–803.
White, C. (2012). A comparison of two approaches to increasing access to care: Expanding
 coverage versus increasing physician fees. Health Services Research 47 (3), 963–983.




                                              26
                     10
                                            Figure 1. : Provider Response to Medicaid Expansions




                                                                                                         12
                                     MC−1




                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                      MC−1
                                                                                                                                                MC−2        MC−3
                     8




                                                                  MC−2




                                                                                                         8
  Marginal Revenue




                                                                                      Marginal Revenue
                     6




                                                                                                         6
                                                                              MC−3
                     4




                                                                                                         4
                     2




                                                                                                         2
                     0




                                                                                                         0
                                 5                        10             15                                       5               10                   15

                                               Number of Visits                                                              Number of Visits




                          (A) Medicaid Expansion, No Fee Increase                                             (B) Medicaid Expansion, Fee Parity
Note: Figure depicts marginal revenue curves faced by providers before (solid) and after (solid and dashed) Medicaid expansion
in the case there is no fee increase (first panel) and with fee parity (second panel). The marginal cost curves for different types
of providers are denoted by MC-1, MC-2, and MC-3.




                                                                                     27
                                                                                                          Figure 2. : Summary Statistics

                                         15
  Number of Observations (in Millions)




                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                              Primary Care Work RVUs
                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                       10

                                          5




                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                          0                                                                                                                                   Pre         Post    Pre       Post   Pre    Post    Pre  Post   Pre     Post   Pre       Post
                                                      All               Dual    High Impact Zips   HPSA      Healthy         Sick                                                   All                 Dual     High Impact Zips   HPSA        Healthy            Sick

                                                                                 Non−Expansion       Expansion                                                                                                    Non−Expansion      Expansion




  (A) Number of Observations in Sample and Each Subsamples                                                                                                                                              (B) Primary Care RVUs

                                         15




                                                                                                                                                                       0.75

                                         10
  Primary Care Visits




                                                                                                                                              New Patient Visits




                                                                                                                                                                       0.50



                                          5

                                                                                                                                                                       0.25




                                          0                                                                                                                            0.00
                                              Pre         Post   Pre       Post   Pre    Post    Pre  Post   Pre     Post   Pre       Post                                     Pre         Post    Pre      Post   Pre    Post    Pre  Post   Pre    Post    Pre       Post
                                                    All                Dual     High Impact Zips   HPSA        Healthy            Sick                                               All                 Dual    High Impact Zips   HPSA        Healthy            Sick

                                                                                 Non−Expansion       Expansion                                                                                                    Non−Expansion       Expansion




                                                                       (C) Primary Care Visits                                                                                                                 (D) New Visits

Note: Panel (A) reports the number of observations (person-years) in expansion and non-expansion states for our full sample
(All) and five subsamples: dually eligible, those in high-impact zip codes (Low Inc Zips), those in health provider shortage areas
(HPSA), those whose Charlson score in the pre-period never exceeds 0 or 1 (Healthy), and those whose Charlson score in the
pre-period is at least 2 (Sick). Panels (B)-(D) report the means for key outcomes in expansion and non-expansion states for the
full sample and six subsamples for the pre- and post-periods. For non-expansion states, the pre-period is defined as 2008-2013.




                                                                                                                                             28
     Figure 3. : Trends in Insurance Coverage in Expansion vs. Non-Expansion States, 2008-2015




                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                        ●
           0.06




                                                                                                         ●       ●      ●                    ●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                              ●




                                                                                           −0.02
           0.04




                                                                               Uninsured
Medicaid




                                                                                                                                                              ●


                                                                          ●
           0.02




                                                                                           −0.04
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
           0.00




                                     ●        ●          ●          ●
                     ●        ●




                                                                                           −0.06
                    −6       −5     −4       −3          −2       −1      0   1                         −6      −5      −4       −3          −2       −1      0   1

                                             Event Time
                                  (A) Medicaid Coverage
                                                                                                                                 Event Time
                                                                                                                        (B) Uninsured

                                                                                           0.05
           0.15




                                                                              ●                          ●                   ●
           0.10




                                                                               Uninsured

                                                                                           −0.05
Medicaid




                                                              ●
           0.05




                                                                                                                                                  ●




                                         ●                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                           −0.15




                     ●
           −0.05




                   −2.0      −1.5     −1.0        −0.5        0.0       0.5   1.0                       −2.0     −1.5    −1.0         −0.5        0.0       0.5   1.0

                                             Event Time
                   (C) Medicaid Coverage (High-impact zip codes)
                                                                                                                                 Event Time
                                                                                                             (D) Uninsured (High-impact zip codes)
           0.08




                                                                                           −0.02 0.00




                                                                                                                        ●         ●          ●          ●
                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                               Uninsured
Medicaid




                                                                                                                                                              ●
           0.04




                                                                          ●

                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                           −0.06
           0.00




                                              ●          ●          ●
                     ●               ●
                              ●




                    −6       −5     −4       −3          −2       −1      0   1                         −6      −5      −4       −3          −2       −1      0   1

                                             Event Time
                         (E) Medicaid Coverage (HPSA counties)
                                                                                                                                 Event Time
                                                                                                                (F) Uninsured (HPSA counties)
     Note: These figures report coefficients from the estimation of Equation 1 for the outcome of insurance or Medicaid coverage in
     the American Community Survey, with the coefficients representing the deviation from the mean difference between expansion
     and non-expansion states in the six years before and two years after expansion. Panels C & D are limited to years 2012-2015
     because zip codes only become available in the 1-year ACS in 2012.




                                                                                      29
Figure 4. : Trends in Primary Care RVUs in Expansion vs. Non-Expansion States, 2008-2015
    2




                                                                   2
    1




                                                                   1
                                                 ●        ●                   ●            ●             ●             ●
    0




                                                                   0
                                ●      ●             ●                  ●           ●             ●
          ●      ●        ●                                                                                     ●
    −1




                                                                   −1
    −2




                                                                   −2
         −6     −5       −4     −3    −2     −1      0    1             −6   −5     −4     −3     −2     −1     0      1

                         (A) All Medicare                                          (B) Dually Eligible
    2




                                                                   2
    1




                                                                   1




          ●      ●        ●     ●                                                                                      ●
                                       ●                  ●                                                     ●
                                                 ●                                                       ●
    0




                                                                   0




                                                     ●                                     ●      ●
                                                                              ●     ●
                                                                        ●
    −1




                                                                   −1
    −2




                                                                   −2




         −6     −5       −4     −3    −2     −1      0    1             −6   −5     −4     −3     −2     −1     0      1

                     (C) High-impact zip codes                                     (D) HPSA counties
                                                                   2
    2




                                                                   1
    1




                                                                                                         ●             ●
                                                                   0




          ●      ●                               ●                                         ●      ●             ●
    0




                          ●     ●      ●             ●    ●                   ●     ●
                                                                        ●
                                                                   −1
    −1




                                                                   −2
    −2




                                                                        −6   −5     −4     −3     −2     −1     0      1
         −6     −5       −4     −3    −2     −1      0    1

                                                                             (F) Charlson score of 2 or more
                  (E) Charlson score of 0 or 1
Note: These figures report coefficients from the estimation of Equation 1 for the outcome of primary care RVUs, with the
coefficients representing the deviation from the mean difference between expansion and non-expansion states in the six years
before and two years after expansion. The gray lines denote 5% of the mean for this subsample.



                                                              30
Figure 5. : Trends in Primary Care Visits in Expansion vs. Non-Expansion States, 2008-2015
    1.0




                                                                   1.0
    0.5




                                                                   0.5
    0.0




                                                                   0.0
                                                 ●   ●                                              ●      ●
                                ●      ●                  ●                                  ●
           ●     ●        ●                                                     ●     ●                          ●
                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                       ●
    −0.5




                                                                   −0.5
    −1.0




                                                                   −1.0
           −6   −5       −4     −3    −2     −1      0    1               −6   −5     −4     −3     −2     −1    0     1

                         (A) All Medicare                                            (B) Dually Eligible
    1.0




                                                                   1.0
    0.5




                                                                   0.5




           ●
                 ●              ●
    0.0




                                                                   0.0




                          ●            ●         ●                                                         ●     ●     ●
                                                     ●                                       ●      ●
                                                          ●                           ●
                                                                          ●     ●
    −0.5




                                                                   −0.5
    −1.0




                                                                   −1.0




           −6   −5       −4     −3    −2     −1      0    1               −6   −5     −4     −3     −2     −1    0     1

                     (C) High-impact zip codes                                       (D) HPSA counties
    1.0




                                                                   1.0
    0.5




                                                                   0.5
    0.0




                                                                   0.0




           ●     ●              ●      ●         ●   ●                                                     ●
                          ●                               ●                                         ●            ●     ●
                                                                                             ●
                                                                          ●     ●     ●
    −0.5




                                                                   −0.5
    −1.0




                                                                   −1.0




           −6   −5       −4     −3    −2     −1      0    1               −6   −5     −4     −3     −2     −1    0     1

                  (E) Charlson score of 0 or 1                                 (F) Charlson score of 2 or more
Note: These figures report coefficients from the estimation of Equation 1 for the outcome of primary care visits, with the
coefficients representing the deviation from the mean difference between expansion and non-expansion states in the six years
before and two years after expansion. The gray lines denote 5% of the mean for this subsample.



                                                              31
Figure 6. : Trends in New Patient Visits in Expansion vs. Non-Expansion States, 2008-2015
    0.15




                                                                    0.15
    0.05




                                                                    0.05
                    ●         ●        ●         ●         ●                                              ●        ●    ●
            ●                                                                       ●           ●
                                                                            ●
    −0.05




                                                                    −0.05
    −0.15




                                                                    −0.15
            −4     −3        −2        −1        0         1                −4      −3         −2        −1        0    1

                        (A) All Medicare                                                 (B) Dually Eligible
    0.15




                                                                    0.15
    0.05




                                                                    0.05




            ●       ●         ●        ●         ●         ●                ●       ●           ●         ●        ●    ●
    −0.05




                                                                    −0.05
    −0.15




                                                                    −0.15




            −4     −3        −2        −1        0         1                −4      −3         −2        −1        0    1

                  (C) High-impact zip codes                                              (D) HPSA counties
    0.15




                                                                    0.15
    0.05




                                                                    0.05




                    ●         ●        ●         ●         ●                                              ●        ●    ●
            ●                                                                       ●           ●
                                                                            ●
    −0.05




                                                                    −0.05
    −0.15




                                                                    −0.15




            −4     −3        −2        −1        0         1                −4      −3         −2        −1        0    1

                  (E) Charlson score of 0 or 1                                   (F) Charlson score of 2 or more
Note: These figures report coefficients from the estimation of Equation 1 for the outcome of new patient visits, with the
coefficients representing the deviation from the mean difference between expansion and non-expansion states in the four years
before and two years after expansion. The gray lines denote 5% of the mean for this subsample.



                                                               32
                                         Table 1—: Difference-in-Differences Results: Health Insurance Coverage
                                                 Panel A: All
                                                                           Uninsured                                Covered by Medicaid
                                                 Expansion × Post             -0.025                                       0.042
                                                                             (0.009)                                      (0.006)
                                                 Pre-ACA Mean:               0.2024                                       0.1098
                                                 N                         21,990,000                                   21,990,000

                                                 Panel B: High-Impact Zip Codes
                                                                    Uninsured Covered by Medicaid
                                                 Expansion × Post     -0.090         0.107
                                                                     (0.017)        (0.017)
                                                 Pre-ACA Mean:        0.406          0.272
                                                 N                    87,000        87,000

                                                 Panel C: Health Professional Shortage Area Counties
                                                                    Uninsured Covered by Medicaid
                                                 Expansion × Post      -0.031            0.049
                                                                      (0.010)           (0.007)
                                                 Pre-ACA Mean:         0.217             0.119
                                                 N                   9,360,000         9,360,000
                 Note: This table displays the difference in differences estimates of the effect of the Medicaid expansion on the probability a
                 respondent is uninsured (Column 1) or enrolled in Medicaid (Column 2) using data on non-elderly adults from the American
                 Community Survey (2008-2015). Sample sizes in the American Community Survey are rounded to the nearest 10,000 due to
                 disclosure requirements. Standard errors are in parentheses. Zip code is only available in the 1-year ACS file beginning in 2012.




                 Figure 7. : Trends in Rates of Delaying Care due to Appointment Availability and Wait
                 Times, 2008-2015
                                                                               Waiting Room Time Too Long

                                                                                                            0.04
                            0.04
No Appointment Available




                                                     ●
                                                                                                            0.00
                            0.00




                                                          ●                    ●                                                             ●
                                                                 ●
                                    ●       ●                                                                            ●    ●         ●             ●
                                                ●                                                                                                 ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                    ●              ●
                                                                                                            −0.04
                            −0.04




                                    −6     −5   −4   −3   −2    −1     0       1                                    −6   −5   −4   −3   −2   −1   0   1

                                                                                   (B) Delayed Needed Care Because Time in Waiting Room
                                                                                                           Event Time
                                                    Event Time
                           (A) Delayed Needed Care due to Appointment Availability Too Long

                 Note: These figures report coefficients from the estimation of Equation 1 for the outcomes specified, with the coefficients
                 representing the deviation from the mean difference between expansion and non-expansion states in the outcome in 2008 to
                 2015 among those 65 or older in the National Health Interview Survey.


                                                                                                   33
                                          Table 2—: Difference-in-Differences Results: Primary Care Services
 Subsample:                         All           Dually Eligible          High-Impact         HPSA Counties     0 or 1                         2+ Charlson
                                                                            Zip Codes                        Charlson Score                        Score
 Panel A: Primary Care RVUs
 Expansion × Post      0.0784                           -0.135                 -0.267                 0.260                  -0.0312                 0.140
                    [-0.74,0.90]                     [-1.11,0.84]           [-1.15,0.61]           [-0.69,1.21]            [-0.41,0.35]           [-0.86,1.14]
 Outcome mean                      15.09                 20.86                  14.77                  14.91                   6.240                 20.61
 % of mean                          0.52                 -0.65                  -1.81                   1.74                   -0.50                  0.68
 Panel B: Number of Primary Care Visits
 Expansion × Post       0.0473        -0.111                                   -0.200                 0.0828                 -0.00362                0.0680
                     [-0.27,0.37]  [-0.51,0.29]                             [-0.52,0.12]           [-0.30,0.47]            [-0.18,0.17]           [-0.33,0.46]




                                                                                                                                                                                  34
 Outcome mean                      9.388                 11.76                  9.083                  9.182                   4.391                 12.51
 % of mean                          0.50                 -0.94                  -2.20                   0.90                   -0.08                  0.54
 Panel C: New Patient Visits
 Expansion × Post      0.00486                         0.00353               -0.00259               0.00269                  0.00376               0.00354
                    [-0.005,0.015]                  [-0.023,0.030]        [-0.017,0.012]         [-0.008,0.013]           [-0.009,0.017]        [-0.008,0.015]
 Outcome mean                      0.748                 0.714                  0.679                  0.720                   0.479                 0.916
 % of mean                          0.65                  0.49                  -0.38                   0.37                    0.78                  0.39
 N                             28,758,522             3,835,554              5,488,541             10,475,157              10,754,291             18,004,231
Note: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates comparing expansion and non-expansion states 2008 to 2015. Each column represents a different sample and each
panel a different outcome. Because of data availability as described in the text, the analysis that uses new patient visits excludes 2008 and 2009, thus reducing the number of
observations for those regressions by approximately 40%. 95% confidence intervals, in brackets, from standard errors clustered at the state level.
                                                    Table 3—: Difference-in-Differences Results: Other Services
      Subsample:                           All            Dually Eligible          High-Impact               HPSA                  0 or 1                2+ Charlson
                                                                                    Zip Codes               Counties           Charlson Score               Score
      Panel A: Number of Physician Services
      Expansion × Post       0.270           -0.0972                                   -0.146                 0.276                  0.127                   0.324
                          [-0.29,0.83]     [-0.70,0.51]                             [-0.65,0.36]           [-0.40,0.95]           [-0.27,0.52]            [-0.32,0.97]

      Outcome mean                       21.89                   26.24                  20.96                  21.47                  10.91                   28.75
      % of mean                           1.23                   -0.37                  -0.70                   1.29                   1.16                    1.13

      Panel B: Days Between Physician Services
      Expansion × Post       -0.152          0.111                                     -0.171                -0.0417                 -0.333                  -0.125
                          [-0.48,0.18]    [-0.32,0.54]                              [-0.48,0.14]           [-0.36,0.28]           [-0.77,0.11]            [-0.41,0.16]




35
      Outcome mean                       22.61                   22.78                  23.53                  23.15                  30.45                   19.19
      % of mean                          -0.67                    0.49                  -0.73                  -0.18                  -1.09                   -0.65

      Panel C: Physician Services Expenditure
      Expansion × Post         27.81          -16.85                                  -26.50                 40.75                   11.35                   30.20
                          [-49.04,104.66] [-101.29,67.59]                         [-91.71,38.71]        [-57.70,139.20]          [-53.82,76.52]         [-58.96,119.36]

      Outcome mean                        3076                   3459                   2963                   3050                    1398                    4124
      % of mean                           0.90                   -0.49                  -0.89                  1.34                    0.81                    0.73

      N                               28,758,522              3,835,554              5,488,541             10,475,157              10,754,291             18,004,231
     Note: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates comparing expansion and non-expansion states 2008 to 2015. Each column represents a different sample and each
     panel a different outcome. “Physician services” refers to the number of Part B claims, including those without primary care services, and “physician services expenditure” refers
     to total Part B expenditure on all services. The days between physician services measure is not defined for individuals with a single claim, so the number of observations for that
     outcome are reduced by approximately 25%. 95% confidence intervals, in brackets, from standard errors clustered at the state level.
          Table 4—: Difference-in-Differences Results: Alternative Crowding Measures
                   Delayed Medical Care Due to   Delayed Medical Care Due to
                   No Appointment Availability Long Wait Times in Waiting Room
  Expansion × Post            -0.004                        0.001
                             (0.004)                       (0.004)
  Outcome mean                0.058                         0.045
  % of mean                    -6.9                          2.2
  N                          48,508                        48,508
Note: This table presents difference-in-differences estimates using data from the 2008 to 2015 National Health Interview Survey
from respondents age 65 and older. The dependent variable in the first column equals 1 if the respondent reported that he or
she delayed medical care because no appointment was available and 0 otherwise; the dependent variable in the second column
equals 1 if the respondent reported that he or she delayed medical care due to a long wait time in the waiting room. Standard
errors are clustered by state and reported in parentheses under the coefficient estimate.




                                                              36
