                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   MORTGAGE PREPAYMENT AND PATH-DEPENDENT EFFECTS OF MONETARY
                             POLICY

                                      David W. Berger
                                     Konstantin Milbradt
                                       Fabrice Tourre
                                       Joseph Vavra

                                     Working Paper 25157
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25157


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                              October 2018, March 2020


We would like to thank Daojing Zhai, Ariza Gusti and Yang Zhang for excellent research
assistance. We would also like to thank our discussants Dan Greenwald, Monika Piazzesi,
Deeksha Gupta, and Ben Keys as well as Erik Hurst, Andreas Fuster, Pascal Noel, Amir Sufi,
Amit Seru, Sam Hanson, Gadi Barlevy, Anil Kashyap, Arlene Wong, Greg Kaplan, Adi
Sunderam, Tom Winberry, and seminar participants at NYU, NBER ME, Duke, Northwestern
Housing and Macro Conference, the ECB, Arizona State, the Chicago Fed, Marquette,
Copenhagen Business School, EIEF, University of Munich, the Bank of Canada, the Philadelphia
Fed, the AEA, NBER Summer Institute, Stanford GSB, FRB-NY Fed Workshop, SED, BFI,
Notre Dame and Berkeley as well as helpful comments from referees and the editor. This
research was supported by the Institute for Global Markets and the Fama-Miller Center at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, and the Guthrie Center for Real Estate Research
at Kellogg. Fabrice Tourre is also affiliated with the Danish Finance Institute and kindly
acknowledges its financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by David W. Berger, Konstantin Milbradt, Fabrice Tourre, and Joseph Vavra. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mortgage Prepayment and Path-Dependent Effects of Monetary Policy
David W. Berger, Konstantin Milbradt, Fabrice Tourre, and Joseph Vavra
NBER Working Paper No. 25157
October 2018, March 2020
JEL No. E0,E2,E4,E43,E5,E52,E58

                                          ABSTRACT

How much ability does the Fed have to stimulate the economy by cutting interest rates? We argue
that the presence of substantial debt in fixed-rate, prepayable mortgages means that the ability to
stimulate the economy by cutting interest rates depends not just on their current level but also on
their previous path. Using a household model of mortgage prepayment matched to detailed loan-
level evidence on the relationship between prepayment and rate incentives, we argue that recent
interest rate paths will generate substantial headwinds for future monetary stimulus.


David W. Berger                                  Fabrice Tourre
Department of Economics                          Finance Department
Duke University                                  Copenhagen Business School
419 Chapel Drive                                 Campus Solbjerg Plads 3 - A4.01
Social Science building 231                      2000 Frederiksberg
Durham, NC 27708                                 Denmark
and NBER                                         ft.fi@cbs.dk
david.berger@duke.edu
                                                 Joseph Vavra
Konstantin Milbradt                              Booth School of Business
Kellogg School of Management                     University of Chicago
Northwestern University                          5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
2001 Sheridan Rd #401                            Chicago, IL 60637
Evanston, IL 60208                               and NBER
and NBER                                         joseph.vavra@chicagobooth.edu
milbradt@northwestern.edu
1      Introduction
How much can the Fed stimulate the economy by cutting interest rates? There is growing evidence that
mortgage refinancing plays an important role in the transmission of monetary policy to real economic
activity.1 We argue that the current strength of this channel will depend on the past history of interest
rates: rate cuts can encourage borrowers to refinance their mortgages, but only if they have not already
locked in lower fixed rates before. This means that past Fed decisions affect the sensitivity of the
economy to today’s actions, and today’s actions in turn affect future "policy space".
     We demonstrate the importance of this path-dependence using a heterogeneous agent incomplete
markets model with prepayable fixed-rate mortgages, which we discipline using empirical patterns ob-
tained from monthly panel data on millions of borrower credit records linked to those borrowers’ mort-
gage loan information. This micro-data consistent model leads to a macro environment with complex
non-linear dynamics and path-dependent transmission of monetary policy to the real economy. Despite
these complicated dynamics, our model delivers a practical rule-of-thumb to help guide policy making:
the fraction of outstanding loans with mortgage rates above the current market rate, a measurable object
we refer to as f rac > 0, summarizes information about past rates relevant for predicting current stimu-
lus power. In addition to this current guidance about the sensitivity of the economy to rate changes, our
model also provides simple predictions about how f rac > 0 evolves under different hypothetical policy
paths and thus guidance about how current actions will affect future policy space.
     While our model can shed light on many different scenarios, we highlight several implications for
policy making in the current macro environment: 1) The secular decline in mortgage rates over the last
thirty years has steadily pushed up f rac > 0 and the effectiveness of monetary policy over this time
period. Policy makers should anticipate weaker responses to monetary stimulus in stable or increasing
rate environments. 2) Monetary policy is less powerful today because rates were kept low for a long
time after the Great Recession, during which time many households refinanced and locked in low fixed
rate mortgages. 3) It will take longer for the Fed to reload its "ammunition" as rates return to normal
than it took to use up its ammunition when it cut rates. This asymmetry stems from the fact that
households avoid prepaying when rates increase but actively refinance when rates decrease. All three
forces constrain the Fed’s ability to stimulate the economy if it needs to in the near future.
     We now discuss the empirical facts that guide our modeling choices and resulting policy conclusions.
Using linked borrower-loan panel data, we begin by characterizing the prepayment hazard as a non-
parametric function of the "rate gap" (the difference between the contractual mortgage coupon on a loan
m∗ and the current market interest rate m on similar mortgages). We find that the prepayment hazard
exhibits a "step-like" shape: prepayment rates are low and constant for loans with negative rate gaps,
increase sharply for rate gaps between 0 and 100bps and then plateau at around 2% per month for rate
gaps above 100bps. This illustrates both the well-known state-dependent nature of prepayment rates
(cf. Schwartz and Torous (1989)) but also the fact that most households nevertheless do not refinance
even with strong rate incentives (cf. Keys, Pope and Pope (2016)). We contribute to this literature by
estimating a non-parametric prepayment hazard which exploits linked borrower-loan data to isolate the
influence of rate incentives separately from confounding factors such as borrower credit worthiness, loan
    1 Cf.   Greenwald (2018), Wong (2019), Beraja et al. (2019)




                                                                  1
age related "burnout" effects, leverage, as well as any permanent borrower heterogeneity.2
    In the presence of state-dependent micro behavior like we observe for mortgage prepayment, it is
well-known that the micro adjustment hazard plays a crucial role in determining how aggregate shocks
transmit to macro outcomes.3 In our context, this means that a credible model of interest rate transmis-
sion through mortgage markets must match the empirical prepayment hazard. After documenting its
basic step-like shape, we dive deeper into the micro data to further inform our theoretical modeling. We
show that the modest prepayment rates for loans with large positive gaps are not driven by refinancing
constraints or by limited benefits from refinancing and instead suggest an important role for inattention
and time-dependence, consistent with Andersen et al. (2019).
    We then explore how different types of prepayment (rate refi, cashout refi and moves) respond to
rate incentives. We focus mostly on total prepayment in both the data and model, since any prepayment
resets a household’s rate gap to zero and is thus equally relevant for determining the evolution of
rate incentives over time. Nevertheless, different types of prepayment could respond differently to
rate incentives, with different implications for modeling. With our borrower-loan linked data, we can
match prepaying loans to newly originated loans by the same borrower, which allows us to construct
separate hazards for each prepayment type.4 Notably, we find that the probability of both rate and
cash-out refinancing is very low for loans with negative rate gaps and both hazards exhibits step-like
nonlinearities. Thus rate incentives are crucial for all refinancing decisions: even households taking cash
out of their homes rarely do so absent a simultaneous rate decrease.5 Most observed prepayment into
higher rates instead occurs from households moving.
    We turn next to time-series implications for aggregate mortgage prepayment. We show that the
distribution of rate gaps varies substantially across time and predicts aggregate prepayment rates in a
way consistent with the average loan-level hazard. In particular, the fraction of loans with positive rate
gaps in the data, f rac > 0, has key predictive power for aggregate prepayment rates. If the empirical
hazard was an exact step function at 0, then f rac > 0 would fully summarize all information about
how rate incentives affect aggregate prepayment. In practice, f rac > 0 predicts 92.5% of the variation
in aggregate prepayment that can be explained using the entire distribution of rate gaps. This formal
metric shows that the qualitative step-like prepayment hazard is a good quantitative fit for the data,
which will in turn be a crucial feature guiding our modeling choice of prepayment frictions.6 The strong
time-series relationship we find between f rac > 0 and prepayment is stable across time and very robust.
It holds before, during and after the housing boom-bust, after controlling for a host of covariates and
non-linearities, and when instrumenting for rate incentives to address endogeneity concerns. It is also
robust to various measurement and sample selection issues, holds at the regional level and shows up
after decomposing total prepayment into its constituent components.
    Thus, rate incentives matter crucially for aggregate prepayment rates. We next argue that mortgage
prepayment also matters for the transmission of interest rates into spending. Using an event study
design similar to Beraja et al. (2019), we show that households are much more likely to buy a car after
   2 Our data also covers a much larger loan sample than typical studies, allowing for more flexible non-parametric estimation.
   3 cf.Caballero and Engel (2007)
   4 To our knowledge, there is no prior micro evidence on how different types of prepayment respond to rate incentives, since

typical loan data sets can measure which loans prepay but not the reason for prepayment.
   5 We later reconcile this result with prior time-series evidence suggesting refinancing into higher rates is somewhat common.
   6 We also show f rac > 0 has more predictive power than many alternative summary statistics for the gap distribution.




                                                               2
refinancing their mortgage.7 To provide direct evidence that rate savings matter for spending, we then
study how car buying interacts with the mortgage interest savings obtained when refinancing. We show
that amongst refinancing households, those obtaining large rate savings are much more likely to buy
a car than those obtaining small savings. Strikingly, this holds both for rate and cash-out refinancing.
More generally, the increased purchase propensity after rate refinancing is 75-88% as large as after cash-
out refinancing, indicating that both types of refinancing are sensitive to interest savings and matter for
spending. We then document that these micro results extend more broadly to regional aggregates, using
cross-region relationships between rate incentives, prepayment and regional auto purchases.
    Finally, we provide empirical evidence that time-varying mortgage prepayment matters for aggregate
monetary transmission. First, we use a simple back-of-the-envelope to argue that observed variation in
mortgage prepayment can lead to transfers between borrowers and lenders worth hundreds of billions of
dollars in present value, and thus plausibly matter for aggregate GDP. Second, we use a local projections
approach to show that monetary policy shocks indeed have stronger effects on aggregate economic
activity when f rac > 0 is large. This suggests that the micro patterns we identify matter for monetary
policy transmission to the real economy. However, this type of aggregate evidence is merely suggestive,
since it does not isolate any one particular transmission mechanism. Furthermore, even if it did reveal
precisely how f rac > 0 matters for monetary transmission through prepayment, it would leave several
crucial policy questions unanswered: How does f rac > 0 evolve when the Fed changes rates? Are there
non-linearities so that this evolution depends on the size of rate changes or their particular path?
    In the second half of the paper, we build a theoretical framework to explore these questions and
characterize how monetary policy affects aggregate spending through its effect on mortgage prepayment.
Importantly, the goal is not to quantify all channels of monetary transmission or even all effects working
through housing and mortgage markets. Instead, the goal of the model is two-fold: 1) Argue that the
microeconomic patterns we document indeed have important implications for how aggregate spending
responds to monetary policy. 2) Provide guidance about the potency of this rate incentive channel at a
moment in time and how this potency will evolve in the future given current policy choices.
    We explore the role of this rate incentive channel in an otherwise standard economic environment.
In particular, we start with a continuous time incomplete markets consumption-savings model with
labor income risk. To this standard setup, we add interest rate fluctuations and fixed rate mortgage
debt which can be refinanced subject to some frictions, which we discipline using the micro evidence
from the first half of the paper. Finally, we introduce a risk-neutral financial intermediary that offers
competitively priced mortgage contracts, generating an endogenous equilibrium link between short rates
and mortgage rates. This leads to an important role for redistribution in equilibrium: rate declines
reduce debt payments for borrowers who refinance, but at the same time lower returns for lenders.8
    Several other elements of our baseline model are kept intentionally simple: all households have
identical constant mortgage balances and we abstract from cashout refinancing, lifecycle effects, and
house price dynamics. Abstracting from these forces in our baseline model allows us to isolate and
more precisely characterize the independent influence of refinancing frictions, which we can directly
discipline using our micro evidence. However, we show in robustness results that adding additional
   7 While our empirical specification deals with some confounding concerns by controlling for borrower and time fixed effects,

the timing of refinancing is clearly endogenous and so these may not be causal effects.
   8 Greenwald (2018) shows that these interactions have important aggregate implications in a representative agent framework.




                                                              3
richness along these dimensions complicates the model but leaves the main insights unchanged.
    We allow for refinancing frictions emphasized in the literature by assuming that households get
opportunities to refinance without cost at some random times, while at other random times households
can refinance only by paying a fixed cost. For different parameterizations, this setup nests a pure state-
dependent "menu cost" model, a pure time-dependent "Calvo" model of inattentive refinancing, as well
as intermediate mixed frictions. To pin down their importance, we initialize models with different
frictions to the actual 1992 loan-level distribution of mortgage rates, expose them to actual monthly
mortgage rates from 1992-2017 and calibrate each model to match the average prepayment frequency in
the data. We then study how each model fits untargeted time-series moments. We begin by comparing
a pure Calvo attention model to a pure menu cost model. The Calvo model is a much better fit: it
generates mortgage coupon distributions and prepayment patterns which track the data fairly closely
across time, while the menu cost model generates many time-series patterns starkly at odds with the
data. This poor time-series fit arises because a menu cost model implies a prepayment hazard at odds
with the micro data: prepayment rates are too low for moderate positive gaps and too high for large
positive gaps, since a large enough rate incentive leads almost everyone to refinance, despite our model
including substantial household heterogeneity and scope for heterogeneous refinancing decisions.
    We next show that a hybrid model with both frictions best matches the prepayment hazard but that
its time-series implications are nearly identical to the pure Calvo model. However, the Calvo model has
crucial advantages over this hybrid model. For counterfactual experiments, we must solve the finan-
cial intermediary’s mortgage pricing problem to endogenize mortgage rates and capture redistributive
effects between borrowers and lenders. For general frictions, this requires treating the endogenous
joint distribution of households as a state-variable. Under the Calvo model, a key simplification arises:
household prepayment decisions are orthogonal to consumption-savings decisions, so new mortgage
contracts can be priced without knowing household state-variables. This then allows us to pin down
monetary policy transmission to mortgage outcomes and disposable income before specifying features
of the model’s "consumption block" like preferences, labor income, and wealth.9 Resulting equilibrium
mortgage outcomes are then easily integrated into the more standard consumption block of the model.
Given the dramatic computational advantages of the Calvo model over the hybrid model despite similar
observable implications, we focus primarily on this specification for most of our results.
    We show that our model generates non-linear, path-dependent implications for monetary policy,
which cannot be easily captured with reduced form statistical relationships. In addition to its numerical
advantages, our baseline Calvo model provides a second key advantage: it allows us to transparently
characterize this path-dependence and provide concrete policy guidance. Adapting results in Caballero
and Engel (2007) to our continuous time setting, we show that in this model, the current value of f rac > 0
encodes the information about past rates necessary to predict how average mortgage coupons respond
to current shocks. This model also delivers simple solutions for the dynamics of f rac > 0, making it easy
to determine how the Fed’s current actions will affect its future ability to stimulate mortgage markets.
However, our key outcome of interest remains aggregate demand. We find in our numerical results that
the implications for mortgage outcomes extend to broader stimulus power: monetary policy has large
    9 This separation between liquidity and rate motives for refinancing might seem like a disadvantage, but it is useful to again

highlight the empirical observation that refinancing without rate incentives is rare. Models with strong liquidity motives for
refinancing instead typically imply that refinancing into higher rates is quite common (Chen, Michaux and Roussanov (2019)).



                                                                4
and state-dependent effects on aggregate spending which are tightly connected to f rac > 0.
      While these spending effects cannot be characterized analytically in our incomplete markets environ-
ment, we solve in closed-form a simplified complete markets version of our model to provide additional
intuition for the magnitude of various channels at work. We characterize the semi-elasticity of con-
sumption to short rates and show that these responses can be amplified substantially by the presence
of fixed-rate prepayable debt. However, the strength of this prepayment channel depends crucially on
the pass-through from short rates to mortgage rates, household asset positions, and how refinancing
frictions interact with rate incentives. These are central, endogenous components of our main model.
      The strong theoretical relationship between f rac > 0 and responses to rate changes together with
the dynamics of f rac > 0 implied by our prepayment model naturally deliver all the policy implications
discussed earlier: 1) f rac > 0 is large when rates are trending down, which increases responsiveness
to monetary policy. 2) f rac > 0 is small if previous rates were lower than today, which decreases
responsiveness to monetary policy. 3) Households actively refinance when rates fall but avoid prepaying
when rates rise, so monetary policy uses its ammunition up more rapidly when lowering rates than it
recovers it when raising rates. All of these forces will constrain the Fed in the near-term.
      We explore various robustness checks in the Calvo refinancing framework with endogenous mort-
gage rates and in more complicated environments using exogenous rates. Our basic conclusions are
robust to introducing: 1) cash-out refinancing and thus heterogeneous time-varying mortgage balances;
2) life-cycle effects and inflow of new mortgages from population growth; 3) more complex forms of
refinancing frictions that improve further model fit; 4) various alternative processes for the dynamics
and persistence of short term interest rates and resulting endogenous passthrough to mortgage rates.


2       Related literature
A large empirical literature using loan-level data shows that rate incentives matter for prepayment.10 .
Our linked borrower-loan data lets us extend this prior literature in several important ways. These
links allow us to isolate the role of rate effects on prepayment independent from confounding factors
emphasized in the literature such as "loan age", "burnout" or permanent heterogeneity. They also let
us measure the sensitivity of some durable spending outcomes to refinancing and to decompose pre-
payment hazards into subcomponents (rate refi, cash-out and moves), in order to show the crucial role
of rate incentives. Finally, our sample has both broader loan coverage and longer time dimension than
typical studies. This allows us to estimate a non-parametric hazard and quantify its implications for
aggregate prepayment over time. We show that the hazard, as a function of interest rate gaps, exhibits a
non-linear shape not well-described by simple, commonly used quadratic or cubic relationships. On the
micro data front, we relate most closely to Andersen et al. (2019). They use Danish rather than US mort-
gage data and a different estimation strategy to identify refinancing frictions. While their work studies
only mortgage outcomes and not spending, they reach conclusions similar to ours about the important
role of time-dependent in addition to more standard state-dependent frictions. We further extend this
literature by exploring the macroeconomic spending implications of these microeconomic relationships,
showing that they lead to important path-dependent consequences of monetary policy.11
    10 Cf.
      Green and Shoven (1986), Schwartz and Torous (1989), Deng, Quigley and Order (2000) for some prominent examples.
    11 Andersen
             et al. (2019) briefly explores the effects of monetary policy on aggregate refinancing under some counterfactual
mortgage systems, but the focus of the paper is on estimating microeconomic frictions.


                                                             5
      A large literature argues that mortgage markets matter for monetary policy transmission.12 Our cen-
tral argument – the fact that time-varying refinancing incentives lead to time-varying effects of monetary
policy – is similar to insights in Beraja et al. (2019). They focus on variation in refinancing incentives
which arise from house price movements and resulting home equity, while we focus on interest rate
incentives. This distinction is crucial: interest rates and resulting rate incentives respond almost im-
mediately to monetary policy while house prices are indirectly and more slowly affected by monetary
policy.13 This means that the current distribution of rate gaps and the effectiveness of monetary policy
is very directly influenced by the past history of interest rates, and it is this intertemporal feedback
between today’s actions and tomorrow’s rate gaps and policy effectiveness that distinguishes our results
from prior studies in which time-varying monetary policy effectiveness is driven by exogenous shocks.14
      Monetary policy transmission in our model relates closely to the interest rate exposure channel
in Auclert (2019). In our model, households’ maturing liabilities and interest rate exposure depend on
mortgage prepayment decisions and thus the distribution of rate gaps. Since this distribution depends on
past rates, interest rate exposure and monetary policy effects are path-dependent. We focus on aggregate
spending effects arising from these changing mortgage payments but note that monetary policy also has
separate, welfare-relevant redistributional consequences from inflation and other channels.15
      Our paper also relates to concurrent work in Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Wong (2019). They make sim-
ilar arguments for state-dependent monetary transmission through refinancing. Our paper begins with
micro data analysis, with a focus on the prepayment hazard and its implications for the entire distribu-
tion of rate incentives over time. Their data work uses regions as the unit of observation, similar to the
second half of our empirical analysis. Our richer micro data in turn motivates a focus on different fric-
tions as a source of infrequent refinancing: they model households that face a fixed cost of refinancing,
while we focus mostly on inattention. Inattentive refinancing can help explain the empirical evolution of
the loan-level rate distribution over time and makes it feasible to calculate equilibrium counterfactuals
with endogenous mortgage rates and borrower-lender redistribution. While we include cash-out refi-
nancing and lifecycle elements in some robustness results, their partial equilibrium model of borrower
behavior is nevertheless richer than ours: it includes decisions about home ownership and house sizes,
movements in aggregate house prices and income with interest rates, and finite duration rather than per-
petual mortgage contracts. We thus view their richer quantitative model as complementary to ours and
find it reassuring that our simplifications do not appear central for understanding path-dependence.

3      Data description
We briefly describe our primary mortgage-related data here. Appendix A.1.1 provides additional details
as well as discussion of other data used in our analysis.
      Our main prepayment measures come from BKFS McDash loan origination and mortgage servicing
records from approximately 180 million loans over the period 1992-2017. This data set includes detailed
    12 See
         Di Maggio et al. (2017), Agarwal et al. (2017), Greenwald (2018), Wong (2019), and Beraja et al. (2019).
    13 Gertler
             and Karadi (2015) finds pass-through of current FFR (one-year rates) into mortgage rates of 0.27 (0.54-0.80) using
FOMC surprises. This high-frequency identification literature also explores real vs. nominal pass-through, effects of expected
rates vs. risk premia and decomposes transmission into rate/information effects (cf. Nakamura and Steinsson (2018)). These
distinctions are unimportant for us: we need only the simpler fact that Fed policy moves nominal mortgage rates.
  14 See e.g. Vavra (2014) and Beraja et al. (2019)
  15 See Doepke and Schneider (2006), Doepke, Schneider and Selezneva (2015)




                                                              6
information on loan characteristics such as current interest rate and unpaid balances, appraisal values
at origination, type of loan (rate-refi, cash-out, purchase), indicators for prepayment and borrower FICO
scores. We measure prepayment shares as the fraction of all fixed rate first liens in the McDash Per-
formance data set in a month with voluntary prepayment indicators.16 While the data set provides
information which distinguishes rate-refi, cash-out and new purchases at the time of loan origination,
these are not available at the time a loan is closed due to prepayment. This this data can measure
prepayment but it cannot separately measure rate refinancing, cash-out and moves.
      To distinguish between different types of prepayment and measure additional individual level out-
comes and covariates, we use information from the Equifax Credit Risk Insight Servicing McDash
(CRISM) data set. This data set merges McDash mortgage servicing records with Equifax credit bu-
reau data and is available from 2005 onwards. The structure of the data set makes it possible to link
multiple loans by the same borrower together, which cannot be done with mortgage servicing data alone.
This lets us link the loan being paid off with any potential new loan and thus measure the reason for
prepayment to distinguish refinancing from moves. It also lets us measure equity extraction through
cash-out refinancing. For time-series analysis prior to 2005 when CRISM starts, we infer the frequency
of rate, cash-out and prepayment from moves by multiplying the origination shares of each type by the
overall prepayment frequency. Appendix Figure A-1 validates this procedure in the post-2005 data.17
      The CRISM data set links every loan in the McDash data set to an individual, and covers roughly
50% of outstanding US mortgage balances. Prior to 2005, the McDash data set has somewhat lower
coverage, ranging from 10% market coverage in the early 90s to 20-25% in the late 90s. As a measure of
representativeness and external validity, Appendix Figure A-2 shows that refinancing in our data closely
tracks the refi applications index produced by the Mortgage Banker’s Association from 1992-2017.18


4     The Prepayment Incentive: Empirical Evidence on Mortgage Outcomes
Our analysis begins with a number of new empirical results relating economic activity to refinancing
incentives. In this section, we focus on mortgage related outcomes such as prepayment and payment
changes; we begin with household loan-level evidence and then turn to aggregate relationships. Next,
in Section 5 we look at implications for spending related outcomes; we begin with household-level
event studies, then show results for region-level auto spending, and finally show aggregate time-series
evidence that refinancing incentives affect the response of broad GDP to monetary policy shocks.


4.1    Overall Loan Level Prepayment Patterns

We begin our empirical analysis by computing the distribution of loan-level "rate gaps" and its rela-
tionship to prepayment, pooling all monthly observations in the CRISM data from 2005-2017. For each
  16 Results are very similar with alternative samples, see Appendix A.2. We equally weight mortgages, but redoing all results

weighting by balances produces nearly identical results. In line with our model setup, our prepayment indicator does not
include default as prepayment. This distinguishes our results from those using MBS pools to estimate prepayment.
  17 We measure origination shares using CoreLogic LLMA data because McDash data has limited loan origination info prior

to 1998. The CoreLogic data is very similar to the McDash data set but its performance data does not include prepayment
information prior to 1999 and cannot be linked to households. Thus, we focus primarily on CRISM/McDash data and use
information from CoreLogic data in only a very limited way.
  18 We measure originations while this index measures applications. According to LendingTree, denials are ≈ 8% after Dodd-

Frank related changes in lending standards; this explains level difference after the Financial Crisis.



                                                              7
                                                                  ∗ − m , where m∗ is the current
outstanding loan i in month t we define the rate gap as gapi,t = mi,t  i,t       i,t
interest rate on the outstanding loan and mi,t is the predicted rate for a new fixed rate loan originated in
period t given borrower/loan characteristics for FICO and LTV.19
    Our main outcome of interest in both the model and the data is total prepayment rather than a
particular subset of prepayment (rate refi, cashout refi, or moves). Any prepayment resets the rate gap
to zero, so all prepayment types are equally relevant for determining the distribution of rate gaps and
its evolution across time. After measuring gapi,t , we sort loan-months into 20 bp wide bins and estimate
a non-parametric relationship between prepayment and rate gaps using the following regression:

                                                                 prepayi,j,t = 1( gapbin) j,t + Xi,j,t + δi + ei,j,t                               (1)

where 1( gapbin) j,t is a dummy for the gap bin of household i with loan j in month t, Xi,j,t is a vector of
loan and household-level characteristics and δi is a household fixed effect.20 This specification controls
for a number of observables which affect both prepayment and rate incentives in order to isolate the
pure rate incentive effect, which can be most directly influenced by interest rate policy.21

                            Figure 1: Prepayment Hazard with Individual Controls
                                                           .03                                                         .08
                              Monthly Fraction Prepaying




                                                                                                                       .06




                                                                                                                             Share of Households
                                                           .02


                                                                                                                       .04


                                                           .01
                                                                                                                       .02



                                                            0                                                          0
                                                                 −2                   0                  2         4
                                                                                            Gap (in %)
                                                                      Prepayment Hazard with Individual Controls
                                                                      Overall Distribution

Figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for coefficients on the 20bp bin dummies in regression 1. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by household and month using CRISM data linked to credit records from 2005m6-2017m4.


    Figure 1 shows the resulting prepayment hazard and distribution of gaps. The first observation is that
there is clear evidence of state-dependent prepayment: loans with positive gaps are much more likely to
prepay than loans with negative gaps. While our data set has broader coverage than many prior studies,
this result is not new. We instead emphasize the particular shape of the prepayment hazard (which again
  19 We assume m is equal to the average market 30-year FRM in month t from the Freddie Mac PMMS, plus an estimated
                      i,t
loan-specific adjustment that is a quadratic function of the borrower’s FICO score and the loan’s current LTV ratio. Instead
using a common rate for all new loans in month t delivers very similar results.
  20 X
       i,j,t controls are: a quadratic in FICO, a quadratic in current LTV, a quadratic in loan age and dummies for whether
the current loan was itself a new purchase loan, a cash-out refi or a rate refi, dummies for investor type (GSE, RFC, GNMA,
on-balance sheet, private MBS), loan type (FHA, VA, conventional w/ and w/out PMI and HUD).
  21 We estimate a linear probability specification both for numerical efficiency and to reduce concerns about incidental vari-

ables bias in non-linear models with fixed effects. However, we have found similar results when using logit specifications; in
practice the bias is likely relatively small since most borrowers have a long monthly time series. We also find similar effects
when estimating stratified regressions by frequency groups rather than running fixed effect specifications.



                                                                                                8
is obtained using rich controls to isolate the role of rate incentives from confounding forces): the hazard
is low and stable for negative rate gaps, then rises rapidly as gaps become positive before stabilizing
again at just over 2% monthly. This implies that prepayment rates are very state-dependent, but most
households still do not prepay even when their rate gaps are very large.22 Furthermore, since Figure 1
controls for both household fixed effects and loan age, this shape is not driven by the burnout effects
and permanent heterogeneity often emphasized in the literature.23
    For a model to deliver credible policy analysis, it must match this "step-like" shape of the prepayment
hazard as function of rate gaps. In particular, it must deliver a low and stable hazard when gaps
are negative, and stable, higher hazard when rate gaps are large. Two straightforward explanations
might rationalize the low sensitivity of prepayment to rate incentives when gaps are large: 1) Lender
constraints: perhaps households with large rate gaps would like to refinance but are prevented from
doing so by lenders. 2) Small benefits: maybe the benefits of refinancing for households with large gaps
are actually small, because they have small balances or small remaining mortgage durations. We now
show that neither explanation is supported by the data. Instead (and consistent with empirical evidence
in Andersen et al. (2019); Keys, Pope and Pope (2016)), we argue that these patterns are more plausibly
explained by inattention to mortgage rates and suboptimal refinancing decisions.


4.1.1      Lender-based Refinancing Constraints?

             Figure 2: Prepayment Hazard with Individual Controls: Unconstrained Households
                                                          .025
                                                                                                                       .06

                                                           .02
                             Monthly Fraction Prepaying




                                                                                                                             Share of Households
                                                          .015                                                         .04



                                                           .01

                                                                                                                       .02
                                                          .005


                                                            0
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                 −2                 0                   2          4
                                                                                           Gap (in %)
                                                                      Prepayment Hazard with Individual Controls
                                                                      Overall Distribution


Figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for coefficients on the 20bp bin dummies in regression 1. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by household and month. The figure includes only borrowers with FICO>650 and LTV<0.65 and
excludes data from the years 2007-2011.


    Maybe households with large rate gaps would like to refinance but are prevented from doing so by
lenders due to a high LTV ratio, a low credit score, or low income (DeFusco and Mondragon, 2020).
Figure 2 suggests that such lender constraints do not drive our results. In this figure, we recompute
  22 While we focus on monthly hazards, the time unit of analysis does not drive our conclusions. See Appendix Figure A-3.
  23 Cf.Deng, Quigley and Order (2000). Importantly, although the regression has household fixed effects, we have a household
panel and thus within household variation in gaps across time, so the regression is identified even if individual households
only prepay once rather than multiple times. Indeed, separately recomputing Figure 1 only including households with one,
two, or three plus prepayment events produces very similar results.


                                                                                               9
Regression (1) but we now only include households with high FICO scores (>650), low LTV (<0.65) and
we exclude the time-period 2007-2011 when households were more likely to be unemployed. These
households can very likely obtain a new loan if they want to refinance. The results are somewhat
noisier since this is a more restrictive sample with a shorter time dimension, but they are qualitatively
unchanged relative to the baseline. Thus, the shape of the prepayment hazard is not caused by lender-
driven constraints.
      Barriers to refinancing might also arise from liquidity constrained households who cannot pay vari-
ous costs like appraisal and title fees incurred when refinancing. We do not observe household balance
sheets or income, so we cannot totally rule this out, but the institutional setting makes this explanation
unlikely: costs associated with refinancing can typically be rolled into the new loan or paid for using
negative points. Thus, households can typically refinance with little out-of-pocket cost. This is especially
true for households with substantial home equity as in Figure 2.

4.1.2    Limited Benefits from Refinancing?

It might also be the case that our results are explained by heterogeneity in mortgage balances: if most
households with large rate gaps have low mortgage balances or remaining durations, their savings from
refinancing may be low despite a large rate gap. We show this is not the case. Focusing just on loans
with very large rate gaps (above 300 bps) which do not prepay, the average (median) annual foregone
mortgage payment savings are $2800 ($2050) with an average (median) remaining mortgage duration of
22.2 (20.8) years.24 Furthermore, while Figure 1 controls for mortgage balances, Appendix Figure A-4
further shows that restricting our analysis to households with substantial outstanding mortgage balances
delivers very similar results. Thus, the low sensitivity of the prepayment hazard to rate incentives for
large gaps cannot be rationalized by a limited refinancing benefit for these loans.


4.2     Prepayment Determinants: Rate Incentives vs. Equity Extraction

While we mainly focus on total prepayment, we also study the three prepayment sub-components: (1)
Moves, (2) Cash-out refinancing, and (3) Rate refinancing (all refinancing without cash-out). This em-
pirical exercise allows us to analyze the potentially different role of rate incentives for each prepayment
type, and in turn influences our modeling choices. While many papers estimate prepayment hazards us-
ing loan-level data, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first paper to estimate relationships between
prepayment type and loan-level rate incentives. We can perform these calculations since our CRISM data
links loans to borrowers. This lets us match prepaid loans to information on new loans originated by
the borrower at the same time, which allows us to determine the type of prepayment. Figure 3 shows
that refinancing incentives strongly affect all three components of prepayment.
      The first takeaway is that rate incentives are a crucial driver of refinancing decisions, even for house-
holds taking cash out of their homes: the probability of both rate and cash-out refinancing is very low for
loans with negative rate gaps. Most prepayment into higher rates occurs when households move rather
than when they refinance. For the 2005-2017 period covered by our CRISM data where we can precisely
measure which loans refinance and their realized rates changes, only 6.3% of all refinancing loans do so
  24 Appendix  Figure A-5 shows the entire distribution of potential payment reductions for these loans. The vast majority
could obtain substantial payment reductions by refinancing.



                                                           10
                  Figure 3: Prepayment Hazard Decomposition with Individual Controls
                                                           .015




                              Monthly Fraction Prepaying
                                                            .01




                                                           .005




                                                             0
                                                                  −2                  0                      2                  4
                                                                                                Gap (in %)
                                                                       Rate Refi w/       Cashout Refi w/        Move w/
                                                                       Individual         Individual             Individual   95% CI
                                                                       Controls           Controls               Controls


Figure shows the point estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals for the coefficients on the 20 basis point gap bin dummies
in regression 1 performed separately for each type of prepayment. Standard errors are two-way clustered by household and
month.


into a higher rate and only 3.3% raise rates by 50 bps or more. Focusing only on cash-out refis, there
are more rate increases but they are still infrequent: 14.7% of cash-out refis lead to any rate increase
and only 7.7% lead to a rate increase of 50 bps or more. Extending to the 1992-2017 sample under an
additional stability assumption implies that the share of all refis (cash-out refis) into any higher rate is
7.0% (14.0%) and into a 50 bps or higher rate is 3.2% (6.6%).25 Furthermore, much of the small share of
refinancing into higher rates that does occur is concentrated in the unusual 2004-2006 boom period.
    In sum, Figure 3 makes clear that rate incentives are a crucial driver of all types of refinancing
decisions. Our earlier results show that a strong rate incentive is far from sufficient to explain refinancing
behavior. The results in this section show that rate incentives are almost a necessary condition for
refinancing. This strong interaction between rate incentives and cash-out refinancing is directly in line
with the evidence in Bhutta and Keys (2016), but in our case using individual loan-level measures of rate
incentives rather than a proxy that relies on current aggregate rates.
    In one sense, this result is unsurprising: if a household wants to tap home equity, taking out a
HELOC will typically dominate refinancing an entire first lien into a higher rate, unless the HELOC-
mortgage rate spread is very large. However, our evidence that few loans refinance into higher rates
might nevertheless seem to be at odds with evidence that in many months, most refinancing loans are
doing so into higher rates.26 It is not. Appendix Figure A-6 shows that we replicate this time-series
evidence almost perfectly in our data. Appendix Figures A-7 and A-8 show that changes in refinancing
frequency are key to explaining these joint cross-section and time-series patterns: the times when most
refis result in rate increases are precisely the times when the frequency of refinancing is extremely low,
so the loans refinancing in these months are a small share of overall refinancing activity.
    Further exploring the determinants of prepayment behavior, Figure 4 shows the prepayment hazard
  25 These calculations assume the hazard prepayment type from 1992-2005 is the same as what we estimate in the post 2005

CRISM data. We cannot fully test this assumption, but Appendix Figures A-6 shows that median implied rate changes from
this procedure line up extremely closely with published data from Freddie Mac.
  26 See for example Chen, Michaux and Roussanov (2019) Figure 1.




                                                                                               11
as a non-parametric function of a loan’s current LTV ratio rather than interest rate gaps.27 Hazards
clearly depend on the LTV ratio, but mostly for underwater households. These are a small share of all
loans, and we have already shown in Section 4.1.1 that they do not drive the non-linear relationship
between rate incentives and prepayment. For more typical households, there is a modest hump-shaped
relationship between home equity and prepayment probabilities, so that prepayment rates are highest
for those with some home equity but who are not close to paying off their homes. These effects, however,
are small in magnitude compared to the effects of rate incentives we emphasize.

                       Figure 4: Prepayment Hazard by Leverage with Individual Controls
                                                              .03
                                 Monthly Fraction Prepaying




                                                              .02




                                                              .01




                                                               0
                                                                    .2           .4           .6           .8     1      1.2
                                                                                                   LTV
                                                                     Prepayment Hazard w/ Individual Controls   95% CI


Figure shows the point estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals for the coefficients on leverage dummies in regression 1.
Standard errors are two-way clustered by household and month. In order to include household fixed effects and time-varying
characteristics, figure uses CRISM data linked to credit records from 2005m6-2017m4.



4.3     Time-Series Variation in Rate Incentives and Aggregate Prepayment

The micro evidence thus far shows a strong non-linear relationship between rate gaps and prepayment
propensities when pooling the data across all months. We next move from these pooled relationships
to time-series analysis in order to show that: 1) The distribution of rate gaps varies substantially across
time. 2) This time-series variation strongly predicts time-series variation in prepayment in a way that
is easily summarized given our micro patterns. In particular, since our prepayment hazard exhibits a
"step-like" pattern, our preferred summary statistic for the distribution of gaps at a point in time is the
fraction of loans with positive rate gaps, which we label as f rac > 0. This statistic is important for the
following reason: if the empirical hazard was an exact step function at 0, then f rac > 0 would capture
all relevant information about the gap distribution necessary to predict current aggregate prepayment
rates. Figure 5 shows that f rac > 0 moves substantially across time, ranging from less than 0.2 in early
2000 to nearly 1 in 2003 and 2010.Figure 5 also shows that f rac > 0 is highly correlated with the fraction
of loans prepaying in a given month, with a correlation of 0.53.
      Table 1 uses a time-series regression to more explicitly assess the predictive content of f rac > 0 for
aggregate prepayment relative to alternative moments of the rate gap distribution. Column 1 shows that
there is a significant positive relationship between f rac > 0 and prepayment. The R2 of 0.282 means
  27 We   also control non-parametrically for rate gaps, but the hazard as a function of LTV is insensitive to these controls.


                                                                                              12
                  Figure 5: Prepayment vs. Fraction with Positive Rate Gap Time-Series

                                                                 6




                                                                                                                                           Fraction of Loans with Positive Gap
                             Monthly Fraction Prepaying (in %)
                                                                                                         ρ=0.53                       1

                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                 2




                                                              0                                                                       0
                                                             1990m1       1995m1       2000m1     2005m1       2010m1       2015m1
                                                                     Prepayment Rate (in %)     Fraction w/ Positive Rate Gap (0−1)


Figure shows the fraction of loans in McDash Performance data with positive rate gaps in each month as well as the fraction
of loans prepaying in each month. The time sample is 1992m1-2017m4.



that this single variable explains just under thirty percent of the time-series variation in prepayment.
Interestingly, if we run a regression of monthly prepayment on the monthly fraction of loans in the full
set of bins used in Figure 1, the R2 rises only from 0.282 to 0.305. This means that f rac > 0 captures
92.5% (.282/.305) of the relevant information in the full distribution of rate gaps for predicting current
prepayment. Since f rac > 0 would capture 100% of the relevant information if the hazard were exactly
a step function at zero, such a hazard is thus a close approximation to the data in terms of predictions
for aggregate prepayment rates. The remaining columns of Table 1 explore the predictive power of
alternative statistics summarizing the distribution of rate incentives. While these moments are highly
correlated, they are all less successful (as measured by R2 ) at predicting prepayment than f rac > 0.
    Having established the basic time-series relationship between f rac > 0 and prepayment, the remain-
der of this section explores various robustness checks and additional outcomes including: 1) controlling
for a host of additional covariates, 2) allowing for time-varying or non-linear relationships 3) looking
at relationships across regions, 4) instrumenting for rate incentives to address endogeneity concerns, 5)
decomposing total prepayment into its constituent components and analyzing changes in coupons in
addition to the frequency of prepayment, and 6) various measurement and sample selection issues.
    The upshot of this analysis is that f rac > 0 has very strong predictive power for prepayment and all
of its subcomponents that is remarkably stable across time and little related to other observables. The
only other covariate we find with predictive power for prepayment is the LTV ratio, and it matters mostly
during the housing boom-bust, and only after controlling for the role of rate incentives, as captured by
f rac > 0. We briefly discuss results in the text but relegate detailed analysis to Appendix A.2.


4.3.1   The Housing Boom-Bust and the Stable Role of Rate Incentives

Motivated by the analysis in Beraja et al. (2019) and the micro effects of LTV ratios shown in Figure 4,
in this section we explore the role of the LTV ratio and whether its inclusion in predictive regressions
changes the relationship between f rac > 0 and prepayment. Table 2 Column (2) shows that a greater LTV
ratio is indeed associated with lower prepayment rates. Looking at the R2 implies that the average LTV

                                                                                                 13
ratio and f rac > 0 together explain roughly half of the time-series variation in prepayment.28 However,
Column (3) shows that the explanatory power of the average LTV ratio by itself is much lower, with an
R2 of only 0.027. This is not surprising in light of our earlier micro evidence that individual prepayment
hazards are more closely related to rate gaps than to LTV ratios.
    Figure 5 suggests that the relationship between f rac > 0 and prepayment rates may have shifted
over time. To assess this, Table 2 Columns (4)-(6) re-estimate regressions prior to, during, and after the
housing boom-bust. From these regressions it is clear that in all sub-periods the response of prepayment
to f rac > 0 is very strong and similar in magnitude: thus, even though average prepayment rates are
lower after 2010, the effect of f rac > 0 on prepayment rates is unchanged. Finally, comparing the R2
in Columns (4)-(6) with that in (7)-(9) shows that outside of the large boom-bust period, including the
LTV ratio along with f rac > 0 provides little additional predictive power. Furthermore, even during this
boom-bust period, LTV only adds predictive power after controlling for rate incentives: re-estimating
the regression in Column (8) with controls for LTV but not f rac > 0 lowers the R2 from 0.67 to 0.03.


4.3.2     Controls for Other Observables and Endogeneity

In Appendix Table A-1, we show that the relationship between f rac > 0 and prepayment is robust
to controls for the business cycle, seasonality, non-linearities and outliers. Most importantly, we show
that our results are very similar when we control for one hundred calendar-quarter fixed effects and
so identify off only within-quarter variation. This rules out many confounding factors such as aging
(Wong (2019)) or changing lender concentration (Agarwal et al. (2017) and Scharfstein and Sunderam
(2016)) that might influence refinancing incentives and prepayment rates but are unlikely to change at
high frequencies. In Appendix Table A-2 we show similar relationships hold at the MSA level, even after
including both calendar-month and MSA × calendar-quarter fixed effects.
    However, this still may not reflect a causal relationship since f rac > 0 depends on past endogenous
interest rates, and it is possible that some unobserved confounding factor affects both f rac > 0 and
prepayment propensities even at high frequencies. To address this concern, Appendix Table A-3 shows
that re-estimating our main regression using high-frequency monetary policy shocks as an instrument
for f rac > 0 delivers almost identical conclusions.


4.3.3     Decompositions, Additional Outcomes and Loan Composition

While we concentrate on total prepayment, in Appendix Table A-4 we replicate our analysis, instead
focusing on individual prepayment types (rate refi, cashout refi and moves). As suggested by Figure
3, the independent effect of f rac > 0 is strongest for rate-refinancing but is also important for cash-out
and moves. Unsurprisingly, the LTV ratio has a significant effect on cash-out refinancing, but together
f rac > 0 and LTV have much more predictive power than either LTV or f rac > 0 alone.
    In Appendix Table A-5, we show that greater rate incentives also translate directly into faster reduc-
tions in actual mortgage coupons, not just into greater prepayment. While this is not surprising, it need
not necessarily hold mechanically. More interestingly, interest rate pass-through into average coupons is
  28 Wehave also explored specifications which interact f rac > 0 with the LTV ratio. The point estimates in these specifications
imply that f rac > 0 has less effect on refinancing when average leverage in the economy is high, but interaction effects are
imprecisely estimated and effects on predictive power for prepayment are negligible.



                                                               14
much stronger when f rac > 0 is large. This increase in rate pass-through with f rac > 0 will be a central
implication of our theoretical model and is a key indicator of path-dependence.
      Finally, Appendix Tables A-6-A-9 show that our conclusions do not depend on the particular loans
in our baseline sample: our baseline includes all fixed rate mortgages, but we can use broader samples
including all loans or more narrow samples which restrict to only conforming fixed rate mortgages or
those fixed rate mortgages which have never been delinquent.


5      Spending and GDP responses
Does this prepayment activity matter for aggregate monetary transmission into spending? To provide
an initial assessment of aggregate scale, we begin with a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation of
how much redistribution in mortgage payments is induced by interest rate reductions under different
scenarios for prepayment rates. The overall level of residential mortgage debt is approximately $12.6
trillion. For simplicity, consider a reduction in mortgage rates of 100 basis points that lasts for one
year.29 This leads to a decline in borrowers’ aggregate annual mortgage payments of roughly $44.7
billion if borrowers prepay at the 2003 rate of 35.4% p.a. but only a reduction of $11.6 billion if they
prepay at the 2000 rate of 9.2% p.a.30 With fixed rates, these annual payment reductions accrue for the
life of the mortgage. A $44.7 ($11.6) billion annual reduction in payments thus translates into a present
value of around $340 ($88) billion.31 Dividing by 128.5 million US households implies an average annual
payment reduction per household of roughly $350 ($90) translating to a present value of $2644 ($684).
Furthermore, if rate reductions also spur equity extraction, as suggested by Figure 3, then this calculation
understates the redistribution of disposable income arising after rate cuts.
      These simple calculations suggest that rate changes could lead to mortgage payment changes big
enough to matter for aggregate spending. Whether this is the case will depend on how spending
responds to changes in mortgage payments. In this section we explore this question. We begin with
individual borrower-level event studies to explore how auto purchases are related to refinancing and
any resulting rate savings or equity extraction. We then show strong regional relationships between auto
purchases and rate incentives. However, these empirical results capture only spending by borrowers and
not potential offsetting effects from declines in lender income after rate reductions. In addition, although
auto spending is an important component of business cycle fluctuations in aggregate spending, it is
clearly somewhat special. We thus finish by providing aggregate evidence that monetary policy shocks
indeed have larger effects on aggregate economic activity when f rac > 0 is large.


5.1      Refinancing Event Studies

Our data does not measure broad spending, but we can proxy for car purchases using new car loans in
borrower credit records. We run a borrower-level event study of this spending measure on refinancing,
similar to Beraja et al. (2019), but extended to 2005-2017 rather than focusing only on 2009. In particular,
    29 This
          is a large rate decline, but not out of line with reductions seen after QE1 and other easing cycles. These calculations
scale linearly with the rate decline, so e.g. a 50 basis point decline leads to payment reductions half as large.
  30 Residential debt in 2019Q3 Fed financial accounts is $12.638 trillion. .01 × 12638 × .354 = 44.8 and .01 × 12638 × .092 = 11.6
  31 This discounts payments over 30 years at a 15% rate to account for both prepayment and time discounting.




                                                                15
we regress a new car loan indicator on household fixed effects, calendar-month fixed effects as well as
months-from-refinancing indicators, interacted with whether the refinancing involves cash-out.32

                     Figure 6: Individual Level response of Car Purchase to Refinancing

                                                                         .8




                               Estimated effect on prob(new car loan),
                                                                         .6



                                        in percentage points             .4



                                                                         .2



                                                                         0

                                                                              −6      −4     −2         0       2       4      6       8   10   12
                                                                                                    Distance from refinance (months)

                                                                                   Rate refinance        Cash−out refinance

Figure shows coefficients on month indicators (relative to refinancing month) from regressing a new car loan indicator on
household fixed effects, calendar-month fixed effects and months-from-refinancing indicators, interacted with whether the
refinancing involves cash-out. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals with standard errors two-way clustered by household
and calendar month. Our indicator for a new car loan is an increase in auto loan balances of $5000 or more.


    Figure 6 shows there are large increases in car buying after refinancing. Adding point estimates im-
plies an increase in the probability of purchasing a car in the 12-months after rate (cash-out) refinancing
of 3.16 (3.59) percentage points. This a large effect: the baseline annual purchase probability is 17.6%, so
borrowers who refinance are 18-20 percent more likely than usual to purchase a car over the following
year. The response of car purchases to cash-out refinancing is more front-loaded within the year, but
the 12-month effect of rate refinancing is 88% as large as that of cash-out refinancing (0.88=3.16/3.59).33
Despite the fixed effects in our regressions which address some obvious threats to identification, re-
financing decisions are clearly endogenous, so these relationships may not be causal.34 Nevertheless,
they suggest that both cash-out and rate refinancing matter for spending. Furthermore, while cash-out
refinancing has a stronger relationship with spending, the type of refinancing matters much less for
subsequent spending than does the fact that a refinancing of either type has occurred.
   Figure 7 explores the relationship between how much households save on interest payments when
they refinance and their subsequent spending behavior. We split the sample into those households with
the top quartile (>$3150) and bottom quartile (<$1250) of annual rate savings when refinancing.35 We
then re-estimate our event study but interacting the effects of cash-out and rate refi with indicators for
these separate savings groups. We again include calendar-month and household fixed effects.36 Panel
  32 Calendar-month fixed effects deal with concerns about confounding effects from time-varying aggregate conditions. For

example, common movements in mortgage and auto loan rates might generate misleading relationships between refinancing
and spending. Our fixed effect specification absorbs common interest rate movements by comparing the purchase decisions of
borrowers who refinance to those who do not within a given month. Household fixed effects deal with concerns that households
who refinance more often on average might also have different average auto purchase behavior.
  33 Over a shorter 3-month horizon, the effect of rate-refinancing is still 74% that of cash-out refinancing (.74=1.22/1.65).
  34 Abel and Fuster (2018) provide evidence (albeit with a less representative sample) that exogenous rate refinancing has a

causal effect on borrower behavior; see also causal of ARM resets on spending in Di Maggio et al. (2017).
  35 We define annual savings as balance          ∗       ∗
                                         pre × ( m pre − m post ), so savings are computed using the initial balance if it changes.
  36 This means results are not driven by the obvious potential confounding factor in months when mortgage and auto interest



                                                                                                              16
                                                                                Figure 7: Heterogeneity by Annual Interest Rate Savings

                                                                    (a): Rate Refi                                                                                                    (b): Cash-out Refi

                                           .8                                                                                                                   1.5
Estimated effect on prob(new car loan),




                                                                                                                      Estimated effect on prob(new car loan),
                                           .6
         in percentage points




                                                                                                                               in percentage points
                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                           .4



                                           .2                                                                                                                    .5


                                           0

                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                          −.2
                                                −6      −4    −2       0       2       4      6       8   10    12                                                    −6      −4    −2       0       2       4      6       8   10    12
                                                                   Distance from refinance (months)                                                                                      Distance from refinance (months)

                                                     Interest Savings < $1250        Interest Savings > $3150                                                              Interest Savings < $1250        Interest Savings > $3150

                                          This figure repeats the analysis in Figure 6 but splitting also by the highest and lowest quartile of interest rate savings.




                                          (a) shows effects of interest savings when rate refinancing, and Panel (b) shows effects of interest savings
                                          when cash-out refinancing. There are two key takeaways: 1) Those with substantial interest savings are
                                          much more likely to buy a car after refinancing. 2) The relationship between car buying and mortgage
                                          interest savings holds both for rate refinancing and for cash-out refinancing, so rate savings also matter
                                          for households who exctract equity from their homes. Indeed borrowers in the high savings-rate refi
                                          group are more likely to purchase a car than borrowers in the low savings-cashout refi group.37
                                                 The borrower-level evidence in this section shows that refinancing is associated with strong effects
                                          on spending, and the strength of rate incentives matters for these relationships: the greater the interest
                                          savings upon refinancing, the greater the subsequent increase in spending. We now turn to more aggre-
                                          gated evidence that mortgage rate incentives matter for spending and thus for monetary transmission.


                                          5.2         Cross-Region Evidence

                                          We now explore regional relationships between rate incentives, prepayment and car purchases using R.L.
                                          Polk zip code registration data. Appendix Table A-2 showed a strong MSA-level relationship between
                                          prepayment rates and f rac > 0. In Table 3, we show there are also strong relationships with MSA car
                                          sales growth. In Column (1), we regress month t to t + 1 auto sales growth on the change in prepayment
                                          between t − 1 and t, plus a month fixed effect so we identify off cross-region but not aggregate time-
                                          variation. This shows that regions with larger increases in prepayment see larger increases in auto
                                          sales.38 Results are slightly stronger in Column (2), which also includes MSA × quarter fixed effects.
                                                 While this shows a strong relationship between changing prepayment and changing car purchases,
                                          rates are low, mortgage savings are high and it is also more attractive to buy a car.
                                            37 The 12-month purchase probability increases by 3.86 percentage points for rate refinancers with the largest savings and by

                                          2.79 percentage points for cash-out refinancers with the smallest savings. Clearly the strongest effect is for cash-out borrowers
                                          with large interest rate savings, whose 12-month purchase propensity increases by 5.77 percentage points (almost 33 percent).
                                            38 The standard deviation of ∆ freq is 0.388, so a 2 SD increase in frequency is associated with a 1.5 percentage point increase

                                          in the growth rate of auto sales (.388*2*.019=.0147). This is relative to an average growth rate of 2.2%.


                                                                                                                     17
this may not be a causal relationship. For example, increases in expected future income might lead to
more car buying and more refinancing to finance that spending, in which case ∆freq is biased upward.
Conversely, current income shocks could bias the coefficient down if greater income leads to greater
spending but a decrease in the need to refinance to fund that spending. Motivated by our empirical
evidence that f rac > 0 affects prepayment, we thus instrument for ∆freq using ∆ f rac > 0 in Columns
(3) and (4). The identifying assumption is that changes in f rac > 0 (after controlling for month and MSA
× quarter FE) only affects car sales growth through refinancing. Point estimates in these IV specifications
are increased substantially, suggesting that the second type of OLS bias above is more important.
    Columns (4)-(8) show show that interest rate changes affect spending more in locations where more
households are prepaying their mortgages. Specifically, we regress auto growth from month t to t + 1
on the frequency of prepayment in month t (rather than the change in prepayment) but now interacted
with the change in mortgage rates between month t − 1 and t. This shows that mortgage rate declines
correlate with greater spending growth when more households are refinancing; a central prediction of
our theoretical model. It is important to note that interest rate endogeneity is not a particular concern
for this specification, since any endogenous relationship between rate changes and aggregate conditions
is absorbed by time fixed effects. However, prepayment frequencies may again be related to other
transitory local conditions which affect auto spending growth and confound causal interpretations. We
are primarily interested in the interaction term, which will be unaffected by shocks which just move
prepayment and spending together. Nevertheless, we next instrument for the frequency of prepayment
using the level (rather than the change) in f rac > 0. The identifying assumptions are similar to those
explained before, and again relationships are strengthened.


5.3    Aggregate Time-Series Evidence

While the borrower-level event studies and regional patterns are highly suggestive, cross-sectional rela-
tionships can potentially differ from aggregate relationships. Furthermore, while car purchases are an
important share of business cycle fluctuations, they are clearly only one, potentially non-representative
component of total spending.39 To address these concerns, we now provide aggregate time-series evi-
dence that the effect of identified monetary policy shocks on aggregate GDP varies with f rac > 0.
      We estimate the response of GDP and aggregate consumption to identified monetary policy shocks
by local projections. We use identified shocks from Romer and Romer (2004) extended through 2008 by
Coibion (2012). The key question of interest is whether aggregate responses to an identified monetary
policy shock vary with f rac > 0.
      We incorporate non-linearities following Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) and estimate a regime-
specific local projection at each horizon h = 0, ..., H:

                 "                                #                "                                #
                            K                                                 K
      yt+h = It−1 αh,1 +   ∑ θh,k
                              1
                                  Xt−k + β1h et       + (1 − It−1 ) αh,2 +   ∑ θh,k
                                                                                2
                                                                                    Xt−k + β2h et       + δh,1 t + δh,2 t2 + ε t
                           k =1                                              k =1




  39 Real chained GDP fell by $628 billion in the Great Recession from 2007Q4 to 2009Q2, while vehicle spending fell by $91
billion, implying roughly a 15% contribution. Similar effects hold in earlier recessions.


                                                              18
 where yt is the outcome variable, αh is a regime specific constant, Xt is a vector of controls including
 lagged values of yt , et is an identified monetary policy shock, t + t2 is a quadratic time trend and It−1 is
 an indicator function equal to 1 when f rac > 0 is greater than its median value and zero otherwise.40 The
 IRFs are the sequences { βlh , β2h }hH=0 , representing output and consumption responses at future horizons
 to shocks today when f rac > 0 is above or below the median, respectively.

                                    Figure 8: Response to Identified Monetary Policy Shocks

                            (a): Real Output                              (b): Real Consumption (PCE)
.04




              high frac>0                                                 high frac>0
              low frac>0                                                  low frac>0




                                                               .04
.02




                                                               .02
0




                                                               0




      0                      2                 3          4          0                  2             3                  4
                                   Years                                                    Years

 Figure shows the response of log real output and non-durable consumption to the identified monetary shocks from Romer and
 Romer (2004), extended through 2008 by Coibion (2012). Dashed lines are 90 percent confidence intervals based on Newey-
 West standard errors. The red-dashed line indicates the effect of a monetary policy shock when f rac > 0 is above its median
 value of 0.596. The blue-dotted line shows the effect when f rac > 0 is below its median value.


          Figure 8 shows results. The left (right) panel shows the response of log real GDP (PCE-Personal
 Consumption Expenditure) to a 100 bps expansionary monetary policy shock. The red-dashed line
 shows the effect when f rac > 0 is above its median value and the blue-dotted line shows the effect
 when f rac > 0 is below its median value. Both output and consumption increase significantly more in
 response to an expansionary monetary policy shock when f rac > 0 is high.


 6        A Model of Mortgage Prepayment
 We now turn to our theoretical model which we use to interpret our empirical results and characterize
 how monetary policy affects aggregate spending through mortgage prepayment. The goal of the model
 is two-fold: 1) Argue that the prepayment patterns we document have aggregate implications for real
 spending that are large enough to matter for monetary policy. 2) Provide guidance about the potency
 of this rate incentive channel at a moment in time and its evolution over time given current policy
 choices. We show that mortgage prepayment leads to non-linear, path-dependent dynamics. This means
 that assessing the effect of current actions on future policy space without theory is likely to generate
      40 Ramey
             (2016) highlights the importance in including time-trends when estimating IRFs by local projections. To extend our
 sample before 1992, we forecast f rac > 0 within our sample period 1992-2017 using nine lags of the fixed rate mortgage rate
 and then use this prediction to forecast out of sample. We run these forecast regressions in log space so that predictions for
 f rac > 0 are bounded between 0 and 1. The within sample correlation between the actual and predicted f rac > 0 is over 92%.




                                                              19
incorrect conclusions. Our micro data consistent model has the added benefit to deliver a rule-of-thumb
for quantifying these intertemporal effects.
      We use a continuous-time open economy model which embeds a household mortgage refinancing
problem into an incomplete markets environment with endogenous mortgage pricing. Our model in-
cludes (a) a continuum of households making consumption, savings and refinancing decisions, and (b)
a competitive, risk-neutral financial intermediary that extends fixed rate prepayable mortgage loans and
finances itself via deposits and short term debt from domestic savers and international capital markets.
      Households are subject to idiosyncratic labor income risk and choose to consume or save in a liquid
asset subject to a borrowing constraint, as in Aiyagari (1994). To this standard environment we add
prepayable mortgage debt and interest rate fluctuations. Households take the stochastic process for both
short-term interest rates and mortgage rates as given. The mortgage interest rate is pinned down by the
financial intermediary’s zero profit condition, and any net funding surplus or deficit run by the financial
intermediary is filled in international capital markets at the short term interest rate. This endogenous
relationship between short rates and mortgage rates leads to endogenous redistributional effects of rate
changes: when rates decline, it frees up disposable income for those borrowers who refinance, but it also
lowers returns for lenders. This in turn influences the strength of monetary policy.


6.1     Uncertainty

Household i receives uninsurable idiosyncratic labor income Yit per unit of time, with ln Yit following
the continuous time counterpart to an AR(1) process:

                                   d ln Yit = −ηy (ln Yit − ln Ȳ ) dt + σy dZit ,                         (2)

where Zit is a standard Brownian motion that is both independent across households and independent
from any aggregate states of the economy, ln Ȳ is the ergodic mean log income, σy2 is the instantaneous
variance (per unit of time) of log income, and ηy measures the persistence of log income.
      Agents also face aggregate interest rate risk. We assume the short term interest rate set by the Fed,
rt , follows a one-dimensional Feller square-root process (see Cox, Ingersoll Jr and Ross (2005))
                                                                   √
                                       drt = −ηr (rt − r̄ ) dt + σr rt dZt ,                               (3)

where Zt is a standard Brownian motion, r̄ is the ergodic average short term rate, rt σr2 is the instantaneous
variance (per unit of time), and ηr measures the persistence of the process.
      Mortgage market interest rates mt also follow a stochastic process, determined in equilibrium via
a risk-neutral asset pricing equation that ensures financial intermediaries break-even when extending
fixed-rate prepayable mortgage debt (see Section 6.3). We note that fluctuations in mt = m(rt ) will arise
from fluctuations in rt in equilibrium.




                                                         20
6.2     Household Balance-Sheets and Refinancing Frictions

Each household is born at t = 0 with liquid savings W0 and a house financed with a fixed-rate pre-
payable mortgage with balance F and coupon rate m∗t .41 In our benchmark model we assume that all
households have identical, constant mortgage balances, but in Section 9.1 we show that introducing
cash-out refinancing and heterogeneous mortgage balances only amplifies our conclusions.
      Our choice to only focus on rate refinancing in the benchmark model warrants additional discussion.
Recall our earlier evidence that cash-out refinancing without a simultaneous rate decline is unusual: the
overwhelming majority of all refinancing is associated with rate reductions. Our benchmark model cap-
tures this crucial role of rate incentives, it can be easily solved numerically, and allows us to transparently
illustrate and discipline the key mechanism driving the path-dependence of monetary policy.42
      We assume that each mortgage can be refinanced at the discretion of the household only at random,
exponentially distributed attention times (with arrival intensity χc + χ f ). When these opportunities
arise, the household can choose to keep its existing mortgage or to refinance at the prevailing mortgage
                                                                      
market rate mt , either (i) “for free” (with probability χc / χc + χ f ) or (ii) by paying a fixed cost κ > 0
                                 
(with probability χ f / χc + χ f ). Our model thus nests two different types of refinancing frictions: when
χ f = 0, we obtain a pure "Calvo" model in which households obtain opportunities to refinance at no
cost at Poisson arrival times, and they exercise their option if and only if the current market interest rate
is below their outstanding coupon rate. This model delivers a prepayment hazard that is a step function
(at zero) in interest rate gap space. When χ f = +∞ and χc = 0, we obtain a pure "menu cost" model in
which households have an option to refinance at any time but only by paying a fixed cost. This implies
a refinancing probability of zero for small rate gaps and +∞ above the (endogenous) individual gap
threshold at which it is optimal to pay the fixed refinancing cost.
      Finally, we also assume that households face exogenous moving shocks that arrive at Poisson rate ν,
forcing them to move to a different (identical) house and reset their mortgage coupon in the process.43


6.3     Financial Intermediaries and Mortgage Pricing Equilibrium

Mortgages in our model are priced by risk-neutral competitive financial intermediaries who originate
fixed rate prepayable mortgages financed with short term floating rate debt. Intermediaries take the
short term interest rate rt as given and have access to a perfectly elastic supply of capital at that rate in
international markets. When the short term rate is r, the value of an existing mortgage loan with coupon
m∗ and face value $1 is determined by the risk-neutral asset pricing equation:
                                              Z       τ           Rt                        Rτ
                                                                                                                           
                                  ∗                            −               ∗         −
                          P (r, m , S) = E                 e        0 ru du   m dt + e       0    ru du
                                                                                                          r0 = r, S0 = S       (4)
                                                   0

  41 We assume the house has constant price and so abstract from interest rate effects on consumption arising through house

price effects documented in Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013), Berger et al. (2018) and Guren et al. (2018). Modeling these effects
would likely amplify our conclusions: interest rate histories leading to greater house price growth, prepayment activity and
cash-out should lead to greater resulting consumption.
  42 The Fed can fairly directly affect rate incentives, and we can in turn directly discipline the effect of rate incentives on

prepayment using our micro data. In contrast, the Fed has much less direct control over cash-out incentives via house prices.
  43 Landvoight, Piazzesi and Schneider (2015) provides empirical evidence for these exogenous moving shocks. Krivenko

(2018) documents that they are important for matching the dynamics of house prices.




                                                                              21
where St is a vector of household state variables and τ is the (endogenous) prepayment time, which can
potentially depend on both aggregate interest rates and idiosyncratic household states. In our perfectly
competitive mortgage market equilibrium, the market value of a mortgage at origination must be equal
to its notional balance. In other words, for financial intermediaries to break-even, the "fair-market"
coupon m(r, S) of a mortgage extended to a household in state S when the short rate is r must satisfy:

                                                           P (r, m(r, S), S) = 1,                                                                (5)

      For the general specification of refinancing frictions described in Section 6.2, solving the mortgage
market equilibrium is extremely difficult: financial intermediaries must forecast household prepayment
decisions to determine m, but prepayment decisions depend both on idiosyncratic household states
and on the equilibrium evolution of m, which we are trying to determine. However, the micro data
patterns documented in Section 4 will ultimately lead us to a particular benchmark model with key
simplifications that imply an equilibrium function m(·) that depends only on the short rate r.


6.4     Household Problem

Households have identical CRRA preferences with rate of time preference δ and inter-temporal rate of
substitution 1/γ. Households can save in a liquid savings account Wt with return rt to insure against
labor income shocks, but they cannot take on unsecured short-term debt, so Wt ≥ 0. Thus, their only lia-
bility is their outstanding mortgage, and their net financial asset position is equal to Wt − F. Households
in our model do not have any option to default.
      The relevant state vector for household’s decision problem is (r, Si ) := (r, Wi , mi∗ , Yi ). Households
                                                                               (c, f )
make consumption {Ct }t≥0 and refinancing decisions {ρt                                  }t≥0 , and solve the following problem (where
we drop the subscript i for notational            convenience):44

                                                                             1− γ
                                                       "Z                                                       #
                                                                 +∞       C
                      V (r, S) : =      sup E                         e−δt t dt r0 = r, S0 = S
                                     C,ρ(c) ,ρ( f )          0            1−γ
                                                                                          (f)      (τ )
                       s.t. dWt = (Yt − Ct + rt Wt − m∗t F ) dt − ρt κFdNt f ,       Wt ≥ 0
                                                                     (τ )
                                               h                                   i
                                                 (c)  (τ )      (f)           (τ )
                            dm∗t = (mt − m∗t− ) ρt dNt c + ρt dNt f + dNt m ,

with Yt following (3), rt following (2), and mt = m (rt , St ) solving (5). Here τc is the sequence of times
when refinancing is costless, τ f is the sequence of times when refinancing requires a cost κ > 0, and
                                                                                                (τc )       (τ f )       (τ f )
τm is the sequence of times the household is forced to move. dNt                                        , dNt        , dNt        are changes in the
associated counting processes (and thus equal 1 at the relevant arrival times and 0 otherwise).
      At any “zero cost” attention time τc , it is optimal for the household to refinance whenever the
prevailing mortgage rate is below that household’s outstanding coupon:
                                                                  
                                                       (c)
                                                                  1,     if mt < m∗t−
                                                      ρt     =
                                                                  0,     otherwise
  44 SeeAppendix Section A.3.3 for more details on our Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation corresponding to the household
value function V and numerical solutions’ method we employ to solve such equation.



                                                                        22
At any “fixed-cost” attention time τ f , it is optimal for the household to refinance whenever the value of
paying the refinancing cost and obtaining a lower rate exceeds the value of inaction:
                                         
                                               if V (Wt − κ, rt , mt , Yt ) > V Wt , rt , m∗t− , Yt
                                         1,                                                          
                               (f)
                              ρt     =
                                         0,   otherwise

6.5     Calibration

We calibrate our model in two steps. We first describe how we discipline the parameters governing
refinancing frictions and then discuss the remaining parameter values.


6.5.1      The Nature of Refinancing Frictions

We argue in this section for a benchmark calibration based on the Calvo inattention friction. This choice
dramatically simplifies the calculation of the mortgage market equilibrium, allows us to provide intuition
for the dynamics of path-dependence, and most importantly, fits the data much better than a pure menu
cost model while giving predictions nearly identical to models with both frictions.
      We begin by comparing a pure Calvo inattention model to a pure menu cost model.45 We initialize
both models to the actual 1992 loan-level distribution of mortgage rates and expose them to the actual
monthly mortgage rate time series from 1992 to 2017. We pick refinancing parameters so that each model
matches the average prepayment frequency in the data from 1992 to 2017, and we study how each model
fits the time-series of various (untargeted) moments of the data.46
      We calibrate the annual moving rate ν to 4.1% to match the empirical prepayment hazard for loans
with negative rate gaps. This leaves one free parameter in both models: we set χc = 22.8% in the
inattention model and κ = $2500 in the menu cost model, which implies an average monthly prepayment
frequency from 1992-2017 in both models of 1.5%. We then see how these models match the time-series
behavior of prepayment rates and the loan-level distribution of coupons and rate gaps over time.
      Figure 9 shows that the model with inattention-based refinancing frictions is a dramatically better
fit than the menu cost model. Panel (a) shows a snapshot of the entire cross-sectional distribution
of coupons in the models vs. the data every five years and Panel (b) - Panel (d) show time-series
fits for various summary statistics. Considering that only the initial distribution in 1992 and average
prepayment rates are targeted, the fit generated by the inattention model is overall quite good (with the
notable exception of missing the large outlier in 2003).
      In contrast, the menu cost model calibrated to match the same average frequency of adjustment in
the data does not fit time-series patterns. Panel (b) shows that the prepayment frequency is much spikier
than in the data. Panel (c) shows that such menu cost leads to an average outstanding coupon m∗t that
closely tracks the running minimum of the market rate mt , in contrast to the more sluggish evolution in
  45 For  computational reasons, we specify a large but finite arrival rate in the menu cost model. Specifically, we pick χ f = 24
so that households get refinancing opportunities on average every 2 weeks.
  46 In the Calvo model, refinancing behavior is independent of preferences, income and the short rate process. In the menu cost

model, households’ refinancing behavior depends on all model parameters, so we jointly calibrate all parameters. Although
we feed in rates from the data, we must also specify interest rate and income expectations, which we do using the eventual
model calibration. None of our conclusions are sensitive to these calibration choices.




                                                                23
the data. Panel (d) shows that the menu cost model generates far too little cross-sectional dispersion in
rates and misses the time-series of dispersion.47

                               Figure 9: Inattention and Menu Cost Models vs. Data: Time-Series Fit

                   (a): Distribution of Gaps                                                              (b): Frequency
                                                                   Data
                                                                   Inattention
                                       97m1                        Menu Cost         >=20%
  0.5
                                                                                                                   Monthly Prepayment Frequency: Data
                                                                                                                   Monthly Prepayment Frequency: Inattention
   0                                                                                                               Monthly Prepayment Frequency: Menu Cost
    -2      -1.5          -1    -0.5    0        0.5       1         1.5         2
                                       02m1
  0.5
                                                                                      15%


   0
    -2      -1.5          -1    -0.5    0        0.5       1         1.5         2
                                       07m1
  0.5
                                                                                      10%

   0
    -2      -1.5          -1    -0.5    0        0.5       1         1.5         2
                                       12m1
   1

  0.5
                                                                                          5%
   0
    -2      -1.5          -1    -0.5    0        0.5       1         1.5         2
                                       17m1
   1

  0.5

   0                                                                                      0%
    -2      -1.5          -1    -0.5    0        0.5       1         1.5         2         1992   1997          2002           2007            2012        2017

                          (c): Average Rates                                                        (d): Std Dev of Rates
 10                                                                                       1.3
                                       Average Outstanding Rate: Data                                    Std Dev of Outstanding Rates: Data
                                       Average Outstanding Rate: Inattention                             Std Dev of Outstanding Rates: Inattention
                                       Average Outstanding Rate: Menu Cost                1.2            Std Dev of Outstanding Rates: Menu Cost
  9
                                       Current 30 Year FRM: Data

                                                                                          1.1
  8

                                                                                           1
  7

                                                                                          0.9

  6
                                                                                          0.8

  5
                                                                                          0.7


  4
                                                                                          0.6


  3                                                                                       0.5
  1992             1997         2002          2007          2012            2017           1992   1997          2002           2007           2012        2017




        This poor time-series fit arises because the menu cost model generates a prepayment hazard at odds
with the micro data, as shown in Panel (a) of Figure 10. The menu cost model implies a hazard which is
too low for moderate positive gaps but which then becomes too high for large positive gaps. This occurs
despite the fact that our model includes substantial cross-household heterogeneity in income and liquid
wealth and thus scope for heterogeneous refinancing decisions: with a fixed cost of adjustment, a large
enough rate incentive eventually leads almost all households to refinance.
        By construction, the inattention model generates a prepayment hazard with a step exactly at zero,
  47 Theseconclusions are robust to different fixed costs as well as permanent heterogeneity in fixed costs. Of course, a random
menu cost model can be made isomorphic to the attention model and so fit the data, but this requires a cost which is typically
very high punctuated by brief periods near zero. Such a process arises naturally via inattention.


                                                                                     24
                                            Figure 10: Prepayment Hazards

    (a): Inattention and Menu Cost vs. Data                                     (b): Hybrid vs. Data

                                                                0.03
             Data                                                        Data
  0.25       Inattention                                                 Data 95% CI
             Menu Cost                                         0.025     Hybrid


   0.2
                                                                0.02


  0.15
                                                               0.015


   0.1
                                                                0.01


  0.05                                                         0.005


    0                                                              0
     -2        -1          0   1      2       3       4             -2     -1          0   1      2       3      4



which is much closer to the empirical hazard. However, the inattention model does not fit the data
perfectly either: it implies prepayment rates which are too high at rate gaps between 0 and 100bps. We
thus explore a "hybrid" model with both inattention and fixed costs of adjustment. In particular, we
jointly pick χc , χ f and κ to match the entire empirical hazard. Panel (b) of Figure 10 shows that a model
with both frictions indeed better fits the prepayment hazard.48 However, Appendix Figure A-10 shows
that this hybrid model generates time-series implications almost identical to the pure Calvo inattention
model. Indeed, for small rate gaps, refinancing makes little difference for a household’s mortgage
coupon. This means that the fact that the Calvo model overstates prepayment rates for households with
small positive gaps is mostly irrelevant for the actual coupons households obtain.
   While both models have similar time-series implications, key simplifications arise for calculating in-
terest rate counterfactuals in the pure Calvo inattention model. In this model, household prepayment
decisions are orthogonal to consumption-savings decisions, and so household states S can be eliminated
from the mortgage pricing equation (4). We can then easily solve the fixed point mortgage equilibrium
equation (5), pinning down the mortgage market rate mt = m(rt ) as a function of the short rate, as
shown in Section A.3.2. In addition, this model delivers simple analytical insights, and thus intuitive
characterizations of monetary policy path-dependence, that are unavailable in environments with other
frictions. Since the time-series implications of the pure inattention and hybrid models are almost identi-
cal under the historical time-series of interest rates but the pure inattention model has key computational
and pedagogical advantages, we focus primarily on this model. However we show in robustness results
that our policy conclusions are nearly identical if we use the hybrid model in a simpler rate environment
without solving for the full mortgage market equilibrium.49
6.5.2     Calibrating Additional Parameters

We summarize parameters in Table A-10. We set γ = 2 following standard values in the macro literature.
We fix the mortgage balance F to the average in our data of $150,000. Log income is calibrated following
 48 The   best fit parameters κ = $8250, χ f = 0.145 and χc = 0.125 imply an average cost when refinancing of $1934.
 49 That   is. we solve the household model with general frictions but equilibrium mortgage pricing from the pure Calvo model.


                                                              25
Floden and Linde (2001), implying mean reversion parameter ηy = 9.3% (corresponding to a half-life of
7.3 years), conditional volatility σy = 21%, and an ergodic mean log income ln Ȳ that leads to an ergodic
average income of E [Yt ] = $58, 000 per year, consistent with average US household income.
      We pick the rate of time preference δ so that after interest rate shocks, the present value change
in aggregate mortgage payments is the same as the present value change in aggregate capital income.50
One can interpret this calibration strategy as targeting a closed economy "on average" but with stochastic
foreign capital flows. This requires δ = 14% per annum, and generates an ergodic average liquid savings
E [Wt ] = $35, 000 and an average MPC out of liquid wealth of 0.26. More interestingly, we find that
households in the lower 50 percentile of the liquid savings distribution have MPCs roughly twice that
of households in the upper 50 percentile of the liquid savings distribution. This heterogeneity of MPCs
with interest rate exposure is directly in line with recent estimates in Crawley and Kuchler (2018).
      The short rate is calibrated to have an ergodic average equal to r̄ = 3.5%, a speed of mean reversion
ηr = 13% (corresponding to a half life of 5.3 years), and a volatility parameter σr = 6% (corresponding
to an ergodic standard deviation of short rates of 2.2%). Those parameters are obtained via a maximum-
likelihood estimation procedure using daily data for 3-months treasury yields from 1982 to 2018.
      The short rate process combined with "Calvo" prepayment frictions leads to an equilibrium mapping
m (·) between short term interest rates rt and mortgage rates mt . The average slope of the mortgage
pricing function m(·) delivers a pass-through of 0.57, which is in line with various estimates from the
literature using high-frequency identification strategies.51 We also explore the robustness of our results
to alternative interest rate calibrations and resulting pass-through to mortgage rates in Section 9.


7     Path-Dependent Monetary Transmission: Mortgage Market Outcomes
In this section, we explore the effect of monetary policy on prepayments and average coupons, and thus
on disposable income. We begin with an analysis of these outcomes since under our benchmark frictions
(χ f = 0 and χc > 0), these outcomes depend solely on χc , ν and the process for rt and not on any of the
more complicated model elements and parameters which determine consumption. We then turn to our
model’s implications for consumption in Section 8.


7.1     f rac > 0 as a Key Statistic: Cabellero-Engel in Continuous Time

Our analysis focuses on comparing impulse response functions (IRFs) at time t = 0 in experiments with
different t < 0 interest rate histories and thus different time-zero cross-sectional coupon distribution.
While each experiment leads to different cross-sectional distributions and resulting IRFs, we preview
now that these differences can be explained through a single moment of the time-zero cross-sectional
coupon distribution: the proportion of households with a positive mortgage rate gap, f rac > 0.
  50 More precisely, we focus on an economy where (a) the short term rate is equal to its ergodic mean, and (b) the cross-

sectional household distribution is equal to its ergodic distribution conditional on the short rate equaling its ergodic mean. We
then compute the impulse response of capital income rt Wt and mortgage payments m∗t Ft to a 100bp decrease in short rates and
pick δ (and thus the ergodic mean of liquid savings Wt ) so that these streams are equal in present value.
  51 Gilchrist, Lopez-Salido and Zakrajsek (2015) finds a pass-through of 0.68 (Table 6), Wong (2019) finds a pass-through of

0.392 (Table 5) and Gertler and Karadi (2015) find pass-through of current Fed Funds Rates into mortgage rates of 0.27 and
pass-through of one-year rates into mortgage rates ranging from 0.54-0.80. (Table 1 Columns 3+7). Importantly, these relatively
high pass-through numbers reflect the fact that even though mortgages have a maturity of 30 years, their pricing is closer to
medium-term treasuries since they typically prepay in around seven years.


                                                               26
      To see this, let f t (m∗ ) be the time t cross-sectional density of mortgage coupons (with cumulative
density Ft ) and h (m∗ − m) be the instantaneous prepayment hazard for a gap of m∗ − m. Under our
Calvo model of refinancing behavior, cross-sectional average prepayment intensities are then
                                             Z
                              Ei [ρit ] :=       h(m∗ − mt ) f t (m∗ )dm∗ = ν + χc [1 − Ft (mt )] .

[1 − Ft (mt )] is exactly ( f rac > 0)t , so model prepayment rates are driven solely by this moment of
the cross-sectional coupon distribution. Thus, if two economies with different time-zero cross-sectional
coupon distributions are exposed to the same rate shock, any resulting differences in prepayment IRFs
can be explained entirely by differential changes in ( f rac > 0)t between t and t + dt.
    Next, consider the average coupon m̄∗t := Ei [mit∗ ] = m∗ f t (m∗ )dm∗ . In Appendix A.3.7, we show
                                                              R

that the slope of the IRF of m̄∗t at t = 0 to a small ε ≈ 0 shock to r at time 0 is:

                                                           dm̄0∗
                                                                  
                              dIRFmε ∗ (t)     ∂
                         lim               ≈ε                          = ε · m0 (r0 ) (ν + χc [1 − F0 (m0 )]) ,
                         t →0    dt           ∂r0           dt

where m0 (r0 ) is represents the "local" pass-through from short rates to mortgage rates. This is essentially
the continuous-time counterpart to discrete-time results in Caballero and Engel (2007) (see their equation
(17)), specialized to a hazard which is a step-function at zero. As a simple numerical example, suppose
that χc = 0.228, ν = .041, ε = −100bps, m0 (r0 ) = .5, and f rac > 0 = [1 − F0 (m0 )] = .8. Then the slope
of the average coupon IRF is -11.2bps per year. If f rac > 0 falls to 0.2, this slope is instead -4.3bps per
year. This emphasizes the importance of f rac > 0 for understanding monetary policy transmission from
short rates to disposable income.


7.2     "Baseline" Economy: the Ergodic Distribution

Let t = 0 be the current time in the economy, from which we begin all policy experiments. To isolate
the effects of different rate histories, most of our experiments compare two economies with identical
current interest rate r0 but different histories {rt }t<0 and thus different initial cross-sectional coupon
and rate gap distributions.52 Most of our experiments compare IRFs of (1) a "baseline" economy with an
initial cross-sectional distribution equal to the economy’s ergodic density when the short rate rt = r0 , to
(2) alternative cross-sectional distributions generated by specific {rt }t<0 paths of interest rates. In most
experiments, we set r0 = r̄. We concentrate mostly on IRFs to a 100bps cut in r0 (which lowers m0 by
roughly 50bps), but we also show effects of lowering r0 to zero, which we refer to as the "max" rate
stimulus. Following the time-zero impulse, rt follows the dynamics specified in equation (3).
      Figure 11 shows the IRF of average coupons to these two stimulus policies occurring at t = 0 in our
"baseline" economy. We depict the peak coupon responses to each shock, which we use as a reference
point in some later scenarios, as horizontal lines in red, but we defer discussion of magnitudes until
introducing additional experiments and bringing consumption back into the model
7.3     Effects of the Secular Mortgage Rate Decline

In our first experiment, we investigate how the actual path of interest rates from 1992-2017 affects mon-
etary policy effectiveness. During that time frame, we witnessed a secular decline in interest rates,
 52 The   distributions of income and wealth also differ, but in our baseline model this is irrelevant for mortgage outcomes.


                                                                       27
                                                Figure 11: Baseline: IRF of Average Coupon m∗ to 100bps & Max decline in r

                                                 (a): Average Coupon m∗                                                                 (b): Monthly Prepayment Flows
                                    0 bp                                                                                       1.6 %

                                                                                                                               1.4 %
      Average Outstanding Coupon



                                   -10 bp
                                                                                                                               1.2 %




                                                                                                     Monthly Prepayment Flow
                                   -20 bp                                                                                        1%

                                                                              -100 bps shock
                                                                                                                               0.8 %
                                                                                                                                                                      -100 bps shock
                                   -30 bp
                                                                              max shock                                                                               max shock
                                                                                                                               0.6 %

                                   -40 bp                                                                                      0.4 %

                                                                                                                               0.2 %
                                   -50 bp
                                                                                                                                 0%

                                   -60 bp                                                                                      -0.2 %
                                            0       10       20          30     40              50                                      0     10     20          30     40              50
                                                                  Year                                                                                    Year




with the 30-year mortgage rate ultimately falling from roughly 9% to 4%. To explore the effects of this
trend, we follow the procedure of Section 6.5.1 by initializing our model with the 1992 empirical coupon
distribution and exposing it to the observed sequence of interest rates from 1992 to 2017 to obtain a
model-implied cross-sectional coupon distribution in 2017. We then compare IRFs computed starting
from this distribution to those obtained under the "baseline" ergodic economy.53 In our comparison, both
economies are started at t = 0 with the same r0 = r̄, have the same {rt }t≥0 and differ only in {rt }t<0
and thus their initial cross-sectional gap distributions. Figure 12 shows that monthly prepayment and
average coupons respond much more to a 100bps rate cut in the "secular decline" economy exposed to
the 1992-2017 rate history than in the "baseline" ergodic economy.54

                                                         Figure 12: Impulse Response Functions to 100bps decline in r

                                                 (a): Average Coupon m∗                                                                 (b): Monthly Prepayment Flows
                                    0 bp                                                                                       0.9 %
                                                                              Baseline                                                                                Baseline
                                                                              Secular Decline                                  0.8 %                                  Secular Decline
      Average Outstanding Coupon




                                    -5 bp                                                                                      0.7 %
                                                                                                     Monthly Prepayment Flow




                                                                                                                               0.6 %

                                   -10 bp                                                                                      0.5 %

                                                                                                                               0.4 %

                                   -15 bp                                                                                      0.3 %

                                                                                                                               0.2 %

                                   -20 bp                                                                                      0.1 %

                                                                                                                                 0%

                                   -25 bp                                                                                      -0.1 %
                                            0       5        10          15     20              25                                      0     5      10          15     20              25
                                                                  Year                                                                                    Year




    This is because the economy with a history of declining rates starts with larger f rac > 0 today, as
  53 Figure 9 shows that this model implied distribution in 2017 is very similar to the 2017 empirical distribution, so if we use

2017 empirical coupons as our "initial distribution", IRFs are very similar.
  54 IRFs for the "max" shock are roughly scaled up versions of the IRFs to the 100bps shock and yield the same path-dependence

conclusions, so we focus mostly on 100bps shocks to simplify exposition.


                                                                                                                    28
shown in Figure 13. This in turn amplifies the response of this economy’s prepayment rates, average
coupons, and ultimately disposable income to current rate cuts, as discussed in Section 7.1

                 Figure 13: Distribution of rate gap m∗ − m in Ergodic and Actual Simulation
                                               0.25
                                                                                 Baseline
                                                                                 Secular Decline

                                                0.2



                                               0.15



                                     Density    0.1



                                               0.05



                                                 0
                                                  -2   -1   0        1       2        3            4
                                                                Gap (in %)




7.4       Effects of Past Easing and Tightening Cycles

We next compare IRFs in the baseline ergodic economy to two alternative scenarios in which previous
rates were either (i) high or (ii) low for an extended period of time.55 In all three economies, time-zero
interest rates are set to r0 = r̄, future rates {rt }t≥0 follow (3), and the economies differ only in {rt }t<0 .
The behavior of the "past high rates" economy illustrates the potency of monetary policy at the end of a
tightening cycle while the "past low rates" economy illustrates the potency of monetary policy following
a long period of monetary easing – such as that observed in the aftermath of the Great Recession.
      Once again, we find substantial path-dependence: Figure 14 shows that average coupons respond to
the same 100bps cut in r more strongly in the economy with previously high than previously low rates.
The intuition is the same as before: given identical current interest rates, the economy with previously
high rates has larger f rac > 0 than the economy with previously low rates. This means that after exiting
a long period of low rates, the Fed will have reduced stimulus power if it needs to reverse course.
7.5       Asymmetries and Reloading

In the prior experiments, r0 and {rt }t≥0 were identical, but the time-zero cross-sectional distributions
differed due to differences in {rt }t<0 . In this section, we illustrate the dynamic effects of actions today on
future monetary policy potency by comparing two economies which are initially identical but that differ
in {rt }t≥0 . In particular, we consider two economies that are initially in the "baseline" environment
described in Section 7.2. In one of them (the "Rate-Shift-Up" economy), the ergodic mean short rate
permanently increases by 100bps at time zero, while in the other (the "Rate-Shift-Down" economy),
it permanently decreases by 100bps. We then compute the effects of rate cuts at different points in
time after the regime shift. This exercise is meant to assess the speed with which the Fed regains
  55 In  the "past high rates" (resp. "past low rates") economy, the time-zero household cross-sectional distribution corresponds
to the ergodic household cross-sectional density arising when interest rates follow equation (3), with r̄ past 100bps above (100bps
below) our baseline. When we analyze consumption outcomes, these cross-sectional distributions are computed assuming that
households have rational expectations – they understand that short term rates have an ergodic mean different from the baseline
rate r̄, thus affecting not only their refinancing but also their savings behavior.


                                                                29
                                                      Figure 14: IRF of Average Coupon m∗ to 100bps decline in r

                                               (a): Average Coupon m∗                                                                                                  (b): Monthly Prepayment Flows
                                   0 bp                                                                                                                       0.6 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                           past low rates
                                   -2 bp                                                                                                                                                                   past high rates
                                                                                                                                                              0.5 %
     Average Outstanding Coupon




                                   -4 bp




                                                                                                                                    Monthly Prepayment Flow
                                   -6 bp                                                                                                                      0.4 %

                                   -8 bp
                                                                                                                                                              0.3 %
                                  -10 bp

                                  -12 bp                                                                                                                      0.2 %

                                  -14 bp                                                                                                                      0.1 %
                                  -16 bp
                                                                                                                                                                0%
                                  -18 bp                                                                     past low rates
                                                                                                             past high rates
                                  -20 bp                                                                                                                      -0.1 %
                                           0      5      10                                            15     20               25                                      0     5          10            15     20              25
                                                              Year                                                                                                                             Year




"ammunition" after raising interest rates and the speed with which it uses it up after cutting interest
rates. Appendix Figure A-11, shows how IRFs evolve over time after the regime shift.
   However, visually unpacking the dynamic evolution of a sequence of functions is hard. Thus, in order
to more cleanly illustrate the dynamics we wish to emphasize, we compute for each IRF its cumulative
                            R∞
discounted value CIRFt = t e−δ(s−t) IRFm∗ (s)ds, which we view as a convenient statistic summarizing
the potency of monetary policy at each date t. Figure 15 then plots CIRFt in the regime-shift economies
relative to CIRFt in the baseline economy, for various years t after the regime shift.

  Figure 15: Regime Shift: Cumulative Discounted Average Coupon IRF decline in r to 100bps shock
                                                                                                  1.15
                                                                                                                                                                             Rate-Shift-Up
                                                                                                                                                                             Rate-Shift-Down
                                                               Relative Monetary Policy Potency




                                                                                                  1.1


                                                                                                  1.05


                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                  0.95


                                                                                                  0.9


                                                                                                  0.85
                                                                                                         0           5                                          10           15                20
                                                                                                                                    Impact Year


   We see that in the "Rate-Shift-Down" economy, monetary policy at first is more potent than in the
baseline, as the decline in rates initially boosts f rac > 0. However, the potency of monetary policy then
declines as households refinance and f rac > 0 falls. The "Rate-Shift-Up" economy exhibits opposite
patterns. However, the economies exhibit asymmetric dynamics: the potency of monetary policy falls
more quickly in the "Rate-Shift-Down" economy than it rises in the "Rate-Shift-Up" economy, so that
relative monetary policy potency crosses 1 (its baseline effectiveness) almost twice as fast. In this sense,
monetary policy uses up ammunition when cutting rates more rapidly than it reloads ammunition when



                                                                                                                                                   30
raising rates.56 Indeed, when rates fall, households actively refinance and the coupon distribution con-
verges more rapidly to the new long run average, whereas rate increases affect the coupon distribution
only slowly through exogenous moves, which force prepayment.57


8      Path-Dependent Effects on Consumption
The previous section demonstrates the path-dependent monetary transmission to mortgage prepayment
and average coupons. However, we ultimately care about whether this matters for monetary transmis-
sion to aggregate spending. In this section, we embed these effects into the consumption block of our
model to show that they are indeed important. We begin by showing that refinancing in our model has a
large effect on individual household spending, closely in line with our empirical event study in Figure 6.
Specifically, we again expose our model to actual interest rates from 1992-2017, identify those households
that refinance and compute their consumption before and after refinancing. Figure 16, shows that in the
model event study, upon refinancing households’ average consumption jumps from $54.4k per year to
$56.1 per year, a 3.1% jump in the consumption rate. The size and dynamics of these responses are very
similar to the data, after accounting for the fact that the event study in the data measures investment and
not service flows. Converting the empirical estimates to implied auto service flows yields an increase of
2.61% in the year after refinancing and 2.15% two years after refinancing. This model event study shows
that refinancing indeed leads to increased spending for those households who refinance.

            Figure 16: Event study: consumption response to refinancing in benchmark model




      We next turn to aggregate spending responses to shocks to r. These responses cannot be character-
ized analytically but will clearly depend on household refinancing patterns, equilibrium relationships
between r and m, and on more standard substitution, income and wealth effects of changing rates. Fig-
ure 17 shows the aggregate consumption IRF to the 100bps decline in r and the "max" rate decline in the
two scenarios studied in Section 7.3: (a) the "baseline" economy, and (b) the "secular decline" economy.
    56 To
       be clear, this exercise focuses on stimulus from the first 100bps cuts. When considering "max" cuts, there is always more
"policy space" in the high rate than low rate regime, but maximum stimulus power increases very slowly after raising rates.
  57 Importantly, results modeling inflows of new mortgages from young households do not change this conclusion.



                                                              31
This figure shows that our conclusions for mortgage market transmission are echoed in consumption:
consumption responds much more to rate cuts in the "secular decline" economy than in the "baseline"
economy. For example, on impact the aggregate spending semi-elasticity is 67bps in the baseline econ-
omy vs. 96bps in the secular decline economy (i.e. a 43% increase over the baseline).

                     Figure 17: IRF of Consumption – Baseline vs. Secular Decline

                    (a): 100bps shock                             (b): max shock




   Figure 18, similarly shows the effects of past easing and tightening explored in Section 7.4 but now
for consumption. Our conclusions again mirror those in mortgage space: after a tightening cycle with
past high rates, monetary stimulus is more powerful than after an easing cycle with past low rates.

                 Figure 18: IRF of Consumption – Past High Rates vs. Past Low Rates
                    (a): 100bps shock                             (b): max shock




   These results show numerically that our model generates large and path-dependent aggregate spend-

                                                   32
ing responses to rate cuts, at frequencies relevant for Fed stimulus. Path-dependent spending effects
mimic path-dependent refinancing effects, and we already showed in Section 7.1 that these effects can
be explained through f rac > 0. This observation, together with the large spending responses to indi-
vidual refinancing shown in Figure 16 shows that the path-dependent spending responses to monetary
policy shown in this section reflect the path-dependent responses of mortgage refinancing to monetary
policy. As a final piece of evidence to better understand the path-dependent transmission of interest
rates to consumption, in Appendix A.3.8 we explore a simple complete markets, partial equilibrium
version of our baseline model in which these effects can be characterized analytically.
   In this deterministic, partial equilibrium, complete markets environment, we assume household
preferences, mortgages and refinancing frictions are identical to those in our benchmark model. The
household is endowed with a constant income ȳ per unit of time, time-zero savings w, a mortgage with
constant balance F, and rt and mt are perfectly predictable and converge asymptotically to their long-run
average.58 Steady-state consumption in this model is equal to permanent income: c0 = ȳ + δ(w − F ). We
then analyze a small mean-reverting shock to the nominal rate in the neighborhood of the steady state,
which also impacts mortgage market interest rates:

                                  r t = δ + et            mt = δ + πet           det = −ηr et dt

While we endogeneized the relationship between short rates and mortgage rates in our benchmark
model, in this simplified environment we assume that the pass-through π between short rates and
mortgage rates is fixed exogenously. Our analytical characterization of the impulse response of expected
prepayment rates and expected coupon rates to this short rate shock (see Appendix A.3.8) shows that
the average coupon response is amplified by (i) the size of the initial rate shock, (ii) the pass-through
π, (iii) the persistence of the shock, and (iv) the attention rate χc . More importantly, we show that the
semi-elasticity of consumption to a time-zero short rate shock is:

                                                 −1
                                                                                                  
                            ∂ ln c                      1   δw                     ηr + δ      χc πF
                                            =             −    + I { e0 < 0 }                                               (6)
                              ∂r     t =0       ηr + δ γ    c0                  ηr + δ + χ c    c0

   The first two terms in brackets in (6) capture standard income, substitution and wealth effects, while
the third term captures the role of prepayable mortgage debt. Absent mortgage debt (F = 0), our result
is identical to the result obtained in Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018): the direct, partial equilibrium,
effect on consumption of a small interest rate shock is higher if (a) the rate of time preference is small, (b)
the persistence of the rate shock is high, and (c) the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution 1/γ is high.
The consumption response is slightly muted (for reasonable asset-to-income levels) by the presence of
initial savings w. The strength of the prepayment channel is increasing with (a) pass-through π, (b) the
attention rate χc , (c) the persistence of the monetary shock, and (d) the mortgage balance F.
   Our formula allows us to quantify the strength of different transmission channels in this simpli-
fied environment. Substituting the numerical parameters of our benchmark model, together with that
model’s average pass-through of 0.57 and w = $125, 000 (to match the same c0 as our benchmark model)
delivers a semi-elasticity of -1.38. The first two-terms, which capture standard transmission effects,
generate a semi-elasticity of -0.66. This implies that prepayment accounts for 52% of total monetary
 58 To   ensure finite, non-zero steady-state consumption, long-run short and mortgage rates must equal the discount rate, δ.


                                                                  33
transmission in this model. Thus mortgage refinancing can play a large role in monetary transmission.
Of course, this steady-state calculation assumes that the rate shock pushes all households from zero to
positive gaps. In practice, the share of households with positive gaps after a rate cut will depend on the
previous history of rates. This path-dependence is the central insight of our paper.

9     Robustness
9.1     Cash-out Refinancing

While our benchmark model is focused on the effects of payment reductions through rate refinancing,
we analyze here an extension to explore whether cash-out refinancing alters our conclusions about
monetary policy path-dependence. At "Calvo" attention times, households have the ability to refinance
their mortgage at the then-market interest rate and to extract home equity, subject to (a) a debt-to-income
limit of 43%, and (b) an LTV limit of 80%. We assume that households only extract home-equity if their
interest rate gap is positive, and when they do so, we assume that they borrow up to the maximum
allowed amount. The assumption that households only extract home equity when their rate gap is
positive is broadly supported by the data (see Section 4.2). Our assumption that households extract the
maximum possible amount of equity when refinancing is meant to be conservative: if path-dependence
holds both in an environment with no cash-out refinancing and in an environment with maximum
possible home equity extraction, then it will likely hold in intermediate environments where households
choose mortgage balances endogenously.
      To generate a non-trivial stationary cross-sectional distribution of mortgage debt, we assume mort-
gages amortize at a constant rate α = 3% (as in Gorea and Midrigan (2017)), to match a mortgage
duration (excluding prepayments) of approximately 30 years, the prevalent mortgage contract in the US.
This calibration choice leads to an ergodic average mortgage balance of around $154,000, consistent with
the average mortgage debt in our sample and with our benchmark model.
      We then recompute IRFs to a 100bps rate decline under different rate histories. Appendix Figure
A-12 shows that cashout refinancing strengthens monetary transmission and amplifies our earlier con-
clusions. Interestingly, in the model with cashout refinancing, IRFs exhibit a mild hump shape. Cashout
refinancing amplifies the consumption response to rate declines, and refinancing occurs more gradually
than standard income, substitution and wealth responses to short rate changes, which occur immediately
on impact.


9.2     Refinancing and the Life-cycle

Our baseline model assumes infinitely lived agents and abstracts from the life-cycle. Life-cycle effects are
important for explaining certain housing patterns, and Wong (2019) shows that these effects matter for
the average transmission of monetary policy through refinancing. It is less obvious that these channels
should matter for the path-dependence and time-varying effects of monetary policy that we emphasize
in this paper. To explore this, we analyze an extension of our benchmark model that includes life-cycle
elements. Households transition stochastically between "young", "middle-aged" and "old" at Poisson
arrival times. We calibrate labor income, retirement income and model amortizing mortgages with
balances matched to data counterparts in the 2001 SCF. Households also have a standard bequest motive


                                                    34
W 1−γ /(1 − γ). This model thus matches broad life-cycle debt, income and consumption patterns.59 . To
preserve stationarity, whenever an old household dies, a young household is borne. Appendix Figure A-
13 shows that including life-cycle elements indeed leaves our conclusions about path-dependent effects
of monetary policy unchanged.

9.3   Hybrid Refinancing Frictions

Figure A-14 shows that repeating our exercise using the "hybrid" model with both Calvo and menu cost
frictions, set to match the empirical prepayment hazard yields similar conclusions.60

9.4   Alternative Monetary Policy Persistence

While we estimated our interest rate process (3) using MLE, monetary policy induced rate changes might
have different persistence from the general time-series of interest rates we observe in the data. To ensure
our results do not depend materially on this persistence parameter, we re-solve our benchmark model
with both higher and lower persistence of the short-rate process. Appendix Figure A-15 shows results.
As implied by Equation 6, average consumption responses increase with the persistence of interest rates:
a shock with greater persistence is a "bigger shock" in cumulative terms and mechanically leads to
bigger responses. However, changing the persistence of our rate process leaves our conclusions about
path-dependence unchanged.

9.5   The Role of Foreigners

We calibrate our baseline model so that on average, when interest rates decline, mortgage payments fall
by the same amount as capital income, implying that capital income declines are borne on average by
domestic savers. While this holds on average, the financial intermediary still faces profit shocks under
different rate paths. In our baseline model, we assume that the intermediary is owned by foreigners who
absorb these shocks. However, the quantitative magnitude of this assumption is modest. To show this,
we assume instead that financial intermediaries are owned by wealthy, risk-neutral domestic agents who
smooth consumption out of permanent income, and then recalculate how aggregate spending responds
to rate cuts in the secular decline vs. the ergodic economy. In this model with domestic owners, average
household spending rises by $146 more in the secular decline economy than in the ergodic economy
on impact after a 100bp rate cut. This difference is $171 in our baseline model with foreign owned
intermediaries. Thus, we preserve 85% of our benchmark model’s path-dependence if we assume fully
domestic-owned rather than fully foreign-owned intermediaries.


10    Conclusion
The Fed kept interest rates low for a long period of time after the Great Recession to stimulate the
economy. Rates have now risen but are still low by historical standards, leaving relatively little room
  59 We define young households in the data as 25-40, middle as 40-62 and old as 62-75. We match average labor income for

the young and middle aged households to SCF data and assume income risk as in Floden and Linde (2001). The old have
constant retirement income matched to SCF data. We also match mortgage balances by age group, so young households (resp.
middle-age and old) have 1.11 (resp. 1.00 and 0.65) times the household average mortgage balance.
  60 For numerical feasibility, we continue to use the mortgage pricing function m (r ) from the Calvo model.



                                                           35
for future cuts if they are needed to stimulate the economy. In this paper, we argue that looking solely
at the level of current rates provides an incomplete picture of Fed "policy space", because the presence
of significant US household debt in fixed-rate pre-payable mortgage contracts leads to path-dependent
consequences of monetary policy. In fact, we argue that the path of interest rates in recent years leaves
the Fed with even less room for stimulus than suggested by current low rates.
   We argue that monetary policy "reloads" stimulus power very slowly after raising rates. Furthermore,
the long secular decline in mortgage rates is unlikely to continue forever, and monetary policy potency
will be weaker in a stable or increasing rate environment. Finally, the extended period with zero rates
allowed households to lock in low mortgage rates, which will dampen future Fed stimulus power. We
highlight these observations in our modeling exercise, but it is important to note that our modeling
framework can provide transparent policy guidance more generally: f rac > 0 is a straightforward
statistic to measure the Fed’s power to stimulate mortgage markets at a moment in time. Moreover, our
micro-data consistent model allows us to easily calculate how f rac > 0 and thus future stimulus power
evolves in response to policy actions today.
   Our insight that rate histories matter for current monetary policy transmission through the mortgage
market is not necessarily specific to the US. While mortgage contracts with fixed rates and no prepay-
ment penalty are uncommon outside of the US and Denmark, similar path-dependence forces can arise
due to the timing of home purchases in countries with limited refinancing and can induce echo effects
several years in the future in countries where mortgage contracts must be refinanced at fixed intervals.61
   More broadly, our point that the Fed faces an intertemporal trade-off between current and future
policy effectiveness extends beyond the mortgage context which is the focus of our paper. Similar forces
likely exist for any rate-sensitive decision with irreversibility, such as auto and home purchases and
firm investment decisions (McKay and Wieland, 2019). Lowering rates can stimulate the economy by
encouraging adjustment today but at the cost of lowering future effectiveness because there are fewer
agents left to adjust in the future. In our paper, we focus on a context in which this broad mechanism is
most easily observed and disciplined.
   Finally, we provide a positive analysis of monetary policy effectiveness at a point in time, and we
show how current actions affect future effectiveness. We do not deliver a normative analysis of optimal
policy. For example, our results show that it will take a long time for monetary policy to recover
ammunition after raising rates. This means that leaving rates low for a long time may have negative
consequences for future stimulus ability, but this does not on its own imply that the Fed should raise
rates earlier in order to regain policy space. We characterize these intertemporal effects in this paper, but
we think exploring implications of prepayable mortgage debt for optimal policy is an interesting area
for future research.


References
Abel, Joshua, and Andreas Fuster. 2018. “How Do Mortgage Refinances Affect Debt, Default, and
 Spending? Evidence from HARP.”
 61 For example, the Bank of Canada Financial System Review in November 2017 expressed concern that 47% of all Canadian

mortgages would refinance in 2018 since many households took out new mortgages when rates were low in 2013.




                                                          36
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tim Landvoigt, Tomasz Piskorski, Amit
 Seru, and Vincent Yao. 2017. “Mortgage Refinancing, Consumer Spending, and Competition: Evi-
 dence from the Home Affordable Refinancing Program.” NBER Working Paper 21512.

Aiyagari, S Rao. 1994. “Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 109(3): 659–684.

Andersen, Steffen, John Y. Campbell, Kasper Nielsen, and T. Ramadorai. 2019. “Sources of Inaction in
 Household Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage Market.” NBER Working Paper No. 21386.

Auclert, Adrien. 2019. “Monetary policy and the redistribution channel.” AER, 109(6).

Auerbach, Alan, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Expansion.” In
 Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis. University of Chicago Press.

Beraja, Martin, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra. 2019. “Regional Heterogeneity and the
  Refinancing Channel of Monetary Policy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra. 2018. “House Prices and Con-
  sumer Spending.” Review of Economic Studies, 85(3): 1502–1542.

Bhutta, Neil, and Benjamin J. Keys. 2016. “Interest Rates and Equity Extraction During the Housing
  Boom.” American Economic Review, 106: 1742–74.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Eduardo Engel. 2007. “Price stickiness in Ss models: New interpretations of old
  results.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54.

Chen, Hui, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov. 2019. “Houses as ATMs: Mortgage Refinancing
 and Macroeconomic Uncertainty.” Journal of Finance, 75: 542–588.

Coibion, Olivier. 2012. “Are the Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks Big or Small?” American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 4: 1–32.

Cox, John C, Jonathan E Ingersoll Jr, and Stephen A Ross. 2005. “A theory of the term structure of
  interest rates.” In Theory of Valuation. 129–164. World Scientific.

Crawley, Edmund, and Andreas Kuchler. 2018. “Consumption Heterogeneity: Micro Drivers and Macro
  Implications.” Danish National Bank Working Paper 129.

DeFusco, Anthony, and John Mondragon. 2020. “No Job, No Money, No Refi: Frictions to Refinancing
 in a Recession.” mimeo.

Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley, and Robert Order. 2000. “Mortgage Terminations, Heterogeneity
 and the Exercise of Mortgage Options.” Econometrica, 68(2): 275–307.

Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, Benjamin J. Keys, Tomasz Piskorski, Rodney Ramcharan, Amit
  Seru, and Vincent Yao. 2017. “Interest Rate Pass-Through: Mortgage Rates, Household Consumption,
  and Voluntary Deleveraging.” American Economic Review, 107(11): 3550–88.

Doepke, Matthias, and Martin Schneider. 2006. “Inflation and the Redistribution of Nominal Wealth.”
 Journal of Political Economy, 114(6): 1069–1097.

Doepke, Matthias, Martin Schneider, and Veronika Selezneva. 2015. “Distributional Effects of Mone-
 tary Policy.”

Eichenbaum, Martin, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong. 2019. “State Dependency and the Efficacy of
  Monetary Policy: The Refinancing Channel.” NBER Working Paper 25152.

                                                  37
Floden, Martin, and Jesper Linde. 2001. “Idiosyncratic Risk in the United States and Sweden: Is There
  a Role for Government Insurance?” Review of Economic Dynamics, 4(2): 406–437.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. 2015. “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activ-
 ity.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1): 44–76.
Gilchrist, Simon, David Lopez-Salido, and Egon Zakrajsek. 2015. “Monetary Policy and Real Borrow-
  ing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1): 77–109.
Gorea, Denis, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2017. “Liquidity constraints in the US housing market.” NBER.
Green, Jerry, and John B Shoven. 1986. “The Effects of Interest Rates on Mortgage Prepayments.” Journal
 of Money, Credit and Banking, 18(1): 41–59.
Greenwald, Daniel. 2018. “The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission.” MIT Sloan
 Working Paper.
Guren, Adam M, Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jon Steinsson. 2018. “Housing Wealth Effects:
 The Long View.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24729.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2017. “The Mortgage Rate Conun-
  drum.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23784.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L Violante. 2018. “Monetary policy according to HANK.”
 American Economic Review, 108(3): 697–743.
Keys, Benjamin J., Devin G. Pope, and Jaren C. Pope. 2016. “Failure to Refinance.” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 122: 482–499.
Krivenko, Pavel. 2018. “Unemployment and the US housing market during the Great Recession.” Mimeo.
Landvoight, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin. Schneider. 2015. “The Housing Market(s) of San
  Diego.” American Economic Review, 105: 1371–1407.
McKay, Alisdair, and Johannes F Wieland. 2019. “Lumpy Durable Consumption Demand and the Lim-
 ited Ammunition of Monetary Policy.” NBER Working Paper 26175.
Mian, Atif, Kamelesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the
 Economic Slump.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1687–1726.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson. 2018. “High-Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-Neutrality:
 The Information Effect.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3): 1283–1330.
Ramey, Valerie. 2016. “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation.” Handbook of Macroeconomics.
Romer, Christiana, and David. Romer. 2004. “A new measure of monetary shocks: Derivation and
  implications.” American Economic Review, 94: 1055–1084.
Scharfstein, David, and Adi Sunderam. 2016. “Market Power in Mortgage Lending and the Transmis-
  sion of Monetary Policy.”
Schwartz, Eduardo S., and Walter N. Torous. 1989. “Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed
  Securities.” The Journal of Finance, 44(2): 375–392.
Vavra, Joseph. 2014. “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss Inter-
  pretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1).
Wong, Arlene. 2019. “Refinancing and the Transmission of Monetary Policy to Consumption.” Princeton
 University Working Paper.

                                                  38
11     Tables

                       Table 1: Predictions of Alternative Summaries for Rate Incentives

                         (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)
 frac > 0             2.051***
                       (0.386)
 frac > 50bp                         1.989***
                                      (0.389)
 frac > 100bp                                        2.249***
                                                      (0.450)
 Mean Gap                                                           0.759***
                                                                     (0.132)
 frac > $250                                                                       1.926***
                                                                                    (0.384)
 frac > $500                                                                                       1.844***
                                                                                                    (0.399)
 frac > $1000                                                                                                     1.662***
                                                                                                                   (0.437)
 Constant             0.0416          0.365**        0.673***       0.993***        0.304*         0.516***       0.941***
                      (0.196)         (0.145)        (0.107)        (0.0558)        (0.156)         (0.131)       (0.0913)
 Adj. R2              0.282           0.277          0.246           0.263          0.274          0.247           0.142
 N                     304             304            304             304            304            304             304
 Date Range          92-17m4         92-17m4        92-17m4         92-17m4        92-17m4        92-17m4         92-17m4
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. frac > 50bp is the fraction of loans with gaps
greater than 50 basis points and frac > 100bp is the fraction with gaps greater than 100 basis points. Mean gap is the average
gap in a month. frac > $250 ($500, $1000) is the fraction of loans with annual savings greater than $250 ($500, $1000), which
we compute by multiplying the current gap times the outstanding balance. Prepayment fractions are measured in month t + 1
while rate incentives and LTV are measured in month t, since McDash data measures origination not application and there is
a 1-2 month lag from application to origination.




                                                              39
                          Table 2: Relationship Between Rate Incentives and Prepayment

                    (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)
 Date Range      92-17m4       92-17m4      92-17m4        92-00              01-10     11-17m4      92-00      01-10      11-17m4
 frac > 0         2.05***      2.82***                    2.06***            2.70***     2.07***    2.16***    4.82***     2.30***
                   (0.39)       (0.50)                     (0.36)             (0.87)      (0.39)     (0.33)     (0.86)      (0.42)
 LTV                           -6.49***       -2.35                                                  -2.36*    -12.3***     -0.89
                                (1.66)        (1.49)                                                 (1.25)     (2.53)      (0.83)
 Constant         0.042        3.58***       2.88***       -0.045            -0.026       -0.40      1.43*     5.86***     -0.0034
                  (0.20)        (0.80)        (1.00)       (0.19)            (0.40)      (0.30)      (0.85)     (1.07)      (0.50)
 Adj. R2           0.28          0.47         0.027         0.56              0.30        0.61       0.57        0.67       0.62
 N                 304           304           304          108               120          76        108         120         76
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. LTV is average leverage. We calculate leverage
for each loan as the ratio of its outstanding balance to value estimated using appraisal values at origination updated using
local house price indices from CoreLogic. Loan level data from McDash Performance data+appraisal values from McDash
origination data is used to calculate LTV. Prepayment fractions are measured in month t + 1 while rate incentives and LTV are
measured in month t, since McDash data measures origination not application and there is a 1-2 month lag from application
to origination.




            Table 3: Auto Sales Growth Responses to Refinancing and Mortgage Rate Changes

                             (1)           (2)            (3)                (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)
                             OLS           OLS            IV                 IV          OLS         OLS          IV         IV
 ∆ freq                    0.0190***     0.0299***     0.0809***           0.135***
                           (0.00725)     (0.00942)      (0.0277)           (0.0397)
 freq                                                                                   -0.00130   0.0329***   0.00365      -0.124
                                                                                       (0.00339)   (0.0111)    (0.0146)    (0.0968)
 freq ×∆ FRM                                                                           -0.0343*    -0.0446*    -0.203***   -0.386**
                                                                                       (0.0191)    (0.0229)     (0.0661)    (0.179)
 Quarter × MSA FE             No           Yes            No                 Yes          No         Yes          No         Yes
 Month FE                    Yes           Yes           Yes                 Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 N                          85328         84585         85328               84585       85328       84585       85328       84585
 Date Range                98-17m4       98-17m4       98-17m4             98-17m4     98-17m4     98-17m4     98-17m4     98-17m4
Standard errors two-way clustered by MSA and month. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. Prepayment
is measured using loan level data from McDash Performance data. ∆ freq is the change in prepayment
and ∆ FRM is the change in the 30-year fixed rate mortgage between month t − 1 and t. To account for
lags between origination and spending, the outcome in all regressions is auto sales growth from R.L.
Polk measured between t and t + 1. IV specifications instrument for freq and ∆ freq using frac > 0 and
∆ frac >0.




                                                                      40
 Appendices to Mortgage Prepayment and
Path-Dependent Effects of Monetary Policy
 David Berger, Konstantin Milbradt, Fabrice Tourre and Joseph Vavra




                                 1
A.1     Data Appendix
A.1.1   Baseline McDash Prepayment Sample
This section describes in more detail our loan-level sample restrictions as well as our identification
of prepayment type in CRISM data. Our primary loan-level data set for measuring prepayment and
loan gaps is the McDash loan performance and origination data from 1992-2017 produced by Black
Knight Financial Services. The origination data provides a number of origination characteristics such
as origination date, amount, loan purpose and appraisal value while the performance data provides
dynamic info on these loans like current unpaid balance, current interest rate and flags for prepayment.
Our prepayment analysis primarily requires information from the dynamic loan performance data: we
define loan prepayment in month t as any loan with termination flag "voluntary payoff" in that month
and a termination date of month t.
    Our primary analysis uses only fixed rate first mortgages, but results are similar when including
all mortgages in the McDash data set. In order to maintain a consistent sample when running cross-
MSA results, we also drop any loan with missing information on MSA-division. We also drop any loan
with missing information on the current interest rate in the McDash loan performance data set, since
we cannot measure gaps for these loans. We define the interest rate gap as the current interest rate
minus the monthly average 30 year FRM from the Freddie Mac PMMS plus an estimated loan-specific
adjustment that is a quadratic function of the borrower’s FICO score and the loan’s current LTV ratio.
We also compute $ gaps in addition to rate gaps, which we define as the current unpaid balance times
the interest rate gap. For that analysis, we drop any loan with missing unpaid balance in the McDash
performance data set.
    Since most of our analysis is focused on prepayment rates, the majority of our analysis can be
performed using only loan performance data, albeit without controls for individual fixed effects or time-
varying observables only available in credit records. However, while performance data is required to
measure prepayment, it cannot be used to decompose prepayment into that arising from refinancing and
moves. This is because loan purpose is collected at origination but not at termination, so the performance
data set tells us if a loan prepays but not why. Conversely, origination data can be used to measure the
share of new originations which are due to refinancing and moves, but it cannot be used to measure the
share of old mortgages which are prepaying. So origination data cannot tell us what share of mortgages
prepay and why, since it contains the wrong denominator. This means that measuring the frequency of
prepayment by type requires linking information on loan performance for terminating loans with loan
origination information for newly originating loans.
    After 2005, we are able to use the linked Equifax/CRISM data which we describe in the next subsec-
tion to precisely link each individual prepaying loan to a newly originating loan so that we can measure
exactly why each individual loan is prepaying. Prior to 2005, these links are unavailable, so we cannot
measure the reason that any individual loan prepays However, in a stationary environment, performance
data and origination data can be combined to proxy for the share of prepayment arising from different
types. In particular, in an environment with no net flows in and out of the mortgage market, every
loan which prepays due to refinancing or due to moving must be matched by a newly originated loan
with the same purpose. While we cannot link the new and old loan together, the shares must remain
unchanged. This allows us to proxy for rate-refi, cash-out refi and movement frequencies in a month
using only loan level data without links to individuals.
                                       type        prepay        type         type
    In particular, we compute f reqt        = f reqt      × sharet where f reqt is the frequency of a given
                             prepay                                                                   type
type of prepayment, f reqt          is the frequency of prepayment in performance data and sharet          is
the share of a given type of loan purpose in origination data. The McDash origination data set only
                                                            type
collects loan purpose after 1998, so we measure sharet using originations data from CoreLogic LLMA.
This data set has a structure nearly identical to the McDash data, but it contains reliable loan purpose
                                                                                   prepay
at origination info as early as 1993. However, we continue to measure f reqt              using McDash data
because CoreLogic performance data does not measure prepayment before 1999, and has roughly half


                                                     2
the market coverage of the McDash Performance Data set. Combining prepayment frequencies from
McDash with loan purposes shares at origination from CoreLogic leverages the comparative advantages
of the two data sets. While stationarity is clearly a strong assumption, we can use the CRISM data
after 2005 to compare our proxies for frequency by type under the stationarity assumption, with actual
frequencies. Figure A-1 shows they are very similar.

                                 Figure A-1: Construction of Prepay Shares by Type




                                        Rate Refi                                            Cash Out Refi
                   3                                                         1.5

                   2                                                          1

                   1                                                          .5


                   0                                                          0
                  1993m1     1999m1      2005m1     2011m1       2017m1      1993m1     1999m1    2005m1     2011m1    2017m1
                           Predicted from Orig Share            Actual                Predicted from Orig Share       Actual



                               Purchase Prepayment
                       2

                   1.5

                       1

                    .5

                     0
                    1993m1     1999m1     2005m1       2011m1    2017m1
                             Predicted from Orig Share          Actual




    Overall, the McDash Performance data set contains information on approximately 180 million loans.
After 2005, the McDash Performance data set covers roughly 50% of total U.S. mortgage debt as mea-
sured by the Federal Reserve. Prior to 2005, coverage is somewhat lower, ranging from around 10%
market coverage in the early 90s to 20-25% in the late 90s. As a measure of representativeness and ex-
ternal validity, Figure A-2 shows that refinancing in our data closely tracks the refinancing applications
index produced by the Mortgage Banker’s Association from 1992-2017.62 This suggests that despite the
changing sample sizes, the McDash Performance data is broadly representative of the U.S. mortgage
market over the entire 1992-2017 period.63
    We use the McDash Performance data rather than CoreLogic Performance data because the Core-
Logic performance data does not measure prepayment before 1999, and has roughly half the market
coverage of the McDash performance data. Using CoreLogic instead of McDash Performance data leads
to somewhat noisier refinancing series and eliminates the first 7 years of data. In addition, we cannot
link loans to individuals in CoreLogic data like we can in the McDash data using the links we describe
next. Nevertheless, we have repeated our analysis of prepayment using series derived from CoreLogic
  62 Note that we measure originations while this index measures applications. According to LendingTree, denials are roughly
8% after the financial crisis due to Dodd-Frank related changes in lending standards. This explains the level difference after
the Financial Crisis but the series continue to highly comove.
  63 Note that even in the months with the fewest observations, we still have more than 5 million mortgages, so only lack of

representativeness and not sampling error is a potential concern.



                                                                         3
LLMA Performance data and arrive at similar conclusions.
Figure A-2: Comparison of Refi Measured with McDash Data to Mortgage Bankers’ Association data




                            600




                            400




                            200




                              0
                             1993m1            1999m1             2005m1          2011m1            2017m1
                                      Refi (Originations) Index       Refi (Applications) Index
                                      Derived from Loan Data          From Mortgage Bankers Association
                                      (2005=100)                      (2005=100)



Figure shows an index of refinancing computed using McDash Performance data and CoreLogic Origination Purpose data
compared to the Mortgage Banker’s Association Refinancing Application Index. Note that the loan-level index measures
originations while the MBA index measures applications. Indices are normalized to 100 in 2005m4.




A.1.2     Linked CRISM Sample: Measuring Refinancing
After 2005, we link loans in the McDash data set to Equifax credit records, which allows us to decom-
pose prepayment into different types and to control for various individual level observables, including
individual fixed effects. Our analysis and description of this data closely follows Beraja et al. (2019).
The linked Equifax/McDash CRISM data set provides the linked Equifax credit records for each Mc-
Dash mortgage for the lifetime of the loan, including an additional 6 months before origination and
after termination. This link is done directly by Equifax. Credit records provide a consumer’s total out-
standing debt amounts in different categories (first-lien mortgages, second-lien mortgages, home equity
lines of credit [HELOCs], auto loans, etc.). Additionally, in any month, Equifax provides the origination
date, amount, and remaining principal balance of the two largest (in balance terms) first mortgages,
closed-end seconds, and HELOCs outstanding for a given consumer.
    In order to reduce the computational burden, we begin the analysis of CRISM data by extract-
ing all the loan and individual characteristics from a random 10% sample of all individuals in the
Equifax/McDash data at some point between 1992 and 2017. This 10% CRISM sample includes all mort-
gage loans (approximately 11 million) for approximately 5.9 million individuals64 We further restrict our
CRISM sample to those consumers who start our sample with two or fewer loans in each category and
never have more than three of any of these types of loans outstanding.65 These sample restrictions leave
  64 Resultsare extremely similar when using 5% and 20% samples since the CRISM sample is very large, so sampling error is
not important.
  65 Equifax only provides detailed origination information on the two largest loans, so this restriction allows us to infer the

origination month, origination balance, and balance of the third largest loan of any loan type even though this information
does not appear explicitly in Equifax. We also drop loans that do not have complete consecutive Equifax records.




                                                                  4
roughly 96% of the 5.9 million individuals in our analysis sample. In creating this loan-level data set, we
assume that the month in which the loan stops appearing in Equifax is the month that it was terminated.
    While McDash loans are linked to individual credit records directly be Equifax using social security
number, individuals can have multiple loans and the loan information in Equifax does not always exactly
match that in McDash, since they come from independent sources.66 We thus have to construct a unique
match between a loan in McDash and the possible set of linked loans in Equifax. As in Beraja et al.
(2019), we consider an Equifax loan/McDash loan pairing a match if the origination date of the Equifax
loan is within 1 month and the origination amount is within $10,000 of the McDash loan. If more than
one loan is matched, we use the origination amount, date, termination date, zip code (where available,
or 3-digit zip code and MSA-div where not)67 , and termination balance as tiebreakers. We are able to
match roughly 93% of McDash loans to an Equifax loan using these restrictions.
    As in our primary analysis, we begin with all remaining outstanding fixed rate first liens in the
McDash which are voluntarily paid off. We then look for any loan in the Equifax data set that has an
open date within 4 months of the McDash loan’s termination date. We classify these new loans as a
refinance if either:

    • The loan also appears in McDash and is tagged as a refinance in the purpose-type variable.

    • The loan also appears in McDash and is tagged as an "Unknown" or "Other" purpose type, and
      has the same property 5 digit zip code (where available, or 3-digit zip code and MSA-div where
      not) as the original loan.

    • The loan appears only in Equifax but the borrower’s Equifax address does not change in the 6
      months following the termination of the original loan.

   This allows us to compute one of our primary outcomes of interest, the count of first-lien FRM
loans which refinance in month t divided by the total number of McDash first-lien FRM loans with
Performance data in that month. (We have also considered results which compute balance weighted
shares, and they are very similar).

A.1.3      Linked CRISM Sample: Decomposing refinancing into rate and cash-out
To compute the cash-out and rate-refinancing share of loans, we must further break these refinancing
loans down by type. In particular, we need to compute how the balance of the new loan compares to the
outstanding balance of the loan(s) being prepaid. We begin by labeling any loan in the Equifax data set
that terminates between -1 and 4 months from a new McDash loan’s close date a "linked" loan, including
first mortgages as well as closed-end seconds and HELOCs, and we call the new loan a refinance if:

    • The loan is a known refinance in McDash.

    • The loan has an "Unknown" or "Other" purpose type in McDash and a linked loan in McDash that
      has a matching property zip code (5 digit when available or 3-digit + MSA-div when not).

    • The loan has an "Unknown" or "Other" purpose type in McDash and a linked loan that appears
      only in Equifax, but the consumer’s Equifax address does not change in the 6 months after the
      new loan was opened.

    If there is more than one linked loan that is a first mortgage in Equifax, we link only the loan that
is closest in balance to the origination amount of the new mortgage. We only link those Equifax loans
  66 Forexample, balances may differ slightly since they may be reported to credit bureaus and servicers at different dates.
  67 Toensure anonymity, McDash reports 5-digit zip code for loans in higher volume locations and 3-digit zip code for loans
in lower volume locations.



                                                             5
that exist in the Equifax data for at least three months to prevent the refinanced loan balance from being
counted in the old balance of the loan.
    For each of these cases, we can then calculate the cash-out amount as the difference between the
origination amount on the refinance loan and the balance of the linked loan(s) at termination. In order
to capture the correct origination amount on the refinance loan, we want to ensure that we are also
including any "piggyback" second liens that are opened with the refinance loan that we find in McDash.
Thus, we look for any loan in the Equifax record linked to our refinance loan that has an Equifax
open date within three months of our refinance loan and an origination balance of less than 25% of
our loan’s origination balance if labeled a first mortgage and less than 125% of the refinance loan’s
origination balance if labeled a HELOC or CES, and add the balance of these piggyback seconds to the
refi origination amount when calculating cash-out amounts.68 To eliminate outliers, we also drop cash-
out and "cash-in" amounts that are greater than $1,000,000. These amount to dropping less than 0.05%
of the refinance loans.
    After measuring the change in the balance, we then call a refinancing a cash-out if, after subtracting
2 percent from the new loan to cover closing costs, the new mortgage balance is at least $5,000 above
the old mortgage. Using a more restrictive definition of cash-out reduces the overall share of cash-
out and the sensitivity of cash-out to rate gaps while using a less conservative cutoff does the reverse
since it reclassifies some rate-refis as cash-outs. By construction, these choices have no effect on the
decomposition of prepayment into refi vs. moves.

A.1.4     Leverage controls
In many of our aggregate regressions we control for average leverage in our data set and in our individ-
ual level regressions, we control for individual leverage. In order to measure leverage at the loan-level
we start with all McDash FRM first mortgages. For each mortgage we estimate its current value as the
appraisal value at origination updated using local house price indices from CoreLogic. We use zip code
level house price indices to update values when the 5-digit zip is available in McDash and in the Core-
Logic indices, and we otherwise use MSA level house price indices. We then compute leverage LTV for
a given loan as the ratio of the current unpaid balance to this estimate of value. Our aggregate controls
then take the average leverage across loans.
    This procedure will tend to understate leverage for individuals with multiple loans, but it can be
applied over the entire 1992-2017 sample. After 2005, we can construct a more accurate measure of
leverage using CRISM data. Following Beraja et al. (2019), we begin with first-lien McDash FRM loans.
For each month, we then take the corresponding Equifax record and assign all outstanding second liens
to the outstanding first liens in Equifax using the rule that each second lien is assigned to the largest first
lien (in balance terms) that was opened on or before the second lien’s opening date. We then add the
assigned second lien balance(s) to the McDash balance of our original loan as our measure of secured
debt on a property, which is the numerator of CLTV. We then divide by the value constructed exactly
as described above.




  68 We impose these upper bounds because we want to avoid picking up other first lien mortgages (to purchase another
property) the borrower might originate at the same time.


                                                         6
A.2        Additional Empirical Results
Figure A-3 is the annualized version of Figure 1 in the main text. The key difference between Figure
1 is that the interest rate gaps are averaged annually (as opposed to monthly), as is the prepayment
indicator.69 However, a comparison between Figure 1 and Figure A-3 shows that they are very similar.
In particular, both show clear evidence of state-dependent prepayment: loans with positive gaps are
much more likely to prepay than loans with negative gaps.

          Figure A-3: Robustness of Prepayment Hazard to Annual Instead of Monthly Frequency
                                                           .3                                                         .08


                                                          .25
                              Annual Fraction Prepaying




                                                                                                                      .06




                                                                                                                            Share of Households
                                                           .2

                                                                                                                      .04
                                                          .15


                                                           .1                                                         .02


                                                          .05
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                −2                   0                  2         4
                                                                                           Gap (in %)
                                                                     Prepayment Hazard with Individual Controls
                                                                     Overall Distribution


Figure shows the point estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals for the coefficients on the 20 basis point gap bin dummies
in regression 1. Gaps are averaged by year, and prepayment is an indicator for any prepayment event over the year. Standard
errors are clustered by household (but not year since we only have 12 year observations). In order to include household fixed
effects and time-varying characteristics, figure uses CRISM data linked to credit records from 2005m6-2017m4.


    Figure A-4 shows that restricting our analysis to households with substantial outstanding mortgage
balances delivers results similar to those documented in Figure 1: a step-like behavior of the prepayment
hazard, as a function of the rate gap.
    Figure A-5 documents the foregone annual savings for households with 300bp+ rate-gaps who do
not refinance. As the graph makes clear, the typical household with a large rate gap also has very
large potential payment savings. For example, the average (median) annual foregone mortgage payment
savings are $2800 ($2050). Overall, this supports our conclusion that lack of prepayment despite high
individual rate gaps does not reflect limited benefits from refinancing.




  69 Wealso compute standard errors differently. In this regression standard errors are clustered by household, but not year
since we only have 12 year observations.


                                                                                               7
  Figure A-4: Prepayment Hazard with Individual Controls: Excluding Mortgage Balances < $100k
                                                         .04
                                                                                                                                          .08




                            Monthly Fraction Prepaying
                                                         .03




                                                                                                                                                Share of Households
                                                                                                                                          .06


                                                         .02
                                                                                                                                          .04


                                                         .01
                                                                                                                                          .02


                                                          0
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                 −2                       0                     2                 4
                                                                                                  Gap (in %)
                                                                           Prepayment Hazard with Individual Controls
                                                                           Overall Distribution


Figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for coefficients on the 20bp bin dummies in regression 1. We
exclude loan-month observations with balances less than $100,000. Standard errors are two-way clustered by household and
month using data from 2005m6-2017m4.




                       Figure A-5: Annual Payment Savings Lost By Not Refinancing
                                                                  1



                                                                 .8



                                                                 .6
                                                           CDF




                                                                 .4



                                                                 .2



                                                                  0
                                                                      $0              $2,000           $4,000            $6,000       $8,000
                                                                                               Foregone Annual Savings


Figure shows CDF of the distribution of foregone annual savings for households with 300bp+ gaps who do not refinance.




                                                                                                       8
    In Section 4.2 we argue that rate incentives are a crucial driver of refinancing decisions, even for
households taking cash out of their homes. The fact that few loans refinance into higher rates might
seem to be at odds with evidence that in many months, most refinancing loans are doing so into higher
rates (see Chen, Michaux and Roussanov (2019) Figure 1, or https://www.wsj.com/articles/americans-
are-taking-cash-out-of-their-homesand-it-is-costing-them-11577529000). It is not. First, Figure A-6 shows
that we can replicate the time-series evidence shown in the publicly available Freddie Mac almost per-
fectly in our data.

                                         Figure A-6: Median of Ratio of New to Old Rate: McDash vs. Freddie Mac Data
                                                                                                              1.1
                                                                            Median Ratio of New to Old Rate

                                                                                                               1



                                                                                                               .9



                                                                                                               .8



                                                                                                               .7



                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                               1990q1        1995q1      2000q1                                                                          2005q1      2010q1        2015q1
                                                                                                                      McDash (Imputed)                                  Freddie Mac Data


For each month, we estimate the ratio of new rates relative to outstanding old rates for refinancing loans in our data. We then
calculate the median of this ratio for each month and compare this to published data for the same object from Freddie Mac.



                                                      Figure A-7: Shares and Frequencies of Refinancing into Higher Rates

                 (a): Share of Refi w/ Increase vs. Refi Freq (b): Frequency of All Refi vs. All Refi w/ Increase

                                    4                                                                                                    .8                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                              Share of All Refis w/ Rate Increases


                                                                                                                                                                                     Frequency of All Refis (in %)
     Frequency of All Refi (in %)




                                    3                                                                                                    .6                                                                          3



                                    2                                                                                                    .4                                                                          2



                                    1                                                                                                    .2                                                                          1



                                 0                                                                                                     0                                                                          0
                                1993m1           1999m1           2005m1                                            2011m1        2017m1                                                                         1993m1               1999m1             2005m1              2011m1   2017m1
                                                                   datem                                                                                                                                                                                  datem
                                         Frequency of All Refi (in %)                                                                                                                                                        Frequency of All Refis (in %)
                                         Share of All Refis w/ Rate Increases (0−1)                                                                                                                                          Frequency of All Refis w/ Rate Increase(in %)




    In particular, for each each month and for all prepaid GSE loans in the McDash data, we compute the
estimated gap between the outstanding interest rate and the estimated new rate for the loan. We then
apply the refinancing hazard computed in CRISM data after 2005 to allocate all of these prepayments
between refinancing and moves. For each imputed refi in McDash data, we then compute the ratio of
the estimated new rate relative to the outstanding old rate. We then calculate the median of this ratio
and Figure A-6 compares it to published data for the same object from Freddie Mac.
    Furthermore, Figure A-7 shows that changes in refinancing frequency are key to reconciling this time-
series pattern with our cross-sectional fact that refinancing into higher rates is very unusual. Panel (a)


                                                                                                                                                                                                   9
                                                  Figure A-8: Shares and Frequencies of Cash-out Refinancing into Higher Rates

                 (a): Share of Refi w/ Increase vs. Refi Freq                                                                                                            (b): Frequency of Refi vs. Refi w/ Increase

                                                                                                                .8
                                       1.5                                                                                                                                                    1.5




                                                                                                                     Share of Cashouts w/ Rate Increases
    Frequency of Cashout Refi (in %)




                                                                                                                                                            Cashout Refi Frequencies (in %)
                                                                                                                .6

                                        1                                                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                                .4


                                        .5                                                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                                                                .2



                                        0                                                                     0                                                                                0
                                       1993m1          1999m1          2005m1              2011m1        2017m1                                                                               1993m1            1999m1            2005m1            2011m1   2017m1
                                                                        datem                                                                                                                                                      datem
                                                Frequency of Cashout Refi (in %)                                                                                                                        Frequency of Cashout Refi (in %)
                                                Share of Cashouts w/ Rate Increases (0−1)                                                                                                               Frequency of Cashout Refi w/ Rate Increase (in %)




shows that the times when most refis result in rate increases are precisely the times when the frequency
of refinancing is extremely low, so the loans refinancing in these months are a small share of overall
refinancing activity. Panel (b) more directly shows that the frequency of refinancing into higher rates
is nearly zero outside of 2005-2006, and even in those two years it is still low compared to the overall
average frequency of refinancing across time. Figure A-8 shows that this is also true when restricting to
only cash-out refinancing and excluding rate refis. In sum, these three figures reconcile our results with
Chen, Michaux and Roussanov (2019).

                                                                              Figure A-9: Distribution of Gaps at Two Dates



                                                                                 .1


                                                                                .08


                                                                                .06


                                                                                .04


                                                                                .02


                                                                                  0
                                                                                      −4                 −2                                                    0                                                  2                  4
                                                                                                                                                           Gap (in %)
                                                                                             Gap Distribution in 2000m12                                                                            Gap Distribution in 2003m12




    Figure A-9 shows the distribution of interest rate gaps at two points in time. The solid black line
shows the distribution of gaps in December of 2000 while the dotted gray line shows the distribution of
gaps in December of 2003. The key takeaway is that there is significant variation in these distributions
and thus the f rac > 0 over time. This time-variation along with the state-dependence of the hazard rate
is what leads to significant path dependence.
    Table A-1 shows that the relationship between f rac > 0 and prepayment is robust to a number of
other potential confounding observables. Columns (2) and (3) add controls for two different measures


                                                                                                                                                            10
              Table A-1: Relationship Between Rate Incentives and Prepayment with Controls

                   (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)           (7)          (8)
                  None             U             Y           Seas        Large ∆m           2003           All        Quart FE
 frac > 0         2.82***       2.82***       2.82***       2.82***        2.83***         2.48***       2.53***        2.14***
                   (0.50)        (0.50)        (0.50)        (0.50)         (0.50)          (0.36)        (0.38)         (0.39)
 LTV             -6.49***      -6.49***      -6.49***      -6.49***        -6.64***       -4.96***      -4.96***          0.53
                  (1.66)        (1.66)        (1.66)        (1.66)          (1.70)         (1.15)        (1.26)          (5.30)
 Constant         3.58***       3.58***       3.58***       3.58***        3.64***         2.79***       2.80***          -0.97
                   (0.80)        (0.80)        (0.80)        (0.80)         (0.81)          (0.57)        (0.61)         (3.52)
 Adj. R2           0.47          0.47          0.47           0.47           0.48           0.62           0.63           0.93
 N                 304           304           304            304            304            304            304            304
 Date            92-17m4       92-17m4       92-17m4       92-17m4         92-17m4        92-17m4       92-17m4        92-17m4
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. LTV is average leverage. Prepayment fractions
are measured in month t + 1 while rate incentives and LTV are measured in month t, since McDash data measures origination
not application and there is a 1-2 month lag from application to origination. U is the current unemployment rate, Y is monthly
log industrial production detrended with an HP(129600) filter. Seas is 12 month of year indicators. Large ∆m includes an
indicator for the top ten percent of months by the 3-month decline in mortgage rates. 2003 includes and indicator for the year
2003. All includes all controls in Columns 2-6 simultaneously. Quart includes calendar-quarter fixed effects.


of the business cycle. Column (4) controls for seasonality with 12 month-of-year dummies. Column (5)
provides evidence that adding additional controls to capture non-linearities in rate changes does not alter
our conclusions. Specifically we include an indicator for periods of unusually large declines in mortgage
rates: for each period, we compute the 3-month change in the mortgage rate ∆3,t ≡ Mt−3 − Mt − and
then add to the baseline regression an indicator for periods in the top ten percent of ∆3,t . Using different
cutoffs for the indicator delivers similar conclusions. We have also explored interactions between large
rate changes and the relationship between f rac > 0 and prepayment and find no significant results.
Importantly, this does not mean there are not non-linear effects of rate incentives on prepayment: non-
linearities are most apparent from the microeconomic hazard in Figure 1. However, the result in Column
(5) shows that these non-linearities are already captured by f rac > 0: when rates decline by large
amounts there are large increases in f rac > 0 and resulting prepayment. Figure 5 shows that there is
a large spike in prepayment in 2003. This unusual increase in refinancing coincides exactly with the
“Mortgage-Rate Conundrum" documented by Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2017). We cannot
explain this outlier in 2003 based on observables but Column (6) shows that if we introduce a 2003
dummy, leverage and f rac > 0 explain almost two-thirds of the variation in prepayment. In Column (7),
we show that jointly controlling for all of these observables again leads to similar conclusions.
    In Column (8), our most stringent empirical specification, we also add controls for one hundred
calendar-quarter fixed effects.70 In this specification, identification comes only from monthly relation-
ships between prepayment and rate incentives within quarters. These specifications rule out many
additional confounding factors such as aging (Wong (2019)) and trends in lender concentration (Agar-
wal et al. (2017) and Scharfstein and Sunderam (2016)) which might influence refinancing incentives and
prepayment rates but are unlikely to matter at these high frequencies.
    In Appendix Table A-2 we show that the relationship between f rac > 0 and prepayment also holds
at the MSA level, even after including both calendar-month and MSA × calendar-quarter fixed effects.
As the table shows, there is a strong positive relationship between total prepayment (column 1) , rate-refi
(column 2), cash-out refi (column 3), home purchases (column 4) and f rac > 0.
  70 We also include all of the other controls except the 2003 indicator, which is collinear with quarter fixed effects, but most of
these controls are almost constant within quarters and so there is little identifying variation. Redoing the regression with only
quarter FE and no additional controls produces similar results.



                                                                11
                     Table A-2: Effects of Rate Gaps on Prepayment Propensities by MSA

                                          (1)                         (2)                     (3)                     (4)
                                      Tot Prepay                   Rate-Refi                Cashout                Purchase
 frac > 0                                3.36***                    2.06***                 0.63***                 0.65***
                                          (0.36)                     (0.25)                  (0.13)                  (0.25)
  Quarter X MSA FE                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
  Month FE                         Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
  Adj. R2                          0.98               0.93                0.94                 0.79
  N                               87219              87219               87219                87219
  Date Range                     92-17m4            92-17m4             92-17m4             92-17m4
Standard errors two-way clustered by MSA and month. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. Prepay-
ment is measured using loan level data from McDash Performance data. After 2005, we decompose
prepayment by type using CRISM data which links new and old loans. Prior to 2005, we decompose
prepayment by type using origination shares by type from CoreLogic LLMA data. See Appendix for
additional discussion. Prepayment fractions are measured in month t + 1 while rate incentives are mea-
sured in month t, since McDash data measures origination not application and there is a 1-2 month lag
from application to origination.




          Table A-3: Instrumenting for Rate Gaps with High Frequency Monetary Policy Shocks

                                                     (1)                              (2)                               (3)
 frac > 0                                          2.36***                          3.01***                          3.34***
                                                    (0.83)                           (0.72)                          (0.74)
 LTV                                                                               -7.83***                          -6.32***
                                                                                    (1.57)                            (1.33)
 Constant                                          -0.073                           4.43***                          3.50***
                                                   (0.55)                            (0.73)                          (0.56)
 Additional Controls                               None                             None                               All
 F-Stat                                            17.2                             16.3                               21.7
 N                                                  247                              247                               247
 Date                                              92-12m7                         92-12m7                           92-17m4
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. This table instruments for f rac > 0 using
the sum over the prior 6 months of the high frequency monetary policy shock series from Gertler and Karadi (2015), available
through 2012m7. LTV is average leverage. We calculate leverage for each loan as the ratio of its outstanding balance to value
estimated using appraisal values at origination updated using local house price indices from CoreLogic. Loan level data from
McDash Performance data+appraisal values from McDash origination data is used to calculate LTV. Prepayment fractions are
measured in month t + 1 while rate incentives and LTV are measured in month t, since McDash data measures origination not
application and there is a 1-2 month lag from application to origination. Additional controls include all those in Column (7) of
Table A-1




                                                              12
    Since f rac > 0 depends on past endogenous interest rates, it is possible that some unobserved
confounding factor affects both f rac > 0 and prepayment propensities even at high frequencies. To
address this concern, Table A-3 re-estimates our baseline regressions using the cumulative value of the
Gertler and Karadi (2015) high-frequency monetary policy shock series over the past six months as an
instrument for f rac > 0. Unsurprisingly, this reduces power and increases standard errors, but point
estimates are nearly identical and f rac > 0 remains a significant predictor of prepayment activity.71
    In Table A-4 we decompose the positive time-series relationship between total prepayment and
f rac > 0 into its constituent types (rate-refi, cashout-refi and purchase). As suggested by the over-
all loan-level relationship in Figure 1, f rac > 0 is most important for explaining rate-refinancing.72
f rac > 0 alone explains roughly 40% of the time-series variance in rate-refinancing. Since leverage di-
rectly affects incentives to cash-out and move, we also explore the relationship between leverage and
the different prepayment types. Leverage has no effect on rate refinancing, but unsurprisingly, it has a
strong negative effect on cash-out and moves. Leverage has stronger independent predictive content (as
measured by R2 ) for cash-out and moves than does f rac > 0. However columns (6) and (9) show that
including both f rac > 0 and leverage gives much stronger predictions than either alone. That is, after
controlling for leverage, f rac > 0 has strong additional predictive content for cash-out and moves.

                      Table A-4: Effects of Rate Gaps on Prepayment Propensities by Type

                               Rate Refi                           Cash-out                           Purchase

                      (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
 frac > 0          1.261***                1.465***   0.296**                  0.599***    0.400***               0.670***
                    (0.187)                (0.255)    (0.128)                  (0.118)     (0.132)                (0.124)
 LTV                             0.343     -1.787**                -1.786***   -2.657***              -1.385***   -2.358***
                                (0.820)     (0.844)                 (0.303)     (0.399)                (0.442)     (0.401)
 Constant          -0.411***     0.212      0.566      0.0670      1.375***    1.520***    0.380***   1.507***    1.669***
                    (0.0948)    (0.533)    (0.413)    (0.0672)      (0.206)    (0.189)     (0.0690)    (0.281)    (0.229)
 Adj. R2            0.418      0.00244      0.472      0.0713       0.211       0.466       0.101      0.0947      0.335
 N                   292         292         292         292         292         292         292         292        292
 Date Range        93-17m4     93-17m4     93-17m4    93-17m4      93-17m4     93-17m4     93-17m4    93-17m4     93-17m4
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. Prepayment is measured using loan level
data from McDash Performance data. After 2005, we decompose prepayment by type using CRISM data which links new and
old loans. Prior to 2005, we decompose prepayment by type using origination shares by type from CoreLogic LLMA data.
Regressions begin in 1993 rather than 1992 since reliable CoreLogic origination data on prepayment shares does not begin
until 1993. See Appendix for additional discussion. Prepayment fractions are measured in month t + 1 while rate incentives
and LTV are measured in month t, since McDash data measures origination not application and there is a 1-2 month lag from
application to origination.

     Many of our empirical results focus on prepayment (and its constituent components) as the out-
come of interest. However, changes in the average outstanding mortgage rate m∗ are arguably more
important than prepayment rates since mortgage payments are what enter the household budget con-
straint and prepayment matters more if households secure large payment reductions. Prepayment
rates
R      and changes in m∗ are of course related: in each month the change in average rates is ∆m̄∗ =
   gap × f ( gap) × h( gap)dgap, where f is the density of gaps and h is the prepayment hazard in that
month. If gaps are typically positive, then increases in prepayment will lead to declines in m̄∗ . However,
it is also clear that they need not move perfectly together since average rates will decline by more if the
households prepaying have larger gaps.
  71 First-stage
               F-stats shown in the table exceed the 15% Stock-Yogo critical values for weak instrument bias.
  72 After2005 we decompose prepayment using CRISM data; prior to 2005 we assume stationarity and decompose using
origination shares. See Section 3. This decomposition requires origination shares data from CoreLogic LLMA data, which has
poor coverage prior to 1993. For this reason, regressions start from 1993 rather than 1992 as in Table ??.


                                                              13
                 Table A-5: Effects of FRM Changes and Gaps on Average Coupon Changes

                                           (1)                       (2)                    (3)                      (4)
 frac > 0                              -0.0486***                                       -0.0470***              -0.0531***
                                        (0.00579)                                       (0.00531)                (0.00654)
 ∆ FRM                                                            0.0188***             -0.0286**                  0.0369
                                                                  (0.00516)              (0.0124)                 (0.0356)
 ∆ FRM × (frac > 0)                                                                      0.0542**                0.0679***
                                                                                         (0.0231)                 (0.0244)
 ∆ FRM × mean LTV                                                                                                  -0.118*
                                                                                                                  (0.0673)
 mean LTV                                                                                                        0.0521**
                                                                                                                 (0.0217)
 Constant                              0.0180***               -0.0142***               0.0175***                 -0.0109
                                       (0.00284)                (0.00178)               (0.00273)                 (0.0111)
 Adj. R2                                 0.497                     0.0497                 0.516                   0.560
 N                                        303                       303                    303                     303
 Date Range                             92-17m3                   92-17m3                92-17m3                 92-17m3
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. Average LTV is average across loans of the
ratio of a loan’s outstanding balance to value estimated using appraisal values at origination updated using local house price
indices from CoreLogic. Loan level data from McDash Performance data+appraisal values from McDash origination data is
used to calculate LTV. ∆ FRM is the change in the current 30 year FRM is the monthly average of the Freddie Mac weekly
PMMS survey 30 year fixed rate mortgage average: https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MORTGAGE30US. To account for a lag
between application and origination, in all specifications, f rac > 0 and LTV is measured as of month t, ∆m∗ is measured
between month t and month t + 1 and ∆ FRM is measured between month t − 1 and month t.

    Column (1) of Table A-5 documents that there is an extremely strong negative time-series relationship
between f rac > 0 and ∆m∗ . Unsurprisingly, Column (2) shows that when the current market interest rate
rises, so does the resulting average outstanding rate. More interestingly, Column (3) shows that there is
a strong interaction effect between f rac > 0 and ∆ FRM: interest rate pass-through into average coupons
is much stronger when f rac > 0 is large. As we discuss below, this increase in rate pass-through with
f rac > 0 is a central implication of our theoretical model and is a key indicator of path-dependence.
Given the importance of leverage for prepayment discussed above, Column (5) also includes interactions
of interest rate changes in month t with average leverage in this same month. While we indeed find a
negative interaction effect between leverage and pass-through, the interaction between f rac > 0 and ∆
FRM is if anything mildly amplified.




                                                             14
    Table A-6 presents robustness to our main regression results when we only include conforming loans
in our sample. Other types of loans can sometimes have different refinancing processes and institutional
constraints (e.g. streamlined FHA refi) that could lead to different interactions with rate incentives.
Reassuringly the results in Table A-6 are very similar to the results from using our baseline sample as
shown in Table 2.
                            Table A-6: Robustness to Including only Conforming Loans

                    (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)
 Date Range      92-17m4       92-17m4     92-17m4       92-00       01-10     11-17m4      92-00       01-10      11-17m4
 frac > 0         2.23***      2.90***                 2.48***       2.86***   2.51***     2.55***     5.06***     2.53***
                   (0.37)       (0.50)                  (0.39)        (0.88)    (0.39)      (0.37)      (0.92)      (0.43)
 LTV                           -5.85***     -1.09                                           -1.58     -12.7***      -0.064
                                (1.83)      (1.62)                                          (1.70)     (2.89)       (0.90)
 Constant          0.074       3.31***      2.16**      -0.086       0.024     -0.65**       0.90      6.18***       -0.62
                   (0.16)       (0.93)      (1.07)      (0.19)       (0.35)     (0.29)      (1.14)      (1.28)      (0.52)
 Adj. R2            0.33        0.45        0.0022       0.61         0.33       0.68        0.62       0.67         0.67
 N                  303         303          303         108          120         75         108        120           75
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. This table redoes the baseline analysis in Table
2, but restricting to only conforming loans.


    Conversely, Table A-7 presents robustness to our main regression results when we exclude conform-
ing loans from our sample. Housing agencies play a role in credit supply and thus potentially affect
transmission of monetary policy into conforming loan mortgage rates, which is outside of the scope
of our model. Around 70% of loans over our whole sample period are conforming, so this is a major
sample restriction. However, results in Table A-7 are again quite similar to the results from using our
baseline sample as shown in Table 2.

                              Table A-7: Robustness to Excluding Conforming Loans

                      (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
 Date Range        92-17m4      92-17m4     92-17m4       92-00       01-10    11-17m4       92-00      01-10      11-17m4
 frac > 0          2.02***      2.63***                  1.77***     2.69***    1.40***    1.85***     4.55***     1.98***
                    (0.43)       (0.45)                   (0.33)      (0.92)     (0.39)     (0.30)      (0.82)      (0.38)
 LTV                            -6.65***    -4.24***                                        -2.23**    -11.3***    -2.15***
                                 (1.30)      (1.36)                                          (1.08)     (1.91)      (0.71)
 Constant            -0.12      3.60***      4.01***     -0.024       -0.29     -0.039      1.38*      4.95***      0.88*
                    (0.26)       (0.62)       (0.91)     (0.19)       (0.56)    (0.30)      (0.76)      (0.74)      (0.44)
 Adj. R2            0.25          0.49        0.11        0.49         0.24      0.41        0.50        0.66        0.54
 N                  304           304         304         108          120        76         108         120          76
 Date Range       92-17m4       92-17m4     92-17m4       92-00       01-10    11-17m4       92-00      01-10      11-17m4
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. This table redoes the baseline analysis in Table
2, but restricting to only non-conforming loans.

    Table A-8 presents robustness to our main regression results when we only include loans which were
never delinquent. The main empirical concern here is that if a loan was ever delinquent it may be more
difficult to refinance. Thus, if we see a household with a large gap not refinancing, it might be because
this household was previously delinquent, not because they are inattentive. Results in Table A-8 are
very similar to the results from our baseline sample shown in Table 2.

                                                                15
                    Table A-8: Robustness to Excluding Loans Which are Ever Delinquent

                     (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
 Date Range       92-17m4      92-17m4      92-17m4       92-00       01-10     11-17m4       92-00       01-10       11-17m4
 frac > 0         2.44***      3.22***                   2.41***      3.18***    2.69***     2.50***     5.19***      2.64***
                   (0.40)       (0.54)                    (0.39)       (0.90)     (0.38)      (0.37)      (0.95)       (0.42)
 LTV                           -6.98***      -1.88                                            -2.23      -12.6***       0.25
                                (1.95)       (1.76)                                           (1.51)      (2.93)       (1.06)
 Constant          0.092       3.96***       2.82**      -0.037       0.084      -0.61**       1.37      6.31***        -0.73
                   (0.19)       (0.97)       (1.17)      (0.20)       (0.37)      (0.27)      (1.02)      (1.29)       (0.59)
 Adj. R2            0.33         0.48        0.011        0.58         0.36       0.71         0.59        0.66         0.71
 N                  303          303          303         108          120         75          108         120           75
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. This table redoes the baseline analysis in Table
2, but restricting to only loans which are never delinquent.


    Table A-9 presents robustness to our main regression results when we only include loans with a fixed
interest rate. The main empirical concern here is that if the loan is an adjusted rate mortgage (ARM)
then there is no incentive to refinance as the interest rate adjusts automatically (at least once it is past
the initial period of fixed rates typical under the hybrid ARMs common in the US). The results in Table
A-9 are very similar to the results using our baseline sample. This is because the ARM share, while
time-varying, is typically low in our sample reflecting the fact that the 30-yr fixed rate mortgage is the
dominant mortgage contract in the U.S. over this sample period and also because even when focusing
on ARMs, many are still in the initial fixed rate period when gaps and refi incentives can emerge.

               Table A-9: Robustness to Including all Loans Instead of Only Fixed Rate Loans

                     (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
 Date Range       92-17m4      92-17m4      92-17m4       92-00       01-10     11-17m4       92-00       01-10       11-17m4
 frac > 0         1.91***      2.79***                   2.01***      2.40***    1.90***     2.09***     5.09***      2.24***
                   (0.40)       (0.50)                    (0.30)       (0.91)     (0.39)      (0.27)      (0.88)       (0.40)
 LTV                           -6.89***      -3.04**                                         -2.32**     -13.6***      -1.24
                                (1.58)        (1.38)                                          (1.08)      (2.39)       (0.77)
 Constant           0.22       3.97***      3.34***      0.069         0.27        -0.20      1.53**     6.60***        0.35
                   (0.20)       (0.76)       (0.93)      (0.16)       (0.41)      (0.27)      (0.75)      (0.97)       (0.46)
 Adj. R2            0.23         0.47        0.052        0.57         0.22       0.56         0.58        0.69         0.60
 N                  304          304          304         108          120         76          108         120           76
Newey-West standard errors in parantheses. *=10%, **=5%, ***=1% significance. This table redoes the baseline analysis in Table
2, but extending the analysis to all loans including those with adjustable rates instead of only looking at fixed rate mortgages.




                                                                 16
A.3      Model Appendix
A.3.1    Model Calibration

                                     Table A-10: Model Parameter Values
                                      Panel A: Exogenous Processes
                  Parameter                   Value                                 Description
                   ln 2/ηr                   5.3 years                    half life of interest-rate shock
                       r̄                   3.5% (p.a.)                 (unconditional) interest rate mean
                      σr                     6% (p.a.)                         interest rate volatility
                   ln 2/ηy                   7.3 years                    half-life of (log) income shock
                    E [Yt ]                   $58,000                     (unconditional) income mean
                      σy                    21% (p.a.)                          log-income volatility
                      γ                          2                                   inverse IES
                       F                     $150,000                      mortgage debt outstanding


                                      Panel B: Refinancing Frictions
 Parameter   Inattention Baseline   Fixed-Cost         Hybrid                       Description
    ν            4.1% (p.a.)         4.1% (p.a.)     4.1% (p.a.)            arrival rate of moving shocks
    χc           22.8% (p.a.)             0          12.5% (p.a.)     arrival rate of zero cost refi opportunity
    χf                0             2400% (p.a.)     14.5% (p.a.)   arrival rate of positive cost refi opportunity
    κ                 0                 $2500           $8250              fixed cost of refinancing for χ f




A.3.2    Mortgage Rates
In this section, we explain how to map short term rates into mortgage rates when risk-neutral financial
intermediaries lend to inattentive households. In the particular case of our pure Calvo model, the value
of a mortgage, from the financial intermediary standpoint, is only a function of (a) the current level of
short rates r, and (b) the mortgage coupon m∗ = m(r ∗ ), since we know the household will refinance
whenever he has the opportunity to do so and whenever the short term rate r is below the short term
rate r ∗ that was prevalent at the time of the previous refinancing. Thus, the price of a mortgage (with
face value of $1) can be encoded via the function P (r, r ∗ ):
                                            Z τ R                                       
                                                    t                    Rτ
                            P (r, r ∗ ) = E     e− 0 rs ds m(r ∗ )dt + e− 0 rs ds r0 = r
                                                 0

In the above, τ is the prepayment time, a stopping time that is the minimum of (a) an exponentially-
distributed time τν representing a move, and (b) the first exponentially distributed attention time τχ for
which the mortgage rate m(rτχ ) is below m∗ . If we note Lr the infinitesimal operator associated with the
stochastic process rt , P satisfies

                                r + ν + χI{r<r∗ } P = m(r ∗ ) + ν + χI{r<r∗ } + Lr P
                                                 


Assuming the mortgage function m(r ∗ ) is known, this is a standard ordinary differential equation, which
can be solved numerically with standard methods. In a risk-neutral environment, it must be the case
that the price of the mortgage, at time of origination, is equal to its notional value. In other words, we
must have the mortgage market equilibrium condition P(r, r ) = 1. This latter equation allows us to pin
down the implicit function m(·).




                                                             17
A.3.3       Solution to Household Problem
Let S := (W, m∗ , Y ) be the household idiosyncratic state and V (r, S) be the value function when the short
rate is r for a household with income Y, liquid wealth W and a fixed mortgage rate m∗ . Let Ly be the
infinitesimal operator associated with the stochastic process Yt . The household Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
(HJB) equation can be written:
                                             
  δV = sup u(C ) + Lr V + Ly V + ν + χIm(r)<m∗ [V (r, S−m∗ , m(r )) − V (r, S−m∗ , m∗ )]
              C
                                                                                               + (rW + Y − C − m∗ F ) ∂W V (A1)

The optimal consumption function C (r, S) solves the first order condition u0 (C (r, S)) = ∂W V (r, S),
which can be written:

                                                         C (r, S) = (∂W V (r, S))−1/γ                                                (A2)

We can then reinject the optimal consumption policy into the HJB equation satisfied by V to obtain a non-
linear partial differential equation satisfied by V. The non-linearity stems from the fact that consumption
is controlled – its value depends on the first partial derivative of V w.r.t. W. The endogenous savings
rate can then be written

                                                  µW (r, S) := rW + Y − C (r, S) − m∗ F

Section A.3.6 discusses our numerical method to solve this non-linear PDE.

A.3.4       Fokker Planck Equation
The joint density gt over (1) the aggregate short rate state r, and (2) the idiosyncratic state vector S,
consisting of (a) savings W, (b) coupons m∗ and (c) income Y, satisfies the following Fokker Planck
equation (for m∗ 6= m(r )):
                                                                                         
                   ∂t gt = −∂W [µW (rt , S) gt (S)] + L∗y gt + Lr∗ gt − ν + χ1{m(rt )<m∗ } gt       (A3)

L∗y (resp. Lr∗ ) is the adjoint operator of Ly (resp. Lr ), associated with the stochastic process for Yt
(resp. rt ). This equation describes the inflows and outflows of "particles" in and out of the state (r, S);
it accounts for changes in short rate rt , in income Yt , in savings Wt , as well as refinancings that reset
the mortgage coupon of a household. A slightly different equation holds for m(r ) = m∗ , since in this
case we must take into account the inflow of households who are refinancing, re-striking their long-term
fixed rate mortgage at the rate m(r ):

                                                     σr2 r
                                                                                                                  2             
                                                                                                                       σr r
       lim               ηr (r − r̄ ) gt (r, S) + ∂r       gt (r, S) − lim                ηr (r − r̄ ) gt (r, S) + ∂r       gt (r, S)
  r & m −1 ( m ∗ )                                    2                r % m −1 ( m ∗ )                                 2
                                                 Z +∞                                         Z +∞                              
                                              +ν       gt m−1 (m∗ ) , W, x, Y dx + χ                    gt m−1 (m∗ ) , W, x, Y dx = 0
                                                 0                                           m∗

These equations will be leveraged in our numerical scheme when computing impulse response functions.

A.3.5       Impulse Response Functions
Our impulse response function ("IRF") calculations focus on the following outcome variables: average
prepayment rates, average mortgage coupons, and aggregate (per household-annum) consumption. The
initial state of the economy is given by a distribution over (a) short rates and (b) liquid savings, coupons


                                                                        18
and income, g0 (r, W, m∗ , Y ) that is degenerate, since the short rate is assumed to be known at time zero.
In other words, given our knowledge of r0 , the initial distribution g0 satisfies g0 (r, W, m∗ , Y ) = 0 for any
r 6= r0 , and there exists a density ĝ0 over (W, m∗ , Y ) that satisfies g0 (r, W, m∗ , Y ) = Ir=r0 ĝ0 (W, m∗ , Y ). To
compute the consumption IRF (for example), we first have to define expected aggregate consumption at
time t, C̄ (t; ĝ0 , r0 ), as a function of the initial state of the economy:
                           ZZZ
    C̄ (t; ĝ0 , r0 ) :=         E [C (rt , Wt , m∗t , Yt ) |r0 = r, W0 = W, m0∗ = m∗ , Y0 = Y ] ĝ0 (W, m∗ , Y ) dWdm∗ dY

In the above, C (rt , Wt , m∗t , Yt ) is the consumption function for an optimizing household with liquid
savings Wt , mortgage coupon m∗t , income level Yt , when the current short term rate is rt (and the
corresponding market mortgage rate is m(rt )). The consumption IRF to a 100 bps decline in rates is then
simply defined as:

                                                                        C̄ (t; ĝ0 , r0 − 1%)
                                             IRFC1% (t; ĝ0 , r0 ) :=                         −1
                                                                            C̄ (t; ĝ0 , r0 )

We express consumption IRFs as semi-elasticities, and compute average mortgage coupon and average
prepayment IRFs in absolute terms:

                                     IRFm1%∗ (t; ĝ0 , r0 ) := m̄∗ (t; ĝ0 , r0 − 1%) − m̄∗ (t; ĝ0 , r0 ).

A.3.6     Numerical Implementation
We compute the equilibrium of the model numerically by determining the value function V at N :=
nw × nr × nr × ny discrete points of the state space. We use a standard finite difference scheme with
upwinding for solving our PDE – in other words, we use a forward difference for approximating the
first partial derivative of V in a given direction whenever the drift in this direction is positive, and a
backward difference otherwise. The upwinding strategy ensures that our finite difference scheme is
monotone. Since the HJB includes an optimal control, we solve the value function iteratively using a
false transient (aka an artifical time-derivative), and at each iteration update the consumption policy
using the value function and its derivatives according to equation (A2). Defining V      ~ (i) as the vector of
values of the value function V at each point of our discretization grid at iteration i, our numerical scheme
leads us to solve successive linear equation systems of the form
                                h                       i
                                  (1 + δ∆t ) I − ∆t M(i) V            ~ (i) + ∆t ~Φ(i) ,
                                                          ~ ( i +1) = V

where ∆t > 0 is the time-step of our false transient algorithm, I is the identity matrix (dimension N),
M(i) is an N × N square matrix, ~Φ(i) is an N dimensional vector with elements {u (Ck )}k≤ N , and V     ~ ( i +1)
                                                    ( i )
is the unknown value vector. The N × N matrix M is the discrete state counterpart to the infinitesimal
operator for the dynamic system (r, S). It has the interpretation of an "intensity" matrix: its diagonal
elements are all negative, its off-diagonal elements are all positive, and its row-sums are all equal to
zero.
    Our algorithm iterates until the point where the artificial time derivative of our false transient is close
to zero. Note that the matrix M(i) then converges to a matrix M at that point. The ergodic distribution of
our economic model is then computed by focusing on the implied transition intensity matrix M, and by
finding the column vector π that solves π 0 M = 0 — in other words, the left-eigenvector of M, associated
with the eigen-value 0, that verifies ∑kN=1 πk = 1.
    Finally, in order to compute impulse response functions, we use the discrete state counterpart of
equation (A3) in order to compute the density of our economic system at time t, given initial conditions.
Starting from a discretized density of our economic system ~g0 at time zero, we compute ~gt be iteratively



                                                                        19
solving the linear system

                                                                      ~gt+1 − ~gt
                                                                                  = M T~gt+1 ,
                                                                          ∆t

where M T represents the transpose of M. This allows us to compute statistics of the economic system
at time t without relying on Monte-Carlo simulations, but instead by leveraging our value function
solution’s method.

A.3.7       Caballero-Engel in Continuous Time
Let mit∗ be the mortgage coupon of household i at time t, and let mt be the market mortgage rate. Let
f t (m∗ ) be the density of mortgage coupons in the economy (and Ft (m∗ ) its CDF). Let us assume that
prepayments are purely driven by a hazard function h(m∗ − mt ). In our model, this function is equal to
h(m∗ − m) = ν + χI{m∗ −m>0} . The time-t average (instantaneous) refinancing intensity is equal to
                                                      Z
                                       Ei [ρit ] :=        h(m∗ − mt ) f t (m∗ )dm∗ = ν + χ (1 − Ft (mt ))

1 − Ft (mt ) is exactly ( f rac > 0)t , meaning that our benchmark model-implied prepayment rates are
purely driven by this moment of the cross-sectional distribution of mortgage coupons. The average
coupon rate m̄∗t can be computed as follows:
                                                                                       Z
                                                          m̄∗t   :=   Ei [mit∗ ]   =       m∗ f t (m∗ )dm∗

We also know that the density f t evolves as follows, between t and t + dt, for any m∗ 6= mt :

                                                 f t+dt (m∗ ) ≈ (1 − h (m∗ − mt ) dt) f t (m∗ )

Thus, we have:
                                   Z                                                                   Z
                       m̄∗t+dt =       m∗ [1 − h (m∗ − mt ) dt] f t (m∗ )dm∗ + mt                          h (m∗ − mt ) f t (m∗ )dm∗ dt

The first term stems from mortgages that have not been refinanced between t and t + dt, whereas the
second term stems from the new mortgages being refinanced, and which are contractually setting their
coupon at mt . In other words, we have:
                                                                        Z
                                   dm̄∗t := m̄∗t+dt − m̄∗t =                (mt − m∗ ) h (m∗ − mt ) f t (m∗ )dm∗ dt

Using our specialized hazard function, we obtain:

                                   dm̄∗t
                                         = ν (mt − m̄∗t ) + χ (mt − Ei [mit∗ |mit∗ > mt ]) (1 − Ft (mt ))                                    (A4)
                                    dt
                                                                                           dm̄∗t
Let us consider a small change in rt and its impact on                                      dt .   This is essentially the (time-slope) of the IRF
w.r.t. to a small change in the interest rate:

            dm̄∗
                                                                                          
   ∂                        0                                     ∂       ∗     ∗
                       = m (rt ) [ν + χ [1 − Ft (m (rt ))]] − χ      Ei [mit |mit > m (rt )] [1 − F (m (rt ) , t)]
  ∂rt        dt                                                  ∂rt
                                                                + χ (Ei [mit∗ |mit∗ > m (rt )] + m (rt )) f t (m (rt )) m0 (rt )




                                                                                   20
Note that                                                                         R∞
                                                                                  m (r t )
                                                                                             m∗ f t (m∗ ) dm∗
                                     Ei [mit∗ |mit∗       > m (rt )] =
                                                                                     1 − Ft (m (rt ))
so that
                                                                                       R∞
        ∂Ei [mit∗ |mit∗ > m (rt )] −m (rt ) f t (m (rt )) m0 (rt )                       m (r t )
                                                                                                    m∗ f t (m∗ ) dm∗
                                  =                                −                                                   (−) f t (m (rt )) m0 (rt )
                   ∂rt                 1 − Ft (m (rt ))                [1 − Ft (m (rt ))]2
                                                                         f t (m (rt )) m0 (rt )
                                 = (Ei [mit∗ |mit∗ > m (rt )] − m (rt ))
                                                                            1 − Ft (m (rt ))

Plugging in, we are left with

                                              dm̄∗
                                                    
                                    ∂
                                                             = m0 (rt ) [ν + χ [1 − F (m (rt ) , t)]]                                               (A5)
                                   ∂rt         dt

A.3.8     Analytic Characterization of Consumption Semi-Elasticity
We focus on a representative household with preferences
                                                                    Z +∞               1− γ
                                                                                    ct
                                                         U :=                e−δt       dt
                                                                      0             1−γ

We are in a complete markets partial equilibrium environment, in which a household is endowed with
constant income ȳ, and at time zero, savings w. The household budget constraint is
                                      Z +∞              Rt                   Z +∞            Rt
                                                    −
                                                e        0 rs ds   ct dt =             e−     0 rs ds   ȳdt + w
                                         0                                    0

We are interested in computing the household’s consumption response to a shock to interest rates, in the
neighborhood of a steady-state. In this steady-state, we assume that short rates are constant and equal
to δ. The household’ savings are invested in a bank account that earns the risk-free rate rt .

A.3.8.1    No Pre-payable Mortgage Debt
We first analyze the consumption semi-elasticity to rates in the absence of mortgage debt. We focus on
a small mean-reverting shock to the nominal rate, such that

                                             r t = δ + et                           det = −ηr et dt

We interpret this as a shock to real rates, under the assumption that prices in this economy are perfectly
sticky. Asymptotically, the short rate converges back to the steady state δ. The persistence of the
monetary shock is parametrized via ηr . Define the value function V (w, e; ȳ) as:
                                                                             Z +∞                   1− γ
                                                                            ct
                                             V (w, e; ȳ) : = max                  dt   e−δt
                                                             c   0         1−γ
                                                s.t. dwt = [(δ + et )wt + ȳ − ct ] dt
                                                             det = −ηr et dt
                                                (w0 , e0 ) = (w, e)




                                                                          21
The value function V satisfies the following HJB equation

                                             c 1− γ
                             δV = max               + [(δ + e)w + ȳ − c] Vw − ηr eVe                   (A6)
                                        c    1−γ

Optimal consumption satisfies c−γ = Vw . We posit the following Taylor expansion for V and optimal
consumption c

                                  V (w, e; ȳ) = V0 (w; ȳ) + eV1 (w; ȳ) + o (e)
                                   c(w, e; ȳ) = c0 (w; ȳ) + ec1 (w; ȳ) + o (e)

The asymptotic expansion of the household’s consumption optimality equation leads to
                                                         −γ
                                                        c0= V00
                                                       c    V0
                                                     −γ 1 = 10
                                                       c0   V0

The terms of order zero in our asymptotic expansion must satisfy

                                              c0 (w; ȳ) = δw + ȳ
                                                             1 (δw + ȳ)1−γ
                                              V0 (w; ȳ) =
                                                             δ    1−γ

In other words, consumption must be equal to permanent income, and the value function is simply
equal to the net present value of the constant flow utilities over consumption. The HJB equation (A6)
allows us to derive a differential equation for the first order term V1
                                    −γ
                           δV1 = c0 c1 + (w − c1 )V00 + [δw + ȳ − c0 ] V10 − ηr V1
                                   −γ
We use the optimality condition c0          = V00 and c0 = δw + ȳ to simplify and obtain

                                               wV00 (w; ȳ)   w (δw + ȳ)−γ
                                  V1 (w; ȳ) =              =
                                                  ηr + δ          ηr + δ
                                                −1
                                                                     
                                  c1 (w; ȳ)             1     δw
                                             =             −
                                  c0 (w; ȳ)   ηr + δ γ c0 (w; ȳ)

The fraction c1 /c0 is the semi-elasticity of consumption to a small shock to interest rates. Our result is
consistent with Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018): the direct, partial equilibrium, effect of a small interest
rate shock onto consumption is higher if (a) the rate of time preference is small, (b) the persistence of
the monetary policy shock is high, and (c) the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution is high. The
consumption response is slightly muted by the presence of positive savings (for reasonable values of the
asset-to-income ratio).

A.3.8.2   Pre-payable Mortgage Debt
Now imagine that parts of the household’s financial position is a fixed-rate mortgage liability, with a
coupon that can be refinanced at Poisson arrival times (intensity χc ). We denote mt the mortgage market
rate at time t, and rt the short term rate at time t. We assume that

                         r t = δ + et              mt = δ + πet               det = −ηr et dt




                                                             22
The parameter π > 0 is the pass-through, from the short rate to the mortgage rate. We are assuming that
the time-zero mortgage coupon of the household is δ, equal to the long run short (and mortgage) rate.
We continue to consider small shocks to the interest rate. If the initial interest rate shock is positive, the
mortgage market interest rate jumps up on impact, the household will never use his option to refinance
(when given the chance to do so), and thus the consumption response of households to a positive
interest rate shock is identical to the response computed in Section A.3.8.1, where the permanent income
ȳ + δ(w − F ) is adjusted to reflect the presence of mortgage debt.
    If the initial interest rate shock is negative, the household will want to refinance whenever he has
the opportunity to do so, and will do so only once, since mortgage rates are monotone increasing,
converging back to their steady state δ. Let J be the household value function before refinancing, which
satisfies
                           c 1− γ
(δ + χc ) J (w, e) = max          + [(δ + e)w + ȳ − δF − c] Jw (w, e) − ηr eJe (w, e) + χc V (w, e; ȳ − (δ + πe) F )
                       c   1−γ

The last term of this HJB equation relates to refinancing, following which the household value function is
equal to the function V computed in Section A.3.8.1. Optimal consumption satisfies once again c−γ = Jw .
The zero order term of our asymptotic expansion satisfies

                                   ( J00 )1−1/γ h                     −1/γ i 0
                  (δ + χc ) J0 =               + δ(w − F ) + ȳ − J00        J0 + χc V0 (w; ȳ − δF )
                                      1−γ

The solution to this equation is J0 = V0 (w; ȳ − δF ), and c0 (w) = δ(w − F ) + ȳ. The first order correction
term J1 satisfies
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                   ∂V0
 (δ + χc + ηr ) J1 = c0−γ c1 + (w − c1 ) J00 + [δw + ȳ − κF − c0 ] J10 + χc V1 (w; ȳ − δF ) − πF      (w; ȳ − δF )
                                                                                                    ∂ȳ

This can be simplified further since c0 = δ(w − F ) + ȳ, and we obtain
                                                                                    
                                            0                       −γ     w      πF
                      (δ + χc + ηr ) J1 = wJ0 + χc (δ(w − F ) + ȳ)             −
                                                                         ηr + δ    δ

Since J0 is known, the above equation allows us to pin J1 . We then compute the first order correction
term for consumption c1 via

                                                          c1  V0
                                                     −γ      = 10
                                                          c0  V0

Plugging in and summarizing our result, denoting I{e0 <0} the indicator for whether the initial rate shock
is negative or not, we have

                                 1 (ȳ + δ(w − F ))1−γ
                            J0 =
                                 δ         1−γ
                            c0 = ȳ + δ(w − F )
                                 (ȳ + δ(w − F ))−γ
                                                                                     
                                                                  w        πFI{e0 <0}
                            J1 =                       w + χc           −
                                     ηr + δ + χ c               ηr + δ         δ
                                    −1
                                                                                  
                            c1             1    δw         ηr + δ      χc πFI{e0 <0}
                               =             −     +
                            c0   ηr + δ γ       c0      ηr + δ + χ c        c0

Those expressions allow us to explicitly see the impact of the mortgage refinancing option on the elas-
ticity of consumption to a small shock to interest rates.


                                                           23
   We can also characterize analytically the full impulse response of expected prepayment rates E0 [ρt ]
and expected coupon rates E0 [m∗t ] − δ to the time-zero shock to short rates. Expected prepayment rates
upon a shock are simply equal to

                                                 E0 [ ρ t ] = I { e 0 < 0 } χ c e − χ c t

I{e0 <0} is the indicator function for whether the time-zero rate shock is positive or negative. Let us then
compute the expected change in mortgage coupon, following the rate shock. Remember that m∗t is the
mortgage coupon of the household at time t. Notice that the current mortgage rate mt satisfies

                                                     mt = δ + πe0 e−ηr t

At time zero, the initial coupon is m0∗ = δ. Our simple model then allows us to compute the expected
coupon change of the household:
                                         Z t
                                                                                  χc πe0                   
                       E0 [m∗t ] − δ =         χc e−χc s πe0 e−ηr s ds =                   1 − e−(ηr +χc )t
                                          0                                       χ c + ηr

Finally, in the case where the rate shock is negative (e0 < 0), we can compute the change in consumption
rate occurring at the time of an actual refinancing (which can in turn be mapped to our empirical and
quantitative event studies of individual refinancing). Just before the refinancing event (assumed to occur
at time τ), the consumption rate is equal to (at the first order, i.e. excluding terms that are of order o (e)):

                                                   ȳ + δ (w − F )
                                                                                              
                                             e                                 ηr + δ
                 cτ − = ȳ + δ (w − F ) −                          − δw +                  χc πF
                                          ηr + δ          γ                 ηr + δ + χ c

Just after the refinancing event, the consumption rate is equal to (at the first order, i.e. excluding terms
that are of order o (e)):

                                                                ȳ + δ (w − F )
                                                                                    
                                                          e
                          cτ = ȳ + δ (w − F ) − eπF −                          − δw
                                                       ηr + δ          γ

In other words,
                                                                                           
                                                                               ηr + δ
                                         cτ − cτ − = −eπF
                                                                            ηr + δ + χ c

Since e < 0, consumption jumps upwards following the actual refinancing event.


A.4     Additional Figures and Tables
Figure A-10 shows that the time-series predictions of the pure Calvo model are nearly identical to the
hybrid model fit to more closely match the micro prepayment hazard. This is because the prepayment
hazard for the Calvo model mostly misses the data for small gaps, and refinancing from a small gap to
zero has little effect on a household’s mortgage coupon.
    Figure A-11 shows the dynamics of the full IRFs for the regime-shift experiments in Section 7.5. We
consider both a 100bps and “max” rate decline. We illustrated the IRF to both the 100bps and “max”
shock for the baseline economy in Figure 11. Analogously, Figure A-11 shows the impulse response to
both the 100bps and the “max” shock in the regime shift economies, noting that the regime shift occurs in
period 0. The horizontal dashed red lines in Figure A-11 (which are identical to those in Figure 11) show
the peak coupon response to the 100bps and the “max” shock in the “baseline” economy respectively,
in order to help comparing coupon responses in the regime shift economies to the “baseline” economy
without regime shift. The date at which the impulse starts indicates how far after the regime shift the


                                                                   24
                Figure A-10: Hybrid Menu Cost+Inattention Model vs. Inattention Model: Time-Series Fit

                 (a): Distribution of Gaps                                                                   (b): Frequency

                                  97m1                                                  0.022

                                                               Inattention                                        Monthly Prepayment Frequency: Inattention
0.5
                                                               Hybrid                                             Monthly Prepayment Frequency: Hybrid
                                                                                         0.02
 0
 -2.5   -2    -1.5   -1    -0.5    0      0.5     1      1.5        2        2.5
                                  02m1                                                  0.018

0.5
                                                                                        0.016
 0
 -2.5   -2    -1.5   -1    -0.5    0      0.5     1      1.5        2        2.5
                                  07m1
                                                                                        0.014
0.5

 0
                                                                                        0.012
 -2.5   -2    -1.5   -1    -0.5    0      0.5     1      1.5        2        2.5
                                  12m1
                                                                                         0.01
0.5

 0                                                                                      0.008
 -2.5   -2    -1.5   -1    -0.5    0      0.5     1      1.5        2        2.5
                                  17m1
                                                                                        0.006
0.5

 0                                                                                      0.004
 -2.5   -2    -1.5   -1    -0.5    0      0.5     1      1.5        2        2.5            1992   1997        2002             2007           2012           2017




                     (c): Average Rates                                                                   (d): Std Dev of Rates

10                                                                                       1.2
                                  Average Outstanding Rate: Inattention                                               Std Dev of Outstanding Rates: Inattention
                                  Average Outstanding Rate: Hybrid                      1.15                          Std Dev of Outstanding Rates: Hybrid

 9
                                                                                         1.1


                                                                                        1.05
 8

                                                                                           1


 7                                                                                      0.95


                                                                                         0.9

 6
                                                                                        0.85


                                                                                         0.8
 5

                                                                                        0.75


4                                                                                        0.7
1992         1997         2002           2007          2012             2017              1992     1997        2002            2007           2012            2017




                                                                                   25
monetary shock occurs. For example, the blue line in panel (a) shows the effect of cutting short rates by
100bps one year after the interest rate regime shifts up, while the blue line in panel (b) shows the effect
of cutting short rates by 100bps one year after the interest rate regime shifts down.

                                             Figure A-11: Regime Shift: Average Coupon m∗ to 100bps & Max decline in r
                                              (a): Rate-Shift-Up: 100bps                                                       (b): Rate-Shift-Down: 100bps
                                 0 bp                                                                              0 bp

                                 -2 bp                                                                             -2 bp
   Average Outstanding Coupon




                                                                                     Average Outstanding Coupon
                                 -4 bp                                                                             -4 bp

                                 -6 bp                                                                             -6 bp

                                 -8 bp                                                                             -8 bp

                                -10 bp                                                                            -10 bp

                                -12 bp                                                                            -12 bp

                                -14 bp                                                                            -14 bp

                                -16 bp                                                                            -16 bp
                                         0       5       10          15    20   25                                         0       5       10          15   20   25
                                                              Year                                                                              Year

                                               (c): Rate-Shift-Up: Max                                                          (d): Rate-Shift-Down: Max
                                 0 bp                                                                              0 bp

                                -10 bp                                                                            -10 bp
   Average Outstanding Coupon




                                                                                     Average Outstanding Coupon




                                -20 bp                                                                            -20 bp

                                -30 bp                                                                            -30 bp

                                -40 bp                                                                            -40 bp

                                -50 bp                                                                            -50 bp

                                -60 bp                                                                            -60 bp

                                -70 bp                                                                            -70 bp

                                -80 bp                                                                            -80 bp
                                         0       5       10          15    20   25                                         0       5       10          15   20   25
                                                              Year                                                                              Year



    There are a number of takeaways from Figure A-11. First, looking at 100bps responses on impact in
black as compared to the baseline peak responses in red, we can see that 100bps short rate cuts initially
have smaller effects on coupons in the “Rate-Shift-Up” economy than in the “Rate-Shift-Down” economy.
This arises exactly from the effects emphasized in the previous experiments: when rates rise, ( f rac > 0)
decreases and this reduces the effects of a given change in short rates. Moreover, as time passes since the
regime shift, 100bps rate cuts become more powerful in the “Rate-Shift-Up” economy and less powerful
in the “Rate-Shift-Down” economy.
    Second, the maximum stimulus power (given by cutting short rates to zero) increases in the “Rate-
Shift-Up” economy and decreases in the “Rate-Shift-Down” economy. A higher average level of interest
rates naturally results in a larger max rate cut and resulting response. More interestingly, the difference
between maximum stimulus power in the “Rate-Shift-Down” and “Rate-Shift-Up” economy grows with
the time since the regime shift (e.g. the green lines in Panel (c) and (d) differ more than the black lines).




                                                                                 26
  Figure A-12: Robustness of Consumption IRFs to Including Cashout Refi
(a): baseline vs. secular decline           (b): past high vs. past low rates




         Figure A-13: Robustness of Consumption IRFs to Life-Cycle
(a): baseline vs. secular decline           (b): past high vs. past low rates




                                    27
     Figure A-14: Robustness of Consumption IRFs to Hybrid Frictions
(a): baseline vs. secular decline          (b): past high vs. past low rates




                                    28
Figure A-15: Robustness of Consumption IRFs to Interest Rate Persistence
  (a): Half-life 0.66 × h                        (b): Half-life 1.33 × h




  (c): Half-life 0.66 × h                        (d): Half-life 1.33 × h




                                  29
