                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF RELIGIOUS POLITICS:
                          EVIDENCE FROM INDONESIA

                                        Samuel Bazzi
                                   Gabriel Koehler-Derrick
                                      Benjamin Marx

                                     Working Paper 25151
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25151


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         October 2018, Revised September 2019




This paper benefited from helpful feedback and suggestions from Abhijit Banerjee, Eli Berman,
Lisa Blaydes, Filipe Campante, Jean-Paul Carvalho, Ernesto Dal Bo, Melissa Dell, Ray Fisman,
Roberto Galbiati, Timur Kuran, Dilip Mookherjee, Jean-Philippe Platteau, Tom Pepinsky, Jared
Rubin, Mohamed Saleh, Tavneet Suri, as well as numerous seminar and conference audiences.
Masyhur Hilmy, Gedeon Lim, and Hanna Schwank provided excellent research assistance. We
also thank Nicholas Kuipers and Tom Pepinsky for sharing data. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Samuel Bazzi, Gabriel Koehler-Derrick, and Benjamin Marx. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Institutional Foundations of Religious Politics: Evidence from Indonesia
Samuel Bazzi, Gabriel Koehler-Derrick, and Benjamin Marx
NBER Working Paper No. 25151
October 2018, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D72,D74,P16,P26,Z12

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper explores the foundations of religious influence in politics and society. We show that
an important Islamic institution fostered the entrenchment of Islamism at a critical juncture in
Indonesia, the world’s largest Muslim country. In the early 1960s, rural elites transferred large
amounts of land into waqf —inalienable charitable trusts in Islamic law—to avoid expropriation
by the state. Regions facing a greater threat of expropriation exhibit more prevalent waqf land
and Islamic institutions endowed as such, including mosques and religious schools. These
endowments provided conservative forces with the capital needed to promote Islamist ideology
and mobilize against the secular state. We identify lasting effects on the size of the religious
sector, electoral support for Islamist parties, and the adoption of local sharia laws. These effects
are shaped by greater demand for religion in government but not by greater piety among the
electorate. Waqf assets also impose costs on the local economy, particularly in agriculture where
these endowments are associated with lower productivity. Overall, our findings shed new light on
the origins and consequences of Islamism.

Samuel Bazzi                                     Benjamin Marx
Department of Economics                          Sciences Po
Boston University                                Department of Economics
270 Bay State Road                               28 Rue des Saints-Peres
Boston, MA 02215                                 75007 Paris
and CEPR                                         France
and also NBER                                    benjamin.marx@sciencespo.fr
sbazzi@bu.edu

Gabriel Koehler-Derrick
Department of Government
Harvard University
1737 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
USA
koehlerderrick@g.harvard.edu
1       Introduction
Religion, “the heart of a heartless world” (Marx, 1844), has been a driving force of historical change.
Major episodes such as the Iranian Revolution, the fall of Communism, and the rise of the religious vote
in the United States reveal a growing influence of religion on public life worldwide. The Muslim world
has witnessed a corresponding rise in support for Islamism, the movement to “return to the scriptural
foundations of the Muslim community. . . for application to the present-day social and political world”
(Euben and Zaman, 2009). Yet, one finds substantial variation in religious politics within Islam (Cammett
and Luong, 2014) as well as other faiths (Barro and McCleary, 2005). Across all religions, the causes of
this variation, and the role that culture and institutions play in explaining it, remain poorly understood.
       In contrast, there is a wealth of evidence on how religion shapes human behavior and development.
Researchers have explored links between religion and economic growth, looking at both Christian
(Becker and Woessmann, 2009; Cantoni et al., 2018) and Muslim societies (Kuran, 2011; Rubin, 2011).
Islamic practices such as pilgrimage (Clingingsmith et al., 2009) and fasting (Campante and Yanagizawa-
Drott, 2015) are known to affect socioeconomic well-being.1 Others have studied how religion mediates
institutional change (Belloc et al., 2016; Chaney, 2013; Platteau, 2017).
       Much less is known about why different societies endorse the mixing of religion and politics. To
explain the resurgence of religion in the public sphere, other scholars have focused on the failure of the
secular state to uphold traditional values in the global era (Almond et al., 2003; Habermas, 2008). This
paper instead emphasizes the fundamental role of institutions. In contrast to previous work showing
how culture shapes institutional change (e.g., Greif, 1994), we find that institutional shocks in the re-
ligious sphere lead to downstream cultural and political change. In particular, legal institutions that
provide permanent and inalienable protection to religious schools and houses of worship can empower
religious actors and transform these organizations into effective venues for political activism. Our main
interest lies in Islamic charitable trusts, which are pervasive in the Muslim world. We show these can be
used to mobilize political support and wage ideological warfare against secular forces.
       We use a natural historical experiment in the world’s largest Muslim country, Indonesia, to identify
the effect of Islamic institutions on religious preferences, politics, and social organization. Our analy-
sis centers on the aborted land reform of the 1960s known as the Basic Agrarian Law (BAL). Following
other work on critical junctures (Banerjee and Iyer, 2005; Dell, 2012), we identify the consequences of this
episode for the revival of the Islamist movement in Indonesia. As part of the BAL, the Sukarno regime at-
tempted to expropriate and redistribute large holdings. While the redistribution effort ultimately failed,
a policy loophole led to a resource windfall—inalienable land endowments—for Islamic organizations
in regions facing the greatest expropriation threat. These endowments contributed to entrench Islamism
by providing conservative forces with the capital needed to proselytize Islamist ideas and actions.
       Importantly, the BAL exempted religious lands held in Islamic charitable trust, known as waqf, from
redistribution. Knowing this, many landowners transferred expropriable land to waqf endowments un-
der the authority of local religious leaders. We show that areas intensely targeted by the land reform
1
    Others argue that economic risk increases religiosity (e.g., Bentzen, 2019; Chen, 2010). See Kuran (2018) for a comprehensive
    survey of the literature on Islam and economic performance.


                                                                 1
exhibit more pervasive waqf land and institutions endowed as such today, including mosques and Is-
lamic schools. In affected districts, these endowments first arise in the 1960s and then exhibit sustained
growth thereafter, as the initial resource shock laid the foundations for future expansion. This stands
in contrast to the lack of any systematic effects of the reform on land inequality over the ensuing years,
which is consistent with most expropriated lands being reclaimed in the late 1960s as the land reform
fell short of its objectives and was largely undone (Department of Agriculture, 1965; Utrecht, 1969).
       Several decades later, regions facing greater expropriation intensity in the 1960s exhibit stronger
support for Islamist political parties and a deeper influence of Islamic precepts on local governance,
ranging from the adoption of sharia regulations to the use of Islamic courts and vigilante activity by Is-
lamist organizations.2 At the same time, we show that the advancement of Islamism is not fueled by
greater religiosity per se. This is an important finding. Like most secular (authoritarian) governments
in Muslim countries past and present, the Suharto regime that ruled Indonesia from 1967–1998 actively
promoted Islamic culture and piety while aggressively suppressing its political organization. The demo-
cratic transition brought an opportunity to capitalize on the Islamist fervor that had been nurtured in
the conservative schools and mosques borne out of the waqf transfers during the 1960s.
       We explore these lasting effects of the land reform by assembling one of the most comprehensive
datasets ever used to measure the spread of Islamism today. Our data include, among others, (i) admin-
istrative records from 243,000 mosques, 26,000 Islamic schools, 1.2 million Islamic court cases, and 400
sharia regulations; (ii) multiple surveys on religious practice, beliefs, and political preferences; (iii) tex-
tual data from 241,000 legislative campaigns; (iv) district-level electoral returns; (v) village-level census
data on land use and Islamic microfinance; and (vi) media-based reports on religious vigilantism.
       We identify causal effects of the land reform using a difference-in-discontinuity design. This strategy
exploits two sources of identifying variation. The discontinuity uses policy variation at a population
density threshold determining the scope of expropriation under the BAL. In districts with more than
400 people/km2 , the maximum size of holdings was set at 5 hectares (ha) as opposed to 9 ha in dis-
tricts below 400 people/km2 . The difference exploits variation in the number of marginal expropriable
landholdings (MEH) between 5–9 ha. The interaction of the difference and the discontinuity isolates the
effects of expropriation intensity under the law. Importantly, the number of MEH is continuous across the
400 threshold. Our main specification thus identifies effects of the reform by measuring the difference in
outcomes between districts with many and few 5–9 ha holdings, and by estimating whether this differ-
ence changes discontinuously at the 400 threshold above which these holdings become expropriable.
       We validate this design by showing that expropriation intensity is unrelated to potential confounders
of Islamism before the land reform, including electoral support for Islamist parties and the prevalence of
violent Islamist insurgencies in the 1950s. We also show the absence of pre-trends in waqf endowments in
the years leading up to the land reform. Moreover, as detailed in Section 6.2, our key insights are robust
to accounting for identifying variation at other population density thresholds in the BAL. There were two
other thresholds at 50 and 250 people/km2 below which the scope of expropriation changed, exempting
progressively larger holdings from redistribution. However, given the staggered implementation of the
2
    The sharia regulations we examine cover many facets of life, including, among others, the payment of alms (zakat), the banning
    of alcohol, and the requirement that women wear the Islamic veil.


                                                                 2
BAL and its abrupt halt in the mid-1960s (see Section 2.3), redistribution efforts were much more limited
in regions affected by these thresholds.
       Our findings point to a shift in both the demand for and supply of religious politics. Modern sur-
vey data show that respondents in districts with greater expropriation intensity in the 1960s are more
likely to scrutinize the religion and religiosity of politicians, and to support the adoption of sharia regu-
lations, even though they do not display higher levels of personal piety. On the supply side, legislative
candidates in these districts are more likely to run on explicitly Islamist themes. We also find greater
politicization of schools, with teachers and students more likely to run for office, and more likely to cam-
paign on an Islamist platform. These results corroborate our findings on electoral and policy outcomes
and, collectively, highlight the influence of Islamists beyond the ballot box.
       Further evidence suggests that these downstream effects of the land reform most plausibly origi-
nated in the waqf land endowments of 1960s. First, we rule out alternative pathways related to changes
in land inequality, general public goods provision, and anti-Communist violence in the mid-1960s. Sec-
ond, while prioritizing the reduced form, we also consider an instrumental variable (IV) approach to
identifying the political and economic impacts of the waqf, using expropriation intensity as an IV for
waqf land. These results clarify that the reduced form effects on the waqf and on Islamism are indeed
driven by the same regions, namely those facing the greatest expropriation intensity in the 1960s and
where waqf endowments nurture conservative Islamic institutions today.
       Why would an increase in land held in waqf impact support for Islamism? The effects of the waqf
are tied to its specific institutional features and its ability to sustain various Islamic organizations over
time. Waqf are inalienable under Islamic law and provide autonomy from the state. Hence, agricultural
lands held under waqf provide a secure, steady stream of revenue for the organizations that operate
them. Unlike moderate Islamic movements that are backed by large non-governmental organizations
and embrace the secular state, Islamist movements have historically faced tighter financial and political
constraints in Indonesia. The waqf transfers caused by the BAL unlocked resources for these conservative
forces and may have allowed them to effectively compete with their closest political rivals—moderate
Islamic movements. For instance, waqf lands are often used to support Islamic boarding schools, many of
which are privately funded and have the option to remain outside the government-mandated education
system (Pohl, 2006). In Indonesia, as elsewhere in the Muslim world, these schools often are key conduits
for Islamist ideas and action (Van Bruinessen, 1995, 2008; McVey, 1983).3 Many Islamic school leaders
have strong ties to Islamist political parties, whose platforms call for an Islamic state based on sharia law.
       We close by investigating whether the land reform affected economic development by immobilizing
land for religious purposes. Despite sizable political impacts, the economic effects of the waqf transfers
seem to have been more circumscribed. We find productivity losses in agriculture but not for broader
measures of development. This is consistent with the fact that the waqf endowments in modern Indone-
sia tend to be confined to agricultural lands supporting religious institutions rather than wider swathes
3
    In 2012/13, roughly 3.8 million or around 7.3% of all students across Indonesia were enrolled in Islamic boarding schools,
    pesantren, according to the Ministry of Education. Other Islamic day schools, madrasa, are also supported by waqf and play
    an important role in shaping religious attitudes. However, they are less focused on producing religious scholars, clerics, and
    leaders than are pesantren. See Section 4.1 for further discussion of these differences. According to the Indonesia Family Life
    Survey, by 2014, nearly one-third of Indonesians had attended a pesantren or madrasa at some time in their educational years.


                                                                  3
of the economy. Still, such lands often come with restrictions on crop type, tenancy arrangements, and
labor coercion (under religious authority) that may result in efficiency losses.4 In sum, although a small
part of the overall economy, waqf endowments can have outsized influence on society through their
effects on politics.
    These findings shed new light on the legacies of the waqf, a widely adopted institution in Muslim
societies. Kuran (2001, 2011) describes how the traditional waqf contributed to economic and political
stagnation in the Middle East.5 Our paper provides among the first empirical evidence in support of
several hypotheses previously formulated about the waqf. Note that the waqf in our context are akin to
the more flexible “modern” waqf in Kuran’s (2016) classification, similar to other waqf established in the
contemporary era. First, we find that the exemption of religious lands in the BAL led landowners to
shield their assets by registering them as waqf. This corroborates extensive work by historians showing
that the waqf has been used for centuries as a protection against state expropriation (see Section 3.1).
Second, we find that waqf lands have deleterious effects on the agricultural economy, in keeping with
Kuran’s thesis about the institution’s broader negative economic impacts. Third, our paper speaks to
recent work on the waqf ’s political legacies (Kuran, 2016). We find that a large resource base immobi-
lized in religious assets outside state purview can foster religious interference in politics in the context
of a democratic and decentralized political system. This finding has important implications for other
religious societies undergoing democratization.
    Across spiritual traditions, religious institutions provide stability and privacy to the individuals who
operate them, which makes them ideal venues for political activism. We hypothesize that three char-
acteristics of the institutions we study caused their sizable influence on Indonesian politics and could
similarly define the role of clerical institutions in other contexts. First, inalienable religious institutions
can protect particular groups during sustained periods of political oppression, allowing them to survive
until they can again compete or seek indirect influence in the political arena. This was true historically
not only for Islamist movements under hostile regimes (Egypt, Indonesia, Turkey), but also, for example,
for conservative movements associated with the Roman Catholic Church such as the Opus Dei. Second,
institutions that attract charitable giving are bound to foster opportunistic alliances between elites and
religious interest groups to influence law and policymaking.6 Third, religious institutions outside gov-
ernment purview can be used to foment opposition to the state. In the same way that radical clerics have
used mosques and religious schools to cultivate Islamism in Indonesia, there is widespread evidence
that radical leaders in India have used temples to cultivate Hindu nationalism.7

Related Literature.        Our paper contributes new insights to the political economy literature on religion.
In a survey of this literature, Iyer (2016) notes an important puzzle, namely the persistence of religion
despite the array of secular forces that militate against it. Our findings suggest that the durability of reli-
4
  Like other governments across the Muslim world, Indonesia’s has been pushing for waqf formation in new areas of the econ-
  omy (Bank Indonesia, 2016). This may imply future scope for economy-wide impacts.
5
  This is in spite of the fact that waqf also helped Islamic society to expand historically (Michalopoulos et al., 2016).
6
  In the U.S., groups such as Priests for Life, the Women’s Christian Temperance Union, and the American Jewish Congress
  “collectively spend over $350 million every year attempting to entrench religious values into the law” (Robinson, 2015).
7
  In 2015, the state of Kerala moved to forbid military drills (‘shakha’) on temple premises by the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
  Hindu nationalist group, triggering the opposition of the right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party party (Times of India, 5 June 2015).


                                                                4
gious institutions and their role in organizing political coalitions are important factors in understanding
this puzzle. This echoes a theme in Rubin (2017), whose work, like that of Chaney (2013), suggests that
Islamic authorities were granted a large say in politics historically as a result of the threat they posed to
ruling elites. Our findings shed light on the microfoundations of this threat.8
    Our paper also adds to a wider social science literature on the rise of Islamism (Berman, 2011; Blay-
des and Linzer, 2011; Fourati et al., 2019; Pepinsky et al., 2012). Binzel and Carvalho (2017) argue that the
Islamic revival in Egypt—and perhaps elsewhere in the Muslim world—is rooted in unmet aspirations
that come with greater education but limited scope for upward mobility. Increased religiosity in this
case helps individuals to cope and recalibrate expectations. While their study draws a connection be-
tween growth in piety and the resurgence of Islamism, we find that the two need not be related and may
respond to different underlying triggers.9 This is consistent with Roháč (2013) who argues that voters
support Islamists not due to piety but because they offer the only credible commitment to provide public
goods. We rule out this reciprocity-based mechanism, finding that public goods are not systematically
different in districts with greater expropriation intensity, despite greater prevalence of waqf. Finally, con-
sistent with Platteau (2017), our results imply that the fusion of religion and politics is not quintessential
to Islam per se. Instead, the strength of fundamentalist forces within the broader Muslim community is
rooted in their ability to capture important institutions within Islam’s highly decentralized organization.
    We also provide causal evidence on the institutional mechanisms driving the emergence and success
of Islamist groups. Overall, there is little evidence on the role of (potentially apolitical) religious orga-
nizations in religious politics. Our key innovation is to isolate a shock to the supply of conservative
religious institutions, which fuel Islamism through three complementary mechanisms: (i) by expanding
opportunities for ideological exposure, (ii) by helping to mobilize around elections and key policy issues,
and (iii) by cultivating future political leaders (see Section 5.4). Iannaccone and Berman (2006) argue that
participating in “extreme” religious behavior can screen out potential free-riders. This provides Islamist
parties with a screening technology that other parties may not have, which makes institutions like In-
donesia’s Islamic boarding schools particularly useful for political mobilization. Our results suggest that
independent, waqf -endowed institutions are important for understanding why Islamism gradually rose
to prominence after a long period of marginalization (see, e.g., Lacroix, 2011; Wickham, 2002, 2013).
    Finally, we add to a vast literature exploring the link between culture and institutions (Alesina and
Giuliano, 2015; Bisin and Verdier, 2017; Lowes et al., 2017). Numerous studies identify a relationship
between economic circumstances and religious culture (see reviews in Carvalho et al., 2018; Chen and
Hungerman, 2014; Iannaccone, 1998). Much less is known about how religious institutions shape culture
and vice versa. Our findings are consistent with a shock to religious institutions in the 1960s feeding back
onto religious culture and political preferences.

8
  Our findings also relate to Heldring et al. (2017) who link the dissolution of religiously-owned monastery lands in 15th century
  England to growth in innovation, agricultural commercialization, and industrial development. We show that religiously-
  owned land played an important role in shaping political development even though that land did not cover the vast swathes
  of territory it did in historical England or elsewhere in Muslim world (see Kuran, 2011).
9
  Pepinsky et al. (2018) draw similar conclusions from survey experiments in Indonesia. Moreover, Buehler (2016), who com-
  piles the sharia law data we use, argues, like we do, that local variation in the institutional strength of Islamist groups is key
  to understanding the “Islamization of politics” in Indonesia.


                                                                 5
       The paper proceeds as follows. Sections 2 and 3 provide relevant background on the land reform and
the waqf, respectively. Section 4 describes our data and empirical strategy. Section 5 presents our main
results, and Section 6 addresses alternative explanations and robustness checks. Section 7 concludes.


2       The 1960 Indonesian Land Reform
In the tumultuous decades after independence, the Sukarno regime sought to launch a major land reform
aimed at empowering poor rural households. In this section, we provide relevant background on this
reform effort, known as the Basic Agrarian Law (BAL) of 1960.


2.1       Design of the Land Reform

The origins of the 1960 land reform lie in the pervasive inequality across Indonesia in the colonial era.
In the early days of the Indonesian republic, land was owned through a variety of property regimes in
force since the Dutch Agrarian Law of 1870. Inequality was most pronounced in Java and Bali where the
average landholder cultivated no more than half a hectare and where 60% of households were landless
(Soemardjan, 1962). Post-independence, President Sukarno and his supporters attempted to do away
with the old colonial laws governing agriculture and to address landlessness via land redistribution.
       The government first laid out detailed plans for “the termination of proprietary rights on land” in
its August 1959 Political Manifesto (Utrecht, 1969). This prompted fears among rural landowners that
comprehensive land redistribution would soon be implemented. These plans were codified in the BAL
(No. 5) introduced on 24 September 1960 and a subsequent law (No. 56) introduced on 28 December
1960. The law stipulated thresholds for maximum allowable landholdings by nuclear households, with
surpluses in excess of these cutoffs destined for redistribution to landless peasants.
       Ceilings on the amount of land any household could own were defined in the BAL as a function of
population density at the district level. These arbitrary cutoffs, which inform our empirical strategy in
Section 4, stipulated that districts with more than 400 people/km2 could have maximum holdings of 5
(6) hectares of wetland (dryland), districts with 251–400 people/km2 could have maximum holdings of
7.5 (9) hectares of wetland (dryland), districts with 51–250 people/km2 could have maximum holdings
of 10 (12) hectares of wetland (dryland), and districts with less than or equal to 50 people/km2 could
have maximum holdings of 15 (20) hectares of wetland (dryland). A later law (No. 224) introduced on 12
September 1961 stipulated the arguably unfavorable terms of indemnification for expropriable lands.10


2.2       The Religious Lands Exemption

In early discussions with the Sukarno regime, Islamic leaders expressed strong reservations about re-
strictions on land ownership being in contradiction to Islamic law (Mortimer, 1972). The regime faced
10
     The fair price was set at 10 times the assessed annual profits from the land for the first 5 hectares and 9 times for the next 5
     hectare increments with 7 times for any remaining land. The government was to deposit 10 percent of the payment in a public
     bank with the remainder in promissory notes that could be redeemed one year after the land was redistributed. Beneficiaries
     would have 16 years in which to pay the government to recoup these costs. Landowners that refused redistribution would
     be imprisoned for 3 months and receive no indemnification. See Huizer (1972) for further details.


                                                                   6
significant political risks when it undertook the land reform and chose not to antagonize religious au-
thorities by conceding that it would not violate Islamic law. Thus, the original BAL (No. 5) stipulated
that religious lands, including all land under Islamic trusts (waqf ), were exempt from redistribution.11
Importantly, this regulation and subsequent ones did not exempt waqf held as family trusts but rather
those held as endowments for religiously sanctioned purposes.12 This precluded the possibility of shield-
ing one’s assets through private trust but incentivized transfers to religious leaders who managed waqf
endowments historically (see Section 3.1). The waqf exemption in the BAL follows a long historical tradi-
tion throughout the Muslim world where rulers were often hesitant to confiscate waqf properties because
they feared the consequences of seizing land “owned” by God (Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2012).
      Regulations and decrees adopted after the initial BAL No. 5 clarified the exemption procedure. A
Ministry of Agriculture Regulation (No. 2, October 10, 1960) stipulated that religious lands must be
registered as such within six months. Act No. 10 in March 1963 mandated that registration of land with
local government would prove legal validity of ownership, effectively allowing waqf transfers prior to
the date of registration. Regulation No. 38 of 1963 clarified the definition of religious lands, ensuring
that such lands were deemed to serve a religiously sanctioned purpose.


2.3     Implementation and Demise of the Reform

At the outset, the government prescribed a two-stage implementation process to be completed by the
mid-1960s. Under Phase I of the BAL, redistribution would take place in the densely populated Inner
Islands of Java, Bali and Nusa Tenggara Barat (NTB) where 88% of districts had a population density
greater than 250 people/km2 . By 1964, redistribution efforts would expand to Phase II regions located
in the sparsely populated Outer Islands.13
      Despite this ambitious agenda, implementation was fraught with challenges. While peasant organi-
zations linked to the Communist Party (PKI) led information campaigns in the early 1960s, most local
redistribution committees established under the BAL did not become operational until late 1962. These
committees were often composed of representatives of the local elite sympathetic to large landowners.
As implementation slowed, vigilante groups affiliated with the PKI began unilaterally seizing property
in late 1963 and early 1964, which significantly escalated tensions in the countryside.14 After a failed
coup in September 1965 by junior army officers accused of being loyal to the PKI, mass violence en-
sued, targeting “leftists” and Sukarno’s supporters (Cribb, 2001; Farid, 2005; Roosa, 2006). The resulting
violence brought land reform efforts to a standstill.
      Although the land reform was never formally repealed, assessments of its legacy note that the many

11
   Article 49(3) addresses the exemption, stipulating: “Perwakafan tanah milik dilindungi dan diatur dengan Peraturan Pemer-
   intah.” This translates as “Waqf land with the right of ownership shall be protected and overseen by Government Regulation.”
12
   These two types of waqf are known in Arabic as waqf ahli and waqf khayri, respectively.
13
   All but two districts in the Outer Islands had a density under 250 people/km2 . Phase I provinces included East, West, and
   Central Java, Bali, NTB, Jakarta, and D.I. Yogyakarta. Phase II provinces included all of Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Sumatra, Nusa
   Tenggara Timur, and Maluku.
14
   These so-called unilateral actions (aksi sepihak) were, according to Mortimer (2006), “part of a sustained PKI attempt to mo-
   bilize the poor peasants and share-croppers to assert their rights under the land reform laws of 1960, the implementation of
   which had bogged down under the weight of bureaucratic inertia and the resistance of interested persons and groups.”


                                                               7
contradictions in the BAL fatally undermined its ability to reallocate land (Lucus and Warren, 2013). By
1965, only 70,420 out of the targeted 178,000 hectares (40%) had been redistributed in Phase I regions,
and a mere 12,904 out of 247,570 hectares (5%) had been redistributed in Phase II regions (Department
of Agriculture, 1964, 1965). A subsequent evaluation of changes in the distribution of land between the
1963 and 1973 Agricultural Censuses concluded that “there appears to be no appreciable change between
censuses in inequality of holdings” (Montgomery and Sugito, 1980). Utrecht (1969) details the process
by which the land reform stalled and was eventually undone throughout the country by the late 1960s as
most expropriated landowners took back their properties. This was not the case, however, for religious
lands held in waqf since the inalienability and sanctity of the land, now under religious tutelage, made
it difficult if not impossible to reverse. Ultimately, the historical record points to a fundamental role of
the waqf exemption in hindering the course of reform, as we discuss below.


3       Expropriation Threat and the Spread of Waqf
This section provides general background on the waqf and its specific use in Indonesia. We also docu-
ment how elites used exemptions in the BAL to transfer land to religious institutions.


3.1       The Waqf in Islamic Law and History

Often described as an Islamic trust, the waqf is defined by the Encyclopedia of Islam as “the elements
that a person, with the intention of committing a pious deed, declares part of his or her property to be
henceforth unalienable and designates persons or public utilities as beneficiaries of its yields.” A vast
literature on the waqf argues that, ever since its introduction in Arabia soon after the death of the Prophet
Muhammad, the institution served as a protection against the threat of expropriation rather than solely
as a vehicle for redistribution (Gil, 1998; Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2012).15 The sanctity of the norm against
expropriation of land in waqf is illustrated in the first enduring record of a waqf from around 913 CE,
which reads in part:

          This [waqf] is inviolable. Fa’iq ibn ’Abd Allah the Sicilian has renounced it, and whoever
          interferes in the distribution of these alms (sadaqa) and of this waqf or changes them, does
          so without authority . . . . May Allah punish him for his bad deed, for verily he has taken
          upon himself the burden of his sin and exposed himself to the anger of his Lord. . . . He who
          interferes with [the regulations of] this [waqf] and who modifies it is warned of being struck
          by a violent death in this world or by the chastisement of the fire of Hell.” (Sharon, 1966)

In principle, any Muslim can endow a waqf. In practice, creating a waqf requires significant resources, not
only to cover the costs of the charitable cause identified by the founder, but also to pay an administrator’s
salary. Because a waqf is meant to last in perpetuity, the funds used to support it are often valuable assets


15
     There is significant anecdotal evidence that in numerous contexts the waqf, particularly the waqf ahli (family waqf), which
     named descendants of the founder as beneficiaries in perpetuity, was used as a vehicle for shielding wealth from redistribu-
     tion mandated by inheritance laws (Crecelius, 1995; Mandaville, 1979).


                                                                 8
that yield annual profits. Endowing a waqf is therefore a pious deed but one typically available to those
with the means necessary for permanently alienating a tangible asset and its revenues.
      Notwithstanding these standard features, Kuran (2016) draws an important distinction between the
traditional and the modern form of waqf. The former prohibited resource pooling and mandated strict
uses of the endowment as stipulated by the founder. These institutional rigidities are at the heart of
Kuran’s original thesis that the waqf stymied innovation and growth across the Middle East historically.
However, more recent manifestations of the institution across the Muslim world appear more flexible
than their historical counterpart. The now-pervasive modern waqf looks more akin to a charitable foun-
dation that allows for institutional growth and change beyond the original founder’s directive, while still
restricting the use of waqf assets to activities with a religious purpose. To quote Kuran (2016), the mod-
ern waqf “has managerial flexibilities denied to its Islamic namesake”, “is directed by a board of trustees
rather than a single caretaker”, “may invest in liquid assets”, and “can engage in politics” even “in co-
operation with other entities, including other waqf ”. These features are important for understanding the
eventual impact of the modern waqf originating out of the 1960s land reform.


3.2    Usage of the Waqf in Indonesia

While the waqf institution reached Indonesia in the 1500s, the Dutch colonial administration did not
legally recognize the waqf for much of the time they ruled the archipelago. These colonial restrictions
limited the diffusion of the waqf in Indonesia relative to the Middle East (Abbasi, 2012; Bussons de
Janssens, 1951). The creation of new waqf gathered pace during the 20th century first during the 1930s
and again during the Sukarno regime (Djatnika, 1985; Fauzia, 2013).
      While in Indonesia, as elsewhere, any charitable asset can be endowed by a waqf, today, the waqf
is primarily used for supporting houses of worship and religious education. Indeed, most mosques
and Islamic schools are endowed as waqf properties. Local elites often use the waqf to “endow public
goods in perpetuity and to benefit from the prestige and reputational benefits associated with this public
demonstration of piety”, allowing “public recognition of their legacy to survive for decades, regardless of
political power changes” (Fauzia, 2013). However, because most economic entities, including farmland,
were not under waqf historically, the geographic coverage of waqf (in terms of land area) remains more
limited than in the Middle East (Jahar, 2006). At the same time, its widespread use for mosques and
schools leaves open the possibility for outsized political and ideological influence.


3.3    Islamic Institutions and Waqf Transfers in the 1960s

By exempting waqf from redistribution in the BAL, the Sukarno government united the interests of
large landowners and religious conservatives who were both threatened by the land reform. While
landowners feared the confiscation of their property, Islamists feared a coup by forces sympathetic to
Communism and the marginalization of rural landowners involved in funding religious institutions.
Not surprisingly, landowners took advantage of the BAL exemption by transferring their land to waqf.
As described in Section 3.1, lands registered under this status would be immune from expropriation, in



                                                     9
addition to conferring reputational benefits upon their founder. As a result, “many Muslim landowners
preferred giving up their excess land in the form of wakaf [sic], rather than seeing them attributed to
the Peasant Front (BTI)” (Djatnika, 1985), and perhaps the “most formidable obstruction to land reform
came from the religious organisations” (Utrecht, 1969).16 Here, we explain how this happened in practice
along with some prominent examples.
       First, the legal context discussed in Section 2.2 made it possible for landowners to transfer their
surplus land to religious authorities before it could be deemed expropriable. Utrecht (1969) alludes
to these “antedated acts of transfer”. This meant that prior to coming under scrutiny by redistribution
committees, a landowner simply had to designate the surplus (i.e., land owned in excess of the maximum
allowable holdings) as waqf properties endowed for charitable uses sanctioned by religious law. The
most common use would have been to support a local mosque or religious school.
       Moreover, this process of endowing land as waqf was extremely simple. Under the Shafi’i school of
Islamic law followed in most of Indonesia, an oral declaration to a local cleric with at least one other
person present is sufficient as a formality of endowment: a “waqf is directly effective and legally binding
if the founder has declared his waqf and given it to a signed person, even without any legal documents”
(Jahar, 2005, p. 135). With the support of religious authorities, a landowner could then assert alienation
of property when confronted with forces agitating for redistribution. This assertion could be readily
endorsed by a local Ministry of Religion office, which were authorized as of 1958 (Regulation No. 3)
to legalize all waqf endowments in their respective subdistricts. Even without formal certification, the
sanctification by local clerics would be enough to ascertain the inviolability of the waqf lands.
       The historical literature provides numerous examples of such land transfers into waqf. Castles (1965)
recounts an instance in which elites transferred land under threat of expropriation to religious leaders:

          “For some years the school [Pondok-Moderen pesantren] has possessed 25 hectares of rice-field,
          but this has recently been greatly increased by about 240 hectares, which was dedicated [to
          waqf ] (diwakafkan) by landowners in the Ngawi district who were to lose it under the land
          reform law. In late 1964 the communist peasant organization B.T.I, was trying to prevent the
          Pondok-Moderen from getting any benefit from the land while the Pondok-Moderen was having
          a struggle to hold on to it. But apparently it is legal to dedicate land in excess of the legal
          maximum for religious purposes in this way.”

This once-modest local pesantren has since blossomed into a center of Islamic education with a large
network of schools growing out of the original Islamic school at Gontor. Today, its waqf board manages
nearly 18,000 hectares of land across Indonesia and its leaders routinely engage in politics. Among
its alumni are many influential Muslim leaders including Hidayat Nur Wahid, an early leader of the
Prosperous Justice Party (Partai Keadilan Sejahtera or PKS), one of Indonesia’s two major Islamist parties.
This example illustrates some of the potential mechanisms linking waqf transfers in the 1960s to the
entrenchment and growth of Islamism, which we explore in Section 5.
       The Gontor case also illustrates the important historical role of waqf lands in supporting brick-and-
16
     Djatnika (1985), for example, documents a surge in registered waqf properties in the province of East Java during the period
     when the agrarian reform was announced. In a previous version of this paper (Bazzi et al., 2018), we provide a discussion of
     the numbers in this study.


                                                                10
mortar Islamic institutions in which economic and religious elites interact. This relationship has long
been a feature of Islamic institutions in the Indonesian context, as described in Hefner (2011):

        “Qur’anic schools across Indonesia have always depended on gifts from wealthy landowners
        and on produce from lands controlled by the school owner. Endowments (waqf ) to religious
        institutions are strongly sanctioned in Islamic law, linked as they are to the reproduction of
        institutions at the heart of religious life. This circulation of wealth from economic to religious
        elites (themselves sometimes from the ranks of the former) is all part of the way differences
        of wealth and class are moralized in traditionalist Muslim communities.”

      Another major network of Islamic schools have their roots in this tradition and also experienced a
large institutional shift in the 1960s. K.H. Choer Affandi, a local Islamist leader in Tasikmalaya district in
West Java established the Miftahul Huda pesantren around the time of the land reform. He received waqf -
endowed land from numerous individuals in 1962 with the blessing of political elites, including the
district mayor (Teguh, 2018). In 1967, he built a second pesantren elsewhere in the district after receiving
a waqf land transfer of 8 ha. Today, many Miftahul Huda alumni are key actors in Islamist mobilization
campaigns pushing for sharia law. They are also well represented among Islamist politicians.
      One important caveat is that many mosques and religious schools are not affiliated with the conser-
vative Islamist movement but instead with more moderate Islamic organizations. Below, we explore the
hypothesis that Islamists were more resource-constrained than moderates as a result of repression by the
Dutch and then the Sukarno regime. Hence, the waqf transfers in the 1960s may have had a relatively
larger effect on their organizational capacity thereafter. Our results in Section 5 speak to these divergent
institutional trajectories.


4     Empirical Framework
This section describes our main data sources and identification strategy.


4.1     Data: Expropriation Intensity, Islamic Institutions, and Islamism

We draw upon a wide array of historical, census, administrative, and survey data. Here, we detail core
regressors and outcomes. We introduce other outcomes of interest as they arise in Section 5. Appendix
Table A.1 reports summary statistics and data sources, and Appendix B provides more complete details
on our data construction.

Land and Demographic Data.            Our analysis relies on two historic district-level variables that deter-
mined the intensity of expropriation under the land reform: 1960 population density and marginal ex-
propriable landholdings. We reconstructed district-level population density using population figures
from the 1961 Population Census and land area figures calculated in ArcGIS, based on the historic dis-
trict boundaries. There are 202 historic districts in the 1960 Census records, and 200 districts in the 1963
Agricultural Census. After linking with other data sources, detailed below, we are left with 191 his-



                                                       11
toric districts, which are the level at which the policy varies and hence our main source of identifying
variation. The average district has 342 people/km2 across all of Indonesia.
     To capture differences in expropriable landholdings, we use district-level tabulations from the 1963
Agricultural Census. The Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS) used this Census to evaluate the land tenure
situation ahead of the implementation of the land reform (Huizer, 1972). The Census provides, at the
district level, the number of landholdings falling in seven discrete bins under 5 hectares (ha), as well as
the total number of holdings above 5 ha. Holdings above 5 ha represent 4% of total holdings.
     Our interest lies in marginal expropriable holdings (MEH). At the 400 people/km2 cutoff, these include
holdings between 5 and 9 hectares (5–7.5 hectares for irrigated land, and 6–9 hectares for dry land).17
Holdings below 9 hectares were not expropriable in districts below the 400 cutoff. However, any hold-
ings above 9 hectares would have been confiscated in all districts above the next lowest threshold of
population density at 250 people/km2 . It is in this sense that the 5–9 ha holdings are marginal to the 400
cutoff. Analogous marginal bins apply at other cutoffs (see robustness checks in Section 6.2).
     Since the exact distribution of holdings above 5 hectares is unobserved in the Census tabulations, we
estimate the number of holdings in the marginal bins, following methods popularized in recent work
on upper tail income and wealth (e.g., Piketty and Saez, 2003; Saez and Zucman, 2016). In particular,
we assume a Pareto distribution over landholdings and estimate the shape parameter separately for
each district (see Appendix B for full details). There is growing consensus that the Pareto distribution
appropriately describes the distribution of landholdings (e.g., see Allen, 2014 and Bazzi, 2017 for evi-
dence from the Philippines and Indonesia, respectively). To the extent that this approach mis-measures
marginal holdings, this should bias our estimates towards zero so long as this measurement error is not
systematically correlated with proclivities for Islamism.18
     Nevertheless, in Appendix A.7, we show that the Pareto assumption is not necessary to generate our
core findings. Our results are robust to a bounding exercise where we compute lower and upper bounds
on the number of marginal expropriable holdings in each district. As part of this exercise, we show
robustness to using observed holdings above 5 ha rather than estimated holdings in the 5–9 ha range.

Islamic Institutions.         Our data on Islamic institutions comes from several sources. First, we measure
the amount and fraction of land under waqf in the 2003 Village Potential (Podes) administrative census.19
These data are based on surveying village government leaders combined with official village records. In
17
   We do not observe holdings separately for irrigated land and dry land. We conservatively focus on holdings between 5 and
   9 hectares, since all holdings we observe between these bounds were potentially expropriable.
18
   Ideally, we would have data on the distribution of landholdings before the announcement of land reform aims in 1959. While
   such data is not available, the Pareto estimating procedure will capture the leading sources of cross-sectional variation in large
   holdings so long as there is not significant misreporting at the cutoffs. We find no indication of pervasive bunching below the
   5 hectare threshold in affected districts. We assess this directly by checking for a violation of the monotonicity implication
   of the power law distribution for landholdings, which implies that the number of landholders with farms of 3–3.99 hectares
   should exceed the number of landholders with farms of 4–4.99 hectares. Violations of this pattern could point to misreporting
   of holdings above 5 hectares as just below 5 hectares to avoid expropriation in districts with population density above 400
   people/km2 . We see 4 out of 58 districts above the 400 cutoff with more landholdings in 4–4.99 ha than in 3–3.99 ha. This
   suggests that bunching, if it exists, is limited. Moreover, results are robust to omitting these four districts.
19
   We restrict attention to around 55,000 villages within the borders of Indonesia as of 1960 with data that can be reliably linked
   to the historic districts from the 1963 Agricultural Census and 1961 Population Census. This excludes the islands of Maluku
   and Irian Jaya (Papua) as the former has no records in the Agricultural Census, and the latter is not yet part of Indonesia.


                                                                 12
2003, 66% of villages have some land under waqf, and the average village has 3.4 hectares of waqf, with
waqf parcels covering 6.1% of zoned land.
     Second, we measure waqf -endowed institutions: Islamic boarding schools (pesantren), Islamic day
schools (madrasa), and mosques. In Podes 2003, we observe mosques and the total number of Islamic
schools, and in Podes 2008, we observe the number of pesantren and madrasa separately. We also use
administrative data from the Ministry of Religion that contain more detailed information on the universe
of pesantren (N = 25, 938) and mosques (N = 243, 340), including location and dates of establishment for
both, number of students in the former, and amount of waqf land in the latter (see Section 5.1).
     While pesantren and madrasa both provide teachings based on Islam, there are important differences
between the two institutions. Pesantren are typically boarding schools, drawing students from many
villages, and they devote much of their curriculum to the study of Islamic texts. Similar to Christian
seminaries, they are geared towards the production of religious scholars (ulama), clerics, and leaders.
Pesantren were “virtually the only non-state institutions actually functioning at the grassroots level”
during the Suharto era (Van Bruinessen, 2008).20 Madrasa are more akin to public day schools in their
pedagogical methods, though they require 2–4 times more religious content in subjects such as Islamic
theology and law. While both madrasa and pesantren may rely on private sources of funding, the lat-
ter have typically been more independent of government oversight in part due to the self-sustaining
nature of their (waqf -endowed) agricultural operations as well as their ability to opt out of government-
mandated curriculum.21

Electoral Support for Islamist Parties.             We draw on two main data sources to measure electoral out-
comes. First, we use the 2003 Podes, which records village-level information on the 1999 national legisla-
tive election—the first election in the post-Suharto, democratic era. This election was won by the Indone-
sian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P, center-left and secular) with 33.8% of the vote; Suharto’s party,
the Party of Functional Groups (Golkar, center-right and secular), finished second with 22.5% of the vote.
Our primary focus is on the performance of Islamic and Islamist parties. Among others discussed in Sec-
tion 5.2, the National Awakening Party (PKB, moderate Islamic) won 12.6% of the vote, and the United
Development Party (PPP, Islamist) won 10.7%.22 Other Islamist parties like the Prosperous Justice Party
(PKS) garnered smaller vote shares but become important in subsequent elections. The Podes data reveal
which party finished first, second, and third in each village but do not indicate the vote shares. This is
the only available dataset with voting outcomes below the district level in the 1999 election.

20
   Geertz (1956) describes a common scene during the Suharto era: “The rich hadji [sic], surrounded by a group of satellite
   landholders and young laborer students, could build up a system of agricultural production (often with home industry
   attached) which took the form of a kind of small-scale plantation.” Geertz (1960) goes on to note that “When a European first
   sees a traditional pesantren, it reminds him almost inevitably of a Catholic monastery.”
21
   Pohl (2006) further describes pesantren as “providers of private, nonformal (religious) education”, which “do not issue state-
   recognized certificates for these educational activities. They range from local Koran schools, in which students are instructed
   in the system of Koran recitation, to religious colleges akin to those found in the Middle East. Some have only a few regular
   students, a single teacher, and perhaps some small agricultural fields, whereas others instruct upward of 3,000 students.”
22
   The PPP was the umbrella Islamic party founded in the early 1970s when the repressive Suharto regime forced all Islamic
   parties into a single ticket. The PKB emerged after the fall of Suharto as an alternative to the longstanding PPP and as a
   vehicle for organizing votes among those long affiliated with the Nahdlatul Ulama movement originating in East Java. Section
   5.2 provides more details on these party and organizational distinctions.


                                                               13
       Second, we use district-level vote shares from the Electoral Commission, which allow us to track vot-
ing behavior beginning in 1955 with the first legislative election after independence.23 These data cover
elections through 2014 and provide a more complete picture of voting patterns in the democratic era but
come at the expense of the geographic detail in Podes. For both the historical and post-Suharto period,
we categorize parties as secular, moderate Islamic, and Islamist using well-established classifications in
the political science literature.

Other Measures of Islamism. We consider a range of outcomes capturing the reach of Islamism in local
governance, public affairs, and citizens’ attitudes. These come from different sources and span several
domains: the size of the local religious bureaucracy, sharia regulations passed by local governments,
Islamic microfinance, Islamic court use, and Islamist vigilante activity; demand for religious politicians
and sharia law in survey data; and Islamist appeals by legislative candidates. In identification checks, we
use data on violent activity perpetrated by Darul Islam, an armed Islamist group that sought to establish
an Islamic state in the 1950s. We also examine numerous measures of religious piety and practice in
survey data as well as economic outcomes plausibly affected by waqf endowments. We describe these
variables at length when presenting the results below.


4.2       Identification

To identify the effects of the land reform, we use a difference-in-discontinuity design analogous to
Grembi et al. (2016). Our specification leverages both discontinuous variation in the anticipated in-
tensity of the reform and cross-sectional variation in the number of marginal expropriable landholdings
(MEH) as defined above. The RD component exploits the discontinuity in the number of MEH to be
seized at 400 people/km2 : the maximum allowable size of landholdings fell discontinuously from 9 to
5 hectares at the 400 cutoff. The difference component looks at the prevalence of holdings in this 5–9
ha range before the reform. The difference on top of the discontinuity helps to identify areas where
the land reform was binding; districts above 400 people/km2 would have relatively limited exposure
to redistribution if there were few landholdings between 5–9 ha. Our measure of expropriation intensity
therefore interacts (i) an indicator for districts with a population density greater than 400 people/km2
and (ii) the number of landholdings between 5–9 ha (MEH). While our baseline specification focuses on
the maximum threshold of 400 people/km2 , robustness checks in Section 6.2 explore effects at the other
cutoffs (50 and 250) as well as a specification identifying the average effect of expropriation intensity
across all three cutoffs.
       Our focus on the 400 cutoff is motivated by the historical context described in Section 2.3. The initial
government plan was to implement the land reform in two phases. Under Phase I of the reform, redistri-
bution would begin with the most densely populated islands of Java, Bali, and NTB. Here, the 400 cutoff
was the most relevant one; only 11 out of 95 districts had a density under 250 people/km2 and only
two under 50 people/km2 . Under Phase II, the reform was to proceed to the sparsely populated Outer
23
     Several districts are missing data for the 1955 elections. We therefore supplement the 1955 national legislative election data
     with data from the 1957 legislative elections that were held in select districts before being halted by the Sukarno regime.
     When data is available for 1955 and 1957, we use average vote shares across both elections.


                                                                 14
Islands, where only 2 districts had a density over 250 people/km2 , and where publicity about the reform
and state capacity for implementing it were also much weaker. By the time implementation was to begin
in these regions, the land reform was already under threat and effectively halted after the September
1965 coup attempt. Indeed, by early 1965, only 40% and 5% of expropriable hectares of land had been
reallocated in Phase I and Phase II regions, respectively (Department of Agriculture, 1964, 1965).
     Our main difference-in-discontinuity estimating equation is as follows:

             yij   = α + γ0 Above400j + γ1 M EHj + β(Above400j × M EHj )                                                       (1)
                        + g(densityj ) × [δ0 + δ1 Above400j + δ2 M EHj + δ3 (Above400j × M EHj )]
                        + f (Xij , Above400j , M EHj ) + islandj + εij ,

where i denotes village and j denotes 1960 district; Above400 is a dummy variable for districts above
400 people/km2 ; M EH is the number of marginal expropriable landholdings (5–9 ha) at the onset of the
land reform; g(density) is a polynomial in population density estimated separately on each side of the
400 people/km2 cutoff, and fully interacted with M EH; and we include five island fixed effects.24 The
main coefficient of interest is β, the coefficient on expropriation intensity, i.e., the interaction of Above400
with M EH. We use a third-order polynomial as a baseline but consider other orders for robustness. We
also estimate versions of equation (1) including a vector of predetermined or time-invariant controls,
Xij , fully interacted with Above400 and M EH, f (·). Our baseline specification includes all districts, and
in robustness checks, we vary the bandwidth around the 400 cutoff. We cluster standard errors by 1960
district, the level of variation of the land reform.25

Illustration of Identification Strategy. Figure 1 illustrates the intuition behind our identification strat-
egy. Graph (a) plots the prevalence of waqf land at the district level above and below the 400 people/km2
cutoff and for two groups of districts based on a binary transformation of M EH: districts with a num-
ber of 5–9 ha holdings above the median (black circles) and below the median (gray triangles).26 We can
also illustrate this strategy by using the following four districts as an example. On the left side of the
cutoff, Sampang and Malang districts have historical population densities of 396 and 399 people/km2 ,
respectively. Sampang has relatively few marginal landholdings (72), and Malang has many more (403).
In neither district are these holdings expropriable under the land reform. Today waqf represent 2.0%
and 3.8% of zoned land in Sampang and Malang, respectively. On the right side, two districts close to
the cutoff are Klungkung (414 people/km2 ) and Bogor (415 people/km2 ). Klungkung has many fewer
MEH (21) than Bogor (297) before the land reform. These holdings are expropriable in both districts,
24
   These include Java, the Lesser Sunda Island group (Bali, NTB, NTT), Sumatra, Kalimantan, and Sulawesi.
25
   Inference is robust to alternative approaches including the wild cluster bootstrap, spatial HAC (Conley, 1999), and an effective
   degrees of freedom adjustment (Young, 2016). See Appendix Table A.4.
26
   These figures differ from our actual estimating equation in two ways. First, equation (1) uses the full, continuous variation
   in 5–9 ha holdings whereas these graphs are based on splitting the full set of 191 districts into those with above and be-
   low median 5–9 ha holdings. Second, for presentational purposes, these figures restrict attention to districts with 250–550
   people/km2 whereas our regressions use the full set of districts. As such, these should be seen only as an approximation to
   the identifying variation in the subsequent regression results. The relatively fewer districts above the median in the figure is
   due to large holdings (including 5–9 ha) being more prevalent in less densely population districts of the Outer Islands, nearly
   all of which fall below 250 people/km2 .


                                                                15
and the gap in waqf prevalence is 2.3% (Klungkung) versus 9.2% (Bogor). Our estimate of β in equation
(1) approximates the difference-in-differences across the 400 people/km2 cutoff (i.e., (9.2-2.3) - (3.8-2.0)).
The remaining graphs reveal similar patterns for a few other important contemporary outcomes: (b)
pesantren, (c) Islamist vote share, and (d) Sharia regulations.
       Figure 1 also illustrates why we do not use a simple RD around the 400 people/km2 cutoff. There
is no discontinuous jump in waqf when looking across the entire sample, because districts with few
MEH faced no substantial discontinuity in the threat of expropriation at this cutoff. For these districts,
we should not observe substantial changes in waqf prevalence and lasting effects on Islamism. Instead,
we focus on the interaction between being above the cutoff and the number of MEH, which captures a
district’s differential response to the reform as a function of the policy rule and the pre-existing number
of exposed landholders. The only holdings that would have been expropriated above 400 people/km2
but not below are holdings between 5–9 ha. The difference-in-discontinuity estimates the differential
response of landowners whose holdings would have been expropriated above the cutoff but not below.

Identification Checks. Several results support the main identifying assumption, namely that potential
outcomes be continuous at the 400 people/km2 threshold and parallel across the distribution of MEH.
We discuss key validation tests here and a complete set of robustness checks in Section 6.2. First, we find
no evidence of manipulation of the running variable, population density in 1960, based on the McCrary
(2008) test (Appendix Figure A.4). Second, the number of 5–9 ha landholdings, MEH, is continuous
across the 400 cutoff (Appendix Figure A.3), which additionally provides evidence against misreporting
of expropriable land in the 1963 Agricultural Census (see footnote 18).
       Importantly, there are no systematic difference-in-discontinuities for leading confounders (Appendix
Table A.2). These include proxies for the prevalence and strength of Islamic institutions before the land
reform: the number of mosques and pesantren, Islamist vote share in the 1950s, violent events associ-
ated with the Darul Islam rebellion in the 1950s, ethnic Arab population in the 1930s, and distance to
the nearest of nine shrines at the grave sites of “saints” that brought Islam to Indonesia in the 1400s
and 1500s.27 In Section 5.1, we discuss additional evidence consistent with a lack of pre-trends in waqf
endowments before the 1960s (see Figure 2). Appendix Table A.2 further shows there is no significant
relationship between expropriation intensity and the Communist vote share in the 1950s. This is reas-
suring as Communist-affiliated organizations played a strong role in agitating for local redistribution.
Finally, there is no correlation with local rainfall shocks in the years leading up to (1955–59) and during
the land reform (1960–65). This helps rule out endogenous policy design aimed at alleviating prior or
(unanticipated) future drought (e.g., Mortimer, 2006, p. 206 describes the effects of a late 1963 drought
on local redistribution effort). Together, these checks bolster the case that equation (1) identifies causal
reduced form effects of expropriation intensity prescribed by the BAL.




27
     Two out of 26 variables in Appendix Table A.2 exhibit significant difference-in-discontinuities, which is to be expected as a
     result of chance. To be sure, we demonstrate robustness to controlling for these covariates in Appendix Tables A.8–A.10.


                                                                 16
4.3     Isolating the Long-Term Effects of Waqf

While the reduced form in equation (1) is our preferred specification, we also ask how waqf holdings
affect our outcomes of interest. We estimate the following specification via ordinary least squares (OLS)
and instrumental variables (IV):

            yij   = α + γ0 Above400j + γ1 M EHj + β w W aqfij                                           (2)
                     + g(densityj ) × [δ0 + δ1 Above400j + δ2 M EHj + δ3 (Above400j × M EHj )]
                     + f (Xij , Above400j , M EHj ) + islandj + εij ,

where W aqfij denotes hectares of waqf in the village in 2003. In the IV specification, we use the
difference-in-discontinuity term from equation (1), Above400j × M EHj , as an instrument for W aqfij .
Under the assumption that expropriation intensity only affects contemporary outcomes via its effect on
waqf, the IV estimate of β w identifies the causal effect of waqf land on downstream outcomes.
      The IV estimates isolate the effects of waqf land endowed in the 1960s as a result of landholders’
attempts to escape expropriation. It seems plausible that this land would have been more productive
than the typical land endowed as waqf. As a result, the institutions benefitting from such land might
gain considerably more than they would from the more marginal waqf lands endowed in normal times.
This is important for understanding the OLS and IV effect sizes in Section 5.5. Of course, as with any IV,
the exclusion restriction is subject to caveats and hence why we prioritize the reduced form equation (1)
in most results that follow.


5     Results: Land Reform, Institutions, and Islamism
This section presents our core empirical results in five steps. First, we link the land reform to increased
prevalence of waqf and Islamic institutions. Second, we identify downstream effects on Islamist poli-
tics. Third, we find a deeper role for Islam in public affairs. Fourth, we distinguish both demand- and
supply-side factors shaping the advance of Islamism. Finally, we estimate adverse effects on agricultural
development that seem to be driven by waqf lands. We present core robustness checks along the way
but defer alternative explanations and further robustness checks to the following section.


5.1     Effects on Waqf and Endowed Institutions

Table 1 estimates the effect of the land reform on contemporary waqf holdings and the prevalence of
Islamic institutions endowed as such. We present the estimated effect of expropriation intensity, i.e., the
interaction of Above400 and M EH in equation (1); all other terms in that equation are included in the
regression but their output suppressed. We express MEH in 100s so that the coefficient can be interpreted
as the differential effect of having 100 additional marginal expropriable holdings. For reference, MEH
(in 100s) has mean 3.9 and standard deviation 5.8. All regressions are run at the village level, which is
the level at which waqf and waqf -endowed institutions are observed.


                                                      17
Land Under Waqf.               Columns 1–3 of Table 1 consider waqf land in hectares (hyperbolic-sine trans-
formed), the fraction of total land under waqf, and the fraction of zoned land under waqf. Across columns,
we find that villages in districts facing greater expropriation intensity have significantly more land un-
der waqf. On average, each additional 100 MEH is associated with 20% more ha of waqf land (column 1)
or nearly 50% more as a fraction of zoned land (column 3). Consistent with the historical record, these
estimates suggest that in anticipation of the land reform, exposed landowners sought to protect their
land from expropriation by registering it under waqf under the authority of local religious authorities.
Given the inalienable nature of the waqf, these endowments persisted until the modern period.

Mosques and Islamic Schools. In columns 4-6 of Table 1, we report effects of the land reform on
mosques, pesantren (Islamic boarding schools), and madrasa (Islamic non-boarding schools) at the village
level in 2008.28 Since waqf in Indonesia are mainly used to support houses of worship and educational
institutions, we should expect expropriation intensity under the BAL to also increase the prevalence of
these institutions. We find that this is indeed the case. Each additional 100 MEH is associated with 3
more mosques relative to the mean of 3.9, 0.5 more pesantren relative to the mean of 0.5, and 1 more
madrasa relative to the mean of 0.9.
       While both types of religious school are instrumental in shaping Islamic knowledge and identity,
pesantren have played a particularly important role in advancing the cause of Islamism in Indonesia.
Most Islamist leaders were educated in pesantren (see Section 3.3 for examples). Pesantren students often
retain their social networks when entering university, where Islamic groups played a central role in
sustaining Islamist organizational capital amidst the repression during the Suharto era (see Machmudi,
2008). Pesantren also engage in community-based activism, influencing those outside the immediate
family networks in these schools. Hamayotsu (2011), for example, details the vital role of Islamic schools
in mobilizing support for the hardline Prosperous Justice Party. Finally, some pesantren maintain their
own militias, which are used for agitation and mobilization around elections (Buehler, 2016). In Sections
5.2–5.4, we revisit these mechanisms as they help clarify some of the later outcomes of the waqf transfers.

Robustness Checks.             In Appendix Table A.8, we show that the results in Table 1 are robust to a range
of alternative specifications and controls. We run different versions of equation (1) including baseline
agricultural controls from the 1963 Agricultural Census (number of males, females, and farms, total
irrigated land area, and total dry land area), village-level geographic controls (altitude, beach location,
distance to the nearest sub-district capital and the nearest district capital), baseline political controls
(Islamist and Communist vote shares in the 1950s and violent activity by the Darul Islam rebellion before
the reform), baseline Islamic organizations (the number of mosques and pesantren in the district by 1920),
and province fixed effects. These controls help rule out confounding factors that predate the reform. All
controls are fully interacted with the Above400 dummy and the number of M EH. Reassuringly, our key
findings are not sensitive to the inclusion of these controls.

28
     The sample size falls relative to columns 1–3 due to an inability to link some villages from later rounds of Podes to our main
     data, which includes other village-level variables used in robustness checks. We find similar insights using data on mosques
     and Islamic schools in Podes 2003, but this round does not distinguish pesantren from madrasa.


                                                                 18
     We also implement a bounding exercise around the number of marginal expropriable holdings in
each district, to ensure that our results are not driven by the assumption that landholdings are Pareto-
distributed. As detailed in Appendix A.7, this exercise shows that our core results are robust to using all
holdings above 5 ha (which are observed) instead of holdings between 5–9 hectares (which are estimated)
in our main specification.29
     Appendix Table A.8 reports two other validation checks. First, our core results are robust to excluding
the islands of Sulawesi and Sumatra. This helps ensure that our results are driven by islands where the
land reform was most intensely implemented before its demise. Second, we report a simple placebo
check that looks for a difference-in-discontinuity at 500 people/km2 , which was not a relevant cutoff
in the land reform. We interact a dummy for districts above 500 people/km2 (instead of 400 in our
main specification) with the number of 5–9 ha holdings. As expected, this interaction is not significantly
associated with contemporary waqf lands or waqf -endowed institutions.

Timing of Waqf Endowments.                 Figure 2 and Appendix Table A.3 provide further evidence that the
land reform caused an increase in the scale of new waqf endowments. We use data from the Indonesian
Ministry of Religious Affairs containing the universe of mosques and pesantren and create a district-
by-year dataset from 1920 to 2009.30 We report time-varying estimates of β from equation (1) fully
interacted with decade fixed effects; each coefficient can be interpreted as the average annual effect of
expropriation intensity in the given decade. Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows estimates for waqf land provided
to newly established mosques, which is the only time-varying measure of waqf land spanning the study
period. Panel (b) reports the same set of coefficients, but looks at student enrollment in newly established
pesantren. Under reasonable assumptions, pesantren enrollment could be proportional to the size of its
waqf properties, which are unfortunately not recorded in the data.
     These graphs offer three important lessons. First, prior to the land reform, there are no systematic pre-
trends in waqf endowments, as seen in the flat difference-in-discontinuity estimate (β) around zero from
1920 to 1959. Note that this is not due to a lack of institutional growth during this period (see Appendix
Figure A.1). Second, beginning in the 1960s, β exhibits a significant jump as waqf endowments begin
to grow relatively faster in districts with greater expropriation intensity. In Appendix Table A.3, we
compare estimates of β across the pre- and post-reform period and find a statistically significant increase
between the 1950s and 1960s.
     Third, the increase in waqf endowments seems to continue well after the land reform. To explain
this dynamic trend, we conjecture four interrelated mechanisms. First, new mosques and pesantren cre-
ated in the 1960s helped mobilize donations from worshippers, allowing these institutions to expand.
29
   In addition to providing an upper bound on marginal expropriable holdings in each district, holdings above 5 ha also capture
   an additional, intensive margin effect of expropriation intensity for landowners already exposed below the 400 people/km2
   cutoff. Those with holdings above 9 ha would have had to give away land in districts above and below 400 people/km2 but
   would have had to abdicate an additional 4 ha of land above the 400 cutoff.
30
   Both data have missing establishment dates: 5,689 out of 25,938 pesantren and 4,689 out of 243,340 mosques. However, neither
   are systematic with respect to expropriation intensity. Although these data only capture surviving institutions, there are two
   reasons why this should not introduce biases (in our favor). First, differential survival between high and low expropriation
   intensity districts should work against finding the flat pre-trends that we do in Figure 2. Second, if there is differential
   survival after 1960 (and this explains the patterns in Figure 2), then this is consistent with our argument, namely that Islamic
   institutions are more resilient and permanent in districts with greater expropriation intensity in the 1960s.


                                                                19
Second, land donations also allowed existing institutions to generate additional agricultural revenue,
multiplying opportunities for subsequent expansion. Third, individuals educated in pesantren created
in the 1960s may have demanded more Islamic education for their children, leading to greater demand
for religious educational infrastructure in their district. Fourth, new mosques and pesantren may have
induced a competition for social prestige, with members of the local elite seeking to outbid each other
in the provision of religious goods to the community. While we cannot adjudicate among these, all four
seem plausible and are borne out in the qualitative literature on Islamic institutions in Indonesia.
       Pesantren alumni are an important contributor to each of these four channels. As boarding schools,
pesantren draw students from many different villages. After graduating, many return home to take up
leadership positions in mosques and religious schools. Some even start pesantren of their own, affiliating
with the original institution where they were educated.31 This geographic diffusion process engenders
far-reaching alumni networks, which are one channel through which a small amount of waqf land in the
1960s can have large and lasting sociopolitical consequences in the district at large.
       Overall, Figure 2 suggests that the land reform led to a resource windfall for Islamic institutions,
putting heavily impacted districts on a diverging institutional trajectory. Institutions borne out of this
historical episode shaped the supply of and the demand for similar institutions in subsequent decades.
In the next sections, we explore the lasting effects of these diverging institutional paths, documenting
greater influence of organized religion on preferences, politics, and the local organization of society.


5.2       Effects on Electoral Support for Islamism

We show in Table 2 that districts facing greater expropriation intensity in the 1960s provide greater elec-
toral support for Islamist parties in the democratic era. The 1999 election was especially important since
it was the first under democratic rule and hence offered an early indication of underlying preferences
long dormant in the Suharto era. However, being the first election, it was also subject to uncertainty and
limited information about the nature and credibility of party platforms. Thus, we also examine whether
effects persist across the 2004, 2009, and 2014 parliamentary elections.

Party Classification.          We look at measures of electoral support for three groups of political parties: (a)
Islamist, (b) moderate Islamic, and (c) secular parties. Panel (a) of Table 2 examines outcomes for three
hardline Islamist parties that advocate for a central role of Islam in government: the United Development
Party (Partai Persatuan Pembangunan) or PPP, the Prosperous Justice Party (Partai Keadilan Sejahtera) or
PKS, and the Crescent Star Party (Partai Bulan Bintang) or PBB. All three parties demanded Islamic law
and rejected Pancasila, the national secular ideology of the state. While the Suharto regime required all
parties to embrace Pancasila, with democratization, parties could for the first time choose whether or
not to do so. Panel (b) examines outcomes for two moderate Islamic parties with no interest in pushing
for an Islamic state. The National Mandate Party (Partai Amanat Nasional) or PAN and the National
Awakening Party (Partai Kebangkitan Bangsa) or PKB both adopted Pancasila in 1999. Panel (c) looks
31
     Both of the pesantren discussed in Section 3.3 fit this characterization: “When some of its [Gontor’s] graduates returned to
     their home towns or migrated to new places, they also founded pesantren or Islamic schools” (Isbah, 2016). “In fact, almost
     every kelurahan or kampong [i.e., village] [in Tasikmalaya district] has an alumni from Miftahul Huda” (Pamungkas, 2018).


                                                                20
at electoral outcomes for all other parties. These include both the longstanding secular parties—the
Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (Partai Demokrasi Indonesia Perjuangan) or PDI-P and Golkar
(Partai Golongan Karya)—as well as newer ones such as the Democrat Party and the Great Indonesia
Movement Party (Partai Gerakan Indonesia Raya) or Gerindra.
     There are two fundamental distinctions between the Islamist and moderate Islamic parties that are
crucial for understanding the results in Table 2. First, Islamist politicians routinely agitate for sharia law
while PKB and PAN explicitly reject such efforts.32 Second, moderate parties are closely affiliated with
the two largest and longstanding Muslim non-governmental organizations in Indonesia (Muhammadiyah
for PAN and Nahdlatul Ulama or NU for PKB).33 These organizations have long had considerable financial
resources at their disposal. As a result, the resource windfall for Islamic institutions in the 1960s may
have been less consequential for moderate Islamic political leaders than for long-repressed Islamist ones.

Islamist Party Support, 1999–2014.              In column 1 of Table 2, the dependent variable is an indicator for
whether the given party family was represented among the top 3 parties in the village in 1999. Expropri-
ation intensity increased long-term electoral support for Islamist parties (panel a). As we discuss below,
there is some indication that the Islamist advantage in affected districts comes at the expense of mod-
erate Islamic parties as well as secular ones (panels b and c). Column 2 bears this out for 1999. Finally,
column 3 shows that this holds across all elections from 1999 to 2014. For each additional 100 MEH,
Islamist parties gained nearly 4.4 percentage points relative to a mean vote share of 15.4%.
     Importantly, the effects of the land reform on Islamist vote shares from 1999 onward are significantly
different from the pre-reform period. In particular, we can reject that the standardized effect size in
column 3 (0.643) is the same as the effect size (0.109) for Islamist parties in the 1950s elections (p-value
of 0.003). This suggests that the effect on Islamist vote shares marks a shift in political preferences and
not merely a continuation of pre-reform regional sorting across party lines.34
     In Appendix Table A.9, we report the same set of robustness checks as those implemented earlier
for the outcomes in Table 1 (see Section 5.1 for a detailed description). We focus on voting for Islamist
parties (PPP, PKS, and PBB) for these checks. The point estimates and standard errors increase in some
specifications but decrease in others. Overall, though, the key takeaways remain unchanged.
     The Islamist advantage in affected districts may come from capturing votes that would otherwise go
to moderate Islamic parties. In the qualitative literature, Hamayotsu (2011) among others, argues that
increasing support for PKS over the first few democratic elections likely came at the expense of support
for PKB, which increasingly found itself competing locally with PKS-affiliated pesantren. Appendix Table
32
   In 2002, for example, Hamzah Haz, former leader of PPP and Vice President of Indonesia from 2001–2004 led a push with
   Islamist legislators to revive the so-called “Jakarta Charter”, a proposed seven-word preamble to the Constitution obliging
   Muslims to follow Islamic law, which came to embody the fight over Pancasila versus Islam during the early days of indepen-
   dence. PKB and PAN legislators joined secular ones in thwarting this effort.
33
   Both Muhammadiyah and NU also engage in politics. For example, in 2007, NU leaders issued a fatwa warning Indonesian
   Muslims against calls for an Islamic state and urging against support for local sharia regulations being “propagated by Islamist
   organizations through their mosque-based activism” (Zuhri, 2013).
34
   The Islamist parties in the 1950s include Masyumi, NU, Perti and PSII (see Appendix B). At the time, all four parties advocated
   for an Islamic state based on sharia law, though NU would subsequently moderate to accommodate the crackdown on Islamic
   parties first by Sukarno and later by Suharto. Omitting NU from the group of Islamist parties in the 1950s, we still find a
   significant difference with the effect size in column 3 of Table 2 (p-value of 0.031).


                                                                21
A.7 provides stronger evidence on this margin of substitution using individual-level survey data on
voting in the 2004 election. This is consistent with the institutional shock of the land reform having a
stronger effect on Islamist party capacity as noted above. If moderates and hardliners compete for votes
in a standard Hotelling framework (with voters ordered on a line from most religious to most secular),
then the waqf transfers may have enabled hardliners to outbid moderates within the segment of the
voting population that is more inclined to vote Islamic.
       Together, these results suggest that an important legacy of the land reform was to shift the popula-
tion towards Islamist parties. This initially took the form of support for the PPP and over time shifted
to PKS and PBB (see Appendix Tables A.5 and A.6). The sustained support for Islamist parties may be
due in part to mobilization through social networks affiliated with pesantren and mosques. Section 5.4
provides empirical evidence in support of this mechanism, which resonates with the qualitative litera-
ture on religious politics in Indonesia. For example, Buehler (2016) provides a compelling account of
how Islamist activists—based in pesantren and mosque-based networks—pushed local governments to
implement sharia-inspired laws, an outcome we explore below. Moreover, conservative institutions en-
dowed as a result of the land reform may have shaped political beliefs as well as the supply of political
leaders. We take a closer look at these mechanisms in the following sections.


5.3       Islamist Capture of Local Governance

In Table 3, we explore effects of expropriation intensity on religious influence in local governance. Do
waqf assets and success at the polls allow Islamists to exert greater control over public affairs? Here we
examine the reduced-form effects of the land reform on outcomes capturing linkages between Islam,
the state, and the local economy. Using novel administrative and survey data, we look at the size of
the religious bureaucracy in government, the adoption of sharia regulations and Islamic microfinance,
judicial activity by sharia courts, and the presence of Islamist vigilantes. All outcomes in Table 3 are
standardized, and we report the sample mean of each variable in Table A.1.
       Explaining regional variation in these outcomes is important for three reasons. First, these mea-
sures reflect the extent of Islamist influence on the state, which has been a recurring point of tension
and conflict since independence. Second, these measures are informative about influence beyond the
ballot box. After decades of suppression under authoritarian rule, Islamist parties faced an uphill battle
in developing the capacity to win elections in the democratic era. Yet, as detailed below, decentraliza-
tion has allowed Islamists to influence politics and society through other means. Third, these regional
policy victories for the Islamist movement have the potential to influence national politics as Islamist
politicians command increasingly pivotal voting blocs that ensure their role in coalition governments.
Since democratization, newly elected presidents, all from secular parties, have typically appointed one
or more Islamist politicians to cabinet-level positions, where they have considerable scope for affecting
the orientation of certain ministries or aspects of governance.35
35
     For example, Tifatul Sembiring, chairman of PKS, was appointed Minister of Communication and Information in 2009 and
     proceeded to push for censorship of internet sites deemed antithetical to Islam. Other examples include (i) the ascendence
     of Hamzah Haz, noted earlier, to the vice presidency in 2001, (ii) the awarding of several cabinet positions to PPP leaders in
     2004, (iii) the election of PKS leader Hidayat Nur Wahid as Speaker of Parliament, also in 2004.


                                                                 22
Religious Bureaucracy.             The first outcome we consider in column 1 of Table 3 is the number of bu-
reaucrats serving in the local Ministry of Religious Affairs (Kemenag) in 2018. These are not high-level
bureaucrats allocated by the central government but rather employees appointed at the discretion of the
district parliament and mayor and include, among others, Islamic court officials, zakat administrators,
and public madrasa instructors. We estimate a positive and significant effect of expropriation intensity:
100 additional MEH are associated with a religious bureaucracy that is larger by 0.6 standard deviations
(SD). In other words, a larger share of local government resources is dedicated to the management of
religious affairs.36
       This is an important result given the historical role of the Ministry in facilitating the expansion of
mosques and madrasas (Hefner, 1993). According to Salim (2008), the Ministry “had transformed itself
into an official agent of Islamization” during the authoritarian era. With decentralization, district-level
Kemenag and their subdistrict branches have been at the forefront of efforts to advance Islamic institu-
tions into new domains of public life.

Sharia Regulations.            In column 2 of Table 3, we find sizable positive effects of expropriation intensity
on sharia-inspired regulations adopted between 1998 and 2013. One hundred additional MEH leads to a
0.6 SD increase in regulations—approximately doubling such regulations off a mean of 1.7. The data on
sharia regulations, compiled by Buehler (2016, 399 in total spanning 176 contemporary districts), include
both laws adopted by local parliaments and decrees adopted by district mayors (bupatis). Topically,
they cover four domains: (i) vice (e.g., alcohol bans), (ii) Islamic dress (e.g., mandatory veil for women),
(iii) mandatory Islamic study and practice, and (iv) payment of zakat. Technically, religious regulations
are the sole purview of the central government. Before 1998, there are no such regulations on record
according to Ministry of Home Affairs data on regional legislation. However, with democracy and de-
centralization, the center has done little to stop such legislation, effectively allowing sharia regulations to
flourish.
       Notably, many of these regulations were supported by secular parties and leaders beholden to the
political clout of the Islamist movement. Consider an example from Tasikmalaya district. In 2001, local
activists effectively lobbied for the adoption of Regulation No. 13/2001 on “Restoring Peace and Or-
der Based on Moral Teachings, Religion, Ethics, and Local Cultural Values.” This sweeping regulation
facilitated several policy changes, including a Qur’an reading skills requirement for entry into public
primary schools (Buehler, 2016, pp. 147-8). Another interesting example comes from Maros district in
South Sulawesi, where an incumbent mayor from the secular Golkar Party had close ties to a local pe-
santren network (Darul Istiqamah) and implemented a flurry of sharia regulations in the lead up to an
election, including dress codes for Muslims and local civil servants as well as requirements to pray and
give zakat (Buehler, 2016, pp. 166-7). While anecdotes abound, a common theme is the central role of
mosques and religious schools in coordinating the Islamist movement.

Islamic Finance.          In Indonesia as in many Muslim societies, Islamic precepts influence the local econ-
omy through increased usage of Islamic finance, “a class of financial transactions that are ostensibly free
36
     To ensure that these results are driven by local discretion, we examine only those “structural” bureaucrats appointed by the
     central government. As expected, doing so yields a small and insignificant effect of expropriation intensity.


                                                                23
of interest and compatible with Islamic teachings” (Kuran, 2018). There is a debate about the economic
significance of this development. Nonetheless, the take-up of products associated with Islamic finance
signals a strong adherence to Islamic values and teachings, with the potential to influence economic and
financial decision-making. We look at a particular dimension of Islamic finance in column 3 of Table
3. The dependent variable here is the share of villages in the district operating Islamic microfinance
cooperatives known as Baitul Maal wat Tamwil or BMT. These institutions operate outside the formal fi-
nancial system and offer Islamic microfinance products compatible with sharia law. We find a positive
effect of expropriation intensity on the prevalence of BMT, although it is not statistically significant at
conventional levels (some robustness checks in Appendix Table A.10 indicate more precise estimates).

Islamic Courts.           The next columns of Table 3 look at the activity of Islamic courts.37 While a few of
these courts go back to Dutch Rule in the 1800s, a 1989 Religious Judicature Act called for the creation
of Islamic courts in every district, granting them purview over a range of issues (Cammack and Feener,
2012). In column 4, we find a positive and significant effect on the volume of cases related to waqf.
Districts targeted for expropriation under the BAL have more land under waqf (Table 1) and more waqf -
related cases adjudicated by Islamic courts. This result is worth noting in the context of a dual legal
system where public and religious courts coexist and oftentimes compete. The use of an institution that
falls outside the secular legal framework creates demand for its own adjudication and dispute settlement
mechanism, beyond the purview of government courts.
       We then consider the two most common types of cases adjudicated by Islamic law: inheritance cases
(column 5) and marital cases (column 6), which include polygamy, divorce, and child marriage. Greater
expropriation intensity leads to a greater volume of inheritance cases, while the effect on marriage cases
is positive but imprecise. Due to lack of data on secular courts, it is not possible to measure substitution
effects across the two types of legal systems for each type of case. Nonetheless, the effects we find in
columns 4–6 of Table 3 are consistent with citizens demanding more dispute settlement by Islamic courts
in areas endowed with more Islamic institutions as a result of the land reform. The 1989 Act solidified the
dual legal system and allowed the institutional shock of the 1960s to translate into a greater prevalence
of judicial institutions associated with religion. Islamists agitate for greater use of these courts, and the
local branches of the Ministry of Religion (examined earlier) played an important role in getting these
courts off the ground in the 1990s.

Islamist Vigilantes.            The last two columns of Table 3 explore violence perpetrated by a prominent
Islamist vigilante group called the Islamic Defenders Front (Front Pembela Islam) or FPI. Established in
1998, the FPI acts as a morality police, targeting social activities deemed incompatible with Islam (e.g.,
selling alcohol, remaining open during Ramadan). We find positive effects of expropriation intensity
on FPI-related incidents and casualties in columns 7 and 8, respectively, as reported by the National

37
     The data span 1.2 million cases with varying coverage from 2007 to 2019 across districts. The outcome here includes all cases
     reported for each district, but results are similar when adjusting to per annum rates. The sample size in these specifications
     falls to 80 districts, which are the only 1960 districts for which administrative data on Islamic courts are publicly available
     (see Appendix B). However, expropriation intensity does not predict missing-ness. Regressing a dummy for any available
     Islamic courts data yields a coefficient of -0.090 (0.160).


                                                                  24
Violence Monitoring System.38 This could be consistent with a greater demand for moral policing or a
weaker response by the secular state to prevent violence by Islamist vigilantes. In many places, FPI has
strong roots in local pesantren networks, including Miftahul Huda mentioned in Section 3.3 (its alumni
are key FPI members in Ciamis and Tasikmalaya districts; see Pamungkas, 2018). The organization
sees its efforts as complementary to those of Islamist parties in hastening the implementation of Sharia-
compliant policies. Consistent with the other findings in Table 3, this is one of the several ways in which
affected districts experience a deeper reach of Islam into society and public affairs.
      In Table A.10, we report the same set of robustness checks as for prior outcomes. Despite limited
power for some specifications with reduced district coverage, the takeaways are largely consistent with
the baseline results.


5.4     The Demand- and Supply-Side of Religious Politics

The results thus far suggest that the land reform may have changed both the demand for and supply of
Islamist politics. This section sheds deeper light on these two forces and reveals that the effects are not
due to a change in religiosity or piety per se. Rather, the institutional shock led to a shift in beliefs about
the role of religion in politics and greater entry of religious candidates into politics.

Demand for Religious Politics. In panel (a) of Table 4, we provide direct evidence on voter preferences
in line with Islamists’ success at the polls. We measure these preferences using survey questions on the
importance of a candidate’s religion and religiosity in influencing voting decisions, and self-reported
demand for sharia law. We first report estimates for two different variables from the Indonesian Family
Life Survey (IFLS) in 2007 and 2014: whether respondents say a political candidate’s religion makes it
very likely to vote for him/her (column 1), and whether a candidate’s religiosity makes it very likely
to vote for him/her (column 2). We find large effects of expropriation intensity on both outcomes. We
also report positive effects on two similar outcomes from a different survey conducted by Pepinsky et
al. (2018) in 2008:39 whether respondents deem the religion (column 3) and the religiosity (column 4) of
the President of Indonesia very important. In columns 5–6, we examine two measures of support for the
adoption of sharia law: an index of support for specific dimensions of sharia40 and stated support for the
adoption of sharia law broadly defined. Expropriation intensity has positive effects on both outcomes.
Together, these results substantiate the greater demand for religious politics among residents of districts
facing greater expropriation intensity in the 1960s.

Supply of Religious Politicians.            Along with these demand-side differences, we also identify comple-
mentary supply-side changes. Mosques and religious schools borne out of the waqf endowments during
38
   The underlying event-based data come from hundreds of media sources (see Appendix B for details). However, these data
   do not cover all of Indonesia and hence the reduced sample size of 114 districts. Reassuringly, the coverage is unrelated to
   expropriation intensity, which has a coefficient of 0.051 (0.139) in a regression testing for systematic missing-ness.
39
   Neither the IFLS nor Pepinsky et al. (2018) survey cover all districts in our study. However, the coverage is not systematically
   correlated with expropriation intensity.
40
   We take a simple average of binary responses indicating very strong support for corporal punishments for: individuals found
   guilty of robbery, prohibiting interest, mandatory wearing of the hijab, polygamy, stoning individuals found guilty of adultery,
   and the death penalty for apostasy.


                                                                25
the land reform surely went on to influence multiple generations of Islamic leaders, some of whom may
have been inclined to enter local politics. Panel (b) of Table 4 sheds light on this channel using origi-
nal data on legislator profiles in 2019.41 We consider the number of candidates mentioning Islam- and
sharia-related terms in their campaign platform (column 7), candidates indicating in their listed name
that they accomplished the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca (column 8), and Islamic scholars running as can-
didates (column 9).42 We find large, positive effects on these outcomes. For example, an additional 100
MEH roughly doubles the number of candidates campaigning on religious themes. Moreover, this result
holds when looking solely at candidates for Islamist parties, but not when looking at those represent-
ing moderate Islamic parties (which do not support government-mandated sharia law). In other words,
Islamist candidates amplify their religious messaging in districts most exposed to the land reform.
     We go further in columns 10–12 to establish that some of the increase in religiously-motivated candi-
dacies can be directly linked to mobilization within schools. Columns 10 and 11 show that expropriation
intensity is associated with greater entry of legislative candidates listing teacher and student, respec-
tively, as their primary occupation. These teacher and student candidates are also more likely to have
Islamist campaign platforms (column 12). While we cannot trace these candidates to specific educational
institutions, these results are consistent with greater (religious) politicization of the educational sector in
districts facing greater expropriation intensity in the 1960s.
     Of course, whether these results purely isolate supply or an equilibrium response to demand is im-
possible to tell. What they do provide is evidence that the shock to Islamic institutions led to persistent
changes in the religious credentials and predisposition of future politicians. To the extent that leaders
matter (Jones and Olken, 2005), this is another important channel by which a small shock to waqf en-
dowments in the 1960s might exert a lasting influence on politics and society.

Political Preferences vs. Piety.           Expropriation intensity had strong effects on beliefs about the role
of Islam in public life, but, in Table 5, we show that this does not seem to operate through a change
in religiosity or intensity of religious practice. The ensuing results highlight an important distinction
between political and non-political religious beliefs and preferences. We find null effects on the following
outcomes from the IFLS: a dummy for being a Muslim (column 1),43 self-reported religiosity (column 2),
and relative trust towards co-Muslims and non-Muslims (column 3). From the Pepinsky et al. (2018)
data, we look at individuals who self-report as Muslim (column 4), pray 5 times a day (column 5),
fast during Ramadan (column 6), read the Qur’an (column 7), always attend Friday prayer (column 8),
recite non-mandatory Sunnah prayers (column 9), are part of a prayer group (column 10), and pay zakat
(column 11). Column 12 pools all practices in columns 5–11 into a single index. Across columns, we fail
to detect systematic effects of expropriation intensity on religious piety and practice.
     While this may seem counterintuitive, it is consistent with the observation that religious voters often
have little appetite for organized religion to play a greater role in government. In fact, such voters
regularly lend their support to explicitly non-religious politicians in settings as diverse as Brazil, Italy,
41
   Thanks to Nicholas Kuipers for scraping these data from the Indonesian Electoral Commission: http://www.kpu.go.id/.
42
   The outcome in column 1 of panel (b) is based on a search for the following terms: umma, dawah, Muslim, Islam, sharia, jihad.
43
   Subsequent columns are restricted to Muslims respondents. We find similar null results for the Muslim share of the village
   population based on the complete-count 2000 Population Census: -0.015 (0.028).


                                                              26
the Philippines, or the United States—a point emphasized in the recent literature on populism (Müller,
2016). Our findings suggest that religiosity and religious political preferences may react to different
underlying triggers. We provide further evidence in Appendix Table A.7, which examines individual-
level votes from the Pepinsky et al. (2018) survey. To be sure, more devout Muslims—proxied by the
piety index in column 12 of Table 5—are more likely to vote for religious parties than for secular parties.
Within the Muslim bloc, pious voters are equally likely to support Islamist and moderate Islamic parties.
However, Islamists gain at the expense of moderate Islamic parties in districts with greater expropriation
intensity, and this substitution effect is unchanged when controlling for personal piety.
      Overall, these results imply that the entrenchment of Islamism is not fueled by greater religiosity.
This is an important finding, especially given that under the authoritarian rule of Suharto, the govern-
ment aimed to promote Islamic culture and piety while repressing Islamic politics. With political open-
ing in the late 1990s came an opportunity to institutionalize the Islamist fervor that had been nurtured
in the conservative institutions borne out of the waqf transfers during the 1960s.


5.5     Political and Economic Effects of the Waqf

Thus far, we have assumed that the reduced-form effects of expropriation intensity on religious politics
can be attributed to greater prevalence of waqf lands inherited from the 1960s. We probe this assumption
in Tables 6 and 7, which regress political and economic outcomes on the prevalence of waqf. Both tables
report the coefficient of interest from equation (2) estimated via OLS and IV. The OLS specification does
not have a causal interpretation but estimates a conditional correlation between waqf prevalence and
outcomes examined in Tables 1-3. In the IV estimation, the difference-in-discontinuity term (Above400 ×
M EH) is used as an instrument for land under waqf. With first-stage F -statistics in the 4–6 range, we
report the p-value for a weak-instrument robust test that the coefficient on waqf is different from zero.

Political Outcomes.       Table 6 examines three sets of outcomes: waqf -endowed institutions; electoral
support for Islamist parties; and the role of Islam in public affairs. As expected, there is a strong as-
sociation between waqf lands and the prevalence of mosques, pesantren, and madrasas in columns 1–3,
respectively. Looking at IV estimates, a 10% increase in land under waqf leads to 1.4 more mosques,
0.26 more pesantren, and 0.5 more madrasas in the village. These effect sizes are large enough to explain
downstream variation in Islamism. In columns 4–5 of Table 6, we estimate significant impacts of waqf
land on support for Islamist parties. The IV estimates imply that a 10% increase in waqf lands leads to a
1.5 percentage point increase in the Islamist vote share from 1999 to 2014, relative to a mean of 15.4%.
      Finally, columns 6–7 of Table 6 look at effects of the waqf on linkages between Islam and the state,
measured by the number of local employees of the Ministry of Religious Affairs (column 6) and the
number of sharia regulations adopted in the district (column 7). These estimates are somewhat imprecise
but again point to positive effects of waqf land on religious politics. For example, a 10% increase in waqf
leads to 0.26 more sharia regulations adopted in the district between 1998-2013—a 15% effect relative to
the sample mean of 1.7.
      Across all outcomes, the IV estimates are larger than the OLS, and this difference is statistically sig-


                                                      27
nificant for most outcomes (based on Hausman-type tests). There are several potential explanations.
First, this could be due to measurement error in waqf land reported by village officials in Podes. Second,
it is consistent with a large local average treatment effect (LATE) if waqf lands created as a result of the
BAL were relatively more productive than marginal lands endowed in waqf in normal times. Since the
IV isolates the effects of waqf endowments created during the 1960s (as discussed in Section 4.3), the
corresponding coefficients are likely to be large in magnitude. Third, regions experiencing the greatest
uptick in waqf due to the BAL may have been those where the Islamist movement was the most resource-
constrained before the reform. Finally, complementary to the LATE interpretation, the OLS may, in fact,
be biased downward for two reasons: (i) if less productive lands are more likely to be endowed as waqf
in regular times, and (ii) the moderate Islamic organizations that reject Islamism (i.e., Muhammadiyah
and NU) command more waqf land on account of the fact they faced less repression historically.

Agricultural and Economic Outcomes. Kuran (2001, 2011) argues that the traditional waqf ’s inflexibil-
ity posed increasing costs on Islamic society, especially after the introduction of the corporation. From
this perspective, the perpetual alienation of property inevitably becomes inefficient as modes of produc-
tion and technologies change. Because the terms of traditional waqf cannot be changed, the waqf “locks”
land into inefficient uses and unlike a corporation, cannot be easily dissolved when it is no longer viable.
The 20th century waqf in Indonesia, like elsewhere in the Muslim world, are mostly of the more flexible
modern variety described by Kuran (2016) as akin to a charitable foundation (see Section 3.2). Yet, it
is possible that modern waqf -endowed assets are less efficient than alternative property arrangements.
This may be especially true in an agricultural economy where land is the most valuable asset.
       Table 7 shows that the land reform adversely affected village-level agricultural productivity via its
impact on waqf.44 We report reduced form, OLS and IV specifications. In Panel A, column 1 shows
that expropriation intensity is associated with lower agricultural income per capita, as measured using
crop-specific output from Podes 2003 and prices from the Food and Agriculture Organization. The IV
estimate in Panel C suggests that this effect runs in part through waqf : a 1% increase in waqf land reduces
agricultural income per capita by 2.5%. Column 2 reports similar, albeit noisier, negative effects on
agricultural output per hectare planted, appropriately weighted by crop-specific revenue shares (see
Bazzi et al., 2016). Some of these productivity losses may be due to lower capital intensity relative to
labor (column 3) and land (column 4).
       These results are consistent with at least four potential mechanisms. First, the waqf endowment may
impart certain restrictions on crop choice that restrict farmland to be used to grow food crops demanded
by local beneficiaries (e.g., students at the pesantren) rather than potentially more profitable cash crops
for consumption outside the village. Second, most waqf -endowed land is farmed under a sharecrop-
ping arrangement known as muzara’a, a type of partnership compliant with Islamic law.45 Given the
well-known inefficiencies of sharecropping (Burchardi et al., 2018; Marshall, 1890), the waqf could have
inhibited alternative, productivity-enhancing tenancy arrangements. Third, the waqf may limit the scope
44
     These results are restricted to villages with agricultural production in 2003. See Appendix B for details on the measures.
45
     In the Gontor example (Section 3.3), once the land was designated as waqf in the early 1960s, the waqf administrator, a local
     cleric, maintained the prior sharecropping terms with each cultivator holding 1 ha of land as these terms were deemed sharia-
     compliant (Winarko, 2006).


                                                                 28
for reinvestment and future growth given that much of the revenue is allocated towards short-run re-
ligious consumption (by mosques and schools, see Jahar, 2005, for examples). Finally, with relatively
cheap labor under coercion by religious authority, waqf administrators may be prone to labor-intensive
modes of production at the expense of capital upgrading.
       In column 5 of Table 7, we find null effects on nighttime light intensity in 2003. This is the best
available proxy for overall village-level development in the absence of a more complete measure of non-
agricultural income.46 While we cannot rule out large negative or positive effects, the weak effects of
expropriation intensity and waqf on overall development suggests that the economic consequences may
be circumscribed to agriculture. That the agricultural income losses are not mirrored in light intensity
seems plausible for the average village where one-quarter of the population reports agriculture as their
primary occupation (in the 2000 Population Census). The results in column 5 also goes against an alter-
native interpretation of our findings, namely that Islamist dominance grew in districts most affected by
the land reform because these districts became systematically less developed. We explore other alterna-
tive explanations, including an inequality channel, in Section 6.1.
       Ultimately, we view these economic effects as being closely connected to the political ones. First, one
does not need a great deal of waqf land to sustain a mosque or Islamic school, which can exert sizable
political impacts. However, the mere 6% of zoned land under waqf in the average village seems too
limited for the economy-wide losses in aggregate income of the sort conjectured by Kuran (2011) for the
historical Middle East, where waqf land comprised as much as half or even three-quarters of all land.
Nevertheless, by controlling productive assets, religious authorities in Indonesia accrue political rents.
Even if it were possible to convert the waqf land to an alternative use, religious leaders would have little
incentive to do so as it could undermine their authority over laborers on that land.


5.6      Summary and Proposed Mechanisms

Our findings thus far suggest that the 1960 land reform led to the entrenchment of Islamism in regions
facing the greatest expropriation intensity. We argue that the causal pathway runs through waqf land
endowments, which provided conservative religious authorities a resource base with which to grow
and expand their efforts to push for a greater role of Islam in public life. We show that this was not due
to an underlying change in piety and religious practice.
       Instead, we view the results above as consistent with three mutually reinforcing mechanisms: (i)
greater exposure to Islamist ideology through mosques and religious schools, (ii) greater mobilization
through mosque- and school-based activist networks, and (iii) a greater pipeline of potential Islamist
leaders educated in religious schools and nurtured in mosque-based youth groups. The findings in
Table 4 are consistent with a greater adherence to Islamist ideology (panel a) and a larger supply of
Islamist politicians mobilized in part through school networks (panel b) in districts most exposed to the
land reform. Each of these mechanisms is in line with the qualitative literature on Islamist politics in
Indonesia, some of which was cited throughout the results discussed above.

46
     The sample size falls due to mismatches between villages in Podes 2003 and those in the shapefiles underlying the light
     intensity data. Restricting columns 1–4 to those with non-missing light intensity leaves the results unchanged.


                                                              29
6     Alternative Explanations and Robustness Checks
This section provides additional evidence bolstering the case for our interpretation of the main results.
First, we consider several leading alternative explanations. Second, we present additional robustness
checks, including an examination of the other expropriation cutoffs at 50 and 250 people/km2 .


6.1     Alternative Explanations

We argued earlier that waqf endowments are the key mediator linking the land reform to the entrench-
ment of Islamism. Here we examine and rule out several alternative explanations that are not related to
Islamist politicization of waqf -endowed institutions.

Residual Land Inequality.           One possibility is that the land reform affected the land distribution. This
would be a concern if land inequality increases support for Islamism (e.g., as an alternative to secular
elites). Columns 1, 3, and 5 of Table 8 show that expropriation intensity did not substantially affect the
change in the number of holdings above 5 hectares from 1963 to 1980, 1985, and 1990, respectively.47
Columns 2, 4, and 6 report analogous tests using district-level estimates of the Pareto dispersion param-
eter (λ) over those same time horizons. The results suggest that expropriation intensity did not reduce
inequality in the countryside in the first few decades after the reform.48
      Overall, the lack of an effect on inequality is consistent with the historical record discussed earlier.
In particular, a small fraction of expropriable lands had been reallocated by 1965 (40% and 5% in Phase
I and Phase II regions, respectively), and most of these lands were reclaimed by their original owners
in the years following the regime transition. Yet, the null result may seem puzzling given that the waqf
transfers alone could have changed inequality by reallocating land from large holders. However, note
that in most cases, this land simply changed hands without being broken up into small parcels, which
would have happened had this land been expropriated by the state. Also, many large holders may have
transferred their excess land to a few religious institutions in their communities, which would have
potentially increased land concentration.

Demographic Changes from the 1965–66 Mass Violence.                          Another concern is that the massacre of
suspected Communists may have tracked the land reform. While the data limitations concerning this
episode of potential genocide are well known (Cribb, 1990), we explore this possibility in columns 7–8
of Table 8, where we test for effects of the land reform on two measures of demographic change that
are potentially informative about the incidence of mass violence: population growth between 1961–71
(column 7), and changes in male-to-female sex ratios between 1961 and 1971 (column 8).


47
   These post-reform data come from large-scale Population Census and intercensal survey data. While there was another
   Agricultural Census conducted in 1973, the data are only publicly available in aggregate regional tabulations not suitable for
   district-level analysis.
48
   We find similar null results using village-level Pareto dispersion parameters (λ) estimated from the Agricultural Census
   in 2003 (reduced form coefficient of 0.030 with a standard error of 0.137). Moreover, there appears to be no systematic
   relationship between waqf land and λ at the village level based on OLS and IV specifications.


                                                               30
       Expropriation intensity does not significantly correlate with these proxies for mass violence.49 This
has two implications for our main results. First, the effects we find on contemporary support for Is-
lamism are not likely to be explained by changes in the underlying voting population, which is con-
sistent with the null effects on religious identity in Table 5. Second, even if Islamist groups organized
around pesantren contributed to the mass violence in 1965–66 (Fealy and McGregor, 2010), the districts
with greater expropriation intensity were not necessarily those where the mass killings disproportion-
ately took place. Overall, these results provide further support to the particular channels we highlight
in Section 3.3: the land reform contributed to contemporary support for Islamism through its effect on
specific Islamic institutions. Of course, a corollary to this explanation is that these religious institutions
may have helped to maintain a strong and persistent ideological opposition to any potential resurgence
of Communism in Indonesia.

Schooling and Public Goods.                Given its impact on the supply of religious educational institutions, the
land reform could have affected local support for Islamism via public goods provision. Citizens may
support Islamists because they provide more local public goods than secular and moderate representa-
tives. This reciprocity-based mechanism has been put forward in other contexts to explain support for
Islamists (see, e.g., Cammett and Luong, 2014, on the Muslim Brotherhood). We find no evidence of this
alternative explanation across a range of outcomes in Table 9: the number of public schools per 1,000 chil-
dren built in the district in the 1970s as part of the government’s landmark INPRES program (column 1,
see Duflo, 2001, on the program); mean years of schooling in the 2000 village population (column 2) and
the share with primary (column 3), junior secondary (column 4), and senior secondary school completed
(column 5); and two summary indices capturing a host of village-level public goods in health (column 6)
and infrastructure (column 7) from 1999 to 2014 (see the table notes). The small null effects across these
outcomes suggests that the land reform did not lead to sizable shifts in access to education or broader
public goods. Rather, the waqf transfers in the 1960s empowered Islamists to provide a different type of
public good more focused around conservative religion in lieu of the prevailing alternatives.


6.2       Further Robustness Checks

Before concluding, we discuss several robustness checks on the outcomes in Tables 1–3. Recall from
Section 5 that our results are robust to a range of alternative specifications and controls in Appendix
Tables A.8–A.10. This section describes additional checks, all of which are elaborated in Appendix A.7.
       Appendix Tables A.11–A.13 demonstrate robustness to alternative RD specifications. For compari-
son, the top row of each table reports estimates from the baseline specification. First, we vary the degree
of the polynomial in the running variable (1960 population density) in equation (1). Our main results
are robust to alternative polynomials (linear, quadratic, and quartic) besides the cubic one used in the
baseline. Second, we vary the bandwidth around the population density cutoff of 400 people/km2 , with

49
     These null findings are in line with a consensus view among demographers of Indonesia that there is little evidence of missing
     people in Population Censuses conducted after the violence during the 1960s. We confirmed this view in several lengthy email
     discussions in 2013 with Terrence Hull and Peter McDonald, leading demographers with decades of experience working on
     the Population Census in Indonesia.


                                                                 31
bandwidths ranging from 100 to 300. The difference-in-discontinuity estimate remains positive and sig-
nificant in most of these specifications. At the lower end, we hit constraints on the capacity to estimate
statistically well-powered regressions as we are left with too few districts (46 out of 191). We view these
results not as illustrating the fragility of our findings but rather the limits of the available identifying
variation from the historical policy.

Other Population Density Cutoffs. Appendix Tables A.14–A.16 probe the role of other cutoffs used in
the land reform. While our analysis focuses on the 400 people/km2 cutoff, the reform plan stipulated two
other cutoffs at 50 and 250 people/km2 . For districts subject to these cutoffs, enforcement was weaker
and redistribution efforts much less advanced by the time the land reform was halted in the mid-1960s,
as discussed in Sections 2.1 and 4.2. Nevertheless, it is possible that expectations of future expropriation
changed behavior even though the threat was never materialized as it did for districts subject to the 400
cutoff. We consider this possibility using two approaches to identifying the effects of expropriation at
these other cutoffs.
       First, we estimate a version of equation (1) where we “pool” all three cutoffs and match each district
to the nearest cutoff: districts under 150 people/km2 are matched to the 50 cutoff, districts between 150–
325 people/km2 are matched to the 250 cutoff, and districts above 325 people/km2 are matched to the
400 cutoff. In this case, marginal expropriable holdings (MEH) are defined for each cutoff following the
BAL schedule: holdings between 5–9 hectares at the 400 cutoff, 7.5–12 hectares at the 250 cutoff, and
10–20 hectares at the 50 cutoff. The difference-in-discontinuity estimate remains positive in all tables,
and is statistically significant in many columns of Appendix Tables A.14–A.16. However, the fact that
little expropriation occurred at the 50 and 250 cutoffs suggests why these results might be less precise.
       Second, we look for difference-in-discontinuities in outcomes at each cutoff. This specification sep-
arately estimates the effect of expropriation intensity at the 50, 250, and 400 cutoffs, using the relevant
definition of MEH at each cutoff. The bottom panel of Appendix Tables A.14–A.16 reports the corre-
sponding estimates of β 50 , β 250 , and β 400 .50
       Overall, there is limited evidence that expropriation intensity at the 50 and 250 people/km2 cut-
offs affected outcomes of interest. The difference-in-discontinuity coefficients associated with these cut-
offs are small in magnitude and insignificant in Appendix Tables A.14–A.16. On the other hand, the
difference-in-discontinuity estimated at 400 people/km2 remains positive and significant across nearly
all specifications. Our core results are therefore robust to accounting for identifying variation at the two
other population density thresholds stipulated in the BAL.
       These heterogeneous effects of the land reform across the three policy cutoffs resonate with the his-
tory of the land reform prior to its reversal. Under Phase I of the reform, redistribution began in the more
central and populous Inner Islands of Java, Bali, and NTB where 400 was practically the only relevant
cutoff (i.e., 2 out of 95 districts fell under 50 people/km2 , and 7 fell in the 50–250 range). Under Phase
II, redistribution effort was slated to expand to the more sparsely populated Outer Islands where the 50
cutoff was the only meaningful one (i.e., 2 out of 96 districts had more than 250 people/km2 ). However,
by the time efforts got underway in this second stage, the turmoil of the mid-1960s and seizure of power
50
     See Appendix Section A.7 for a detailed description of this specification.


                                                                  32
by Suharto had already led to a scaling back and eventual halt to most government-led redistribution
efforts. Putting this history together, it is clear why we find such muted effects around the 50 and 250
people/km2 cutoffs and much stronger effects at 400.


7   Conclusion
This paper provides causal evidence of the effects of Islamic institutions on religious politics and the
spread of Islamism in the world’s largest Muslim country. Our results suggest that a major Islamic
institution, the waqf, played a disproportionately important role at a critical juncture in Indonesian his-
tory. The 1960 land reform exempted religious lands from redistribution, prompting rural landown-
ers to transfer their holdings to waqf endowments to avoid seizure by the government. These transfers
proved especially valuable for the Islamist movement, which was able to use the endowed institutions—
mosques and religious schools—to entrench their conservative ideology and ultimately influence the
course of politics. Today, citizens in affected regions demand a greater role for Islam in public affairs
and are more successful in implementing that preference. We find that these institutional changes are
not due to a change in piety per se but rather to a change in views about the role of religion in public life
and the resources available to actors capable of leveraging those views to enact political change.
    While the resurgent Islamist movement has brought profound changes to Indonesia, the movement
itself remains fractured, with its vote split across three parties, to say nothing of their contentious rela-
tionship with moderate Islamic groups. It is possible that the personalized nature of the waqf plays a part
in this fragmentation, effectively ensuring sustained competition in the market for votes and political
support. Iannaccone and Berman (2006) highlight a potential upside, namely that religious competition
may act as a moderating force over the long-run under certain conditions. Whether this competition
mechanism holds in Muslim countries like Indonesia and what role the waqf plays in this process is an
important question for future research.
    Our findings may have broader implications for understanding the the rise of religious politics in
other societies. This pertains, first and foremost, to support for Islamism in the Muslim World. Waqf
are prevalent across the Middle East, North Africa, and India, where their impacts on Islamism and the
economy deserve further exploration. Beyond Islamist politics, the literature on the economics of reli-
gion has generally not focused on the impact that specific institutions play in shaping political activism
by religious actors and organizations. Much like the waqf created in the 1960s continue to influence In-
donesian politics, religious institutions may also determine the success of religious influence on politics
in the West, or in other parts of the developing world.




                                                     33
References
Abbasi, M. Z., “The classical Islamic law of Waqf: A concise introduction,” Arab Law Quarterly, 2012, 26
 (2), 121–153.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano, “Culture and institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2015, 53 (4), 898–
  944.
Allen, T., “Information Frictions in Trade,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (6), 2041–2083.
Almond, G., R. S. Appleby, and E. Sivan, Strong Religion: The Rise of Fundamentalisms Around the World,
  Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Banerjee, A and L Iyer, “History, institutions, and economic performance: The legacy of colonial land
  tenure systems in India,” American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1190–1213.
Bank Indonesia, “Wakaf: Pengaturan dan Tata Kelola yang Efektif,” Departemen Ekonomi dan Keuangan
  Syariah Bank Indonesia, Jakarta, 2016.
Barro, R. J. and R. M. McCleary, “Which countries have state religions?,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2005, 120 (4), 1331–1370.
Baswedan, A. R., “Political Islam in Indonesia: present and future trajectory,” Asian Survey, 2004, 44 (5),
  669–690.
Bazzi, S., “Wealth Heterogeneity and the Income Elasticity of Migration,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (2), 219–255.
  , A. Gaduh, A. D. Rothenberg, and Maisy Wong, “Skill transferability, migration, and development:
  Evidence from population resettlement in Indonesia,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (9), 2658–
  98.
  , G. Koehler-Derrick, and B. Marx, “The Institutional Foundations of Religious Politics: Evidence
  from Indonesia,” NBER Working Paper no. 25151, 2018.
Becker, S. O. and L. Woessmann, “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of Protestant Economic
  History,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, (May).
Belloc, M., F. Drago, and R. Galbiati, “Earthquakes, Religion, and Transition to Self-Government in
  Italian Cities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (4).
Bentzen, J. S., “Acts of God? Religiosity and Natural Disasters Across Subnational World Districts,”
  Economic Journal, 2019, 129 (622), 2295–2341.
Berman, E., Radical, Religious, and Violent: The New Economics of Terrorism, Cambridge, Massachusetts:
  MIT Press, 2011.
Binzel, C. and J.-P. Carvalho, “Education, social mobility and religious movements: The Islamic revival
  in Egypt,” The Economic Journal, 2017, 127 (607), 2553–2580.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier, “On the joint evolution of culture and institutions,” Technical Report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
Blaydes, Lisa and Drew a. Linzer, “The Political Economy of Women’s Support for Fundamentalist
  Islam,” World Politics, jun 2011, 60 (04), 576–609.
Buehler, M., The politics of shari’a law: islamist activists and the state in democratizing indonesia, Cambridge
  University Press, 2016.
Burchardi, K. B., S. Gulesci, B. Lerva, and M. Sulaiman, “Moral hazard: Experimental evidence from
  tenancy contracts,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 134 (1), 281–347.


                                                      34
Bussons de Janssens, G., “les waks dans l’Islam Contemporain,” Revue des etudes islamiques, 1951, 19 (1),
  1–72.
Cammack, M. E. and R. M. Feener, “The Islamic legal system in Indonesia,” Pac. Rim L. & Pol’y J., 2012,
  21, 13.
Cammett, M. and P. J. Luong, “Is There an Islamist Political Advantage?,” Annual Review of Political
  Science, 2014, 17 (1), 187–206.
Campante, F. and D. Yanagizawa-Drott, “Does religion affect economic growth and happiness? Evi-
  dence from Ramadan,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (2), 615–658.
Cantoni, D., J. Dittmar, and N. Yuchtman, “Religion Competition and Reallocation: the Political Econ-
  omy of Secularization in the Protestant Reformation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (4).
Carvalho, J.-P., S. Iyer, and J. Rubin, Advances in the Economics of Religion, Springer, 2018.
Castles, L., “Notes on Guntur Islamic School,” Indonesia, 1965, 1, 30–45.
Chaney, E., “Revolt on the Nile: Economic Shocks, Religion, and Political Power,” Econometrica, 2013, 81
 (5), 2033–2053.
Chen, D. L., “Club Goods and Group Identity: Evidence from Islamic Resurgence During the Indonesian
 Financial Crisis,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (2).
  and D. M. Hungerman, “Economics, religion, and culture: A brief introduction,” Journal of Economic
  Behavior and Organization, 2014, (104), 1–3.
Clingingsmith, D., A. I. Khwaja, and M. Kremer, “Estimating the Impact of the Hajj: Religion and
  Tolerance in Islam’s Global Gathering,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, pp. 1133–1170.
Conley, T. G., “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of econometrics, 1999, 92 (1),
  1–45.
Crecelius, D., “Usurpation of Waqf Revenues in Late Sixteenth Century Damiette,” Journal of the Ameri-
  can Research Center in Egypt, 1995, 32, 265–268.
Cribb, R., “Problems in the Historiography of the Killings in Indonesia,” The Indonesian Killings 1965-
  1966: Studies from Java and Bali, 1990, pp. 1–44.
  , “Genocide in Indonesia, 1965-1966.,” Journal of genocide research, 2001, 3 (2), 219–239.
Dell, M., “Path dependence in development: Evidence from the Mexican Revolution,” 2012.
Department of Agriculture, Penjuluh Land Reform, Djanuari s/d April 1964.
  , Penjuluh Land Reform, April s/d Juli 1965.
Djatnika, R., “Les wakaf ou biens de mainmorte à Java-est: étude diachronique,” Archipel, 1985, 30 (1),
  121–136.
Duflo, E., “Schooling and labor market consequences of school construction in Indonesia: Evidence from
 an unusual policy experiment,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4), 795–813.
Encyclopaedia of Islam, ““Wakf”,” 2012.
Euben, R. and M. Q. Zaman, “Introduction,” in Roxanne Euben and Muhammad Qasim Zaman, eds.,
  Princeton Readings in Islamist Thought: Text and Contexts from al-Banna to Bin Laden, Princeton and Ox-
  ford: Princeton University Press, 2009, p. 4.
Farid, H., “Indonesia’s original sin: Mass killings and capitalist expansion, 1965-66,” Inter-Asia Cultural
  Studies, 2005, 6 (1), 3–16.
Fauzia, A., Faith and the state: a history of Islamic philanthropy in Indonesia, Leiden: Brill, 2013.


                                                        35
Fealy, G. and K. McGregor, “Nahdlatul Ulama and the Killings of 1965-66: Religion, Politics and Re-
  membrance,” Indonesia, 2010, 89 (April 2010), 37–60.
Fourati, M., G. Gratton, and P. A. Grosjean, “Render unto Caesar: Taxes, charity, and political Islam,”
  European Economic Review, 2019, 119, 114–146.
Geertz, C., “Religious Belief and Economic Behavior in a Central Javanese Town : Some Preliminary
 Considerations,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 1956, 4 (2), 134–158.
  , “The Javanese Kijaji: The changing role of a cultural broker,” Comparative Studies in society and history,
  1960, 2 (2), 228–249.
Gil, M., “The Earliest Waqf Foundations,” Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 1998, 57 (2), 125–140.
Greif, A., “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on
 Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102, 912–950.
Grembi, V., T. Nannicini, and U. Troiano, “Do Fiscal Rules Matter?,” American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 2016, 8 (3), 1–30.
Habermas, J., “Secularism’s crisis of faith: Notes on post-secular society,” New Perspectives Quarterly,
 2008, 25, 17–29.
Hamayotsu, K.., “The political rise of the Prosperous Justice Party in post-authoritarian Indonesia: ex-
 amining the political economy of Islamist mobilization in a Muslim democracy,” Asian Survey, 2011,
 51 (5), 971–992.
Hefner, R. W., “Islam, state, and civil society: ICMI and the struggle for the Indonesian middle class,”
 Indonesia, 1993, (56), 1–35.
  , Civil Islam: Muslims and Democratization in Indonesia, Vol. 40, Princeton University Press, 2011.
Heldring, L., J. A. Robinson, and S. Vollmer, “Monks, Gents and Industrialists: The Long-Run Impact
 of the Dissolution of the English Monasteries,” Working Paper 21450, National Bureau of Economic
 Research August 2017.
Henderson, J. V., A. Storeygard, and D. N. Weil, “Measuring economic growth from outer space,”
 American economic review, 2012, 102 (2), 994–1028.
Huizer, G., “Peasant mobilisation and land reform in Indonesia,” ISS Occasional Papers, 1972, (18).
Iannaccone, L. R./, “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1998, 36
  (3), 1465–1495.
Iannaccone, L. R. and E. Berman, “Religious extremism: The good, the bad, and the deadly,” Public
  choice, 2006, 128 (1-2), 109–129.
Isbah, M. F., “Examining the Socio-Economic Role of Islamic Boarding Schools (Pesantren) in Indonesia,”
  Unpublished Manuscript, 2016.
Iyer, S., “The new economics of religion,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2016, 54 (2), 395–441.
Jahar, A. S., “Reinterpreting Islamic Norms: The Conflict Between Legal Paradigms and Socio-Economic
  Challenges; a Case Study of Waqf and Zakât in Contemporary Indonesia.” PhD dissertation, Verlag
  nicht ermittelbar 2005.
  , “The clash of Muslims and the state: Waqf and zakat in post independence Indonesia,” Studia Is-
  lamika, 2006, 13 (3).
Jones, B. F. and B. A. Olken, “Do leaders matter? National leadership and growth since World War II,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (3), 835–864.
Kuran, T., “The Provision of Public Goods under Islamic Law: Origins, Impact, and Limitations of the

                                                     36
  Waqf System,” Law & Society Review, 2001, 35 (4), 841–898.
  , The Long Divergence: How Islamic Law Held Back the Middle East, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
  2011.
  , “Legal Roots of Authoritarian Rule in the Middle East: Civic Legacies of the Islamic Waqf,” American
  Journal of Comparative Law, 2016, 64, 419–54.
  , “Islam and economic performance: Historical and contemporary links,” Journal of Economic Literature,
  2018, 56 (4), 1292–1359.
Lacroix, Stéphane, Awakening Islam, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2011.
Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J. A. Robinson, and J. L. Weigel, “The evolution of culture and institutions: Evi-
  dence from the Kuba Kingdom,” Econometrica, 2017, 85 (4), 1065–1091.
Lucus, A. and C. Warren, “The Land, The Law, and The People,” Land for the People: The State and Agrarian
  Conflict in Indonesia, 2013, (126), 1–39.
Machmudi, Y., Islamising Indonesian: The Rise of Jemaah Tarbiyah and the Prosperous Justice Party, ANU
 Press, 2008.
Mandaville, J. E., “Usurious Piety: The Cash Waqf Controversy in the Ottoman Empire,” International
 Journal of Middle East Studies, 1979, 10 (3), 289–308.
Marshall, A., “The Principles of Economics,” Technical Report, McMaster University Archive for the
 History of Economic Thought 1890.
Martinez-Bravo, M., “The local political economy effects of school construction in Indonesia,” American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (2), 256–89.
Marx, K., Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right 1844.
McCrary, J., “Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A density
 test,” Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 698–714.
McVey, R., Faith as the outsider: Islam in Indonesian politics, Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Michalopoulos, S., A. Naghavi, and G. Prarolo, “Islam, inequality and pre-industrial comparative de-
 velopment,” Journal of Development Economics, 2016, 120, 86–98.
Montgomery, R. and T. Sugito, “Changes in the Structure of Farms and Farming in Indonesia between
 Censuses , 1963-1973 : The Issues of Inequality and Near-Landlessness,” Journal of Southeast Asian
 Studies, 1980, 11 (2), 348–365.
Mortimer, R. A., Indonesian Communist Party and land reform, 1959-1965, Vic., Centre of Southeast Asian
 Studies, Monash University, 1972.
  , Indonesian communism under Sukarno: Ideology and politics, 1959-1965, Equinox Publishing, 2006.
Müller, J.-W., What Is Populism?, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016.
Pamungkas, C., “Gone but Not Forgotten: The Transformation of the Idea of Islamic State through
  Traditional Religious Authorities,” Jurnal Sosiologi, 2018, pp. 187–211.
Pepinsky, T. B., R. W. Liddle, and S. Mujani, “Testing Islam’s Political Advantage: Evidence from
  Indonesia,” American Journal of Political Science, 2012, 56 (3), 584–600.
  , , and , Piety and Public Opinion: Understanding Indonesian Islam, New York: Oxford University
  Press, 2018.
Piketty, T. and E. Saez, “Income Inequality in the United States, 19131998,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2003, 118 (1), 1–39.


                                                      37
Platteau, J.-P., Islam Instrumentalized. Religion and Politics in Historical Perspective, Cambridge University
  Press, 2017.
Pohl, F., “Islamic Education and Civil Society: Reflections on the Pesantren Tradition in Contemporary
  Indonesia,” Comparative Education Review, 2006, 50 (3), 389–409.
Robinson, Z., “Lobbying in the Shadows: Religious Interest Groups in the Legislative Process,” Emory
 Law Journal, 2015, 64, 1041–1102.
Roháč, D., “Religion as a commitment device: The Economics of Political Islam,” Kyklos, 2013, 66 (2),
 256–274.
Roosa, John, Pretext for Mass Murder: The September 30th Movement and Suharto’s Coup d’Etat in Indonesia,
  Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2006.
Rubin, J., “Institutions, the rise of commerce and the persistence of laws: Interest restrictions in Islam
 and Christianity,” The Economic Journal, 2011, 121 (557), 1310–1339.
  , Rulers, Religion, and Riches: Why the West got rich and the Middle East did not, Cambridge University
  Press, 2017.
Saez, E. and G. Zucman, “Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized
  Income Tax Data,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (2), 519–578.
Salim, A., Challenging the secular state: The Islamization of law in modern Indonesia, University of Hawaii
  Press, 2008.
Sharon, M., “A waqf Inscription from ramlah,” Arabica, 1966, 13 (1), 77–84.
Soemardjan, S., “Land Reform in Indonesia,” Asian Survey, 1962, 1 (12), 23–30.
Teguh, I., “K.H. Choer Affandi, Santri Kelana di Antara Perang dan Damai,” tirto.id, nov 2018.
Utrecht, E., “Land Reform in Indonesia,” Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 1969, 5 (3), 71–88.
Van Bruinessen, M., Kitab kuning, pesantren, dan tarekat: Tradisi-tradisi Islam di Indonesia, Mizan, 1995.
  , “Traditionalist and Islamist Pesantrens in Indonesia,” in F. A. Noor and Y. Sikand, eds., The Madrasa
  in Asia: Political activism and transnational linkages, Oxford: Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam,
  2008, chapter 9.
van Dijk, C., Rebellion under the Banner of Islam, Brill, 1981.
Wickham, C. R., Mobilizing Islam: Religion, Activism and Political Change in Egypt, New York, New York,
 USA: Columbia University Press, 2002.
  , The Muslim Brotherhood: Evolution of an Islamist Movement, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2013.
Winarko, W., “Petani dan politik di Jawa Timur: gerakan politik petani di desa Sambirejo Kecamatan
 Mantingan Kabupaten Ngawi, 1963-1965,” 2006.
Young, A., “Improved, nearly exact, statistical inference with robust and clustered covariance matrices
  using effective degrees of freedom corrections,” Manuscript, London School of Economics, 2016.
Zuhri, S., “The Mosque as Religious Sphere: Looking at the Conflict over Al Muttaqun Mosque,” Regime
  Change, Democracy And Islam: The Case Of Indonesia, 2013, p. 295.




                                                      38
Figures

                                                                          Figure 1: Illustration of the Difference-in-Discontinuities Design
                                                                                          Contemporary Waqf and Islamism
                                                                             (a) Waqf Land                                                                                                    (b) Islamic Boarding Schools
                                                                   ←not expropriable            expropriable→                                                                                   ←not expropriable             expropriable→
                                                        few 5-9 ha holdings                                                                                         1500                 few 5-9 ha holdings
                                             10
                                                        many 5-9 ha holdings                                                                                                             many 5-9 ha holdings
waqf, % of zoned land, 2003 | island FE




                                                                                                                              pesantren, 2008 | island FE
                                                                                                                                                                    1000
                                              5


                                                                                                                                                                          500

                                              0

                                                                                                                                                                               0


                                             -5

                                                                                                                                                                          -500
                                                  250            300         350         400          450        500   550                                                         250          300         350         400          450      500   550
                                                                              population density in 1960                                                                                                     population density in 1960


                                                                         (c) Islamist Vote Share                                                                                                    (d) Sharia Regulations
                                                                   ←not expropriable             expropriable→                                                                                 ←not expropriable             expropriable→
                                               .1                                                                                                                         10
                                                            few 5-9 ha holdings                                                                                                      few 5-9 ha holdings
Islamist vote share, 1999-2014 | island FE




                                                                                                                              Sharia regulations, 1998-2013 | island FE




                                                            many 5-9 ha holdings                                                                                                     many 5-9 ha holdings




                                             .05                                                                                                                          5




                                                  0                                                                                                                       0




                                             -.05                                                                                                                         -5
                                                      250          300         350         400          450      500   550                                                     250            300         350         400          450        500   550
                                                                                population density in 1960                                                                                                 population density in 1960


                     Notes: This figure illustrates how the difference in outcomes between districts with “few” and “many” marginal 5–9 ha
                     landholdings (below and above the median, respectively) changes at the 400 people/km2 cutoff, above which 5–9 ha
                     holdings are expropriable and below which they are not. We partial out island fixed effects from the outcomes before
                     plotting these figures, in keeping with our within-island research design. We restrict the graph to districts in the 250–
                     550 people/km2 range for presentational purposes, but the above/below median split is based on the full sample. Our
                     estimating equation (1) uses the full, continuous variation in 5–9 ha holdings whereas this figure splits the full sample
                     of districts into the above and below median 5–9 ha holdings. As such, this should be read only as an approximation to
                     the identifying variation in the regression results reported in subsequent figures and tables. The curves are local linear
                     regressions with an Epanechnikov kernel and bandwidth of 50.




                                                                                                                         39
                                                                                Figure 2: Timing of Waqf Endowments
                                                                   (a) Waqf Land Endowments in Newly Created Mosques
                                                                  1.25

                new waqf-endowed mosque land (ha), annualized
                                                                    1
                         Difference-in-Discontinuity, β:




                                                                   .75



                                                                    .5



                                                                   .25



                                                                    0


                                                                         1920    1930   1940    1950    1960     1970    1980   1990   2000
                                                                                               decade of establishment


                                                                                 (b) Size of Newly Created Pesantren
                                                                  600
                number of students at new pesantren, annualized
                         Difference-in-Discontinuity, β:




                                                                  400




                                                                  200




                                                                    0

                                                                        1920    1930    1940    1950    1960     1970    1980   1990   2000
                                                                                               decade of establishment


Notes: This figure shows difference-in-discontinuity estimates based on equation (1) fully interacted with decade dum-
mies. The unit of observation is a district–year from 1920 to 2009, and the dependent variable is (a) the amount of waqf
land allocated to newly established mosques, and (b) total student enrollment in newly established pesantren. Each coeffi-
cient (circle) can be read as the annual effect of an additional 100 marginal expropriable landholdings (MEH) on the given
outcome in the given decade. Both outcomes are constructed from Ministry of Religion administrative records. Standard
errors are clustered by district, and the vertical bars represent 90% confidence intervals. In (a), we can reject the null that
the coefficient for the 1960s is the same as the coefficient for the 1950s with a p-value equal to 0.010. The corresponding
p-value for (b) is 0.093. See Appendix Table A.3 for regression output based on pooling all pre- and post-1960 years rather
than decade-specific event studies.

                                                                                                    40
Tables


                Table 1: Contemporary Waqf Land and Waqf -Endowed Institutions

                                                Waqf Land                       Waqf -Endowed Institutions
                                        hectares % total % zoned               mosques pesantren madrasas
                                          (1)      (2)     (3)                   (4)      (5)          (6)

     expropriation intensity             0.207**      0.251**      3.286**      2.956***      0.532**        1.024**
                                         (0.097)      (0.107)      (1.483)       (0.985)      (0.264)        (0.410)

     Number of Villages                   55,200      55,200       55,200        48,978       48,978         48,978
     Number of Districts                    191         191          191           189         189             189
     Dependent Variable Mean               0.848       0.518       6.127          3.921       0.503           0.787
     R2                                    0.033       0.005        0.044         0.234       0.165           0.195

 Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1). Waqf land is observed in the 2003 Podes village survey and measured
 in hectares (hyperbolic sine transformed) in column 1, as % of total land in column 2, and as % of zoned land in column
 3. Waqf -endowed institutions are observed at the village level in 2008 and include: the number of mosques in column
 4, the number of Islamic boarding schools (pesantren) in column 5, and the number of Islamic day schools (madrasa) in
 column 6. Expropriation intensity denotes the interaction of an indicator equal to one for districts above 400 people/km2
 in 1960 (Above400) with the number of marginal expropriable holdings (M EH, in 100s) in the size category subject to
 redistribution above this cutoff according to the Basic Agrarian Law, namely holdings between 5 and 9 hectares. The
 coefficients on each of the own terms are included in the regression but not reported here. The specification includes
 island fixed effects and a cubic polynomial in 1960 population density interacted separately with the two land reform
 exposure variables (Above400 and M EH) and their interaction. The sample size drops in columns 4–6 as the data could
 not be linked to the baseline 2003 data for certain villages as a result of changes in administrative codes and boundaries.
 Including a combined measure of pesantren and madrasa for the complete sample in 2003 yields a coefficient of 0.689
 (0.270)**.

 * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.




                                                             41
                         Table 2: Islamist Party Support in Legislative Elections

                                                           Village               District Level
                                                            1999               1999       1999-2014
                                                         Top 3 Finish       Vote Share Vote Share
                                                             (1)                (2)          (3)

                                                                       (a) Islamist Parties

                    expropriation intensity                  0.158*            0.049**          0.044**
                                                             (0.083)           (0.024)          (0.020)

                    Number of Villages                       55,200              189              746
                    Number of Districts                       191                 –                –
                    Dependent Variable Mean                  0.516              0.136            0.154
                    R2                                       0.051              0.205            0.222

                                                                (b) Moderate Islamic Parties

                    expropriation intensity                  -0.129             -0.024          -0.008
                                                             (0.083)           (0.037)          (0.023)

                    Number of Villages                       55,200              189              746
                    Number of Districts                       191                 –                –
                    Dependent Variable Mean                  0.468              0.170            0.152
                    R2                                       0.204              0.387            0.339

                                                                       (c) Secular Parties

                    expropriation intensity                  -0.009             -0.025          -0.036
                                                             (0.028)           (0.044)          (0.031)

                    Number of Villages                       55,200               –                –
                    Number of Districts                       191                189              746
                    Dependent Variable Mean                  0.932              0.695            0.695
                    R2                                       0.270              0.414            0.327

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1). The dependent variable is: an indicator of whether a given political
family finished in the top 3 in the 1999 national legislative elections, as observed in the 2003 Podes (column 1), district-level
vote shares in the 1999 elections (column 2), and district-level vote shares in each of the 1999, 2004, 2009 and 2014 elections
(column 3). The top panel reports effects on electoral support for Islamist parties, which include the United Development
Party (PPP), the Prosperous Justice Party (PKS), and the Crescent Star Party (PBB). In the middle panel, electoral support
is defined with respect to moderate Islamic parties: the National Mandate Party (PAN) and the National Awakening
Party (PKB). Unlike Islamist parties, which rejected Pancasila in 1999 and had advocated for including Islamic law in
the Indonesian Constitution, these two parties have pluralistic ideologies that embrace Pancasila, the secular-nationalist
doctrine of the Indonesian state. The bottom panel looks at effects on support for all other, secular parties, including
the Indonesian Party of Struggle (PDI-P) and the Golkar Party. See Appendix Tables A.5 and A.6 for party-specific
outcomes. Regressions in column 1 are at the village level while regressions in columns 2 and 3 are at the district and
district×election year level, respectively. See the notes to Table 1 for additional details on the specification and Appendix
Table A.1 for summary statistics.

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.
                                                        Table 3: Islamist Capture of Local Governance

                                         Local Relig.          Sharia             Sharia            Islamic Court Cases re:              Islamist Vigilante Activity
                                        Gov. Officials       Regulations       Microfinance         Waqf   Inherit. Marital              Incidents      Casualties
                                             (1)                 (2)               (3)               (4)     (5)       (6)                   (7)           (8)

       expropriation intensity              0.628**             0.600**             0.346          1.153*      0.825**       0.045        0.837**           1.119***
                                            (0.267)             (0.289)            (0.237)         (0.603)     (0.397)      (0.424)       (0.349)            (0.357)

       Number of Districts                    191                 191                189             80           80          80            114                114
       R2                                    0.297               0.136              0.435           0.436        0.688       0.451         0.268              0.304

     Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) for several outcomes, all of which are standardized: the number of district-level government employees
     dedicated to managing religious affairs in the local Ministry of Religion office (column 1), the number of sharia regulations adopted in the district between
     1998–2013 (column 2), the share of villages in the district with at least one sharia-based microfinance institution (column 3), the number of sharia court cases
     related to waqf, inheritance, and marriage/divorce (columns 4–6, respectively), and the number of incidents (column 7) and casualties (column 8) inflicted by the
     Islamic Defenders Front (FPI), an Islamist vigilante group. All regressions are run at the district level. The sample size is smaller in columns 4–8 due to missing
     data on court cases and Islamist vigilante activity. Expropriation intensity is not significantly associated with attrition in either dataset (see text for details). See
43




     the notes to Table 1 for additional details on the specification and Appendix Table A.1 for summary statistics.

     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors.
                          Table 4: Demand for and Supply of Religious Politics
                                                              (a) Demand: Survey Responses

Data Source:                            IFLS Survey                                Pepinsky et al. Survey
Outcome:                          candidate [...] very impt.         Muslim      Religiosity          Sharia Law
                                     in determining vote            president    president   support         support
                                   religion         religiosity     very impt.   very impt. objective       subjective
                                      (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)            (6)

expropriation intensity            0.092***         0.083***         0.117***     0.088**      0.056*            0.062
                                    (0.026)         (0.029)           (0.044)     (0.043)      (0.033)          (0.052)

Number of Individuals               43,965           43,965           1,825        1,822        1,840            1,709
Number of Districts                  157              157              129          129          129              129
Dependent Variable Mean             0.394            0.406            0.665        0.770        0.435            0.605
R2                                  0.084            0.076            0.052        0.035        0.087            0.082

                                                        (b) Supply: Legislative Candidate Entry

Outcome:                        campaign on           Hajj          religious         occupation:          teacher/student
                               Islam & Sharia      experience        scholar      teacher     student      Islam campaign
                                     (7)              (8)               (9)         (10)        (11)             (12)

expropriation intensity            9.624***         43.406***        0.809**     14.319***      5.692          1.411***
                                    (3.318)         (15.805)         (0.322)      (5.117)      (4.241)          (0.461)

Number of Districts                   191              191             191          191          191              191
Dependent Variable Mean               7.1              45.3            0.3          16.9         23.6             0.7
R2                                   0.160            0.267           0.324        0.309        0.239            0.183

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) for demand-side survey responses (panel a) and supply-side legislator
responses (panel b). In Panel (a), columns 1–2 look at two outcomes from the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS): an
indicator for whether the religion (column 1) and the religiosity (column 2) of a candidate is a very important factor in
individual voting decisions. Panel (a), columns 3–6 look at outcomes from the Pepinsky et al. (2018) survey data: whether
respondents say the president being Muslim (column 3) and being religious (column 4) is very important; and whether
they support an index of specific Sharia-inspired legal regulations (column 5) and generically support Sharia law (column
6). These two surveys do not cover all districts in Indonesia, hence the smaller district sample size. These individual-level
regressions control for gender, age and age squared, and an indicator for urban; the IFLS regression additionally controls
for survey wave fixed effects. None of these added controls materially affect the results. The regressions in column 1–4
are also restricted to Muslims (see Table 5). In Panel (b), we look at data on legislators’ profiles in the 2019 election: the
number of candidates for district parliament that mention Islam- or Sharia-related concepts in their campaign platforms
(column 7), indicate their status as Hajj pilgrims in their formal name listed on the ballot (column 8), hail from a religious
scholar background (column 9), report “teacher” as their primary occupation (column 10), report “student” as their
primary occupation (column 11), and the number of students and teachers with Islamic campaign platforms as measured
in column 7 (column 12). See the notes to Table 1 for additional details on the specification.

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.




                                                               44
                                                            Table 5: Religious Piety and Private Practice
     Source:                                     IFLS Survey                                                     Pepinsky et al. Survey
     Outcome:                        Am I       Am I Very        Trust         Am I      Pray        Fast       Read      Friday      Pray     Prayer     Pay      Practices
                                    Muslim?     Religious?    Co-Muslims      Muslim    5x/day     Ramadan      Quran     Mosque     Sunna     Group     Zakat       Index
                                                                 More                                                                                              cols. 5-11
                                       (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)        (12)

     expropriation intensity          0.033        -0.003        -0.004        -0.002     0.024       0.063     -0.046    -0.065     -0.036     0.006     0.030      -0.014
                                     (0.050)      (0.006)        (0.014)      (0.032)    (0.043)     (0.043)    (0.060)   (0.048)    (0.046)   (0.055)   (0.056)    (0.039)

     Number of Individuals           45,296       43,965         40,727        2,047      1,847      1,848       1,843     1,842      1,829    1,841     1,841       1,848
     Number of Districts              158          157             157          137        129        129         129       129        129      128       129         129
     Dependent Variable Mean         0.899        0.102          0.119         0.807      0.665      0.817       0.264     0.231      0.177    0.258     0.837       0.440
     R2                              0.244        0.037           0.094        0.329      0.132      0.075       0.035     0.076      0.056    0.048     0.048       0.087

     Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) for the following outcomes: from the IFLS, a dummy for being a Muslim (column 1), self-reported religiosity
     (column 2), and relative trust towards co-Muslims and non-Muslims (column 3). From the Pepinsky et al. (2018) data, we look at individuals who self-report
     as Muslim (column 4), individuals who report praying 5 times a day (column 5), fasting during Ramadan (column 6), reading the Qur’an (column 7), always
     attending Friday prayer (column 8), attending non-mandatory Sunnah prayers (column 9), being part of a prayer group (column 10), and paying zakat collection
     group (col. 11). We also pool all practices in columns 5–11 in an index, and regress this index on our main specification in column 12. All regressions except those
45




     in columns 1 and 4 are restricted to Muslims. All regressions control for gender, age and age squared, and an indicator for urban; the IFLS regression additionally
     controls for survey wave fixed effects. None of these added controls materially affect the results. See the notes to Table 1 for additional details on the specification.

     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.
                                 Table 6: Effects of Waqf -Endowed Land on Religious Institutions and Politics

                                                   Waqf -Endowed Institutions                                      Religious Politics
                                                  mosques pesantren madrasas                         Islamist Party          Min. Religion               Sharia
                                                                                             Top 3, 1999 Vote Shr. 99-14      Employees                Regulations
                                                      (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)              (6)                     (7)

                                                                                            (a) Ordinary Least Squares

     waqf land                                     0.614***      0.129***      0.177***        0.037***           0.034***              0.102*            0.527**
                                                    (0.067)       (0.021)       (0.028)         (0.007)            (0.008)              (0.060)           (0.229)

     Number of Villages/Districts                   48,710        48,710        48,710          55,200               191                 191                191
     Dependent Variable Mean                         3.930         0.505         0.791           0.516              0.154               6.474              1.681
     R2                                              0.231         0.166         0.188           0.052              0.306               0.362              0.139

                                                                                            (b) Instrumental Variables
46




     waqf land                                     14.612**       2.632**       5.062**         0.766**            0.148*               0.654*             2.633
                                                    (6.967)       (1.083)       (2.199)         (0.369)            (0.087)              (0.373)           (2.065)
      [weak-instrument robust p-value]              [0.003]       [0.045]       [0.013]         [0.057]            [0.017]              [0.095]           [0.156]

     Number of Villages/Districts                   48,710        48,710        48,710          55,200               191                 191                191
     Dependent Variable Mean                         3.930         0.505         0.791           0.516              0.154               6.474              1.681
     First Stage Effective F Statistic                4.5           4.5           4.5             4.6                7.3                 5.8                5.8
     Underidentification Test, p-value              0.040         0.040         0.040           0.038               0.016               0.010              0.010

     Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2). Panel (a) reports OLS estimates, and panel (b) reports IV estimates, where we use the difference-in-
     discontinuity term from equation (1), Above400 × M EH, as an instrument for waqf land (hyperbolic-sine transformed as in Column 1 of Table 1). All other
     controls in equation (1) are retained in the OLS to ensure comparability with the IV. Columns 1–3 examine institutional outcomes from Table 1: the number of
     mosques (column 1), Islamic boarding schools (pesantren, column 2), and Islamic non-boarding schools (madrasa, column 3) observed at the village level in 2008.
     Columns 4–5 look at outcomes from Table 2: an indicator for whether Islamist parties finished in the top 3 in the 1999 national legislative elections (column 4),
     and the district-level vote share received by Islamist parties across the 1999, 2004, 2009 and 2014 elections (column 5). Columns 6–7 examine outcomes from
     Table 3: the number of local government employees dedicated to managing religious affairs (column 6), and the number of sharia regulations adopted in the
     district between 1998–2013 (column 7). See the notes to Table 1 for additional details on the specification.

     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors.
                 Table 7: Waqf Land, Agricultural Development, and Misallocation
                                         log agric.      log agric.      capital/labor    capital/land       light
                                        GDP/capita      productivity         ratio            ratio        intensity
                                            (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)

                                                                      (a) Reduced Form

     expropriation intensity              -0.577***         -0.113*         -0.729***         -0.050**       0.112
                                           (0.215)          (0.059)          (0.298)           (0.025)      (0.103)

     Number of Villages                    47,598           47,598           47,598           47,597        41,459
     Number of Districts                     191              191              191             191            187
     Dependent Variable Mean               13.012           -0.473           2.223            0.111         1.648
     R2                                     0.060            0.158            0.038           0.017          0.658

                                                                 (b) Ordinary Least Squares

     waqf land                              -0.011           0.016            0.008           -0.006**       -0.011
                                           (0.021)          (0.013)          (0.050)           (0.003)      (0.011)

     Number of Villages                    47,249           47,249           47,240           47,248        41,151
     Number of Districts                     191              191              191             191            187
     Dependent Variable Mean                13.0            -0.470           2.239            0.112         1.657
     R2                                     0.053            0.159            0.037           0.016          0.657

                                                                 (c) Instrumental Variables

     waqf land                            -2.526**           -0.495         -3.219**          -0.221*        0.563
                                           (1.013)          (0.335)          (1.444)          (0.122)       (0.495)
      [weak-IV robust p-value]             [0.008]          [0.058]          [0.015]          [0.049]       [0.272]

     Number of Villages                    47,249           47,249           47,249           47,248        41,151
     Number of Districts                    191               191             191              191           187
     Dependent Variable Mean                13.0            -0.470           2.239            0.112         1.657
     1st Stage Effective F Stat             6.4               6.4             6.4               6.4           4.5
     Underidentification, p-value          0.012             0.012           0.012            0.012         0.038

Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (1) in panel (a), and estimates from equation (2) in panels (b) and (c)
using OLS and IV, respectively, as in Table 6. The village-level dependent variable, measured in 2003, is: the log of
agricultural GDP per capita (column 1), the revenue-weighted log of output per hectare by crop (column 2), the total
number of agricultural machines per capita (column 3) and per hectare planted (column 4), and nighttime light intensity
(hyperbolic-sine transformed). The sample in columns 1–4 is restricted to villages with positive production of at least one
crop. The sample drops in column 5 due to problems merging luminosity shapefiles with the administrative data in 2003.
See the notes to Table 1 for additional details on the specification.

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.




                                                            47
                               Table 8: Alternative Explanations (I): Land Inequality and Demographic Change

                                                              ∆ Landholdings Distribution                                    ∆ Demographics, 1961-71
                                                   1963–1980           1963–1985            1963–1990                        population  sex ratio
                                              no. >5 ha      λ    no. >5 ha      λ     no. >5 ha      λ
                                                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)                          (7)               (8)

              expropriation intensity           -0.075         -0.206     -0.011       -0.222         0.068       -0.144        -0.090            -0.323
                                                (0.179)        (0.192)    (0.154)      (0.170)       (0.214)      (0.190)       (0.102)           (0.237)

              Number of Districts                 191           191         191          191           191          191           168               168
              R2                                 0.086         0.404       0.131        0.395         0.076        0.359         0.169             0.157
     Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) for district-level measures of changes in the land distribution since 1963: changes in the number of 5+ hectare
     holdings and land dispersion (λ) between 1963 and 1980 (columns 1 and 2), 1963 and 1985 (columns 3 and 4); and 1963–1990 (column 5 and 6). Recall that the
     estimated Pareto parameters, λ, are decreasing in in dispersion/inequality. We also consider district-level population growth between 1961 and 1971 (column
     7) growth in the male-to-female sex ratio between 1961 and 1971 (column 8). The sample size is smaller in columns 7–8 due to uncovered districts in the 1971
     Population Census. All dependent variables are normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation one. See the notes to Table 1 for additional details on the
     specification.
48




     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors.
                Table 9: Alternative Explanations (II): Schooling and Public Goods
                             INPRES      Mean Yrs.      Population Share with . . . School      Public Goods Index
                             Schools     Schooling     Primary Junior Sec. Senior Sec.         Health Infrastructure
                               (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)             (5)        (6)         (7)

expropriation intensity       0.001         -0.030      -0.027       -0.003           0.007     0.005     -0.012
                             (0.261)       (0.259)      (0.017)      (0.008)         (0.008)   (0.015)    (0.029)

Number of Villages             190         46,147       46,628       46,628          46,628    41,437     41,437
Number of Districts            190          188           190          190            190       187        187
Dep. Var. Mean                2.241        4.676        0.372        0.123           0.092     0.392      0.497
R2                            0.281        0.126         0.109        0.159          0.114     0.088      0.264

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) for the following outcomes: the number of public primary schools
per 1,000 students constructed at the district level by the Suharto government from 1973–78 as part of the INPRES
program (column 1); the mean years of schooling in 2000 (column 2); the share of the village population in 2000 with
primary schooling (column 3), with junior secondary schooling (column 4), with senior secondary schooling (column
5); village-level indices, ranging from zero to one, capturing the presence of health public goods including doctors,
midwives, and health clinics (column 6) and infrastructure public goods including 4-wheel road access, safe water,
sewage, garbage collection, and kerosene supply (column 7). These indices are based on the mean across all rounds
of Podes from 1999 to 2014. The sample size is smaller in columns 5 and 6 due to changing boundaries and merging
difficulties. See the notes to Table 1 for additional details on the specification.

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.




                                                            49
Appendix

A Further Empirical Results                                                                                                                                             51
  A.1 Descriptive Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . .   .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   51
  A.2 Identification Checks . . . . . . . . . . . .    .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   53
  A.3 Waqf Establishments across Time Periods          .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   55
  A.4 Alternative Inference Procedures . . . . .       .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   56
  A.5 Party-by-Party Electoral Outcomes . . . .        .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   57
  A.6 Individual-Level Voting Outcomes . . . .         .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   59
  A.7 Further Robustness Checks . . . . . . . .        .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   60
       A.7.1 Alternative Specifications . . . . .      .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   60
       A.7.2 RD Robustness Checks . . . . . . .        .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   64
       A.7.3 Other Land Reform Policy Cutoffs          .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   68

B Data Sources and Construction                                                                                                                                         72


List of Tables
   A.1 Summary Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   51
   A.2 Balance on Time-Invariant and Pre-Reform Covariates . . . . . . . . .                                                            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   54
   A.3 Waqf Land and Waqf -Endowed Institutions, 1920–2009 . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   55
   A.4 Alternative Approaches to Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   56
   A.5 Party-by-Party Voting Results, Top 7 (out of 48) Parties in the 1999 Election                                                    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   57
   A.6 Party-by-Party Voting Results, All 12 Parties in the 2014 Election . . . . . . .                                                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   58
   A.7 Voting at the Individual Level in the 2004 Legislative Election . . . . . . . .                                                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   59
   A.8 Waqf Land and Waqf -Endowed Institutions: Alternative Specifications . . .                                                       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   61
   A.9 Islamist Party Support: Alternative Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   62
   A.10 Islamist Capture of Local Governance: Alternative Specifications . . . . . .                                                    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   63
   A.11 Waqf Land and Waqf -Endowed Institutions: RD Specification Checks . . . .                                                       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   65
   A.12 Islamist Party Support: RD Specification Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   66
   A.13 Islamist Capture of Local Governance: RD Specification Checks . . . . . . .                                                     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   67
   A.14 Waqf Land and Waqf -Endowed Institutions: Other BAL Cutoffs . . . . . . .                                                       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   69
   A.15 Islamist Party Support in Legislative Elections: Other BAL Cutoffs . . . . .                                                    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   70
   A.16 Islamist Capture of Local Governance: Other BAL Cutoffs . . . . . . . . . .                                                     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   71


List of Figures
   A.1 Distribution of Establishment Dates for Mosques and Pesantren . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                                      52
   A.3 Continuity of Marginal Expropriable Holdings (M EH) Around the 400 Cutoff . . . . . .                                                                            53
   A.4 Population Density: McCrary (2008) Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                                  53




                                                       50
A     Further Empirical Results
A.1   Descriptive Statistics

                                            Table A.1: Summary Statistics
                                                      Mean       SD       N                   Source
             District-level data
             Historic Population density              342.38   754.34    191          1961 Population Census
             Above 400 ppl/km2 threshold               .309     .463     191         1963 Agricultural Census
             Expropriable holdings (5-9 hectares)       392      577     191         1963 Agricultural Census
             Baseline land dispersion                  .846      .335    191         1963 Agricultural Census
             Mosques by 1920                           22.7      29.5    191       Min. Relig. Affairs (Kemenag)
             Pesantren by 1920                          3.4     31.7     191       Min. Relig. Affairs (Kemenag)
             Islamic vote 1955–57                       .40       .24    191           Electoral Commission
             Communist vote 1955–57                     .15       .14    191           Electoral Commission
             Islamist vote share, 1999                 .136      .098    189           Electoral Commission
             Islamist vote share, 1999–2014            .154      .086    746           Electoral Commission
             Islamic moderate vote share, 1999         .170     .142     189           Electoral Commission
             Islamic moderate vote share, 1999-2014    .152     .106     746           Electoral Commission
             Local employees Min. Relig. Affairs      777.9    480.3     191       Min. Relig. Affairs (Kemenag)
             Sharia regulations                         1.7       2.6    191               Buehler (2016)
             Islamic microfinance                      .058     0.073    189                 2017 Podes
             Islamic court waqf cases                   .61     1.30      80      Relig. Courts Info. Syst. (SIPP)
             Islamic court inheritance cases            208       624     80      Relig. Courts Info. Syst. (SIPP)
             Islamic court marital cases              10,840   10,005     80      Relig. Courts Info. Syst. (SIPP)
             FPI incidents                              .30       .91    114     Violence Monitoring Syst. (SNPK)
             FPI casualties                             .31     1.03     114     Violence Monitoring Syst. (SNPK)
             Candidates campaigning on Islam            7.1     10.8     191         Electoral Commission Site
             Candidates with Hajj experience           45.2     47.0     191         Electoral Commission Site
             Candidates who are religious scholars      .26       .64    191         Electoral Commission Site
             Candidates who are teachers               16.9      16.7    191         Electoral Commission Site
             Candidates who are students               23.6      23.7    191         Electoral Commission Site
             Candidates who are students/teachers      0.73     1.56     191         Electoral Commission Site
              campaigning on Islam

             Village-level data
             Waqf land in village (hectares)          3.44      39.6    55,200             2003 Podes
             Waqf in village (% total land)             .52      2.96   55,200             2003 Podes
             Waqf in village (% zoned land)            6.11      20.8   55,200             2003 Podes
             Mosques in village                        3.92      4.67   48,978             2008 Podes
             Pesantren in village                       .50      1.31   48,978             2008 Podes
             Madrasas in village                       .787      1.83   48,978             2008 Podes
             Islamist parties in top 3, 1999           .517       .50   55,200             2003 Podes
             Distance to nearest shrine (km)          669.2     620.6   49,311          Google Maps/GIS
             Dist. to subdistrict office (km)          10.0      21.8   55,200             2003 Podes
             Dist. to district office (km)             46.6      56.2   55,200             2003 Podes

             Individual-level survey data
             Candidate religion very important         .394     .489    43,965                IFLS
             Candidate religiosity very important      .406     .491    43,965                IFLS
             Muslim president very important            .67      .47     1,825         Pepinsky et al. (2018)
             Religiosity president very important      .770     .423     1,822         Pepinsky et al. (2018)
             Support Sharia law (objective)            .435     .267     1,840         Pepinsky et al. (2018)
             Support Sharia law (subjective)           .605     .489     1,709         Pepinsky et al. (2018)
 Notes: This table reports means, standard deviations (SD), and sample sizes for dependent and independent variables
 used in the paper and appendix. For a full elaboration of sources and variable construction, see Appendix B.




                                                               51
          Figure A.1: Distribution of Establishment Dates for Mosques and Pesantren

                      (a) Mosques                                                    (b) Pesantren




Notes: This figure reports the distribution of establishment dates for the universe of (a) mosques and (b) pesantren. Data
from the Ministry of Religious Affairs.




                                                           52
A.2   Identification Checks


 Figure A.3: Continuity of Marginal Expropriable Holdings (M EH) Around the 400 Cutoff
                                                                600
                 number of marginal expropriable landholdings




                                                                400




                                                                200




                                                                  0
                                                                       250     300       350         400          450    500     550
                                                                                          population density in 1960

 Notes: This figure illustrates the continuity of marginal expropriable landholdings (5-9 ha) across the 400 people/km2
 cutoff. We restrict attention to districts in the 250–550 people/km2 range for presentational purposes. The curves are local
 linear regressions with an Epanechnikov kernel and bandwidth of 50.


                                                                       Figure A.4: Population Density: McCrary (2008) Test
                                                                .006




                                                                .004
                 estimated density




                                                                .002




                                                                  0
                                                                         0      200      400        600         800     1000   1200
                                                                                           population density, 1960

 Notes: This figure reports the McCrary (2008) test for manipulation of the running variable, population density in 1960.
 The graph reveals no evidence of such manipulation. The figure excludes three districts with population density above
 1300 people/km2 for presentational purposes.




                                                                                                 53
                 Table A.2: Balance on Time-Invariant and Pre-Reform Covariates

                                                                        N      Mean       Expropriation
                                                                                            intensity
                      Mosques by 1920                                  191        22.7         5.879
                                                                                (29.47)      (7.511)
                      Pesantren by 1920                                191        1.15        -1.454
                                                                                 (2.49)      (1.513)
                      Islamist vote, 1955/57                           160          .4          .027
                                                                                  (.24)       (.059)
                      Masyumi vote, 1955/57                            160         .22          .015
                                                                                   (.2)       (.014)
                      NU vote, 1955/57                                 160         .13          .012
                                                                                  (.15)       (.052)
                      Darul Islam events                               191         .88          .576
                                                                                 (2.86)       (.537)
                      Ethnic Arab population, 1930 Pop. Census         179         .67          .514
                                                                                  (1.2)       (.394)
                      Ethnic European population, 1930 Pop. Census     179         .84          .122
                                                                                 (2.23)       (.337)
                      Ethnic Chinese population, 1930 Pop. Census      179        6.29         4.583
                                                                                (13.64)      (3.781)
                      Communist vote, 1955/57                          160         .15         -.072
                                                                                  (.14)        (.05)
                      Mean rainfall shocks, 1955-59                    191         .05         -.007
                                                                                  (.06)       (.024)
                      Mean rainfall shocks, 1960-65                    191        -.08          .012
                                                                                  (.06)       (.012)
                      Baseline land dispersion, 1963                   191         .85           .07
                                                                                  (.34)       (.054)
                      Number of males, 1961 Pop. Census                191      215.64        25.554
                                                                               (150.54)     (54.555)
                      Number of females, 1961 Pop. Census              191      221.37          23.4
                                                                               (157.82)     (56.158)
                      Number of farms, 1963 Ag. Census                 189       61.16          2.76
                                                                                (41.14)      (12.61)
                      Dryland area (ha), 1963 Ag. Census               190        42.9       -10.041
                                                                                (40.58)      (8.877)
                      Wetland area (Ha), 1963 Ag. Census               189       22.27         5.901
                                                                                (17.28)      (3.979)
                      Total agricultural area (ha), 1963 Ag. Census    190       64.78         -4.18
                                                                                (47.49)      (9.765)
                      Village located on hill                         55200        .29         -.035
                                                                                  (.45)       (.042)
                      Altitude                                        55200     287.76        22.145
                                                                              (1794.06)     (149.08)
                      Village located on beach                        55200         .1        .036**
                                                                                   (.3)       (.014)
                      Distance to nearest shrine (km)                 48956     669.15        69.197
                                                                               (620.57)     (60.192)
                      Distance to subdistrict office                  55200      10.01         1.725
                                                                                (21.78)      (1.122)
                      Distance to district office                     55200      46.53        9.012*
                                                                                (56.07)      (5.331)
                      Java-Bali-NTB                                   55200        .44         -.018
                                                                                   (.5)       (.016)

Notes: This table reports balance checks on baseline covariates (either time invariant or measured prior to the land reform)
regressed on our baseline specification. Each cell reports estimates from a separate regression. Across columns, we
report the number of observations (N ), mean and standard deviation in parentheses, and the difference-in-discontinuity
coefficient from equation (1).
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered
                                                             54 by 1960 district.
     A.3 Waqf Establishments across Time Periods
     Table A.3 reports results based on aggregating decadal estimates in Figure 2. The data is at the district-by-year level. Columns 1 and 3
     look at the entire 1920–2009 period. Columns 2 and 4 examine solely the two decades around the land reform (1950s and 1960s). The first
     row reports the main effect of expropriation intensity, i.e., the estimate associated with expropriation intensity in the pre-land reform
     period. The second row reports the interaction between expropriation intensity and an indicator for the post-1960 period.


                                           Table A.3: Waqf Land and Waqf -Endowed Institutions, 1920–2009

                                                                           Waqf Land, New Mosques             Students, New Pesantren
                                                                           1920-2009    1950-69               1920-2009    1950-69
                                                                              (1)         (2)                    (3)         (4)

                               expropriation intensity (pre)                  0.075            0.039             18.75           13.38
                                                                             (0.055)          (0.088)           (13.81)         (25.98)

                               expropriation intensity x post-1960          0.490***          0.189***         197.31**         61.94*
                                                                             (0.174)           (0.073)          (78.0)          (36.71)
55




                               Number of Districts                             191              191              191              191
                               Dependent Variable Mean                        0.551            0.435            158.89           64.28
                               Number of Observations                         17190            3820             17190            3820

       Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) fully interacted with a post-1960 dummy. The dependent variables are measures of waqf endowed land given
       to new mosques and of the number of students enrolled in new pesantren between 1920–2009, as in Figure 2. These measures vary at the district-year level. See
       the notes to Table 1 for additional details on the specification.

       * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors.
     A.4     Alternative Inference Procedures


                                                                Table A.4: Alternative Approaches to Inference
                                                                            Waqf       Waqf -Endowed Institutions                                      Religious Politics
                                                                          land, ha    mosques pesantren madrasas                     Islamist Party        Min. Religion      Sharia      Vigilante
                                                                                                                             Top 3, 1999 Vote Shr. 99-14    Employees       Regulations   Casualties
                                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)              (6)           (7)             (8)          (9)

      expropriation intensity                                              0.207        2.956        0.532        1.024        0.158           0.047           0.628           0.600        1.119
       clustering by 1960 district, baseline                              (0.097)**   (0.985)***    (0.264)**    (0.410)**    (0.083)*        (0.020)**       (0.267)**      (0.289)**    (0.357)***
       clustering by 1960 district, wild bootstrap p-value                [0.046]**   [0.004]***     [0.055]*    [0.036]**    [0.098]*         [0.062]*       [0.020]**       [0.057]*     [0.032]**
       clustering by 1960 district + Young (2016) effective d.o.f.-adj.    (0.115)*    (1.174)**      (0.315)     (0.489)*     (0.098)        (0.026)**       (0.295)**       (0.320)*     (0.421)**
       Conley (1999) spatial HAC, 100 km bandwidth                        (0.110)**   (1.039)***      (0.354)   (0.324)***     (0.108)        (0.020)**      (0.208)***       (0.358)*    (0.303)***
       Conley (1999) spatial HAC, 300 km bandwidth                        (0.111)**   (0.288)***   (0.132)***         –       (0.082)*       (0.014)***      (0.201)***       (0.343)*    (0.207)***

      Number of Observations                                               55,200      48,978       48,978       48,978        55,200           191             191            191           114


       Notes: This table re-estimates core results from Tables 1–3 using alternative approaches to inference besides the baseline clustering by 1960, the level at which the
       land reform policy varies. After that baseline, we use the wild cluster bootstrap, reporting the p-value. The Young (2016) adjustment accounts for the effective
       degrees of freedom implied by the residual variation. The Conley (1999) spatial HAC allows for correlated unobservables across districts or villages within 100
56




       and 300 km of the given district or village centroid. The missing standard error (“–”) is due to a matrix computational failure.

       * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
A.5    Party-by-Party Electoral Outcomes
Tables A.5 and A.6 report results for individual political parties in the 1999 and the 2014 legislative
elections, respectively. The 3 Islamist parties running in these elections are the United Development
Party (Partai Persatuan Pembangunan) or PPP, the Prosperous Justice Party (Partai Keadilan Sejahtera) or
PKS, and the Crescent Star Party (Partai Bulan Bintang) or PBB. These parties advocate for an Islamic
state based on sharia law and reject Pancasila, the doctrine promoting a secular and inclusive vision for
Indonesia. The two moderate Islamic parties competing in these elections are the National Mandate
Party (Partai Amanat Nasional) or PAN and the National Awakening Party (Partai Kebangkitan Bangsa) or
PKB. Both parties endorsed Pancasila prior to the 1999 election. Secular parties include the Indonesian
Democratic Party of Struggle (Partai Demokrasi Indonesia Perjuangan, the party of President Joko Widodo)
or PDI-P and the Golkar Party (Partai Golongan Karya, the party of former President Suharto), as well as
(in the 2014 election) the Great Indonesia Movement Party (Partai Gerakan Indonesia Raya) or Gerindra,
the Democrat Party (PD), the Nasdem Party (Partai Nasdem), the People’s Conscience Party (Partai Hati
Nurani Rakyat) or Hanura, and the Indonesian Justice and Unity Party (Partai Keadilan dan Persatuan
Indonesia) or PKIP, a split from the Golkar party.


      Table A.5: Party-by-Party Voting Results, Top 7 (out of 48) Parties in the 1999 Election

                                                     Islamist                Moderate Islamic          Secular
                                           PPP         PKS           PBB     PAN       PKB         Golkar PDIP
                                            (1)         (2)           (3)     (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)

                                                Panel A: Village-Level Top 3 Finish (col. 1 of Table 2)

      expropriation intensity             0.159*      -0.000     -0.000      -0.005    -0.114      -0.037       0.002
                                          (0.082)     (0.002)    (0.004)     (0.018)   (0.089)     (0.062)     (0.049)

      Number of Villages                  55,200      55,200     55,200      55,200    55,200      55,200      55,200
      Number of Districts                  191          191       191          191       191         191        191
      Dependent Variable Mean             0.503        0.004     0.021        0.145    0.351        0.829      0.807
      R2                                  0.047       0.001      0.020        0.056     0.309      0.127       0.210

                                                   Panel B: District-Level Vote Share (col. 2 of Table 2)

      expropriation intensity             0.042**      0.004      0.003       0.013    -0.038      -0.001       -0.030
                                          (0.021)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.008)   (0.043)     (0.020)     (0.033)

      Number of Villages                    189         189           189     189        189         189        189
      Dependent Variable Mean              0.107       0.010         0.019   0.060      0.110       0.276      0.301
      R2                                   0.178       0.392         0.154   0.540      0.373       0.749      0.427
  Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) using specifications analogous to those in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2,
  further disaggregating the three groups of parties reported in that table.

  * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.




                                                                57
                                  Table A.6: Party-by-Party Voting Results, All 12 Parties in the 2014 Election
                                                Islamist             Moderate Islamic                                    Secular
                                       PPP        PKS       PBB      PAN       PKB       Golkar    PDIP      Gerindra   Demokrat    NasDem      Hanura     PKPI
                                        (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)

        expropriation intensity        0.014    0.014*     0.007*     0.006    -0.026     0.014    -0.032*     0.016      -0.013      -0.005     0.007    -0.001
                                      (0.012)   (0.008)    (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.019)   (0.033)   (0.018)    (0.011)    (0.009)     (0.012)    (0.006)   (0.003)

        Number of Villages              175       175       175       175       175       175       175        175        175          175        175       175
        Dependent Variable Mean        0.071     0.064     0.028     0.084     0.087     0.151     0.153      0.108      0.097        0.071      0.062     0.025
        R2                             0.265     0.234     0.347     0.330     0.411     0.244     0.418      0.151      0.233        0.233      0.399     0.482

     Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) using a specification analogous to that in column 2 of Table 2 but for the 2014 Legislative Election and
     further disaggregating the three groups of parties reported in that table. We are missing data for 16 districts that did not post complete voting outcomes to the
     Indonesian National Electoral Commission website from which we obtained the data (via Nicholas Kuipers).

     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors.
58
     A.6   Individual-Level Voting Outcomes


                                      Table A.7: Voting at the Individual Level in the 2004 Legislative Election

                                                                                              Voted for . . . Party
                                                              Islamist                        Moderate Islamic                            Secular
                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)            (7)        (8)           (9)

             piety index                         0.132***                 0.151***     0.172***                 0.151***     -0.286***                -0.292***
                                                  (0.037)                  (0.039)      (0.047)                  (0.045)      (0.057)                  (0.056)
             expropriation intensity                          0.075**     0.079**                   -0.145**    -0.142**                    0.045       0.039
                                                              (0.030)      (0.031)                   (0.067)     (0.064)                   (0.070)     (0.066)

             Number of Individuals                 1,398       1,398        1,398       1,398        1,398        1,398        1,398        1,398       1,398
             Number of Districts                    128         128          128         128          128          128          128          128         128
             Dependent Variable Mean               0.133       0.133        0.133       0.173        0.173        0.173        0.662        0.662       0.662
59




      Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) for voting outcomes in the 2004 legislative election as reported in the Pepinsky et al. (2018) survey data. The
      dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the individual voted for an Islamist party (columns 1–3), a moderate Islamic party (columns 4–6), and a secular
      party (columns 7–9). See the notes to Table 2 for these party classifications. The piety index is based on the summary index used in column 12 of Table 5, capturing
      a range of obligatory and non-obligatory Islamic practices. The specifications are otherwise identical to those using the Pepinsky et al. (2018) data in Tables 4
      and 5.
      * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.
A.7     Further Robustness Checks
A.7.1   Alternative Specifications
We elaborate here on the robustness checks on our core Tables 1, 2, and 3 as described in Section 6.1. In
the tables described below, we report estimates from our baseline specification (1) in the top row, and
we describe alternative specification choices in the first column. Each subsequent column reports the
difference-in-discontinuity term estimated from a different regression.
    In Tables A.8, A.9, and A.10, we check the robustness of our main results to different versions of
equation (1) where we include: baseline agricultural controls from the 1963 Agricultural Census (num-
ber of males, females, and farms, total irrigated land area, and total dry land area); baseline political
controls (the vote share received by Islamist parties and by the Communist Party in the 1950s elections,
and violent events associated with the Darul Islam rebellion); baseline Islamic organizations (the num-
ber of mosques and pesantren in the district by 1920); and province fixed effects. In Table A.8, where
regressions are estimated at the village level, we also show robustness to including village-level geo-
graphic controls (altitude, beach location, distance to the nearest subdistrict capital and district capital).
All controls are fully interacted with the Above400 dummy and the number of M EH. We also show ro-
bustness of our core results to excluding Sulawesi and Sumatra, motivated by concerns for the quality
of the 1963 Agricultural Census data.
    The subsequent two rows of Tables A.8, A.9, and A.10 test the robustness of our main results to the
assumption that landholdings follow a Pareto distribution. We do this by computing lower and upper
bounds on the number of M EH in each district, and by estimating the difference-in-discontinuity at
these bounds. For the upper bound, note that holdings between 5-9 ha are bounded above by the number
of holdings above 5 ha, which is observed in the Census tabulations. We therefore estimate a specification
where we use all holdings above 5 hectares in lieu of estimated holdings between 5–9 hectares. Our core
results are robust (and sometimes stronger) when we use this actual measure of large landholdings.
    A plausible lower bound can be obtained from the following simple procedure. We first calculate the
total amount of land held in holdings of size 5 ha and above as the difference between total agricultural
land in the district and land held in holdings under 5 ha. Next, we compute the largest possible number
of holdings with size 9 ha and above, which is simply equal to the total land area calculated in the
first step divided by 9. The difference between the observed number of holdings above 5 ha and the
maximum number of holdings above 9 ha (set to zero if negative) provides a lower bound on the number
of holdings between 59 ha. In Tables A.8, A.9, and A.10, we show that our core results are mostly robust
to using this lower bound. The difference-in-discontinuity coefficient remains positive throughout but is
sometimes imprecisely estimated. This is not surprising since marginal expropriable holdings increase
the amount of identifying variation we can exploit in each district.
    Finally, Tables A.8, A.9, and A.10 report a simple placebo check where we look for a discontinuous
jump in outcomes at 500 people/km2 , which was not a relevant cutoff in the land reform. Here we
interact a dummy for districts above 500 people/km2 (instead of 400 in our main specification) with the
number of holdings between 5–9 hectares. As expected, we do not find any evidence that this interaction
is associated with the contemporary prevalence of waqf lands, waqf -endowed institutions, voting for
Islamist parties, and Islamist influence on local governance.




                                                     60
      Table A.8: Waqf Land and Waqf -Endowed Institutions: Alternative Specifications
                                                                Waqf Land                Waqf -Endowed Institutions
                                                     hectares    % total % zoned        mosques pesantren madrasas
                                                       (1)         (2)     (3)            (4)      (5)          (6)

   Baseline specification (Table 1)                   0.207**    0.251**     3.286**    2.956***     0.532**      1.024**
                                                      (0.097)    (0.107)     (1.483)     (0.985)     (0.264)      (0.410)


   Controls: Agriculture                              0.177*     0.274**     3.032**    3.385***     0.420*       1.077**
                                                      (0.102)    (0.114)     (1.442)     (0.768)     (0.214)      (0.499)


   Controls: Geography                                0.196**    0.250**     3.329**    3.234***     0.539**      1.041**
                                                      (0.098)    (0.106)     (1.480)     (0.928)     (0.259)      (0.412)


   Controls: 1955-57 Vote Shares + Darul Islam        0.154*     0.168*      2.958**    2.561***      0.261       0.687**
                                                      (0.082)    (0.088)     (1.475)     (0.797)     (0.228)      (0.288)


   Controls: Mosques & Pesantren in 1920               0.124     0.279***    4.720**    2.548***     0.422*       1.117**
                                                      (0.108)     (0.099)    (1.921)     (0.870)     (0.235)      (0.474)


   Province Fixed Effects                             0.204**    0.265**     2.537**      1.490       0.366       0.712**
                                                      (0.083)    (0.105)     (1.228)     (1.053)     (0.252)      (0.333)


   No Sulawesi/Sumatra                                0.199**    0.206*      2.014**    3.224***     0.575**      1.122**
                                                      (0.097)    (0.107)     (0.965)     (1.141)     (0.287)      (0.465)


   Lower bound on MEH                                  0.092      0.078       1.695      2.735**      0.164       0.841**
                                                      (0.089)    (0.098)     (1.133)     (1.073)     (0.217)      (0.424)


   Upper bound on MEH (all 5+ holdings)               0.076**    0.096***    1.002**    0.952***     0.146*      0.416***
                                                      (0.034)     (0.036)    (0.449)     (0.332)     (0.087)      (0.159)


   Placebo: expropriation at 500 ppl/km2               0.027     -0.043       1.547       0.604       0.023        0.305
                                                      (0.063)    (0.065)     (1.834)     (1.677)     (0.239)      (0.285)


   Number of Villages                                 55200       55200      55200       48978        48978       48978
   Number of Districts                                 191         191        191         189          189         189
   Dependent Variable Mean                            0.848       0.518      6.127       3.921        0.503       0.787
   R2                                                 0.033       0.005      0.044       0.234        0.165       0.195

Notes: This table reports estimates from variants of equation (1) using the same outcomes as in Table 1. Geographic
controls include altitude, coastal location, distance to the nearest subdistrict capital and the district capital. Agricultural
controls include number of males, number of females, number of farms, total irrigated land area, and total dry land area
measured in the 1963 Agricultural Census. Vote shares refer to Islamic parties and the Communist Party in the 1955/57
legislative elections. Controls are fully interacted with the Above400 dummy and the number of marginal expropriable
holdings (M EH). The R2 reported in the bottom panel corresponds to the baseline specification.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.
                    Table A.9: Islamist Party Support: Alternative Specifications
                                                                   Village            District Level
                                                                    1999            1999       1999-2014
                                                                 Top 3 Finish    Vote Share Vote Share
                                                                     (1)             (2)          (3)

                                                                              Islamist Parties

                Baseline specification (Table 2)                    0.158*         0.049**       0.044**
                                                                    (0.083)        (0.024)       (0.020)


                Controls: Agriculture                               0.197**        0.056*        0.053**
                                                                    (0.094)        (0.030)       (0.024)


                Controls: 1955-57 Vote Shares + Darul Islam         0.112*          0.023        0.027**
                                                                    (0.061)        (0.017)       (0.012)


                Controls: Mosques & Pesantren by 1920                0.128          0.039        0.044*
                                                                    (0.094)        (0.030)       (0.025)


                Province Fixed Effects                               0.090          0.034         0.031
                                                                    (0.092)        (0.028)       (0.023)


                No Sulawesi/Sumatra                                 0.211**        0.057**       0.049**
                                                                    (0.094)        (0.027)       (0.022)


                Lower bound on MEH                                  0.177**        0.041*        0.034*
                                                                    (0.077)        (0.024)       (0.018)


                Upper bound on MEH (all 5+ holdings)                0.050*         0.015*        0.014*
                                                                    (0.029)        (0.009)       (0.007)


                Placebo: expropriation at 500 ppl/km2               -0.015          0.001        -0.007
                                                                    (0.083)        (0.027)       (0.020)


                Number of Villages                                  55200             –            –
                Number of Districts                                  191             189          191
                Dependent Variable Mean                             0.516           0.136        0.154
                R2                                                  0.051           0.205        0.222

Notes: This table reports estimates from variants of equation (1) using the same outcomes as in panel (a) of Table 2. The
estimate in column 3 pools across all four quinquennial elections. Agricultural controls include number of males, females,
and farms, total irrigated land area, and total dry land area. Vote shares refer to Islamic parties and the Communist Party
in the 1955/57 legislative elections. Controls are fully interacted with the Above400 dummy and the number of marginal
expropriable holdings (M EH). The R2 reported in the bottom panel corresponds to the baseline specification.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.
                                   Table A.10: Islamist Capture of Local Governance: Alternative Specifications
                                                                 Local Relig.      Sharia       Sharia     Islamic Court Cases re:      Islamist Vigilante Activity
                                                                Gov. Officials   Regulations   Banking    Waqf     Inherit. Divorce     Incidents      Casualties
                                                                     (1)             (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)           (8)

                  Baseline specification (Table 3)                 0.614**         0.600**      0.346    1.153*     0.825**    0.050     0.837**       1.119***
                                                                   (0.266)         (0.289)     (0.237)   (0.603)    (0.397)   (0.423)    (0.349)        (0.357)


                  Controls: Agriculture                            0.495*           0.649      0.803**   1.152**    0.660*     0.032      0.364          0.878
                                                                   (0.269)         (0.406)     (0.316)   (0.493)    (0.362)   (0.294)    (0.527)        (0.602)


                  Controls: 1955-57 Vote Shares + Darul Islam      0.504*           0.388      0.399*    0.924**     0.909    -0.135     0.794*        1.063***
                                                                   (0.256)         (0.278)     (0.239)   (0.441)    (0.580)   (0.423)    (0.418)        (0.371)


                  Controls: Mosques & Pesantren by 1920            0.534*           0.311      0.402*    1.131**    0.743*    -0.092    1.042***       1.272***
                                                                   (0.306)         (0.294)     (0.206)   (0.489)    (0.395)   (0.653)    (0.350)        (0.403)


                  Province Fixed Effects                            0.098          0.414**      0.085     0.907      0.237    -0.758     0.881**       1.178***
63




                                                                   (0.243)         (0.180)     (0.243)   (0.755)    (0.409)   (0.588)    (0.358)        (0.369)


                  No Sulawesi/Sumatra                              0.541*          0.631*       0.332    1.669***    0.788    -0.028    0.972***       1.302***
                                                                   (0.281)         (0.321)     (0.261)    (0.530)   (0.475)   (0.496)    (0.354)        (0.341)


                  Lower bound on expropriable holdings              0.347           0.361      0.470*     0.505      0.495    -0.143      0.561         0.773*
                                                                   (0.285)         (0.288)     (0.257)   (0.580)    (0.323)   (0.444)    (0.467)        (0.435)


                  Upper bound on expropriable holdings            0.239***         0.216**      0.141     0.314     0.290*     0.012     0.260**        0.341**
                                                                   (0.091)         (0.106)     (0.089)   (0.194)    (0.148)   (0.138)    (0.130)        (0.148)


                  Placebo: expropriation at 500 ppl/km2             0.122           -0.101      -0.197    0.054     -0.017     0.729     -0.860*         -1.308
                                                                   (0.318)         (0.472)     (0.254)   (0.523)    (0.314)   (0.520)    (0.512)        (1.057)


                  Number of Districts                                191             191         189        80       80        80          114           114
                  R2                                                0.289           0.136       0.435     0.436     0.688     0.453       0.268         0.304


     Notes: This table reports estimates from variants of equation (1) using the same standardized outcomes as in Table 3. Agricultural controls include number
     of males, females, and farms, total irrigated land area, and total dry land area. Vote shares refer to Islamic parties and the Communist Party in the 1955/57
     legislative elections. Controls are fully interacted with the Above400 dummy and the number of marginal expropriable holdings (M EH). The R2 reported in
     the bottom panel corresponds to the baseline specification.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors.
A.7.2   RD Robustness Checks
In Tables A.11, A.12, and A.13, we show that our main results are mostly robust to alternative
parametrizations of the RD specification. For comparison, the top row of each of these tables reports
estimates from the baseline specification in Tables 1, 2, and 3, respectively. We then report the following
checks. First, we vary the degree of the polynomial in the running variable (1960 population density)
in equation (1). Our main results are robust to alternative polynomials (linear, quadratic, and quartic)
besides the cubic specification used in the baseline estimates.
    Second, we vary the bandwidth around the population density cutoff of 400 people/km2 , with band-
widths ranging from 100 to 300. The difference-in-discontinuity estimate remains positive and signifi-
cant in most of these specifications. At the lower end, we see the limits of the identifying variation
afforded by the policy as we are left with too few districts (46 out of 191) to conduct statistically well-
powered difference-in-discontinuity regressions with the associated interactions.




                                                    64
      Table A.11: Waqf Land and Waqf -Endowed Institutions: RD Specification Checks
                                                        Waqf Land                Waqf -Endowed Institutions
                                             hectares    % total % zoned        mosques pesantren madrasas
                                               (1)         (2)     (3)            (4)      (5)          (6)

          Baseline specification (Table 1)    0.207**    0.251**     3.286**    2.956***     0.532**      1.024**
                                              (0.097)    (0.107)     (1.483)     (0.985)     (0.264)      (0.410)


          Linear in density                  0.155***    0.143***     0.822       0.865       0.223       0.546**
                                              (0.052)     (0.050)    (1.008)     (0.732)     (0.145)      (0.214)


          Quadratic in density                 0.109     0.195**      0.230      1.733**      0.305       0.740**
                                              (0.071)    (0.075)     (1.314)     (0.826)     (0.199)      (0.366)


          Quartic in density                   0.128      0.155       1.060      2.213**      0.340       0.935**
                                              (0.078)    (0.099)     (1.205)     (0.922)     (0.286)      (0.376)


          Local linear, Bandwidth: 100        0.224*      0.152       2.310       1.262       0.788       0.997**
                                              (0.113)    (0.159)     (1.635)     (1.394)     (0.590)      (0.429)

          Villages                            12,304      12,304     12,304      12,089      12,089       12,089
          Districts                             46          46         46          46          46           46


          Local linear, Bandwidth: 200        0.223**    0.182*      1.969**    3.228***     0.742**     1.206***
                                              (0.090)    (0.104)     (0.970)     (1.092)     (0.343)      (0.428)

          Villages                            18,917      18,917     18,917      18,406      18,406       18,406
          Districts                             71          71         71          71          71           71


          Local linear, Bandwidth: 300        0.197**    0.277***     0.379     2.308***     0.522*      0.939***
                                              (0.080)     (0.091)    (1.195)     (0.774)     (0.297)      (0.345)

          Villages                            24,563      24,563     24,563      23,739      23,739       23,739
          Districts                             97          97         97          96          96           96


          Number of Villages                   55200      55200      55200       48978        48978       48978
          Number of Districts                   191        191        191         189          189         189
          Dependent Variable Mean              0.848      0.518      6.127       3.921        0.503       0.787
          R2                                   0.033      0.005      0.044       0.234        0.165       0.195

Notes: This table reports estimates from variants of equation (1) using the same outcomes as in Table 1. Each row reports
results from a different specification. In the second to fourth row, we vary the degree of the polynomial in the running
variable (1960 population density) to alternative polynomials (linear, quadratic, and quartic) besides the cubic specification
used in the baseline estimates. In subsequent rows, we vary the bandwidth around the 400 people/km2 cutoff, with
bandwidths ranging from 100 to 300. The bottom panel reports regression statistics from the baseline specification. See
Section A.7.2 for a detailed description of each specification.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.


                                                             65
                     Table A.12: Islamist Party Support: RD Specification Checks
                                                           Village               District Level
                                                            1999            1999          1999-2014
                                                         Top 3 Finish    Vote Share Avg. Vote Share
                                                             (1)             (2)             (3)

                                                                        Islamist Parties

                     Baseline specification (Table 2)       0.158*         0.049**          0.044**
                                                            (0.083)        (0.024)          (0.020)


                     Linear in density                      0.114**        0.030**         0.035***
                                                            (0.046)        (0.014)          (0.011)


                     Quadratic in density                    0.099          0.029           0.036**
                                                            (0.065)        (0.018)          (0.014)


                     Quartic in density                     0.179*         0.051**          0.045**
                                                            (0.092)        (0.024)          (0.019)


                     Local linear, Bandwidth: 100            0.088          0.056            0.054
                                                            (0.143)        (0.049)          (0.037)

                     Observations                           12,304           46               179
                     Districts                                46             46               46


                     Local linear, Bandwidth: 200           0.143*         0.062**          0.054**
                                                            (0.086)        (0.027)          (0.021)

                     Observations                           18,917           71               277
                     Districts                                71             71               71


                     Local linear, Bandwidth: 300            0.116         0.039*           0.043**
                                                            (0.073)        (0.023)          (0.018)

                     Observations                           24,563           97               380
                     Districts                                97             97               97


                     Number of Villages                     55200             –                –
                     Number of Districts                     191             189              191
                     Dependent Variable Mean                0.516           0.136            0.154
                     R2                                     0.051           0.205            0.222

Notes: This table reports estimates from variants of equation (1). Islamist parties are defined as in Table 2. Each row reports
results from a different specification. In the second to fourth row, we vary the degree of the polynomial in the running
variable (1960 population density) to alternative polynomials (linear, quadratic, and quartic) besides the cubic specification
used in the baseline estimates. In subsequent rows, we vary the bandwidth around the 400 people/km2 cutoff, with
bandwidths ranging from 100 to 300. The bottom panel reports regression statistics from the baseline specification. See
Section A.7.2 for a detailed description of each specification.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.
                                    Table A.13: Islamist Capture of Local Governance: RD Specification Checks
                                                            Local Relig.      Sharia       Sharia     Islamic Court Cases re:      Islamist Vigilante Activity
                                                           Gov. Officials   Regulations   Banking    Waqf     Inherit. Divorce     Incidents      Casualties
                                                                (1)             (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)           (8)

                        Baseline specification (Table 3)      0.614**         0.600**      0.346    1.153*     0.825**    0.050     0.837**       1.119***
                                                              (0.266)         (0.289)     (0.237)   (0.603)    (0.397)   (0.423)    (0.349)        (0.357)


                        Linear in density                     0.283**          0.269       -0.217   0.516*      0.218     0.012     0.472**       0.480***
                                                              (0.134)         (0.190)     (0.136)   (0.296)    (0.305)   (0.263)    (0.191)        (0.175)


                        Quadratic in density                  0.315*          0.445*       0.066    0.761*      0.548    -0.018     0.513*         0.718**
                                                              (0.179)         (0.228)     (0.172)   (0.432)    (0.501)   (0.342)    (0.269)        (0.291)


                        Quartic in density                     0.165           0.439       -0.087   1.047*      0.665    -0.043      0.481          0.599
                                                              (0.264)         (0.318)     (0.264)   (0.612)    (0.501)   (0.379)    (0.679)        (0.546)


                        Local linear, Bandwidth: 100           0.478          0.915**      0.228    2.785***    0.531    -0.007      0.815         1.288*
67




                                                              (0.487)         (0.421)     (0.365)    (0.657)   (0.565)   (0.415)    (0.889)        (0.725)

                        Districts                               46              46          46        22         22        22         33             33


                        Local linear, Bandwidth: 200          0.555*          0.891**      0.355     1.193      0.684    -0.351      0.679         0.935*
                                                              (0.290)         (0.342)     (0.251)   (0.712)    (0.479)   (0.438)    (0.547)        (0.484)

                        Districts                               71              71          71        37         37        37         47             47


                        Local linear, Bandwidth: 300           0.235          0.510*       -0.019    0.973      0.664    -0.276      0.519         0.577*
                                                              (0.252)         (0.279)     (0.210)   (0.589)    (0.468)   (0.341)    (0.346)        (0.325)

                        Districts                               97              97          96        47         47        47         62             62


                        Number of Districts                     191             191         189        80       80        80          114           114
                        R2                                     0.289           0.136       0.435     0.436     0.688     0.453       0.268         0.304


     Notes: This table reports estimates fron variants of equation (1) using the same standardized outcomes as in Table 3. In the second to fourth row, we vary
     the degree of the polynomial in the running variable (1960 population density) to alternative polynomials (linear, quadratic, and quartic) besides the cubic
     specification used in the baseline estimates. In subsequent rows, we vary the bandwidth around the 400 people/km2 cutoff, with bandwidths ranging from 100
     to 300. The bottom panel reports regression statistics from the baseline specification. See Section A.7.2 for a detailed description of each specification.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors.
A.7.3   Other Land Reform Policy Cutoffs
In Tables A.14, A.15, and A.16, we probe the role of other cutoffs used in the 1960 land reform. While the
core of our analysis focuses on the 400 people/km2 cutoff, nominally the reform used two other cutoffs
at 50 and 250 people/km2 , as discussed in Sections 2.1 and 4.2. We proceed in two ways. First, we
estimate a version of equation (1) where we “pool” all three cutoffs and each district is matched to the
nearest cutoff. The specification takes the following form:
                                                                                        3
                                                                                        X
        yij       = α + γ0 Abovej + γ1 M EHj + β(Abovej × M EHj ) +                            cdj + islandj     (A.1)
                                                                                         d=1
                            3
                            X
                        +         cdj g(densityj )[δ0d + δ1d Abovej + δ2d M EHj + δ3d (Abovej × M EHj )] + εij
                            d=1

where c = 1, 2, 3 is a set of indicators equal to 1 if threshold d is the nearest threshold (d = 1, 2, 3
denote the cutoffs at 50, 250, and 400, respectively), and Abovej is equal to 1 if district j is above the
population density threshold of the nearest cutoff. In this case, marginal expropriable holdings (M EH)
are defined for each cutoff as follows: holdings between 5–9 hectares at the 400 cutoff, holdings between
7.5–12 hectares at the 250 cutoff, and holdings between 10–20 hectares at the 50 cutoff. The difference-in-
discontinuity estimate remains positive in all tables, and is statistically significant across most columns
of Table A.14 and A.16. However, the fact that considerably less expropriation actually occurred at these
lower cutoffs implies that the results delivered in this specification are much more imprecise.
    Second, we look for discontinuities in outcomes at each cutoff. The specification in this case is:

                  yij       =        α + γ050 Above50j + γ150 M EH50j + β 50 (Above50j × M EH50j )               (A.2)
                            +        γ0250 Above250j   +   γ1250 M EH250j   +β   250
                                                                                       (Above250j × M EH250j )
                            +        γ0400 Above400j   +   γ1400 M EH400j   +β   400
                                                                                       (Above400j × M EH400j )
                  3
                  X
              +         g(Ddj ) [δ0d + δ1d Above{d}j + δ2d M EH{d}j + δ3d (Above{d}j × M EH{d}j )]
                  d=1
                            +        islandj + εij ,

where Ddj represent the distance to cutoff d for district j and d = 1, 2, 3 denote the cutoffs at 50, 250,
and 400, respectively. Here, to improve precision we use non-overlapping intervals of MEH at each
cutoff, namely 5–9 ha at 400, 9–12 ha at 250, and 12–20 ha at 50 people/km2 . The bottom panel of Tables
A.14, A.15, and A.16 reports the corresponding estimates of β 50 , β 250 , and β 400 . These coefficients are
jointly significant when looking at land under waqf (Table A.14 column 1). Again, the results are less
precise than when focusing solely on the 400 cutoff where expropriation intensity was most binding. As
discussed in Section 6.2, these patterns are in line with the historical record of policy implementation,
which suggests that by the time the land reform was halted in the mid-1960s it had mostly not reached
regions of the country where the other cutoffs were most pervasive.




                                                                  68
          Table A.14: Waqf Land and Waqf -Endowed Institutions: Other BAL Cutoffs
                                                      Waqf Land                    Waqf -Endowed Institutions
                                          hectares     % total % zoned            mosques pesantren madrasas
                                            (1)          (2)     (3)                (4)      (5)          (6)

Baseline specification (Table 1)           0.207**      0.251**      3.286**       2.956***       0.532**       1.024**
                                           (0.097)      (0.107)      (1.483)        (0.985)       (0.264)       (0.410)


Pooling all cutoffs                        0.174**     0.150***       1.105        1.316**         0.141          0.266
                                           (0.075)      (0.052)      (1.144)       (0.602)        (0.154)        (0.164)


Expropriation at 50 ppl/km2                 0.102        0.055        2.042         -0.113         0.040          0.049
                                           (0.126)      (0.044)      (1.976)        (0.457)       (0.078)        (0.107)

Expropriation at 250 ppl/km2                0.340        0.925        -6.949        -3.733         -0.185         -2.559
                                           (0.861)      (0.923)      (9.021)        (9.655)       (1.592)        (2.056)

Expropriation at 400 ppl/km2               0.180**      0.268**       1.118        2.203**         0.376         0.582*
                                           (0.074)      (0.107)      (0.878)       (0.948)        (0.255)        (0.341)


Number of Villages                         55200         55200        55200         48978         48978          48978
Number of Districts                         191           191          191           189           189            189
Dependent Variable Mean                    0.848         0.518        6.127         3.921         0.503          0.787
R2                                         0.033         0.005        0.044         0.234         0.165          0.195

Notes: This table examines the same outcomes as in Table 1. We first report estimates from equation (A.1) where each
district is matched to the nearest cutoff. In the bottom panel, we report estimates of β 50 , β 250 , and β 400 from equation
(A.2). See Section A.7.3 for a detailed description of each specification.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.




                                                             69
        Table A.15: Islamist Party Support in Legislative Elections: Other BAL Cutoffs
                                                         Village                 District Level
                                                          1999              1999          1999-2014
                                                       Top 3 Finish      Vote Share Avg. Vote Share
                                                           (1)               (2)             (3)

                                                                         Islamist Parties

             Baseline specification (Table 2)             0.158*            0.049**             0.044**
                                                          (0.083)           (0.024)             (0.020)


             Pooling all cutoffs                           0.011             0.025               0.029
                                                          (0.059)           (0.022)             (0.022)


             Expropriation at 50 ppl/km2                  -0.095            -0.004              -0.003
                                                          (0.059)           (0.010)             (0.007)

             Expropriation at 250 ppl/km2                 -0.322            -0.021              -0.094
                                                          (0.595)           (0.157)             (0.117)

             Expropriation at 400 ppl/km2                  0.145            0.056**             0.059**
                                                          (0.103)           (0.028)             (0.028)


             Number of Villages                            55200               –                   –
             Number of Districts                            191               189                 191
             Dependent Variable Mean                       0.516             0.136               0.154
             R2                                            0.051             0.205               0.222

Notes: This table examines the same outcomes as in Table 2. We first report estimates from equation (A.1) where each
district is matched to the nearest cutoff. In the bottom panel, we report estimates of β 50 , β 250 , and β 400 from equation
(A.2). See Section A.7.3 for a detailed description of each specification.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by 1960 district.
                                       Table A.16: Islamist Capture of Local Governance: Other BAL Cutoffs
                                                Local Relig.         Sharia            Sharia         Islamic Court Cases re:            Islamist Vigilante Activity
                                               Gov. Officials      Regulations        Banking        Waqf    Inherit. Divorce            Incidents      Casualties
                                                    (1)                (2)              (3)           (4)      (5)       (6)                 (7)           (8)

     Baseline specification (Table 3)              0.614**             0.600**          0.346       1.153*      0.825**       0.050       0.837**           1.119***
                                                   (0.266)             (0.289)         (0.237)      (0.603)     (0.397)      (0.423)      (0.349)            (0.357)


     Pooling all cutoffs                            0.215               0.073           0.131        0.851      1.066*        0.528       1.025***          1.487***
                                                   (0.182)             (0.238)         (0.180)      (0.680)     (0.554)      (0.444)       (0.315)           (0.213)


     Expropriation at 50 ppl/km2                   -0.166              -0.090          -0.053        0.064       0.958       -0.216        -0.353            -0.122
                                                   (0.114)             (0.155)         (0.115)      (1.464)     (1.492)      (0.835)       (0.224)           (0.137)

     Expropriation at 250 ppl/km2
71




                                                   -0.061              -3.630*         -3.109*       4.149       9.017      8.166***        1.477             1.848
                                                   (1.371)             (1.880)         (1.692)      (4.545)     (5.993)      (2.559)       (2.147)           (1.477)

     Expropriation at 400 ppl/km2                   0.246              0.675*          0.740*       2.379*      -1.360       -0.358        1.195*           1.589***
                                                   (0.278)             (0.349)         (0.390)      (1.329)     (1.406)      (0.582)       (0.604)           (0.409)


     Number of Districts                             191                 191             189          80          80           80            114               114
     R2                                             0.289               0.136           0.435        0.436       0.688        0.453         0.268             0.304

     Notes: This table examines the same standardized outcomes as in Table 3. All regressions are run at the district level. We first report estimates from equation
     (A.1) where each district is matched to the nearest cutoff. In the bottom panel, we report estimates of β 50 , β 250 , and β 400 from equation (A.2). See Section A.7.3
     for a detailed description of each specification.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors.
B    Data Sources and Construction

We describe here the key variables and data sources used in the paper.

Historic Population Density
We measure historic district-level population density using tabulations from the 1961 Population Census
available in island-level hard-bound report, Sensus Penduduk 1961 in the Central Bureau of Statistics
(Badan Pusat Statistik or BPS) library in Jakarta. The specific table that we use is titled “Sensus Penduduk
Republik Indonesia 1961. Angka Sementara Penduduk Indonesia Menurut Jenis Kelamin. Per Daerah
Tingkat II.” We use ArcGIS to construct the area of historical 1961 districts by amalgamating later districts
back to their 1961 boundaries. Using the resulting population density, we classify districts into the four
categories discussed in the paper.

Historic Landholdings
We measure the historic landholdings distribution and number of large holders using the 1963 Agricul-
tural Census conducted for the purposes of assessing landholdings in order to implement the stipulated
reform. We digitized district-level tabulations available in a report by BPS, Sensus Pertanian 1963, with
the table “Number of farms by size of area” (“Banjaknja usaha pertanian rakjat menurut golongan luas
tanah”). While the raw data from the Agricultural Census are no longer available, these tabulations pro-
vide sufficient granularity to estimate (with noise) the number of large landholders in each district that
would be affected by the land reform. For each district, we observe the number of holders with 0.1–0.49
hectares (ha), 0.5–0.99 ha, 1–1.49 ha, 1.5–1.99 ha, 2–2.99 ha, 3–3.99 ha, 4–4.99 ha, and greater than or equal
to 5 ha.
    As detailed in Section 4.1, assuming that landholdings L follow a Pareto distribution with probability
density function λLλ L−λ−1 , we can estimate the number of landholders in different bins above 5 ha.
Given the Pareto formulation, the distribution parameter λ holds over all truncated segments of the
distribution. As such, we can use the bins below 5 ha to recover the shape of the distribution above 5
ha where we do not know the number of landholders in each affected size bin subject to redistribution
based on the four density cutoffs.
    We proceed in two steps. First, we estimate the Pareto shape parameter, λ, for each district using
a maximum likelihood procedure for landholdings L ∈ [0.1, 5) ha. Second, we use λ           b to back out the
number of landholders with 5–9 ha, 9–12 ha, 12–20 ha, and > 20 ha, following the stipulated cutoffs.
Concretely, we multiply the number N5 of landholders in the ≥ 5 ha bin by the share of the district’s
total landholding distribution in the given range based on the Pareto cumulative distribution function
                                           λb
(e.g., for 5–9 ha, this is given by [1 − 95 ] × N5 ).
    Although we are not able to estimate these marginal landholdings separately by wetland and dry-
land, we are able to control for the total number of farms, total wetland area (ha), and total dryland area
(ha) using district-level tabulations elsewhere in the Sensus Pertanian 1963 report under the table titled
“Farm area, average size of Farm and Paddy area” (“Luas tanah Pertanian Rakjat dan luas panenan
padi”).
    We measure the post-land reform distribution of landholdings using the 1980 and 1990 Population
Censuses as well as the 1985 Intercensal Survey (Supas). These are the first three Census/Inter-census
rounds that include measures of total landholdings owned by each household. We use the samples
available on IPUMS International and estimate the Pareto landholdings dispersion parameter λ, for all



                                                     72
landholdings above 0.1 ha. These estimates are at the district-level, at which the population summary
statistics are representative, and hence directly comparable with the tabulations from 1963.

Contemporary Landholdings, Including Waqf
We measure contemporary landholdings using the 2003 Agricultural Census. We use this universal
census data to estimate Pareto shape parameters, λ, for every village and also to construct a measure
capturing the share of all households with greater than 0.1 ha over which λ is estimated. See Bazzi
(2017) for details on the data and estimation procedure, which differs from that used for the coarser,
binned 1963 Agricultural Census data.
   We use the 2003 administrative village census (Potensi Desa or Podes) to measure the total land area
under waqf status overall, as a share of total land, and as a share of zoned land.

Contemporary Islamic Institutions
We use the Podes 2003 and 2008 data to construct village-level measures of Islamic institutions. The 2003
data include the total number of Islamic schools (pesantren and madrasa), and the 2008 data disaggregate
the two. Both rounds include the number of mosques.
    We also draw upon administrative data from the Ministry of Religion to measure (i) the amount of
waqf land allocated to new mosques and (ii) the number of students enrolled in pesantren, both by year
and district of establishment. We scrape these administrative data from the web: (i) is from http://
simas.kemenag.go.id/ and (ii) is from https://ditpdpontren.kemenag.go.id/pbsb/. The
number of pesantren established by 1920 is winsorized at the 99th percentile due to data concerns over
one district (Jember), where 71% of pesantren are implausibly reported as having been established in
1900.

Electoral Outcomes
We draw upon several sources to measure historic and contemporary electoral outcomes.
    First, we draw upon district-level vote shares by party from the national legislative elections in 1955,
1999, 2004, 2009, and 2014. These data were graciously shared with us by individuals that worked with
Dwight King. Several districts are missing data for the 1955 elections. We therefore supplement the
1955 legislative election data with data from the 1957 district legislative elections that were held in select
districts. There are still some historic districts with no voting data from the 1950s, and for these 20
districts, we impute the vote shares for neighboring districts so as to retain the largest possible sample
of districts when including this control in robustness checks. We digitize the latter from raw electoral
reports obtained from files shared with us by Donald Hindley.
    Second, we use the 2003 Podes, which records the top 1, 2, and 3 ranked parties at the village-level in
the first post-Suharto legislative election held in 1999. Unfortunately, the vote shares themselves are not
reported.
    We categorize parties based on conventions put forward in the political science literature on Indone-
sia, including numerous works by Dwight King and R. William Liddle as well as a seminal article by
Baswedan (2004) aligning parties in the post-Suharto era along a spectrum of Islamist leanings. In 1955
and 1957, we define Islamist parties as Masyumi, the Indonesian Islamic Union Party (Partai Serikat Islam
Indonesia or PSII), the Islamic Educators Association (Perhimpunan Tarbiyah Islamiyah or Perti), and Nahd-
latul Ulama (NU). While the first post-Sukarno election in 1971 saw several Islamic parties (NU, PSII,
Perti, and the Muslim Party of Indonesia; Masyumi was banned in 1961), thereafter the Suharto regime



                                                     73
allowed only a single Islamic party in the United Development Party (Partai Persatuan Pembangunan or
PPP).
    From 1999 onward, we follow Baswedan (2004) in classifying Islamic parties. We consider as moder-
ate Islamic parties the National Mandate Party (Partai Amanat Nasional or PAN) and the National Awak-
ening Party (Partai Kebangkitan Bangsa or PKB), both of which initially adopted the national ideology of
Pancasila prior to the 1999 election when parties were allowed to choose whether or not to embrace this
for the first time in the post-Suharto era. The PKB is the successor to a large part of the former NU polit-
ical wing, which disbanded from the PPP in 1984. The Islamist parties include the PPP, the Prosperous
Justice Party (Partai Keadilan Sejahtera or PKS), and the Crescent Star Party (Partai Bulan Bintang or PBB).
All three parties rejected Pancasila, including the PPP which was forced to accept Pancasila during the
Suharto era.
    In sum, the PPP, PBB, and PKS can be seen as traditional Islamist parties whereas the PKB and
PAN are Islamic albeit inclusive and non-Islamist in their orientation. While the particular leanings
of these parties change over time and until today, this rough breakdown lines up with most historical
and contemporary accounts by political observers.
    There are numerous non-Islamic parties, nearly all of which are secular (except a few tiny Christian
parties). We lump all of these parties into the residual, secular category. For a full elaboration, see
Appendix A.5.
    In 1955/57, we also observe the Communist vote share.

Religious Political Preferences, Piety, and Practice
We use the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS) rounds 4–5 in 2007 and 2014/15, respectively, to measure
individual-level religious political preferences. These include the following questions: (i) In an election,
having a candidate with the same religion as yours makes it [...] to vote for him/her. (... is a 1 to 5
scale ranging from very likely to very unlikely; and (ii) In an election, if the candidates have the same
religion as yours, how important is the religiosity of a candidate in influencing your decision to vote
for him/her? A more religious candidate make [...] to vote for him/her. (... is the same scale as (iv)).
The IFLS also includes questions about tolerance towards other religious faiths living in one’s village,
neighborhood, house, and family as well as building a house worship nearby. We take the mean of these
five questions which range on a 1 to 4 scale from very happy with to very opposed. We also consider two
other variables capturing religiosity (“Am I a very a religious person?”) and interreligious trust (“Do I
trust members of other religious faiths less than those of my own?”).
    We use rich individual-level survey data from Pepinsky et al. (2018), which is based on a 2008 survey
conducted by the authors in which 10 individuals were sampled from each district. The data include
numerous questions we use in Tables 4, 5, and A.7. This includes religious political preferences (e.g., how
important is the religion and religiosity of the President of Indonesia, support specific sharia regulations)
as well as a host of questions about Islamic practice (e.g., fasting, paying zakat).

Sharia Regulations
We use data from Buehler (2016), Appendix 1, pp. 215–220 on the number of Sharia regulations adopted
by district between 1998 and 2013. We use the total number of regulations, inclusive of legislative and
executive branch regulations.




                                                     74
Islamic Microfinance
We use the Podes 2017 data to measure the prevalence of Islamic microfinance institutions known as
Baitul Maal wat Tamwil or BMT. These data are available at the village level. We aggregate to the district
level in Table 3 and related robustness tables, in keeping with the unit of analysis for other outcomes in
that table.

Legislator Profiles
In Table 4, we consider three measures capturing the religious appeal of legislative candidates in the 2019
election. Thanks to Nicholas Kuipers for scraping and sharing these data from the Indonesian Electoral
Commission: http://www.kpu.go.id/. The first measure captures whether the candidate’s online
campaign statement appeals to Islamic or Islamist themes. These include umma, dawah, Muslim, Islam,
sharia, and jihad. The second measure captures whether the candidate’s official name listed on the ballot
includes an honorific title (Haji or simply H) signaling their prior Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca. The third
measure captures whether the candidate’s official name listed on the ballot includes an honorific title
signaling their status as a relgiious scholar (Kyai or Kyai Haji or simply KH).

Islamic Courts
We scrape data from web portals for every district-level Islamic court that reports such information on-
line through the Religious Courts Information System (SIPP). A complete list of these portals is available
upon request. The data, which vary in years of coverage, include date of filing and type of case.

Islamist Vigilante Activity
We capture the number of incidents and casualties due to violent activities by the Islamic Defend-
ers Front (FPI) using data from the National Violence Monitoring System (or SNPK by its Indonesian
acronym). The event-based data include a textual description of the underlying media report, and we
search for terms related to the FPI. We include counts over the entire period the data are available, be-
ginning in 1998 through 2014. The SNPK do not cover all regions of the country and hence the more
limited sample size for this analysis.

Local Religious Bureaucracy
We digitized tabulations of the number of different types of bureaucrats working in the district-level
Ministry of Religious Affairs in 2018. These come from “Dalam Angka” reports available in pdf on the
Ministry of Religious Affairs website.

Historic Demographics
We use the Sensus Penduduk 1961 report noted above to control for the total number of men and women
in each district as of 1960 before the land reform. We use the 1971 Population Census to construct age-
specific male-to-female sex ratios. The data come from IPUMS International, and we use the population
weights to go from the sample constructed by IPUMS to the historic district-level total male and female
population. We also construct district population growth between 1961 and 1971 using this data.
    We also use the 1930 Population Census to measure the number of ethnic Arab and Chinese in
each historic district. These data come from digitizing 1930 Population Census tabulations from Dutch
archives.


                                                    75
Islamic Holy Sites
We use Google maps to identify the latitude/longitude of holy sites for the nine “saints” of Indonesian
Islam in Java known as Wali Songo (the “nine saints” in the Javanese language). These nine men are
credited with being the vanguard for the advance of Islamic across Java historically. We then compute
the great circle distance of each village to the nearest holy site.

Islamist Insurgency in the 1950s
We use the book by van Dijk (1981) on the Darul Islam rebellion to hand-code measures of the Islamist
rebellion that took place across Indonesia in the 1950s. We construct indicators for whether any violence
took place in a given district.

Contemporary Demographics
We use the universal coverage 2000 Population Census to capture mean years of schooling and the share
with different levels of education.

Contemporary Agricultural Production, Development, and Public Goods
We use the triennial Podes to construct several village-level proxies for development and public goods.
Using the 2003 round, we construct the price-weighted agricultural output and total agricultural pro-
ductivity (with price weights coming the FAO, see Bazzi et al. (2016) for details). We also measure the
total number of capital machines for farming in each village in 2003. We construct an index of locally
provided health and infrastructure public goods using all six Podes rounds from 1999 to 2014. The in-
frastructure index is based on that used in Martinez-Bravo (2017). Following Henderson et al. (2012),
we capture a summary measure development based on the share of the village with any nightlights as
observed from NOAA satellites in 2000.

Geographic Controls
We use the Podes 2003 data to construct the following geographic controls: indicators for whether the
village is located on a hill or on a beach, the altitude in meters, and the distance to subdistrict and
district capitals in kilometers.




                                                   76
