                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          PARTIAL RATING AREA OFFERING IN THE ACA MARKETPLACES:
                       FACTS, THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                        Hanming Fang
                                          Ami Ko

                                      Working Paper 25154
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25154


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2018




We thank Naoki Aizawa, Fatih Karahan, Andres Aradillas Lopez, Xu Cheng, Phil Haile, Timothy
Layton, Daniel Polsky, Robert Porter, Holger Sieg, Amanda Starc, Petra Todd and seminar
participants at Wisconsin-Madison, Federal Reserve Bank of New York and NBER Summer
Institute for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Hanming Fang and Ami Ko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Partial Rating Area Offering in the ACA Marketplaces: Facts, Theory and Evidence
Hanming Fang and Ami Ko
NBER Working Paper No. 25154
October 2018
JEL No. I11,I13,L1

                                          ABSTRACT

In the health insurance marketplaces established by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), each state is
divided into a set number of geographic ``rating areas." The ACA mandates that an insurer price
its health insurance plan uniformly in all counties within the same rating area, conditional on
insurees' age and smoking status. However, the ACA does \textit{not} require that an insurer sell
its plan in all counties in a rating area. Using the federal marketplace data, we quantify the
prevalence of a phenomenon, which we refer to as partial rating area offering, where insurers
enter some but not all of the counties in a rating area. To understand why insurers selectively
enter a subset of the counties in a rating area, we develop a simple model of insurer competition.
The model implies that if common county characteristics, such as the county's risk distribution,
market size and provider availability, are the primary drivers for the partial rating area offering
phenomenon, then there would be a positive correlation among insurers' entry decisions. In
contrast, if the partial rating area offering phenomenon is driven by market segmentation, then
there would be a negative correlation. We develop a novel nonparametric correlation test and
apply it to the federal marketplace data. We find strong evidence for a positive correlation of
insurers' entry decisions, suggesting that common cost factors are the main driver for the partial
rating area offering phenomenon. To the extent that it is a concern that many counties now have
few insurers, our result suggests that it is important to offer insurers subsidies that are tied to
county characteristics.


Hanming Fang
Department of Economics
Ronald O. Perelman Center
for Political Science and Economics
133 South 36th Street
Suite 150
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu

Ami Ko
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
3700 O st NW, ICC 557
Washington DC 20007
ami.ko@georgetown.edu
1        Introduction

    The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) established state-by-state health in-
surance marketplaces which came into full operation in October 2013. The ACA heavily regulates
factors that insurers can use for pricing insurance plans. To limit insurers’ ability to vary premiums
by geographic region, each state is divided into a set number of geographic “rating areas” which
were approved by the federal government before the opening of the marketplaces. The division
of the rating areas was primarily based on differences in health care provider prices, and in most
states, a rating area is composed of several counties. One of the most notable ACA regulations is
the requirement that an insurer price its health insurance plan uniformly in all counties within the
same rating area, conditional on insurees’ age and smoking status. However, the ACA does not
require that a plan be sold in all counties within the rating area.

    In this paper, we investigate (1) whether insurers sell plans that cover only a strict subset of
counties of a rating area – a phenomenon which we refer to as “partial rating area offering” – and if
so, (2) what the underlying driving forces are. Note that if insurers in the marketplaces issue plans
that are sold in some but not all counties of a rating area, then the geographic risk adjustments
are effectively based on counties, and not rating areas. Furthermore, different insurer motives for
the partial rating area offering phenomenon may call for different policy remedies. For example,
if insurers are using partial rating area offering to divide up a rating area with their competitors
and avoid head-on competition, then a direct regulation on insurers’ service area could be called
for.1 On the other hand, if insurers are not offering plans in high-cost counties where it is almost
impossible to avoid a loss, then mandating all plans be offered in all counties of a rating area might
instead trigger insurer exits. In this case, a different policy intervention should be considered such
as providing subsidies that are tied to the risk scores of counties.

    We first assess the prevalence of the partial rating area offering phenomenon in the health in-
surance marketplaces. Our main data come from the 2016 Marketplace Public Use Files collected
by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The dataset has the universe of individual
health insurance plans sold in the 38 states that receive support from the Department of Health
and Human Services for their marketplace operations. Based on various statistics developed in this
paper, we find that partial rating area offering is quite common in the marketplaces: about 30% of
     1
    A service area of a marketplace health insurance plan is the set of counties where the plan is sold. Note
that marketplace plans that partially cover a county are almost never approved by the federal government.



                                                     2
the insurance companies exclude at least one county from their service area while selling plans to
other counties in the same rating area.

  We then present empirical facts that suggest that insurers avoid entering counties with unfavor-
able market conditions. Using county data from the Area Health Resources Files and the County
Health Rankings, we find that counties with relatively fewer potential marketplace enrollees and a
higher share of unhealthy consumers have lower insurer participation rates. As the division of rat-
ing areas was not strictly based on differences in health risks, counties belonging to the same rating
area may have heterogeneous expected medical care spending distributions which could strengthen
insurers’ risk screening motives. Using the Medicare Advantage service area data, we also find
that insurers’ entry probability is lower in counties where they did not sell Medicare Advantage
plans prior to the ACA. This descriptive pattern suggests that insurers may be less likely to enter
counties where they face a large fixed cost of building a provider network.

  Motivated by these facts, we develop a simple model of insurer competition within a rating area.
Counties in the rating area are differentiated by their market size and their medical care spending
distribution. In addition, each insurer faces a fixed cost of entry that varies by county. Insurers
simultaneously decide which counties to enter and how to price their plans. An insurer’s total fixed
cost increases in the number of plans it offers in the rating area. If an insurer sells the same plan
to multiple counties, then its price has to be the same for all of the serviced counties, as required
by the ACA. Insurer competition in a county takes a form of Bertrand competition with a spurious
product differentiation. In the Nash equilibrium, each insurer’s entry and pricing decisions are best
responses to those of its competitors.

  We parameterize the model and numerically compute the equilibrium for a wide range of param-
eter values. The model implies that when partial rating area entry is driven by insurers’ avoidance
of counties with unfavorable market conditions (e.g., adverse risk distribution, low demand or high
fixed cost of entry), insurers’ county-level entry decisions are positively correlated within the rating
area. For example, insurers would pool to not servicing the high cost counties. On the other hand,
when partial rating area entry is driven by market segmentation, insurers’ county entry decisions
are negatively correlated as they avoid entering counties where competitors are present.

  To test the relative importance of common market characteristics and market segmentation effect,
we develop a novel nonparametric correlation test. Our measure of correlation quantifies the average
alignment of insurers’ county-level entry decisions in a given rating area. We construct a test


                                                   3
statistic based on this correlation measure, and test the null hypothesis of independent and random
entry against the alternative hypotheses of positively or negatively correlated entry. We reject
the null in favor of positively correlated entry at a very small significance level. We therefore
find that county characteristics have a larger impact on insurers’ entry decisions than the market
segmentation effect.

  We also use regression analysis to examine which county characteristics are the primary drivers
of the positive correlation in the insurers’ entry patterns. When we control for heterogeneity in
county health risks, market size, and provider costs, the positive correlation disappears, suggesting
that these county characteristics are the primary factors driving the positive correlation. In partic-
ular, insurers avoid counties with worse health measures, which implies that, to encourage entry,
geographic risk adjustments need to be effectively based on counties instead of rating areas.

  The findings presented in this paper have several policy implications. First, rating area regulation
only delivers an imperfect government control over insurers’ ability to vary premiums by geographic
region. As documented in this paper, residents of the same rating area can face de facto different
premiums for the same plan depending on which counties they live. Second, the current risk
adjustment program, which transfers funds from plans with lower risk enrollees to plans with higher
risk enrollees, is not very effective in eliminating insurers’ risk screening incentive. Counties with a
higher share of unhealthy consumers are still more likely to be excluded from insurers’ service area
in the marketplaces. Third, providing insurers with subsidies that are tied to their service area
could increase insurer participation, especially in counties that have traditionally had a difficult
time attracting insurers.

  Our paper is related to the literature on the design of the health insurance exchanges. Many
papers in this literature use data from the Massachusetts health insurance exchange, which was
established in 2006 and have regulation settings similar to the ACA marketplaces, such as age-
based pricing (Ericson and Starc, 2015), individual mandate (Hackmann et al., 2015), and subsidies
(Finkelstein et al., 2017; Jaffe and Shepard, 2017). Recent work by Dafny et al. (2017) and Polsky
et al. (2016) use ACA marketplace data to examine the prevalence of narrow provider networks
and their potentials for lowering premiums.2 We contribute to this literature by documenting,
for the first time to the best of our knowledge, the prevalence of the partial rating area offering
   2
    Studies that use estimates based on non-individual health insurance markets, and use simulations to
study ACA-like settings include Handel et al. (2015), Aizawa and Fang (2015), and Azevedo and Gottlieb
(2017).



                                                   4
phenomenon, and studying insurers’ entry/exit responses to the community rating requirement
based on geographic rating areas using a novel nonparametric correlation test.

    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we describe our data. In Section
3, we demonstrate the prevalence of partial rating area offering and provide descriptive patterns.
In Section 4, we present our model of insurer competition. In Section 5, we develop and implement
a nonparametric correlation test. In Section 6, we conduct a regression analysis. Finally, in Section
7, we conclude.



2         Data

2.1        Brief Background on ACA Marketplaces and Rating Areas

    Before the ACA, individual health insurance sold in most states was medically underwritten;
insurers could deny coverage or charge a higher premium based on many factors including health
status and medical history.3 The ACA aims to limit such underwriting practices, and mandates
that in each state marketplace, premiums be adjusted only for an individual’s age, tobacco use
and geographic location. Each state has a set number of geographic rating areas that all insurers
participating in the state’s marketplace must uniformly use in their price setting. The default
geographic rating areas for each state was the Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) plus the
remainder of the state that is not included in a MSA. However, states were given a chance to seek
approval from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) for a different division method,
provided that the division method was based on counties, three-digit zip codes, or MSAs/non–
MSAs. Furthermore, states had to demonstrate how the new division method would (1) reflect
significant differences in health care costs by rating area, (2) lead to stability in rates over time,
(3) apply uniformly to all insurers in a market, and (4) not be unfairly discriminatory.4

    If a state already had an existing rule to divide the state into rating areas, the state frequently
kept the division rule to minimize shocks to insurers (Giovannelli et al., 2014). States without such
legacy used differences in provider costs to divide the state. In doing so, some states explicitly
ruled out morbidity and health risk differences as the ACA prohibits price discrimination based on
health.
      3
          Source: Kaiser Family Foundation.
      4
          Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.



                                                        5
  Table A1 in Appendix A provides information about each state’s method for dividing the state
into rating areas. The geographic scope of implemented rating areas varies greatly by state. Seven
states (Alabama, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Texas, Virginia, and Wyoming) have the
federal default MSAs+1. Six states (Delaware, Hawaii, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode Island,
and Vermont) and District of Columbia have a single rating area, meaning that there is no premium
adjustment for geographic location within the state. On the other extreme, states like Florida and
South Carolina have single-county rating areas, implying that premiums vary by county within the
state.


2.2       Data

Marketplace Public Use Files. Our main data come from the 2016 Marketplace Public Use Files
(PUF) provided by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). The data cover 38
states participating in federally-facilitated marketplaces; the last column in Table A1 indicates
whether a state has a federally-facilitated marketplace.5 From the data, we can obtain information
on plan characteristics including benefits, copayments, premiums, and the set of counties where a
plan is sold, which is referred to as the plan’s service area. In Section 3, we use this service area
information to assess how prevalently insurers enter a strict subset of counties in a rating area.

  There are 4,125 individual health plans offered in 38 federally-facilitated marketplaces in year
2016. We impose the following set of restrictions on the data. First, we exclude two states, Alaska
and Nebraska, that use zip codes, rather than counties, to define rating areas. This is because our
unit of analysis is at the county level.6 Imposing this restriction leaves us with 4,059 plans offered by
235 insurers in 36 states and 405 rating areas. Second, we only keep plan-rating area combinations
for which we have both service area and premium information. This restriction reduces the number
of plan-rating area combinations from 20,569 to 19,991. Table 1 summarizes our sample after
imposing this restriction. Lastly, we exclude rating areas that consist of a single county because in
such rating areas, there can be no partial rating area offering by definition. Out of the 405 rating
areas, 146 have just one county and we exclude them from the sample. Imposing this restriction
      5
      The degree to which states rely on the HHS varies; 27 states have marketplaces that are entirely operated
by the HHS, 7 states perform in-person consumer assistance while delegating all other functions to the HHS,
and 4 states are responsible for performing their own marketplace functions, except that they rely on the
federal IT platform. In this paper, we refer to the 38 states that rely on the HHS for any support as having
federally-facilitated marketplaces.
    6
      We focus on insurers’ entry decisions at the county level because the federal government almost never
approves plans that are not sold to all residents of a county.


                                                      6
   Plans    Insurers    Networks      States   RAs     Non Single County RAs        Counties    Plan-RA
   4,059      235         471           36     405              259                  2,481       19,991

Table 1: 2016 Marketplace PUF Sample Before Excluding Single County RAs
Notes: Only individual health plans offered in federally-facilitated marketplaces are considered. Alaska and
Nebraska are excluded as they use zip codes to define rating areas.

                  Plans    Insurers    Networks      States   RAs    Counties     Plan-RA
                  3,442      214         423           34     259     2,335        13,029

Table 2: 2016 Marketplace PUF Sample After Excluding Single County RAs
Notes: Only individual health plans offered in federally-facilitated marketplaces are considered. Rating areas
that have only one county are excluded. Alaska and Nebraska are excluded as they use zip codes to define
rating areas. Florida and South Carolina are excluded as their rating areas always consist of one county.


excludes all plans from Florida and South Carolina as their rating areas always consist of a single
county.

  Table 2 reports the summary statistics of the final Marketplace PUF sample. We have 3,442
individual health plans offered by 214 insurers in 34 states. The number of non single county rating
areas is 259, and we have a total of 2,335 counties and 13,029 plan-rating area combinations.

  Table 3 reports the average characteristics of the plans in our final Marketplace PUF sample by
their metal class. Metal classes are determined by the actuarial value of a plan, and it increases
from Catastrophic, Bronze, Silver, Gold, to Platinum. Most of the plans are either Silver or Bronze,
followed by Gold plans. Catastrophic plans have the highest maximum out of pocket expenditures
and deductibles, followed by Bronze, Silver, Gold and Platinum plans. The average premium is the
lowest for Catastrophic plans, and rises with metal levels. For a given plan, the average premium
increases with enrollees’ age.

  Table 4 shows the share of each plan type in the sample. Different types of plans put differ-
ent restrictions on consumers’ provider choice outside the plans’ networks. Exclusive Provider
Organization (EPO) and Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) plans do not cover providers
outside their networks, while Point of Service (POS) and Preferred Provider Organization (PPO)
plans cover out-of-network providers for an additional cost.7 HMOs have the largest share (52%),
followed by PPO (31%), POS (10%), and EPO (8%).

  Table 5 provides summary statistics of insurer participation in the 2016 marketplaces. On average,
   7
     The main difference between EPOs and HMOs is that HMOs require primary care physicians while EPOs
do not. The main difference PPO and POS is that while POSs usually require primary care physicians and
their referrals to see a specialist, PPOs do not have such requirements.



                                                      7
   Metal            Plans    Premium 21      Premium 45          Premium 64     OOP Max       Deductible
   Catastrophic       230           170             246                  509       6,850          6,850
   Bronze           1,061           211             306                  634       4,913          4,326
   Silver           1,282           261             378                  782       3,656          1,848
   Gold               767           313             455                  940       3,429            928
   Platinum           102           373             541                1,120       1,613            209

Table 3: Average Plan Characteristics of the 2016 Marketplace PUF Sample
Notes: Premium 21, 45, and 64 represent the average monthly rate for a non-smoking 21-year-old, 45-year-
old, and 65-year-old, respectively. OOP Max represents the annual out-of-pocket maximum. For the sample
restriction, see Table 2 and the text.

                                     Plan Type           Plans    Share
                                     EPO                   263     0.08
                                     HMO                 1,778     0.52
                                     POS                   350     0.10
                                     PPO                 1,051     0.31
                                     Observations        3,442

Table 4: Plan Types of the 2016 Marketplace PUF Sample
Notes: EPO stands for Exclusive Provider Organization, HMO for Health Maintenance Organization, POS
for Point of Service, and PPO for Preferred Provider Organization.

                                                         Mean     Std.    Min   Max    Obs
                # of Active Insurers in a County          3.51    1.79      1    13   2,335
                # of Active Insurers in a RA              4.77    2.69      1    13     259
                # of Active Insurers in a State           6.29    4.65      1    17      34

Table 5: Insurer Participation in the 2016 Marketplace PUF Sample
Notes: The table reports the summary statistics of insurer participation.


there were about 3.5 insurers in a county, and every county had at least one marketplace insurer.
The average number of insurers in a rating area was about 4.8, and the average number of insurers
in a state was about 6.3.

  Later in the paper, we also use the 2017 Marketplace PUF to present some of the meaningful
changes that took place from 2016 to 2017. In Appendix F, we provide summary statistics of the
2017 Marketplace PUF data.


Medicare Advantage Service Area Data.         To proxy insurers’ county-level entry costs into the mar-
ketplace, we use information about their Medicare Advantage (MA) service area obtained from the
data provided by the CMS. The idea is that, if a marketplace insurer had sold managed MA plans
in a county before the ACA, then the insurer probably faced a low entry cost in that county as it
could use the legacy from its MA provider networks. The sample period of the MA data is from


                                                     8
August 2012 to July 2013, which covers 12 months prior to the first-ever deadline for insurers to
submit marketplace plan information to the government. We further restrict the data to managed
MA plans (which are the majority) because other plan types such as fee-for-service do not have
a well defined network at the county level, and therefore would be an uninformative proxy for
insurer-county level entry costs. Using this dataset, we know for each marketplace insurer and each
county, the number of managed MA plans (HMO or Local PPO) that the insurer had sold in the
county during one year prior to the opening of the marketplaces.


County Data.      To obtain additional information about the counties, we use the Area Health Re-
sources Files (AHRF) provided by the HHS as well as the County Health Rankings by the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation (CHR). The AHRF and CHR provide county level data on various
health and socioeconomic characteristics.



3     Prevalence of Partial Rating Area Offering

    In this section, we assess how prevalently insurers selectively enter counties within a rating area.
To this end, we develop various measures based on insurers’ service area. We also develop analogous
measures using plans’ service area, and the results are reported in Appendix B.


3.1    Prevalence of Partial Rating Area Offering

    We index health insurance plans by p = 1, ..., P ; rating areas by r = 1, ..., R; counties by c =
1, ..., C; and insurers by i = 1, ..., I. For each plan p, IP (p) ∈ {1, ..., I} denotes the insurer who
offers plan p. C(r) denotes the set of counties in rating area r. Using the Marketplace PUF data,
we can construct the following indicator of whether a plan is sold in a county:
                                       
                                       
                                       1
                                           if plan p is sold in county c,
                           O(p, c) =                                                                (1)
                                       
                                       0
                                       
                                            otherwise.

Using these notations, we can construct several auxiliary objects reported in Table 6 which will be
helpful for notational clarity throughout the rest of the paper. As described in Table 6, we say an
insurer is active in a county if it sells at least one plan in the county. We say an insurer is active
in a rating area if it is active in at least one of the counties that belong to the rating area.

                                                     9
 Notations                                                              Descriptions
 Set of Plans
   PI (i) = {p : IP (p) = i}                                            Set of plans offered by insurer i.
   PC (c) = {p : O (p, c) = 1}                                          Set of plans offered in county c.
   PR (r) = ∪c∈C(r) PC (c)                                              Set of plans offered in rating area r.
 Set of Insurers
   IC (c) = {i : i = IP (p) for p ∈ PC (c)}                             Set of active insurers in county c.
   IR (r) = ∪c∈C(r) IC (c) = {i : i = IP (p) for p ∈ PR (r)}            Set of active insurers in rating area r.
 Set of Counties
   CI (i) = {c : PI (i) ∩ PC (c) 6= ∅}                                  Set of counties in which insurer i is ac-
                                                                        tive.
    CP (p) = {c : O (p, c) = 1}                                         Set of counties in which plan p is of-
                                                                        fered.
 Set of Rating Areas
   RI (i) = {r : C (r) ∩ CI (i) 6= ∅}                                   Set of rating areas in which insurer i is
                                                                        active.
    RP (p) = {r : C (r) ∩ CP (p) 6= ∅}                                  Set of rating areas in which plan p is
                                                                        offered.

Table 6: Notations and Definitions
Notes: The table defines and describes various sets for notational clarity. IP (p) ∈ {1, ..., I} denotes the
insurer who sells plan p, C(r) denotes the set of counties in rating area r, and O(p, c) is the indicator for
whether plan p is sold in county c.


  We develop three statistics to evaluate how prevalently insurers selectively enter counties within
a rating area. First, we develop an insurer-rating area level measure to assess how comprehensively
an insurer serves a rating area. For every insurer i and for every rating area r where the insurer is
active, we compute the share of counties where the insurer offers at least one plan:

                                                        |CI (i) ∩ C (r)|
                                         B1I (i, r) =                    .                                  (2)
                                                             |C (r)|

The denominator is the number of counties in rating area r and the numerator is the number of
counties in rating area r in which insurer i offers at least one plan (see Table 6 for the definition
of the set CI (i)). For example, if insurer i offers at least one plan in every county in rating area
r, then B1I (i, r) = 1. In contrast, if insurer i only offers plans in one of the three counties, then
B1I (i, r) = 31 .

  Second, we develop a county level measure to evaluate how completely a county is serviced by
insurers active in its rating area. For every county c, we compute the fraction of active insurers in




                                                        10
                    Measure      Unit            Obs.     Share of Obs. < 1     Mean     Std
                    B1I (i, r)   Insurer-RA     1,236                   0.29     0.85   0.28
                    B2I (c)      County         2,335                   0.41     0.83   0.26
                    B3I (r)      RA               259                   0.52     0.89   0.14

Table 7: Insurer Coverage Measures
Notes: The table reports summary statistics on the three measures of marketing breadth using insurer
coverage.


its rating area that sell at least one plan in the county:

                                                            |IC (c)|
                                          B2I (c) =                                               (3)
                                                      |IR (r) : c ∈ C (r)|

where the denominator is the number of active insurers in rating area r to which county c belongs,
and the numerator is the number of active insurers in county c.8

  Third, we develop a rating area level measure to quantify how comprehensively insurers serve
counties in a rating area. To do this, we compute the average of the first measure, B1I (i, r), or the
second measure, B2I (c), both of which yield the same result:

                                                      1       X
                                     B3I (r) =                     B I (i, r)
                                                   |IR (r)| i∈I (r) 1
                                                                  R

                                                      1       X
                                              =                  B I (c) .                        (4)
                                                   |C (r)| c∈C(r) 2


  Table 7 reports the summary statistics of the three measures. Using the first measure B1I (i, r) ,
we find that in 29% of the 1,236 instances where an insurer is active in a rating area, the insurer
enters some, but not all of the counties in a rating area, resulting in B1I (i, r) < 1. On average,
an insurer offers plans in 85% of the counties in a rating area where it is active. Indeed, we find
that out of the 214 insurers in our sample, 116 insurers (about 54%) engage in partial rating area
offering by not selling any plans in at least one county that belongs to a rating area where they
are active. From the second measure B2I (c) , we find that 41% of the 2,335 counties in our sample
are excluded by at least one insurer who is active in their rating areas. On average, a county is
excluded by 17% of active insurers in its rating area. Finally, using the third measure B3I (r) , we
find that 52% of the 259 rating areas with multiple counties have some active insurers who do not
operate in all of their counties. On average, a rating area has an insurer participation rate of 89%.
   8
       The definitions for sets IC (c) and IR (r) are provided in Table 6.



                                                         11
                        State’s Avg Insurer Participation Rate in a RA
                                                                                   WY FL DE  HI    OK
                                                                         1.0                          MT
                                                                                                                                AR                       SD
                                                                                   SC  NV ME    IL                         TN
                                                                                    ND NM                                  NH
                                                                                        AL
                                                                                                                                     MO
                                                                                                  WV
                                                                                             OR                      LA                             KS
                                                                                             UT
                                                                                        AZ
                                                                         0.9                               NC

                                                                                                           MS                                                      NJ
                                                                                                                PA                             IA
                                                                                             MI


                                                                                                      OH
                                                                         0.8                          IN

                                                                                             TX

                                                                                                      WI
                                                                                                                                GA

                                                                                                           VA
                                                                         0.7
                                                                               0                  5                       10              15                  20
                                                                                        State’s Median Number of Counties in a RA


Figure 1: Partial Rating Area Offering by State
Notes: The sample consists of the 2016 Marketplace PUF data including single county rating areas (as
summarized in Table 1). For each state, we compute the number of counties in each of its rating areas. The
x-axis represents the state’s median number of counties in its rating areas. For example, if a state has three
rating areas, and each rating area consists of 5 counties, the state’s x-axis value is 5. The y-axis represents
for each state, the mean value of B3I (r) among rating areas that belong to the state.


To sum, partial rating area entry does happen in the marketplaces, and it is not uncommon to
observe insurers selectively entering counties within a rating area.


3.2   Descriptive Patterns

  To understand why insurers selectively enter counties within a rating area, we examine descriptive
patterns between insurers’ county entry decisions and various factors such as county characteristics
and fixed costs of entry.

  We first examine the prevalence of partial rating area offering by state. In particular, we ask if
partial rating area offering is driven by the geographic scope of a rating area. For instance, it may
be harder for insurers to be active in the entire rating area when the rating area consists of many
counties. If this were true, then we would observe more prevalent partial rating area entry in states
with large rating areas. Figure 1 shows that this is not always true. For example, South Dakota is
divided into large rating areas that consist of 18 counties on average. However, all insurers in the
state’s marketplace are active in each and every county, implying that there is no partial entry in

                                                                                                                          12
                                                                          0.92




                         Insurer Partcipation Rate in a County, B2I (c)
                                                                          0.88




                                                                          0.84




                                                                          0.80




                                                                          0.76




                                                                                    0.05      0.1     0.25     0.5      0.75      1
                                                                                 Qtiles of Demeaned # of Potential Enrollees in a County



Figure 2: County Market Size and Insurer Participation Rate
Notes: The sample consists of the final 2016 Marketplace PUF data (as summarized in Table 2). For each
county c, we measure the number of potential marketplace enrollees as individuals aged below 65 years old
whose incomes are less than 400% FPL. Call this variable xc . Then, for each rating area r, we compute
the average value of xc using counties that belong to the rating area. Call this variable xr . To compute
the demeaned number of potential enrollees in a county, we do xc − xr (assuming county c belong to rating
area r). The x-axis represents the quantiles of xc − xr . The y-axis represents the mean of B2I (c) (insurer
participation rate in a county) for each quantile.


any of the state’s rating areas. Also, partial rating area entry is very common in Wisconsin and
Virginia, but these states have moderately-sized rating areas consisting of 5 or 6 counties. Figure
1 therefore suggests that the geographic scope of a rating area is not a primary factor explaining
insurers’ partial entry decisions.

  Second, we examine how insurers’ county-level entry decisions within a rating area are correlated
with the county market size. It may be the case that insurers are avoiding counties with relatively
fewer potential marketplace enrollees as they may not be able to recover the fixed costs of entry. For
each county, we measure the number of potential marketplace enrollees as individuals aged less than
65 years old whose incomes fall below the 400% FPL. This is because premium subsidies are only
available for individuals with incomes below the 400% FPL. Since we are interested in examining
insurers’ county entry decisions within a rating area, what matters is how small a county’s market
size is relative to other counties in the same rating area. We therefore demean each county’s market
size by their respective rating area average. Figure 2 shows the relationship between a county’s
demeaned demand size and the insurer participation rate in the county, i.e., B2I (c) as defined in

                                                                                                       13
Equation (3). The insurer participation rate falls quite substantially at the bottom quantiles,
suggesting that the partial entry phenomenon may be explained in part by insurers’ desire to avoid
low demand counties.

  Third, we ask if insurers are avoiding relatively high risk counties in a given rating area. As argued
by Hendren (2013), insurers have an incentive to reject observably high risk individuals (rather than
charging them a high price) because they are likely to have greater amounts of private information
which would aggravate adverse selection. Since the division of rating areas was primarily based on
the differences in health care provider prices, counties within a rating area may have heterogeneous
health risk distributions, which could strengthen insurers’ risk screening motives.

  We use various county health measures from the CHR data, including self-reported physically
and mentally unhealthy days per month and the share of heavy drinkers, to study the relationship
between the insurer participation rate in a county, B2I (c), and county health risks. Again, we
demean county health measures by their respective rating area average to examine how risky a
county is relative to other counties in the same rating area. Figure 3 reports the results. The
insurer participation rate drops substantially at the top quantile which represents the highest risk
counties. Such descriptive patterns provide suggestive evidence for risk screening.

  Finally, we consider how the fixed costs of setting up a provider network are correlated with
insurers’ county entry decisions. For instance, insurers may be reluctant to sell marketplace plans
in counties where they do not already have established provider networks. To examine if this were
true, for each marketplace insurer and each rating area where the insurer is active, we classify a
county in the rating area as an MA county if the insurer had sold MA plans in the county before
the ACA, and as a non-MA county otherwise. We then compute the share of MA counties and the
share of non-MA counties where the insurer sells marketplace plans. The former can be thought
of as the insurer’s marketplace entry probability in its MA counties, and the latter as the insurer’s
marketplace entry probability in its non-MA counties. Table 8 summarizes the results. On average,
a marketplace insurer enters 91% of counties in a rating area where it sold managed MA plans before
the ACA. In contrast, the insurer enters only about 79% of counties where it did not have any MA
plans. This pattern suggests that insurers may be avoiding counties in a rating area where they
face relatively larger fixed costs of building a provider network.




                                                  14
                                                   0.925                                                                                                          0.925
  Insurer Partcipation Rate in a County, B2I (c)




                                                                                                                 Insurer Partcipation Rate in a County, B2I (c)
                                                   0.900                                                                                                          0.900




                                                   0.875                                                                                                          0.875




                                                   0.850                                                                                                          0.850




                                                   0.825                                                                                                          0.825




                                                           0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8     0.9   0.95     1                                                                  0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8     0.9    0.95       1
                                                            Qtiles of Demeaned Physically Unhealthy Days                                                                   Qtiles of Demeaned Mentally Unhealthy Days

                                                   0.925                                                                                                          0.925
  Insurer Partcipation Rate in a County, B2I (c)




                                                                                                                 Insurer Partcipation Rate in a County, B2I (c)



                                                   0.900                                                                                                          0.900




                                                   0.875                                                                                                          0.875




                                                   0.850                                                                                                          0.850




                                                   0.825                                                                                                          0.825




                                                           0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8     0.9   0.95     1                                                                  0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8     0.9    0.95       1
                                                           Qtiles of Demeaned Share Reporting Poor Health                                                                   Qtiles of Demeaned Share of Heavy Drinkers




Figure 3: County Health Risks and Insurer Participation Rate
Notes: The sample consists of the final 2016 Marketplace PUF data (as summarized in Table 2). Let xc
represent a county health measure that is either (1) the average number of physically unhealthy days per
month, (2) the average number of mentally unhealthy days per month, (3) the share of the county population
reporting poor health, or (4) the share of the county population that are heavy drinkers. For each rating
area r, we compute the average value of xc using counties that belong to the rating area, denoted by xr . We
compute the demeaned county health measure as xc − xr (assuming county c belong to rating area r). The
x-axis represents the quantiles of xc − xr . The y-axis represents the mean of B2I (c) (insurer participation
rate in a county) for each quantile.




                                                                                                            15
                                                                 Mean     1st quartile    3rd quartile
      Marketplace entry probability in MA counties                0.91               1               1
      Marketplace entry probability in non-MA counties            0.79            0.6                1
      Observations (insurer-rating area combinations)            1,236

Table 8: Marketplace Entry Probability in MA vs. non-MA counties
Notes: The table reports the summary statistics of marketplace insurers’ county entry probabilities in
counties (1) where they had sold managed Medicare Advantage plans before the ACA, and (2) where they
had not sold any managed Medicare Advantage plans. See the text for more details.


3.3   Possible Explanations

  The descriptive patterns presented in this section imply that common county characteristics such
as the market size and the risk distribution may be important in understanding insurers’ county-
level entry decisions in a rating area. In particular, given that the division of rating areas was not
strictly based on the differences in health risks, insurers may have a strong risk screening incentive
as suggested in Figure 3. In such a scenario, we suspect that insurers’ entry decisions would be
positively correlated because county characteristics such as the market size and the risk distribution
affect insurers’ profits in a similar manner.

  In contrast, considering that the average number of insurers in a county is only 3.5, the desire to
avoid competition may also explain insurers’ partial entry in a rating area.9 In such a scenario, we
suspect that insurers’ county entry decisions would be negatively correlated. For instance, insurers
would be less likely to enter counties where competitors are present.

  Finally, we speculate that the fixed costs of entry could contribute to either a positive or negative
correlation among insurers’ entry decisions. For example, if insurers have very similar fixed costs
of entry, then all else equal, insurers’ entry decisions will be alike. In contrast, if insurers face very
heterogeneous fixed costs of entry, then their entry decisions will be very different. In the next
section, we develop a model of insurer competition in a rating area to formalize the above channels
and derive testable implications.
    9
      The degree of insurer competition is higher in other health insurance markets; for example, according to
the Kaiser Family Foundation, the average person on Medicare in 2017 had 6 Medicare Advantage insurers
to choose from.




                                                     16
4        Model

4.1      Model Description

Market Environment.            Consider a rating area that consists of two counties indexed by c ∈ {A, B}.
The distribution of health expenditure θ in county c is given by CDF Hc (θ). The willingness to
pay for insurance of a type-θ consumer is given by v (θ) . We assume that v (θ) > θ. The population
size of county c is given by λc > 0.

    There are two insurance companies indexed by i ∈ {1, 2}. Each insurer can sell at most one plan
in each county. Let pci denote the price of a health plan sold to county c by insurer i. Each insurer
chooses a vector of prices, pi = (pA    B
                                   i , pi ) ≥ 0, to maximize its profit given its competitor’s vector

of prices, pi0 = (pA     B                                                          c
                   i0 , pi0 ). If insurer i’s price in county c is infinite, i.e., pi = +∞, it implies that

insurer i is inactive in county c. A finite price, on the other hand, implies that insurer i is active
in county c. If an insurer were to offer an identical plan in both county A and county B, the ACA
regulation requires that the prices be the same, i.e., pA    B
                                                        i = pi .

    Let Cic represent insurer i’s fixed cost of entering county c which includes the cost of building a
provider network and other administrative costs. The total fixed cost function for insurer i is given
as below:
                 
                                                                            0
                  Cic   if i is active in county c only, i.e., pci < ∞ and pci = ∞,
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
T F Ci (pi ) =      A
                  Ci + Ci  B     if i offers two county-specific plans, i.e., pA     B    A          B
                                                                               i 6= pi , pi < ∞ and pi < ∞,
                 
                 
                 
                 
                  A    B            if i offers the same plan to both counties, i.e., pA    B
                 
                 
                  Ci + Ci − D                                                           i = pi < ∞.
                                                                                                        (5)
That is, if an insurer enters only one county, the total fixed cost is Cic which represents the cost
of building a provider network in that county and other administrative costs. If the insurer enters
both counties and sells two separate plans (one for each county), then the total fixed cost is simply
the sum of the insurer’s county-specific entry costs. If the insurer sells the same plan to both
counties at the same price (as required by the ACA), then compared to the case of selling two
county-specific plans, there is a reduction in the administrative costs, D ≥ 0.10
    10
     Under the ACA, each and every health plan must be certified by the government before they can be
sold at marketplaces. As this process can be lengthy and costly, we assume there is a reduction in the
administrative costs when an insurer manages fewer plans.




                                                       17
Imperfect Competition.           Following Fang and Wu (2018), we model the competition between the
two insurers in a county as a form of modified Bertrand competition. Different from the standard
Bertrand competition in which the insurer with the lowest price gets the entire market, we assume
that consumers cannot compare prices perfectly. Instead, a consumer receives a noisy signal about
which of the two insurers has a lower price. The consumer inspects the actual price of the insurer
indicated by the noisy signal, and decides whether to buy from the insurer. The noisy signal creates
spurious product differentiation and induces imperfect competition.11

  Specifically, given the vector of prices posted by the two insurers in county c, (pc1 , pc2 ), the noisy
signal, s, is determined by:                         
                                                      1 if pc − pc +  ≤ 0,
                                                     
                                                             1    2
                                          s=                                                                    (6)
                                                      2 otherwise,
                                                     


where  ∼ N (0, σ 2s ). It is clear that a consumer always follows the signal: if s = i, the consumer
will find out the actual price pci and decide between purchasing insurance at price pci and staying
uninsured. Hence, conditional on price vector (pc1 , pc2 ), the probability that a consumer considers
                                        pc −pc 
                                          i0     i
purchasing from insurer i is Φ             σs         , where Φ is the normal CDF. Conditional on observing
insurer i’s price pci , the purchase decision of type-θ consumer is very simple: purchase at price pci if
and only if v (θ) ≥ pci .


Game Between the Insurers. We denote an insurer’s monopoly profit function in county c as
ΠcM (p) where p is the insurer’s monopoly price. The monopoly profit function in county c is given
by:
                                                          Z
                                       ΠcM (p) = λc                   (p − θ) dHc (θ) .                         (7)
                                                           v(θ)≥p


  Insurer i’s net profit as a function of its own price vector pi and its opponent’s price vector pi0 is
given by
                                                 !                                !
                                     pA      A
                                      i0 − p i                      pB      B
                                                                     i0 − p i
                  Πi (pi , pi0 ) = Φ                  ΠA   A
                                                       M (pi )   +Φ                   ΠB   B
                                                                                       M (pi ) − T F Ci (pi )   (8)
                                         σs                             σs

            pc −pc 
             i0    i
where Φ       σs        represents the probability that consumers in county c receive a noisy signal indi-
cating that insurer i has the lower premium. So insurer i’s net profit function is the sum of any
    11
       This is a modeling device to introduce imperfect competition in a tractable way, and not to be taken
literally.



                                                                 18
profits from county A and county B minus the total fixed cost. Note that if insurer i is inactive in
county c, then it is equivalent to charging an infinite price, which would result in zero profit from
county c.


Equilibrium.     A strategy profile (p∗1 , p∗2 ) is a Nash equilibrium of the model described above if, for
i 6= i0 ,
                            Πi (p∗i , p∗i0 ) ≥ Πi (pi , p∗i0 )   for all pi ≥ 0 and i = 1, 2.          (9)


Despite its simplicity, the model cannot be analytically solved. We instead present numerical results
below.


4.2     Parameterization

   To numerically solve the model, we make several parametric assumptions. We parameterize the
health expenditure distribution in county c as a log-normal distribution with location parameter
µc and scale parameter σ c . We parameterize type-θ’s willingness to pay for a health plan as
v(θ) = (1 + ρ)θ where ρ can be interpreted as the degree of risk aversion. The parameters of the
model are therefore ({µc , σ c , λc }c=A,B , σ s , ρ, {Cic }i=1,2,c=A,B , D).


4.3     Equilibrium Analysis

   It is useful to categorize an insurer’s pricing decision, pi = (pA    B
                                                                    i , pi ), into five broad categories:

(1) charge different and finite prices to county A and county B (“2 plans”, one for each county); (2)
charge the same finite price to both county A and county B (“RA plan” offered to both counties);
(3) charge a finite price to county A only (“A plan”); (4) charge a finite price to county B only (“B
plan”); and (5) charge an infinite price to both counties (“Exit”). The reason why we categorize
insurers’ pricing decisions in this manner is because it would be easier to present equilibria of the
game in terms of these market structures, rather than in terms of equilibrium prices.

   Figures 4 to 7 present how various factors affect the equilibrium market structures of the game.
Details of the simulation are reported in the footnotes of each figure. Figure 4 shows that both
insurers are likely to offer two separate plans, one for each county, when there is a large risk
heterogeneity between the counties, and the savings from managing fewer plans are negligible. On
the other hand, both insurers are likely to offer a single rating area plan to all counties when the


                                                                 19
                            0.5C




                               0



                                       A
                                                                  2   A




Figure 4: Risk Heterogeneity, Administrative Costs and Nash Equilibrium
Notes: The figure reports the Nash equilibrium market structures for different values of σ B and D. The
x-axis represents σ B , the scale parameter of the log-normal health expenditure in county B. In the figure, σ B
is equal to either σ A (no risk heterogeneity) or 2σ A (large risk heterogeneity). The y-axis represents D, the
reduction in administrative costs from offering a single rating area plan instead of two county-specific plans.
In the figure, D is equal to either 0 (no benefit from offering a rating area plan) or 0.5C (large benefit from
offering a rating area plan). The figure holds constant the rest of the parameters as the following: (1) the
log-normal health expenditure in county A has µA =5.67 and σ A =0.25 implying the mean expenditure of
$300 and the standard deviation of $75, (2) the log-normal health expenditure in county B has the location
parameter set at µB = µA , (3) the county population size is λA = λB = 1, (4) the fixed cost of entering a
county is the same for all insurers and counties with Cic = C = 20 for i = 1, 2 and c = A, B, (5) the standard
deviation of the noisy price signal is σ s =150 and the risk aversion parameter is ρ =1.


counties in the rating area do not differ too much in their risk distributions and there is a substantial
reduction in the administrative costs from managing fewer plans. The model therefore sheds light
on why there is a substantial number of rating areas in which all plans are sold to all counties of
the rating area, despite the presence of county heterogeneity.12

  Figure 5 shows that counties with very small market size are avoided by insurers in equilibrium.
The model can therefore rationalize the empirical pattern that counties with a small number of
potential marketplace enrollees have lower insurer participation rates.

  Figure 6 presents the equilibrium market structures when for a given county, both insurers face
the same fixed costs of entry, i.e., C1c = C2c for c = A, B. For example, if the two insurers had sold
  12
     Using the 2016 Marketplace PUF sample, we find that 37% of the rating areas fall into this category
(see Table B1 of Appendix B).



                                                      20
                             1




                            0.1


                                       0.1                       1



Figure 5: County Market Size and Nash Equilibrium
Notes: The figure reports the Nash equilibrium market structures for different values of county market
size. The x-axis represents λA , the marketplace market size in county A and the y-axis represents λB , the
marketplace market size in county B. In the figure, for c = A, B, λc is equal to either 0.1 (very small demand
size) or 1 (large demand size). The rest of the parameters are set such that when λc = 0.1, no insurer can
earn a positive profit in county c regardless of the market structure. Specifically, the figure holds constant
the rest of the parameters as the following: (1) county A and county B have the same log-normal health
expenditure distribution with µA = µB =5.67 and σ A = σ B =0.25 implying the mean expenditure of $300
and the standard deviation of $75, (2) the fixed cost of entering a county is the same for all insurers and
counties with Cic = C = 20 for i = 1, 2 and c = A, B, (3) D = 0.05C, i.e., there is a small reduction in
administrative costs when insurers offer a single rating area plan instead of two county-specific plans, (4)
the standard deviation of the noisy price signal is σ s =150 and the risk aversion parameter is ρ =1.


MA plans in the same set of counties before the ACA, then for a given county, they probably faced
very similar entry costs in the marketplaces. The figure shows that insurers do not enter counties
with a large entry cost in equilibrium. The figure confirms our conjecture that under symmetric
fixed costs of entry, insurers’ entry decisions would be positively correlated.

  Finally, Figure 7 presents the equilibrium market structures when insurers have asymmetric entry
                                   0
costs in the sense that Cic = Cic0 for i 6= i0 and c 6= c0 . The figure shows that market segmentation
is achieved in equilibrium when insurers face large entry costs in different counties. This would
be the case, for example, if the two insurers had operated in completely different sets of counties
before the ACA. Note that competitive pressure also helps to sustain market segmentation as an
equilibrium outcome. In the figure, when insurer 1 faces a small entry cost in county A and a
large entry cost in county B, insurer 1 enters county A only. However, if there were no insurer


                                                     21
                             7C




                              C


                                      C                             7C




Figure 6: Symmetric Fixed Costs and Nash Equilibrium
Notes: The figure reports the Nash equilibrium market structures when for a given county, insurers face
the same fixed costs of entry, i.e., C1c = C2c for c = A, B. The x-axis represents insurers’ symmetric fixed
costs of entry in county A, and the y-axis represents insurers’ symmetric fixed costs of entry in county B.
In the figure, the symmetric fixed cost of entry for a given county is either small (C) or large (7C) with
C = 20. The rest of the parameters are set such that when Cic = 7C, no insurer can earn a positive profit in
county c regardless of the market structure. That is, even the optimal monopoly profit after paying the fixed
cost is less than zero. Specifically, the figure holds constant the rest of the parameters as the following: (1)
county A and county B have the same log-normal health expenditure distribution with µA = µB =5.67 and
σ A = σ B =0.25 implying the mean expenditure of $300 and the standard deviation of $75, (2) the county
population size is λA = λB = 1, (3) D = 0.05C, i.e., there is a small reduction in administrative costs when
insurers offer a single rating area plan instead of two county-specific plans, (4) the standard deviation of the
noisy price signal is σ s =150 and the risk aversion parameter is ρ =1.


2, then insurer 1 would enter both counties.13 This implies that asymmetric entry costs and the
competitive concern jointly help sustain market segmentation as an equilibrium outcome.


4.4    Testable Implications

  The model implies that we can categorize various factors that could be important for insurers’
entry decisions into those that result in a positive correlation among insurers’ entry statuses and
those that result in a negative correlation. Symmetric fixed costs of entry and common market
characteristics (such as risk distributions and market size) belong to the former while asymmetric
  13
     The parameters used to generate Figure 7 ensure that insurer 1’s optimal monopoly profit in county B
after paying the large entry cost is still greater than zero. See the notes of the figure for more details.



                                                      22
                             5C




                              C


                                      C                              5C




Figure 7: Asymmetric Fixed Costs and Nash Equilibrium
Notes: The figure reports the Nash equilibrium market structures when insurers have asymmetric fixed costs
                             0
in the sense that Cic = Cic0 for i 6= i0 and c 6= c0 . The x-axis represents insurer 1’s fixed cost of entry in
county A which is equal to insurer 2’s fixed cost of entry in county B. Similarly, the y-axis represents insurer
1’s fixed cost of entry in county B which is equal to insurer 2’s fixed cost of entry in county A. In the figure,
Cic is either small (C) or large (5C) with C = 20. The rest of the parameters take exactly the same values
as those used to generate Figure 6 (see the notes for details). Note that under this set of parameter values,
the optimal monopoly profit in county c = A, B after paying the large fixed cost of 5C is still greater than
zero. This implies that market segmentation observed in equilibrium would not have been possible without
competitive pressure. For example, if there were only insurer 1 in the entire rating area, insurer 1 would be
active in both counties regardless of whether C1c is small (C) or large (5C).


fixed costs and competitive pressure belong to the latter. In what follows, we develop a novel
correlation test based on this implication, and further highlight the main driving forces for the
insurers’ partial rating area offering in the marketplaces.



5     Correlation Test

    In this section, we develop a statistical test to examine whether insurers’ county-level entry
decisions are positively or negatively correlated in a rating area. If the test favors a positive
correlation, then it implies that common market characteristics or symmetric fixed costs of entry
are the primary considerations for insurers. In contrast, if the test favors a negative correlation,
then it implies that market segmentation is prevalent in the marketplaces which could arise due to
asymmetric fixed costs of entry or competitive pressure.


                                                       23
5.1    Correlation Construction

  Using the notations introduced in Section 3, we construct a nonparametric measure of correlation.
For each insurer i active in rating area r, i ∈ IR (r), and for each county that belongs to the rating
area, c ∈ C(r), define an indicator O (i, c) as follows:
                                                         
                                                          1 if i ∈ IC (c) ,
                                                         
                                            O (i, c) =                                                                    (10)
                                                          0 if i ∈
                                                         
                                                                  / IC (c)

where IC (c) is the set of insurers active in county c.

  Define ĨR (r) ⊂ IR (r) × IR (r) as the set of all 2-combinations of IR (r). For example, if IR (r) =
{i1 , i2 , i3 }, then the set ĨR (r) consists of 
                                                  three pairsof insurers, ĨR (r) = {(i1 , i2 ), (i1 , i3 ), (i2 , i3 )}.
                                                   |IR (r)|                       ˜ ⊂ C(r) × C(r) as the
The number of elements in ĨR (r) equals                    . Similarly, define C(r)
                                                       2
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                    |C(r)| 
                                                                                ˜
set of all 2-combinations of C(r). The number of all possible 2-combinations is C(r) =
                                                                                      
                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                      2

  For each pair of insurers active in the rating area (i, i0 ) ∈ ĨR (r) and for each pair of counties that
                                     ˜
belong to the rating area (c, c0 ) ∈ C(r), we define o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) as the following:
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                       1      if O (i, c) = O (i0 , c) and O (i, c0 ) = O (i0 , c0 ) ,
                                      
                  o i, i0 ; c, c0 =
                               
                                       −1 if O (i, c) 6= O (i0 , c) and O (i, c0 ) 6= O (i0 , c0 ) ,                     (11)
                                      
                                      
                                       0 otherwise.
                                      


In words, o (i, i0 ; c, c0 ) takes value 1 if insurers i and i0 are completely aligned regarding their entry
decisions in counties c and c0 ; −1 if they are completely opposed; and 0 for any other cases.

  For a given rating area r, we define CORR(r) as the average value of o (i, i0 ; c, c0 ) over all possible
                                                             ˜
insurer pairs (i, i0 ) ∈ ĨR (r) and county pairs (c, c0 ) ∈ C(r):

                                                  1
                                                                                           o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ).
                                                                        X           X
                 CORR(r) =                                                                                            (12)
                                    |IR (r)|   |C(r)|  (i,i0 )∈ĨR (r) (c,c0 )∈C(r)
                                                                                   ˜
                                             ·        
                                        2           2

In words, CORR(r) measures the average alignment of insurers’ entry decisions across counties in
a given rating area. We say insurers’ county entry decisions are positively correlated in rating area


                                                            24
r if CORR(r) > 0 and negatively correlated if CORR(r) < 0.


Illustrative Examples. Consider the model presented in Section 4. If all insurers avoided county
B and were active in county A only, then CORR(r) would be 1. If insurer 1 were active in county
A only and insurer 2 were active in county B only, then CORR(r) would be −1. More illustrative
examples are presented in Appendix C.


5.2    Empirical Correlations

  We compute the correlation measure CORR(r) for each rating area in our sample. To examine
if there were any meaningful changes in the correlation between insurers’ entry choices from 2016
to 2017, we also use the 2017 Marketplace PUF (see Appendix F for more details about the 2017
Marketplace data).14 To compute the correlation measure CORR(r), we restrict to rating areas
with at least two insurers. This restriction reduces the number of rating areas from 259 to 247 in
the 2016 sample, and from 267 to 205 in the 2017 sample.15 The greater reduction in the 2017
sample implies that the degree of competition decreased quite substantially from 2016 to 2017.

  Table 9 reports the empirical correlations computed for years 2016 and 2017. In 2016, there was
partial entry in about 55% of the rating areas. That share increased to 62% by 2017, implying
that partial rating area offering was still prevalent in 2017. Among the rating areas with partial
entry, 90% had a strictly positive correlation in 2016. That share decreased to 62% in 2017.
Correspondingly, the mean correlation decreased from 0.37 in 2016 to 0.25 in 2017. The main
implication from Table 9 is that positive correlations are much more likely to be observed in both
years 2016 and 2017, despite the increase in the number of rating areas with negative correlations.


Entry Cost Correlation. We can also use our correlation measure to determine if insurers’ fixed
costs of entry are positively or negatively correlated within a rating area. For example, if we
found that insurers’ county entry decisions for their Medicare Advantage plans had been positively
correlated before the ACA, then the result would imply that insurers faced relatively symmetric
fixed costs of entry in the ACA marketplaces, contributing to the positive correlations presented in
  14
      In 2017, Kentucky transitioned to the federal marketplace. Due to this change, the number of rating
areas with multiple counties increased from 259 in 2016 to 267 in 2017.
   15
      In the 12 rating areas that are dropped from the 2016 sample due to having a single insurer, there was
no partial entry, i.e., B3I (r) = 1. Also, no partial entry was observed in the 62 rating areas with a single
insurer in year 2017.


                                                     25
                                                                   Year 2016     Year 2017
               # of RAs with partial entry, B3I (r) < 1                  135           126
                 : # of RAs with CORR(r) > 0                             121            78
                 : # of RAs with CORR(r) = 0                               2             7
                 : # of RAs with CORR(r) < 0                              12            41
                 : Mean CORR(r) using nonequal weights                  0.37          0.25
                 : Mean CORR(r) using equal weights                     0.34          0.13
                 : Median CORR(r)                                       0.34          0.12
                 : Standard deviation of CORR(r)                        0.27          0.36
               # of RAs with no partial entry, B3I (r) = 1               112            79
               Observations (RAs)                                        247           205

Table 9: Empirical Correlations Among Insurers’ County Entry Decisions
Notes: The sample is restricted to rating areas with at least two counties and two active insurers. For each
rating area with partial entry, we compute its weight as the denominator in Equation (12) divided by the
sum of this value for all rating areas with partial entry. These weights are used to compute the mean of
CORR(r) using nonequal weights. For rating areas with no partial entry, the correlation measure is one by
construction.


Table 9. Using the MA service area data, we compute the correlation among insurers’ MA offering
decisions in each rating area before the ACA. We denote this correlation measure by CORRM A (r).

  We compute the MA correlation measure CORRM A (r) for each of the 135 rating areas that
had partial entry in 2016. Figure 8 reports the histogram of CORRM A (r). There is a big mass
around zero and the average correlation is almost zero (the mean is 0.07 and the median is -0.05).
This suggests that marketplace insurers’ county entry decisions in the MA market before the ACA
showed no meaningful correlation. While fixed costs of entry may be an important factor for each
insurer’s county entry decision, they may not be the primary explanation for why insurers’ county-
level entry decisions in the marketplaces are positively correlated. In other words, the positive
correlation that we detect in the ACA marketplaces may be due to common county characteristics
and not symmetric fixed costs of entry.


5.3   Test Construction

  We now develop a test to determine if insurers’ county entry decisions are positively correlated
in a statistically significant way. We construct a null hypothesis of independent and random entry
decisions by insurers and use our correlation measure to determine if the null can be rejected in
favor of positive or negative correlations.

  Consider a rating area where each insurer decides the set of counties to enter with the constraint



                                                    26
                                           50


                                           40




                         Frequency (RAs)
                                           30


                                           20


                                           10


                                           0
                                                -1.0       -0.5         0.0       0.5    1.0
                                                                  CORRM A


Figure 8: Histogram of Correlation Measure CORRM A (r)
Notes: The figure reports the histogram of the MA service area correlation measure, CORRM A (r), computed
for each of the 135 rating areas with partial entry in 2016 (reported in the first row of Table 9). The mean
is 0.07 and the median is -0.05.


that it has to enter at least one county.16 Let ai ∈ {0, 1}|C(r)| denote insurer i’s choice, where the
kth element in the vector ai denotes insurer i’s entry status in county k. For example, if there are
three counties and insurer i chooses ai = (1, 0, 0), it implies that insurer i only enters county 1. Let
A(r) denote the set of possible choices, i.e., ai ∈ A(r). The set A(r) excludes a zero vector because
insurers have to be active in at least one county. The number of possible choices is given by


                                                       |A(r)| = 2|C(r)| − 1.


For example, consider a rating area with two counties. The choice set A(r) is given as A(r) =
{(1, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1)} and the number of choices in the set is |A(r)| = 22 − 1 = 3.

Null Hypothesis. In a given rating area r, county entry decisions are independent across insurers,
and each insurer randomly chooses a set of counties to enter with an equal probability, i.e., each
                                                                                1
insurer chooses an action in the set A(r) with probability                    |A(r)| .


To better illustrate the null, consider a rating area with two counties. Under the null, we have
P r(ai , aj ) = P r(ai ) · P r(aj ) for insurers i 6= j as insurers make independent county entry decisions.
  16
    We impose this constraint as we study correlations among insurers that are active in at least one of the
counties in the rating area.


                                                                   27
The null therefore precludes the competition effect. Also, we have P r(di = (1, 0)) = P r(di =
                               1
(0, 1)) = P r(di = (1, 1)) =   3   for any insurer i as the null assumes random entry by insurers and
therefore precludes the effects of entry costs or common county characteristics.

  We can derive the analytical forms of E[CORR(r)] and Var[CORR(r)] under the null and we
detail the derivation in Appendix D. We find that under the null, E[CORR(r)] depends only on
the number of counties in the rating area, and as the number of counties approaches to infinity,
E[CORR(r)] converges to zero under the null. Var[CORR(r)] depends only on the number of
counties and the number of insurers in the rating area.

  We assume all rating area observations are independent, implying that correlation measures
{CORR(r)}r=R
         r=1 are also independent, where R is the total number of rating areas with at least two
                                                  PR=1
insurers and two counties. Define CORR =            r=1   CORR(r), which is the sum of all correlation
measures. Then mean and variance of CORR under the null are given as the following:

                                                  R
                                                  X
                                   E[CORR] =            E[CORR(r)],       and                       (13)
                                                  r=1
                                                  XR
                               Var[CORR] =              Var[CORR(r)].                               (14)
                                                  r=1


By the Lindeberg-Lyapunov Central Limit Theorem, we have

                                      CORR − E[CORR]         d
                               tR =      q                  −→ N (0, 1)                             (15)
                                             Var[CORR]

as R −→ ∞. Therefore, we reject the null of independence and randomization in favor of a positive
correlation if the test statistic tR is sufficiently large, and we reject the null in favor of a negative
correlation if tR is sufficiently small.17


5.4    Test Results

  We implement the test for years 2016 and 2017. Table 10 reports the results. For each year, we
use two different samples: one sample consists of all rating areas with at least two insurers and two
counties, and the other sample is further restricted to rating areas with partial entry. Using the
2016 data, we obtain a very large test statistic (higher than 25) for both samples, so we reject the
  17
    In Appendix E, we compare our correlation test with some recent nonparametric tests of affiliation in
the auction literature.


                                                    28
                                         Year 2016                                         Year 2017
                        All RAs         RAs with Partial Entry             All RAs        RAs with Partial Entry
      CORR               158.42                          46.42                95.69                        16.69
      E[CORR]               4.04                          1.49                 2.84                         1.42
      Var[CORR]            15.47                          3.20                19.60                         8.65
      tR                   39.25                         25.11                20.97                         5.19
      p-value             <1e-7                          <1e-7               <1e-7                       2.06e-7
      Sample size (R)        247                           135                  205                          126

Table 10: Correlation Test Results
Notes: The table reports the correlation test results for years 2016 and 2017. For each year, we implement
the test twice; first, we use all rating areas with at least two insurers and two counties, and second, we
further restrict the sample to rating areas where there is partial entry, i.e., B3I (r) < 1.


null in favor of a positive correlation. The test statistic is much lower when we use the 2017 data,
but we can still reject the null in favor of a positive correlation at a very small significance level.
The results imply that the desire to avoid high-cost counties has a greater impact on insurers’
county-level entry decisions than the desire to avoid competition. We now turn to a regression
analysis to identify which common market characteristics are important in explaining the positive
correlation that we find.



6     Regression Analysis

    We estimate the following equation to understand which factors are the most relevant for the
significantly positive correlation that we find:


                                        O(i0 , c) + βM Ai,c + γCOU N T Y c + τ i + η r + i,c .
                               X
                O(i, c) = α                                                                                        (16)
                               i0 6=i


The dependent variable is the indicator for insurer i’s entry status in county c as previously defined
in Equation (10). For a given insurer, this variable is constructed for each county that belongs to a
                                                         P                0 , c)
rating area where the insurer is active. The term            i0 6=i O(i            represents the number of competing
insurers that are active in county c. M Ai,c is an indicator for whether insurer i had sold any MA
plans in the county before the ACA and it captures insurer-county level entry costs. The vector
COU N T Y c includes county characteristics such as residents’ average health status, the number
of potential marketplace enrollees, and the number of health care providers. We include insurer
fixed effects denoted by τ i and rating area fixed effects denoted by η r .

    Table 11 reports the summary statistics of the regression sample. We use the 2016 Marketplace

                                                        29
PUF and restrict the sample to rating areas with partial entry.18 Table 12 reports the linear
regression results.19 Column (1) in Table 12 reports the results when we regress an insurer’s entry
status in a county on the number of competing insurers only. The coefficient estimate for α is
positive and statistically significant which is consistent with the correlation test result reported in
Table 10. Columns (2)-(5) estimate α controlling for different sets of factors that may be important
in explaining the positive correlation among insurers’ county entry statuses.

  Column (2) estimates α while controlling for M Ai,c only. Compared to Column (1), the estimate
of α does not change much, implying that insurers’ fixed costs of entry are not the primary driver of
the positive correlation that we detect.20 Columns (3)-(5) estimate α conditional on county health
measures, market size, and provider availability, respectively. The estimate of α from each of the
three regressions is substantially lower than the estimate of α from Column (1). This suggests that
such county characteristics are important in explaining the positively correlated entry patterns of
insurers. In particular, insurers are less likely to enter counties with worse health measures, smaller
market size, and lower urban population share. Finally, Column (6) reports the results when we
estimate α conditional on all of the regressors used in Columns (2)-(5). The coefficient estimate
on the number of competing insurers is now negative and statistically significant. This suggests
that once we control for county health risks, market size, and provider availability, the positive
correlation among insurers’ entry statuses disappears, and we observe the market segmentation
effect.

  To summarize, while both county characteristics and competitive pressure affect insurers’ de-
cisions to selectively enter counties within a rating area, the former has a greater impact. In
particular, insurers avoid counties with a higher share of unhealthy consumers and a lower share of
urban population. The findings suggest that providing insurers with subsidies that are better tied
to the risk scores of the counties in the insurers’ service area may increase insurer participation in
counties with unfavorable market conditions.




  18
      We also estimate Equation (16) using all rating areas, and the results are qualitatively the same.
  19
      We also estimate probit and logit models, and the results are qualitatively the same.
   20
      This is consistent with empirical findings presented in Figure 8 which shows that insurers’ fixed costs
of entry are not correlated in a meaningful way. Note that our theoretical model implies that symmetric
(asymmetric) fixed costs of entry would lead to a positive (negative) correlation in insurers’ entry patterns.


                                                     30
                                                            Mean        Std.   Min         Max
         Insurer sells ACA plans in county                   0.71       0.46   0.00        1.00
         Competing ACA insurers in county                    4.11       2.21   0.00       12.00
         Insurer sold MA plans in county                     0.36       0.48   0.00        1.00
         Obese share                                         0.31       0.04   0.15        0.45
         Smoker share                                        0.21       0.06   0.06        0.49
         No leisurely physical activity share                0.26       0.05   0.11        0.41
         Avg physically unhealthy days/mo                    3.80       1.07   1.20        8.80
         Share with access to physical activity              0.67       0.20   0.01        1.00
         Access to good food (0-1)                           0.73       0.11   0.09        1.00
         Non-elderly pop. below 400% FPL (10k)               6.82      16.51   0.06      269.31
         MDs                                               332.63    1042.46   0.00    13427.00
         Hospitals                                           2.37       4.67   0.00       74.00
         Urban population share                              0.48       0.29   0.00        1.00
         Observations (insurer-county combinations)         6,008

Table 11: Summary Statistics of the Regression Sample
Notes: The table provides summary statistics of the regression sample. Each observation represents an
insurer-county combination. The sample is from the 2016 Marketplace data and is restricted to rating areas
with partial entry.




                                                   31
                                                                                       Insurer’s county entry status
                                                                       (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                       Competing ACA insurers in county             0.0169∗∗     0.0115      0.0028     -0.0002      -0.0058     -0.0144∗
                                                                    (0.0077)   (0.0077)    (0.0076)    (0.0078)    (0.0079)      (0.0080)

                       Insurer sold MA plans in county                         0.3685∗∗∗                                        0.3415∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.0417)                                         (0.0422)

                       Obese share                                                           -0.2361                              -0.0388
                                                                                            (0.2120)                             (0.2085)

                       Smoker share                                                          -0.1150                              -0.0758
                                                                                            (0.0970)                             (0.0962)

                       No leisurely physical activity share                                -0.7433∗∗∗                           -0.5512∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.1807)                             (0.1740)

                       Avg physically unhealthy days/mo                                      -0.0069                              -0.0070
                                                                                            (0.0049)                             (0.0049)
32




                       Share with access to physical activity                              0.1447∗∗∗                               0.0274
                                                                                            (0.0331)                             (0.0346)

                       Access to good food (0-1)                                             -0.0072                             0.1979∗∗
                                                                                            (0.0874)                             (0.0932)

                       Non-elderly pop. below 400% FPL (10k)                                            0.0032∗∗∗                  0.0012
                                                                                                         (0.0005)                (0.0011)

                       MDs                                                                                            0.0000      -0.0000
                                                                                                                    (0.0000)     (0.0000)

                       Hospitals                                                                                    0.0061∗∗       0.0052
                                                                                                                    (0.0030)     (0.0043)

                       Urban population share                                                                       0.1202∗∗∗   0.0892∗∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.0237)    (0.0287)
                       Observations (insurer-county combinations)      6,008      6,008        6,008       6,008        6,008       6,008

     Table 12: Linear Regression Results
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. The table reports the estimates from a linear probability model of whether the insurer is active in a
     county. All regressions include rating area and insurer fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by insurer and are reported in parentheses.
7     Conclusion

    In this paper, (1) we document the prevalence of the partial rating area offering phenomenon
in the ACA marketplaces, where insurers selectively enter a strict subset of the counties within a
geographic rating area, and (2) we study the primary motives that drive the phenomenon. Using
publicly available data on individual health insurance plans sold in the federally-facilitated mar-
ketplaces, we find that about a third of the insurers enter some, but not all, counties of a rating
area. We use a simple model of insurer competition to derive a testable implication that (1) if
insurers selectively entered counties to avoid servicing markets with unfavorable conditions (higher
risk, smaller market size or potentially larger entry costs), then their county entry decisions would
be positively correlated, and (2) if they selectively entered counties to segment a rating area and
avoid competition, their county entry decisions would be negatively correlated. We propose and
implement a novel nonparametric correlation test and find strong empirical evidence for a positive
correlation. Our finding implies that the partial rating area offering phenomenon is driven mostly
by insurers’ avoidance of counties with unfavorable market conditions.

    The findings presented in this paper have several policy implications. First, to the extent that
insurers can choose not to offer a plan in all counties of a rating area, the ACA community rating
regulation based on rating areas only delivers an imperfect government control over insurers’ ability
to vary premiums by geographic region. Second, if the government aims to increase insurer par-
ticipation in counties with few marketplace insurers, our findings suggest that the insurers need to
be provided with subsidies that are tied to their service areas. Mandating that all plans be offered
in all counties of a rating area, including the counties with higher risks and counties where the
insurers do not have legacy provider networks, may instead trigger the insurers to exit the rating
area altogether.



References

Aizawa, N. and H. Fang (2015): “Equilibrium Labor Market Search and Health Insurance
    Reform,” Working paper.
Aradillas-Lopez, A. (2016): “Nonparametric Tests for Conditional Affiliation in Auctions and
    Other Models,” Working paper.




                                                 33
Aradillas-Lopez, A., P. Haile, K. Hendricks, and R. Porter (2017): “Testing Competition
  in U.S. Offshore Oil and Gas Lease Auctions,” Working Paper.
Azevedo, E. M. and D. Gottlieb (2017): “Perfect Competition in Markets with Adverse
  Selection,” Econometrica, 85, 67–105.
Dafny, L. S., I. Hendel, V. Marone, and C. Ody (2017): “Narrow Networks On The Health
  Insurance Marketplaces: Prevalence, Pricing, And The Cost Of Network Breadth,” Health Af-
  fairs, 36, 1606–1614.
de Castro, L. and H. Paarsch (2010): “Testing Affiliation in Private-Values Models of First-
  Price Auctions Using Grid Distributions,” Annals of Applied Statistics, 4, 2073–2098.
Ericson, K. and A. Starc (2015): “Pricing Regulation and Imperfect Competition on the
  Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97, 667–682.
Fang, H. and Z. Wu (2018): “Multidimensional Private Information, Market Structure and
  Insurance Markets,” Rand Journal of Economics, 49, 751–787.
Finkelstein, A., N. Hendren, and M. Shepard (2017): “Subsidizing Health Insurance for
  Low-Income Adults: Evidence from Massachusetts,” NBER Working Paper No. 23668.
Giovannelli, J., K. Lucia, and S. Corlette (2014): “Implementing the Affordable Care
  Act: State Approaches to Premium Rate Reforms in the Individual Health Insurance Market,”
  Commonwealth Fund.
Hackmann, M. B., J. T. Kolstad, and A. Kowalski (2015): “Adverse Selection and an
  Individual Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice,” American Economic Review, 105, 1030–
  1066.
Handel, B., I. Hendel, and M. Whinston (2015): “Equilibria in Health Exchanges: Adverse
  Selection versus Reclassication Risk,” Econometrica, 83, 1261–1313.
Hendren, N. (2013): “Private Information and Insurance Rejections,” Econometrica, 81, 1713–
  1762.
Jaffe, S. P. and M. Shepard (2017): “Price-Linked Subsidies and Health Insurance Markups,”
  NBER Working Paper No. 23104.
Jun, S., J. Pinkse, and Y. Wan (2010): “A Consistent Nonparametric Test of Affiliation in
  Auction Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 159, 46–54.
Milgrom, P. and R. Weber (1982): “A Theory of Auctions and Competitive Bidding,” Econo-
  metrica, 50, 1089–1122.
Polsky, D., Z. Cidav, and A. Swanson (2016): “Marketplace Plans With Narrow Physician


                                               34
  Networks Feature Lower Monthly Premiums Than Plans With Larger Networks,” Health Affairs,
  35, 1842–1848.
Roosen, J. and D. Hennessy (2004): “Testing for the Monotone Likelihood Ratio Assumption,”
  Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 22, 358–366.




                                              35
A   Appendix: Additional Tables

State                                      Division    RAs   Non Single County RAs   Counties   FFM
Alabama                                    MSAs+1       13                      8         67      1
Alaska                          3-Digit   Zip Codes      3                                29      1
Arizona                                    Counties      7                      5         15      1
Arkansas                                   Counties      7                      7         75      1
California             Counties/3-Digit   Zip Codes     19                                58      0
Colorado                                   Counties      9                      4         64      0
Connecticut                                Counties      8                      0          8      0
Delaware                                   Counties      1                      1          3      1
District of Columbia                       Counties      1                      0          1      0
Florida                                    Counties     67                      0         67      1
Georgia                                    Counties     16                     16        159      1
Hawaii                                     Counties      1                      1          5      1
Idaho                           3-Digit   Zip Codes      7                                44      0
Illinois                                   Counties     13                     12        102      1
Indiana                                    Counties     17                     16         92      1
Iowa                                       Counties      7                      7         99      1
Kansas                                     Counties      7                      7        105      1
Kentucky                                   Counties      8                      8        120      0
Louisiana                                  Counties      8                      8         64      1
Maine                                      Counties      4                      4         16      1
Maryland                                   Counties      4                      4         24      0
Massachusetts                   3-Digit   Zip Codes      7                                14      0
Michigan                                   Counties     16                     15         83      1
Minnesota                                  Counties      9                      9         87      0
Mississippi                                Counties      6                      6         82      1
Missouri                                   Counties     10                     10        115      1
Montana                                    Counties      4                      4         56      1
Nebraska                        3-Digit   Zip Codes      4                                93      1
Nevada                                     Counties      4                      3         17      1
New Hampshire                              Counties      1                      1         10      1
New Jersey                                 Counties      1                      1         21      1
New Mexico                                 MSAs+1        5                      2         33      1
New York                                   Counties      8                      8         62      0
North Carolina                             Counties     16                     16        100      1
North Dakota                               MSAs+1        4                      2         53      1
Ohio                                       Counties     17                     17         88      1
Oklahoma                                   MSAs+1        5                      4         77      1
Oregon                                     Counties      7                      7         36      1
Pennsylvania                               Counties      9                      9         67      1
Rhode Island                               Counties      1                      1          5      0


                                                  A1
  South Carolina                            Counties       46                         0         46       1
  South Dakota                              Counties        4                         4         66       1
  Tennessee                                 Counties        8                         8         95       1
  Texas                                     MSAs+1         26                        16        254       1
  Utah                                      Counties        6                         5         29       1
  Vermont                                   Counties        1                         1         14       0
  Virginia                                  MSAs+1         12                        12        134       1
  Washington                                Counties        5                         4         39       0
  West Virginia                             Counties       11                        10         55       1
  Wisconsin                                 Counties       16                        14         72       1
  Wyoming                                   MSAs+1          3                         1         23       1
  Total                                                    499                     298       3,143      38

Table A1: Rating Areas in the State Marketplaces
Notes: The column “Division” reports the way each state is divided into rating areas; MSAs+1 means the
state is divided into MSAs plus the remainder of the state not included in a MSA, Counties means rating
areas are composed of a single or multiple counties, and 3-Digit Zip Codes means rating areas are composed
of a single or multiple 3-digit zip codes. The column “RAs” reports the number of rating areas in each
state. The column “Non Single County RAs” reports, for each state that uses counties to define rating areas,
the number of rating areas that have two or more counties. The column “Counties” reports the number of
counties in each state. The column “FFM” reports whether each state has a federally-facilitated marketplace.



B     Appendix: Prevalence of Partial Rating Area Offering based on Plans’
      Service Area

  Section 3 develops three measures of marketing breadth based on insurers’ service areas. In this
appendix, we use plans’ service areas to develop three analogous measures of marketing breadth.

  First, for each plan and for each of the rating areas where the plan is offered, we define plan-RA
level marketing breadth as the fraction of counties in the rating area where the plan is offered.
This measure tells us how broadly a plan covers a rating area. This measure can be represented as
follows: for every r ∈ {1, ..., R} , and every p ∈ P R (r) ,

                                                      |CP (p) ∩ C (r)|
                                       B1P (p, r) =                                                    (17)
                                                           |C (r)|

where the denominator is the number of counties in rating area r, and the numerator is the number
of counties in rating area r where plan p is offered. For example, if plan p is offered in every county
in rating area r, then CP (p) ∩ C (r) = C (r), resulting in B1P (p, r) = 1, i.e., plan p’s marketing
breadth in rating area r is 1. If plan p is only offered in one of the three counties that form rating
area r, then B1P (p, r) = 31 .

                                                      A2
  Second, we develop a county level measure to evaluate how completely a county is served by plans
that are offered in the county’s rating area. Specifically, for each county, we compute the fraction
of plans offered in its rating area that are also offered in the county:

                                                          |PC (c)|
                                         B2P (c) =                        ,                               (18)
                                                     |PR (r) : c ∈ C (r)|

where the denominator is the number of plans that are offered in the rating area to which county
c belongs, and the numerator is the number of plans offered in county c. For example, if five plans
are offered in the rating area to which county c belongs, but only two of the five plans are offered
in county c, then B2P (c) = 25 .

  Lastly, we develop a rating area level measure to quantify how broadly plans serve counties in
a rating area. This measure can be computed either by taking the average of the first plan-RA
level measure, or by taking the average of the second county level measure. Both methods yield
the same result:21

                                                       1       X
                                    B3P (r) =                       B P (p, r)                            (19)
                                                    |PR (r)| p∈P (r) 1
                                                                     R

                                                       1     X
                                              =                   B P (c) .
                                                    |C (r)| c∈C(r) 2


  Table B1 reports the summary statistics of the three measures for the 2016 Marketplace PUF
described in Table 2. From the first measure B1P (p, r) , we see that 33% of the 13,029 plan-RA
combinations have coverage breadth less than one. This means that one third of the plans are sold
to some, but not all of the residents in a rating area. On average, a plan is offered to 81% of counties
in a rating area, with a standard deviation of 30%. From the second measure B2P (c), we find that,
  21
       To see this, note that, for rating area r,
                                                1         X
                               B3P (r)   =                         B1P (p, r)
                                             |PR (r)|
                                                        p∈PR (r)

                                                1         X        |CP (p) ∩ C (r)|
                                         =
                                             |PR (r)|                   |C (r)|
                                                        p∈PR (r)
                                                   1               X
                                         =                                 |CP (p) ∩ C (r)| .
                                             |PR (r)| |C (r)|
                                                                p∈PR (r)


P |CP (p) ∩ C (r)| represents the total number of counties in rating area r where plan p is sold,
As
  p∈PR (r) |CP (p) ∩ C (r)| represents the total number of plan-county combinations in rating
                                                                                         P
                                                                                              area r. An alter-
native expression for the total number of plan-county combinations in rating area r is c∈C(r) |PC (c)| .



                                                          A3
                  Measure      Unit         Obs.       Share of Obs. < 1         Mean     Std
                  B1P (p, r)   Plan-RA    13,029                     0.33         0.81   0.30
                  B2P (c)      County      2,335                     0.57         0.79   0.25
                  B3P (r)      RA            259                     0.63         0.87   0.15

Table B1: Plan Coverage Measures
Notes: The table reports summary statistics on the three measures of marketing breadth using plan coverage.


of the 2,335 counties located in rating areas that consist of multiple counties, 57% are excluded by
at least one plan offered in their respective rating area. On average, a county is served by 79% of
plans in its rating area, with a standard deviation of 25%. From the third measure B3P (r) , we find
that, of the 259 rating areas with multiple counties, about 63% have at least one plan that is not
universally offered across counties. On average, rating areas have plan coverage rate of 87%.



C    Appendix: More Illustrative Examples of the Correlation Measure

Example 1. Consider rating area r with two counties, c1 and c2 . There are two insurance com-
panies, insurer 1 and insurer 2, and a total of 5 plans, {a, b, d, e, f }, that are offered in the rating
area. Suppose insurer 1 offers plan a in county c1 and plan b in county c2 ; insurer 2 offers plan d
in both counties, plan e in county c1 , and plan f in county c2 . The object o(1, 2; c1 , c2 ) as defined
in Equation (11) is 1. The correlation measure CORR(r) is computed as

                                                         1
                               CORR(r) =                       o(1, 2; c1 , c2 )
                                                2   2 
                                                  ·   
                                                   2         2
                                          = 1.


As both insurers are active in all counties of the rating area, we could say that they are perfectly
aligned in their county entry decisions, resulting in a correlation measure of one.


Example 2. As in the previous example, consider rating area r with two counties, c1 and c2 , and
two insurance companies, insurer 1 and insurer 2. There is again a total of 5 plans, {a, b, d, e, f },
that are offered in the rating area. Now suppose that insurer 1 offers plans a and b in county c1 ,
and insurer 2 offers plans d, e, and f in county c2 . The object o(1, 2; c1 , c2 ) as defined in Equation




                                                       A4
(11) is −1. The correlation measure CORR(r) is then computed as

                                                               1
                              CORR(r) =                                o(1, 2; c1 , c2 )
                                                     2   2 
                                                       ·   
                                                        2            2
                                            = −1.


As the two insurers perfectly segment the rating area, the correlation measure results in -1.


Example 3. Rating area r again has two counties, c1 and c2 , but now there are three insurance
companies, insurer 1,2, and 3. There is a total of 7 plans, {a, b, d, e, f, g, h} , that are offered in the
rating area. Insurer 1 offers plans a, b and d in county c1 ; insurer 2 offers plan e in both counties
and plan f in county c2 ; and insurer 3 offers plans g and h in county c2 . The objects o(·, ·; ·, ·)
as defined in Equation (11) are: o(1, 2; c1 , c2 ) = 0, o(1, 3; c1 , c2 ) = −1, o(2, 3; c1 , c2 ) = 0. Thus the
correlation measure CORR(r) is computed as

                                       1
            CORR(r) =                         {o(1, 2; c1 , c2 ) + o(1, 3; c1 , c2 ) + o(2, 3; c1 , c2 )}
                               3   2 
                                 ·   
                                  2         2
                           1
                         =   {0 + (−1) + 0}
                           3
                             1
                         = − .
                             3

While no pair of insurers are perfectly aligned in their county entry decisions, insurer 1 and insurer 3
are perfectly misaligned in their county entry decisions. As a result, the overall correlation measure
for the rating area is negative at − 13 .



D     Appendix: E[CORR(r)] and Var[CORR(r)] under the Null

  We derive the analytical forms of E[CORR(r)] and Var[CORR(r)] under the null hypothesis
stated in Section 5. For notational simplicity, define function C(n, k) as the combination function
                                                
                                                       n!
                                                                   if n ≥ k,
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                    (n−k)!k!
                                  C(n, k) =                                                                     (20)
                                                
                                                0
                                                
                                                        otherwise.


                                                            A5
Analytical Form of E[CORR(r)].             For any given pair of insurers (i, i0 ) and a pair of counties (c, c0 ),
the probability that o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) = 1 is

                                                                                         !2                             !2
                             0                0           0   2|C(r)|−2
                                                                  0                                    2|C(r)|−2 − 1
        P r[(O(i, c) = O(i , c) and O(i, c ) = O(i , c )] = 3                                 +                              .
                                                               |A(r)|                                     |A(r)|

The probability that o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) = −1 is

                                                                                !2                                               !
                                                             2|C(r)|−2                  2|C(r)|−2 2|C(r)|−2 − 1
  P r[O(i, c) 6= O(i0 , c) and O(i, c0 ) 6= O(i0 , c0 )] = 2                         +2          ·              .
                                                              |A(r)|                     |A(r)|      |A(r)|

The expected value of o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) is


E[o(i, i0 ; c, c0 )] = P r[(O(i, c) = O(i0 , c) and O(i, c0 ) = O(i0 , c0 )] − P r[(O(i, c) 6= O(i0 , c) and O(i, c0 ) 6= O(i0 , c0 )]
                          1
                     =
                       |A(r)|2
                              1
                     =
                       (2|C(r)| − 1)2

which only depends on the number of counties in the rating area. The expected value of CORR(r)
under the null is

                                                  1
                                                                                                      E[o(i, i0 ; c, c0 )]
                                                                           X              X
                 E[CORR(r)] =
                                         C(|I|, 2) · C(|C|, 2)                                 ˜
                                                                       (i,i0 )∈ĨR (r) (c,c0 )∈C(r)
                                                  1
                                   =                          .
                                         (2|C(r)|     − 1)2

As the number of counties in a rating area approaches to infinity, the mean correlation converges
to zero under the null.


Analytical Form of Var[CORR(r)].              Express Var[CORR(r)] as


                          Var[CORR(r)] = E[CORR(r)2 ] − (E[CORR(r)])2 .                                                              (21)




                                                                  A6
We already computed E[CORR(r)] under the null, so it suffices to derive the expression for
E[CORR(r)2 ] which can be written as
                                                                                                                                                  2 
                                                         1
                                                                                                                                   o(i, i0 ; c, c0 )  .
                                                                                                             X
              E[CORR(r)2 ] =                                                        2E                                                                            (22)
                                                                                                                                                     
                                              (C(|I|, 2) · C(|C|, 2))                           (i,i0 )∈IR (r),(c,c0 )∈C(r)


We can express the expectation term on the right hand side of the equation as the following:
                                                       2 
                                                                                                                  h                     i
                                        o(i, i0 ; c, c0 )  =                                                E o(i, i0 ; c, c02
                     X                                                                     X
E                                                                                                                                                                   (23)
                                                           
          (i,i0 )∈IR (r),(c,c0 )∈C(r)                                         (i,i0 )∈IR (r),(c,c0 )∈C(r)
                                                                                                                                   h                                      i
                                                                                                                                E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 ) .
                                                                                                  X
                                                                     +
                                                                              (i,i0 ),(ĩ,ĩ0 )∈IR (r),(c,c0 ),(c̃,c̃0 )∈C(r)
                                                                                          (i,i0 ,c,c0 )6=(ĩ,ĩ0 ;c̃,c̃0 )


The analytical form of E o(i, i0 ; c, c02 under the null is
                                                             


      h                   i
   E o(i, i0 ; c, c02          = P r[o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) = 1] + P r[o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) = −1]
                                                      !2                               !2                             !2                                       
                                    2|C|−2                           2|C|−2 − 1                               2|C|−2               2|C|−2 − 1 2|C|−2 
                               = 3                           +                             + 2                               +2           ·
                                     |A|                                 |A|                                   |A|                     |A|     |A|
                                     22|C|−1 − 2|C| + 1
                               =                        .
                                         (2|C| − 1)2

So we have
                                                                                                                                               !
                           X                      h
                                                          0         02
                                                                         i                                       22|C|−1 − 2|C| + 1
                                              E o(i, i ; c, c                = C(I, 2) · C(I, 2) ·                                  .                              (24)
               (i,i0 )∈IR (r),(c,c0 )∈C(r)
                                                                                                                     (2|C| − 1)2

  h                                       i
E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 ) can be written as

                     h                                          i
                  E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )       = P r[o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) = 1 and o(i, ĩ0 ; c, c0 ) = 1]

                                                                    + P r[o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) = −1 and o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 ) = −1]

                                                                    − P r[o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) = 1 and o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 ) = −1]

                                                                    − P r[o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) = −1 and o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 ) = 1].

                                              h                                           i
The exact expression of E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 ) under the null depends on the presence of
common insurers between the two pairs of insurers (i, i0 ) and (ĩ, ĩ0 ), and the presence of common


                                                                                  A7
counties between the two pairs of counties (c, c0 ) and (c̃, c̃0 ). We compute the analytical form of
   h                                       i
E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 ) under each of the following six cases.

Case 1: There is no common insurer between (i, i0 ) and (ĩ, ĩ0 ). As the null assumes insurers’ county
entry decisions are independent, we get the following analytical form22 :

                         h                                                 i                                              h                  i
                      E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 1        = E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · E o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )
                                                                                                                

                                                                                       1
                                                                                =
                                                                                      |A|4
                                                                                               1
                                                                                =                    4 .
                                                                                         2|C| − 1


Case 2: There is one common insurer between (i, i0 ) and (ĩ, ĩ0 ), and the two pairs of counties are
identical, i.e., (c, c0 ) = (c̃, c̃0 ).

                                                                                !3                                   !3
   h
            0     0             0      0
                                                    i       2|C|−2                                 2|C|−2 − 1
E o(i, i ; c, c ) · o(ĩ, ĩ ; c̃, c̃ )|Case 2          = 3                          +1∗
                                                             |A|                                       |A|
                                                                                !3                                            !2                    !2
                                                            2|C|−2                     2|C|−2                2|C|−2 − 1                    2|C|−2             2|C|−2 − 1
                                                        + 2                          +        ·                                    +                      ·
                                                             |A|                        |A|                      |A|                        |A|                   |A|
                                                                                    !3                                            !2                     !2                   
                                                                           2|C|−2              2|C|−2             2|C|−2 −1                      2|C|−2               2|C|−2− 1
                                                        − 2 2                            +                  ·                          +                         ·
                                                                               |A|                 |A|                |A|                         |A|                    |A|
                                                                                !3                                   !3
                                                            2|C|−2                                 2|C|−2 − 1
                                                        = 3                          +1∗
                                                             |A|                                       |A|
                                                                                   !3                                         !2                      !2                      
                                                                      2|C|−2                  2|C|−2             2|C|−2 −1                   2|C|−2               2|C|−2  − 1
                                                        − 2                             +               ·                             +                      ·                .
                                                                           |A|                 |A|                   |A|                         |A|                   |A|


Case 3: There is one common insurer between (i, i0 ) and (ĩ, ĩ0 ), and there is one common county
   22
        Note that (c, c0 ) = (c̃, c̃0 ) is allowed.




                                                                               A8
between (c, c0 ) and (c̃, c̃0 ).

          h                                                 i
       E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 3
                                       !2                                !2
       2|C|−3 − 1        2|C|−2 − 1            2|C|−3           2|C|−2             2|C|−3 2|C|−2 2|C|−2 − 1
  =                                         +5                                +2         ·      ·
           |A|               |A|                |A|              |A|                |A|    |A|       |A|
                                  !2                              !2                                                                      !2
       2|C|−3 − 1        2|C|−2           2|C|−3        2|C|−2             2|C|−3 2|C|−2 2|C|−2 − 1 2|C|−3                   2|C|−2 − 1
  +                                    +4                               +2       ·      ·          +
           |A|            |A|              |A|           |A|                |A|    |A|       |A|     |A|                         |A|
                                                                                     !2                                     
       2|C|−3 − 1 2|C|−2 2|C|−2 − 1    2|C|−3                                2|C|−2           2|C|−3 2|C|−2 2|C|−2 − 1 
  − 2           ·      ·           +4                                                     +3       ·      ·             .
           |A|     |A|       |A|        |A|                                   |A|              |A|    |A|       |A|


Case 4: There is one common insurer between (i, i0 ) and (ĩ, ĩ0 ), and there is no common county
between (c, c0 ) and (c̃, c̃0 ).


    E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 4
                                                       
                          2                                                               2
      2|C|−4 2|C|−2                     2|C|−4 2|C|−2 2|C|−2 − 1 2|C|−4 − 1 2|C|−2 − 1
                                                                                
  = 9                          +6                  ·        ·           +
        |A|       |A|                     |A|        |A|        |A|         |A|      |A|
                            2                                                           2                       2
      2|C|−4 2|C|−2                     2|C|−4 2|C|−2 2|C|−2 − 1 2|C|−4 − 1 2|C|−2            2|C|−4 2|C|−2 − 1
                                                                                                   
  + 8                          +6                  ·        ·           +                  +
        |A|       |A|                     |A|        |A|        |A|         |A|    |A|         |A|         |A|
                                    2                                                        2
                                                                                                                               !
          2|C|−4 2|C|−2                        2|C|−4 2|C|−2 2|C|−2 − 1 2|C|−4 2|C|−2 − 1         2|C|−4 − 1 2|C|−2 2|C|−2 − 1
                                                                                        
  − 2 9                                +5             ·       ·           +                    +             ·      ·            .
            |A|         |A|                     |A|       |A|       |A|      |A|    |A|               |A|      |A|      |A|


Case 5: The two pairs of insurers are identical, i.e., (i, i0 ) = (ĩ, ĩ0 ), and there is one common county
between (c, c0 ) and (c̃, c̃0 ).

                                                                                              !2               !2
                  h                                                 i           2|C|−3 − 1            2|C|−3
               E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 5       =                          +7
                                                                                    |A|                |A|
                                                                                                                    !2
                                                                            2|C|−3 − 1 2|C|−3    2|C|−3
                                                                        + 2           ·       +6                         .
                                                                                |A|     |A|       |A|



Case 6: The two pairs of insurers are identical, i.e., (i, i0 ) = (ĩ, ĩ0 ), and there is no common county




                                                                        A9
                                                      Number of {(i, i0 ; c, c0 ), (ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )} Combinations
                                  Case 1              C(|I|, 2) · C(|I| − 2, 2) · C(|C|, 2)2
                                  Case 2              2C(|I|, 2) · C(|I| − 2, 1) · C(|C|, 2)
                                  Case 3              4C(|I|, 2) · C(|I| − 2, 1) · C(|C|, 2) · C(|C| − 2, 1)
                                  Case 4              2C(|I|, 2) · C(|I| − 2, 1) · C(|C|, 2) · C(|C| − 2, 2)
                                  Case 5              2C(|I|, 2) · C(|C|, 2) · C(|C| − 2, 1)
                                  Case 6              C(|I|, 2) · C(|C|, 2) · C(|C| − 2, 2)
                                  Total               2C(C(|I|, 2) · C(|C|, 2), 2)

Table D1: Number of {(i, i0 ; c, c0 ), (ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )} Combinations for Each of the Six Cases
Notes: The table reports the number of {(i, i0 ; c, c0 ), (ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )} combinations for each of the six cases when
we sum over the left-hand side of Equation (25). For n < k, C(n, k) = 0 as defined in Equation (20).


between (c, c0 ) and (c̃, c̃0 ).

                                                                                                          !2                   !2
              h
                        0             0           0        0
                                                                           i                 2|C|−4 − 1               2|C|−4
           E o(i, i ; c, c ) · o(ĩ, ĩ ; c̃, c̃ )|Case 6                       =                                + 15
                                                                                                 |A|                   |A|
                                                                                                                                       !2
                                                                                    2|C|−4 − 1 2|C|−4      2|C|−4
                                                                                + 2           ·       + 14
                                                                                        |A|     |A|         |A|
                                                                                                                                           !2 
                                                                                       2|C|−4 − 1 2|C|−4      2|C|−4
                                                                                − 2 2           ·       + 14                                  
                                                                                           |A|     |A|         |A|
                                                                                                          !2                   !2
                                                                                             2|C|−4 − 1               2|C|−4
                                                                                =                                + 15
                                                                                                 |A|                   |A|
                                                                                                                                       !2 
                                                                                              2|C|−4−1           2|C|−4        2|C|−4
                                                                                − 2                   ·     + 14                          .
                                                                                                 |A|     |A|                    |A|


Using the number of {(i, i0 ; c, c0 ), (ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )} combinations for each of the six cases (reported in
Table D1), we obtain the following expression:

                                                                      h                                          i
                                                                   E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )
                                          X
                                                                                                                                                       (25)
            (i,i0 ),(ĩ,ĩ0 )∈I   R   (r),(c,c0 ),(c̃,c̃0 )∈C(r)
                       (i,i0 ,c,c0 )6=(ĩ,ĩ0 ;c̃,c̃0 )
                                                                                     h                                             i
       = C(|I|, 2) · C(|I| − 2, 2) · C(|C|, 2)2 · E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 1
                                                                                     h                                             i
       + 2C(|I|, 2) · C(|I| − 2, 1) · C(|C|, 2) · E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 2
                                                                                                          h                                        i
       + 4C(|I|, 2) · C(|I| − 2, 1) · C(|C|, 2) · C(|C| − 2, 1) · E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 3
                                                                                                          h                                        i
       + 2C(|I|, 2) · C(|I| − 2, 1) · C(|C|, 2) · C(|C| − 2, 2) · E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 4
                                                                                     h                                             i
       + 2C(|I|, 2) · C(|C|, 2) · C(|C| − 2, 1) · E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 5
                                                                                 h                                             i
       + C(|I|, 2) · C(|C|, 2) · C(|C| − 2, 2) · E o(i, i0 ; c, c0 ) · o(ĩ, ĩ0 ; c̃, c̃0 )|Case 6 .


                                                                                   A10
Using Equations (24) and (25), we obtain the analytical form for E[CORR(r)2 ]. As the analytical
form for E[CORR(r)] has already been computed, we obtain the analytical form for Var[CORR(r)].



E        Appendix: Connections with Affiliation Tests

    Here we discuss and contrast our correlation test with some recent nonparametric tests of affil-
iation in the auction literature. The notion of affiliation is stronger than positive correlation, and
it was first introduced into economics by Milgrom and Weber (1982) in auction settings.23 Affil-
iation of bidders’ signals has testable implications for observable decision variables, such as bids
and participation decisions. Since then, various tests have been developed to test affiliation in the
context of auctions (Roosen and Hennessy, 2004; de Castro and Paarsch, 2010; Jun et al., 2010;
Aradillas-Lopez, 2016). In particular, Aradillas-Lopez (2016) developed a non-parametric test for
affiliation of bidders’ participation decisions based on the aggregate number of bidders.24 The test
is based on the result that in competitive auctions where bidders’ values are affiliated, bidders’
participation decisions would also be affiliated. This implies that, under the null hypothesis of
affiliation, the aggregate number of bidders in auctions must satisfy some inequality. If the test
rejects the null hypothesis of affiliation, it could suggest that bidders are not acting competitively,
such as acting in collusion. Indeed, Aradillas-Lopez et al. (2017) use this implication as the basis
for testing whether there is evidence for collusion in off-shore oil and gas lease auctions.

    One of the main hypotheses that we test in this paper is whether partial rating area offering can
be explained by insurers’ incentive to segment a rating area and avoid competition. As market
segmentation could also be sustained as a result of collusion among insurers, it could be tempting
to apply Aradillas-Lopez (2016)’s test of affiliation to our setting. A county will correspond to an
auction, and insurers’ county entry decisions would correspond to bidders’ participation decisions in
auctions. Aradillas-Lopez (2016)’s test of affiliation is based on the number of bidders in auctions.
Applied to our setting, we would use the number of entering insurers in a county as the analog of
the number of bidders in an auction. Using multiple observations of counties, we would compute
Aradillas-Lopez (2016)’s test statistic, and decide whether to reject the null of affiliation among
insurers’ entry decisions in a county. Finding evidence for the null of affiliation would be supportive
    23
         For a formal definition of affiliation, see Milgrom and Weber (1982).
    24
         Refer to Section 2.5.1 in Aradillas-Lopez (2016) for details.




                                                       A11
of the importance of common market level shocks, while finding evidence against the null would be
supportive of the market segmentation hypothesis.

    However, one key assumption needed to properly implement Aradillas-Lopez (2016)’s test is that
bidders’ participation decisions are i.i.d. across auctions. Applied to our setting, this assumption
would imply that insurers’ county entry decisions are i.i.d. across all counties. However, insurers’
county entry decisions within a rating area are unlikely to be independent. As in our model, it
is reasonable to assume that insurers in a given rating area decide simultaneously which counties
to enter with the constraint that premiums of the same plan have to be identical for all counties
within the rating area. In this case, insurers’ entry decisions in counties that belong to the same
rating area would not be independent, and Aradillas-Lopez (2016)’s test would not be applicable.
That is why we develop our correlation test which is also nonparametric but is better suited to test
the relative importance of common market characteristics and competitive pressure in the context
of insurer competition under the geographic rating regulation.



F     Appendix: Description of the 2017 Marketplace Data

    This appendix provides a brief description of the 2017 Marketplace PUF data. Table F1 describes
the data before excluding rating areas that consist of a single county. Table F2 describes the final
2017 Marketplace PUF sample which excludes single county rating areas. Compared to the 2016
Marketplace PUF data described in Tables 1 and 2, the number of states increased by one as
Kentucky transitioned to the federal marketplace for year 2017. Despite this change, there are
fewer plans and insurers, as several insurers exited the marketplaces. Table F3 describes premiums
and copayments of the 2017 marketplace plans. Compared to 2016, premiums increased across
all metal levels. Table F4 provides information about insurer participation. Compared to 2016,
the average number of insurers participating in a state marketplace decreased from 6.3 to 4.4, the
average number of insurers active in a rating area decreased from 4.8 to 2.9, and the average number
of active insurers in a county decreased from 3.5 to 2.1. Table F5 provides the summary statistics
of the three measures that we developed in Section 3 to quantify insurer marketing breadth relative
to rating areas. The results are quantitatively similar to the 2016 measures, implying that partial
rating area coverage is still common in the 2017 marketplaces.




                                                A12
   Plans    Insurers    Networks      States   RAs       Non Single County RAs          Counties    Plan-RA
   3,064      162         288           37     413                267                    2,601       12,495

Table F1: 2017 Marketplace PUF Sample Before Excluding Single County RAs
Notes: Only individual health plans offered in federally-facilitated marketplaces are considered. Alaska and
Nebraska are excluded as they use zip codes to define rating areas.



                  Plans    Insurers    Networks        States   RAs    Counties    Plan-RA
                  2,637      154         272             35     267     2,455       8,048

Table F2: 2017 Marketplace PUF Sample After Excluding Single County RAs
Notes: Only individual health plans offered in federally-facilitated marketplaces are considered. Rating areas
that have only one county are excluded. Alaska and Nebraska are excluded as they use zip codes to define
rating areas. Florida and South Carolina are excluded as their rating areas always consist of one county.



   Metal             Plans     Premium 21      Premium 45         Premium 64      OOP Max         Deductible
   Catastrophic        191            221             319                 662        7,150            7,150
   Bronze              843            268             388                 804        5,106            4,547
   Silver            1,123            316             457                 948        3,865            2,103
   Gold                446            406             587               1,217        3,738              991
   Platinum             34            434             627               1,302        2,015              232

Table F3: Average Plan Characteristics of the 2017 Marketplace PUF Sample
Notes: Premium 21, 45, and 64 represent the average monthly rate for a non-smoking 21-year-old, 45-year-
old, and 65-year-old, respectively. OOP Max represents the annual out-of-pocket maximum.



                                                          Mean     Std.   Min     Max      Obs
                # of Active Insurers in a County           2.09    1.13     1       9     2,455
                # of Active Insurers in a RA               2.88    1.73     1       9       267
                # of Active Insurers in a State            4.40    3.30     1      15        35

Table F4: Insurer Participation in the 2017 Marketplace PUF Sample
Notes: The table reports the summary statistics of insurer participation.



                  Measure      Unit             Obs.     Share of Obs. < 1      Mean       Std
                  B1I (i, r)   Insurer-RA        769                   0.34      0.81     0.30
                  B2I (c)      County          2,455                   0.38      0.80     0.28
                  B3I (r)      RA                267                   0.47      0.87     0.18

Table F5: Insurer Coverage Measures from the 2017 Marketplace PUF Sample
Notes: The table reports summary statistics on the three measures of marketing breadth using insurer
coverage.



                                                       A13
