                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      GRANDPARENTS, MOMS, OR DADS? WHY CHILDREN OF TEEN MOTHERS
                           DO WORSE IN LIFE

                                          Anna Aizer
                                        Paul J. Devereux
                                        Kjell G. Salvanes

                                      Working Paper 25165
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25165


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2018




We thank participants at the ESPE conference in Antwerp in 2018, and the Nordic Summer
Institute in Labor Economics in Helsinki. We have not financial interests to disclose. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Anna Aizer, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Grandparents, Moms, or Dads? Why Children of Teen Mothers Do Worse in Life
Anna Aizer, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 25165
October 2018
JEL No. I3,J13,J24

                                            ABSTRACT

Women who give birth as teens have worse subsequent educational and labor market outcomes
than women who have first births at older ages. However, previous research has attributed much
of these effects to selection rather than a causal effect of teen childbearing. Despite this, there are
still reasons to believe that children of teen mothers may do worse as their mothers may be less
mature, have fewer financial resources when the child is young, and may partner with fathers of
lower quality. Using Norwegian register data, we compare outcomes of children of sisters who
have first births at different ages. Our evidence suggests that the causal effect of being a child of a
teen mother is much smaller than that implied by the cross-sectional differences but that there are
still significant long-term, adverse consequences, especially for children born to the youngest
teen mothers. Unlike previous research, we have information on fathers and find that negative
selection of fathers of children born to teen mothers plays an important role in producing inferior
child outcomes. These effects are particularly large for mothers from higher socio-economic
groups.

Anna Aizer                                         Kjell G. Salvanes
Brown University                                   Department of Economics
Department of Economics                            Norwegian School of Economics
64 Waterman Street                                 Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen
Providence, RI 02912                               Norway
and NBER                                           and IZA and CEPR
anna_aizer@brown.edu                               kjell.salvanes@nhh.no

Paul J. Devereux
School of Economics
and Geary Institute
University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4
Ireland
and IZA and CEPR
devereux@ucd.ie
        It is well documented that children who are born to teenage mothers have worse

outcomes including worse health, less schooling, and lower earnings in adulthood (Hofferth,

1987; Francesconi, 2008). However, less is known about whether this is a causal effect of teen

childbearing or whether it is because mothers who have teen births are negatively selected so that

their children will have poorer outcomes irrespective of the age of the mother at birth. Negative

maternal selection is likely to be important as previous work has shown that the negative

relationship between teen parenting and long-term maternal outcomes – educational attainment

and earnings -- declines significantly and, in some studies, declines to zero with more

comprehensive controls for selection into teen parenting or using natural experiments for

identification. 2

        However, there may still be a negative causal impact of teen parenting on child outcomes

for several reasons. First, teenagers have lower levels of psychosocial maturity than their older

and more developed counterparts – they are more likely to be depressed and more likely to report

greater levels of stress (Kingston, Fell, Heaman, and Chalmers, 2012; Hodgkinson, Lee Bears,

Southammakosane, and Lewin, 2014), both of which have been linked to deficits in parenting

behaviors (Reid and Meadows-Oliver, 2007). Second, previous work on the impact of teen

parenting on maternal education and income finds small long-term effects once selection has

been considered, but with the negative effects on income declining over time (Hotz McElroy,

and G. Sanders, 2005). As such, teen parents may be more resource constrained during their

children’s earliest years, a period critical for child development (Almond and Currie, 2011,

Carneiro, Lopez Garcia, Salvanes, and Tominey, 2015). Finally, teen birth may also be




2See Geronimus and Korenman, 1992; Holmlund, 2005; Hotz, McElroy and Sanders, 2005; Lang and Weinstein,
2015; Ashcraft and Lang, 2013; Fletcher and Wolf, 2009; Ribar, 1994; Klepinger, Lundberg and Plotnick, 1999.


                                                      2
associated with lower paternal quality. If so, this can also result in worse outcomes for affected

children through either genetic heritance or fewer and lower quality paternal inputs.

         We examine the impact of teen motherhood on child short-, medium- and long-term

outcomes using sister fixed effects to control for negative selection into teen motherhood.

Specifically, using Norwegian administrative data that links individuals across three generations,

we compare the outcomes of children born to a teen mother with the outcomes of her non-teen

sister’s children (cousins). In this way, we allow for negative selection into teen motherhood by

controlling for all family background characteristics (observed and unobserved) of teen mothers

that are common across children born to the same family. Though existing work suggest that

family background is likely the most important determinant of teen child bearing, there can still

be within family variation in maternal background characteristics correlated with teen pregnancy

and offspring outcomes. 3 As such, we also control for whether the mother started academic high

school, a marker for academic achievement and aspirations at age 16.

         While this sister fixed effects approach to studying the effects of teen childbearing on

offspring outcomes has previously been used, our empirical work adds to the literature in several

ways. First, since we have population wide data, our sample sizes are much larger than the small

samples that have been previously used with sister fixed effects, allowing much more precise

estimates. Second, not only do we consider the short and medium run outcomes of these

children, such as birth weight and test scores among preschool and elementary school children,

as others already have (Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1995; Geronimus, Korenman, and Hillemeier,


3
  Previous work has shown that family background matters much more than peers, classmates or neighbors in
explaining adolescent delinquency (Duncan, Boisjoly and Harris, 2001). Moreover, comparing monozygotic and
dizygotic twins, the authors found that while both environmental and genetic factors affect cognitive test scores, the
latter seems not to exert much influence over adolescent delinquency, underscoring the importance of controlling for
family background in our estimation. Using sibling correlations in educational attainment, and decomposing into
family and neighborhood factors, Solon, Page and Duncan (2000) for the USA, and Raaum, Salvanes and Sørensen
(2008) for Norway, both find that most of the inequality in education can be explained by family background.


                                                          3
1994), but we can also consider long-term outcomes such as adult IQ score (for boys),

educational attainment, and earnings. Examining long run outcomes is particularly important in

this context as there is a growing literature showing that conditions in early childhood can have

effects in the long-run that are not observed in the short or even medium term (see Chetty et al.,

2011; Deming, 2009). Third, because it is register-based, our measure of teen childbearing is not

subject to recall bias or reporting error. Finally, while previous work has emphasized the

importance of the underlying background characteristics of teen mothers, it has not been able to

consider the role of fathers as information on fathers is generally unavailable for teen mothers.

Because our register data records the father, we can examine what role paternal quality plays in

explaining the worse outcomes of the offspring in both absolute terms and relative to factors

previously considered - maternal human capital and resources.

       In OLS regressions with controls for only mother’s year of birth and child gender, we

find a strong negative relationship between teen motherhood and offspring outcomes: offspring

have lower grades in middle school, IQ scores that are one third of a standard deviation lower,

are shorter in young adulthood, complete 1.3 fewer years of schooling, are 15 percentage points

less likely to complete high school, have 11 percent lower earnings at age 30, and are 16

percentage points more likely to have ever used means-tested social assistance. Among female

offspring, those born to teen mothers are seven percentage points more likely to have a teen birth

themselves.

        However, consistent with prior research on teen motherhood and maternal outcomes,

much of this negative relationship can be explained by teen mothers’ underlying levels of

disadvantage. In our data, teen mothers are 15 percentage points more likely to come from a

home in which the father has not completed high school (an important determinant of household




                                                 4
resources). They are also 25 percentage points less likely to have started academic high school

by age 16, a measure of past academic achievement and future aspirations. When we include

sister fixed effects that control for observed and unobserved differences in the teen mother’s

family background, the estimates decline considerably, but still suggest a negative relationship

between teen childbearing and child outcomes. However, within family differences between

sisters remain: teen mothers are 9 percentage points less likely to start academic high school than

their sisters. When we augment the fixed effects with a control for this within family difference

in maternal background, the estimated relationship between teen motherhood and offspring

outcomes changes little and still suggests a negative effect. With all controls included, we find

that children born to teen mothers have cognitive test scores that are 13 percent of a standard

deviation lower, complete half a year less of schooling, have four percent lower earnings at age

30, and are three percentage points more likely to have a teen birth themselves. These estimated

effects are generated from examining all teen births (ages 15-19). We find that the estimated

negative effects are much larger for the youngest teenagers, those aged 15-17 at the time of birth.

Most effects for 15-17 year-olds are between 25 and 70 percent larger than those for women who

are 18-19 year old when giving birth.


       To assess the likelihood that these remaining estimated effects are driven by unobserved

characteristics biasing our estimates, we calculate how much selection on unobservables must

remain for the true effect to be zero. More specifically, we conduct an exercise in which we

assume that the remaining omitted variable bias is proportional to coefficient movements scaled

by the change in R-squared when controls are included (Altonji, Elder, and Taber, 2005; Oster,

2017). We find that, for reasonable assumptions about the relative importance of included and

excluded variables, the estimates still indicate a negative effect of teen childbearing on child



                                                  5
outcomes. We conclude that negative selection into teen motherhood explains much but probably

not all of the worse outcomes observed for their offspring. 4

         What explains the remaining negative relationship between teen motherhood and

offspring outcomes? We consider three factors: teen mother behavior (ie, smoking while

pregnant), household resources in early childhood, and paternal quality. All three appear to play

a role in explaining the worse child outcomes still observed after controls for maternal selection

are included. Teen mothers are more likely to smoke even after including sister fixed effects.

Teen mothers also have lower levels of family earnings especially when the child is young, but

over time, the size of the effect declines (consistent with existing work). Finally, paternal quality

is much lower for children born to teen mothers even once we control for observable and

unobservable characteristics of the teen mother. The “partners” of teen mothers score

significantly lower on a cognitive test at age 18, are shorter, consistent with diminished nutrition

in childhood, and are less likely to have started academic high school at age 16. Once we

control for the underlying characteristics of both teen mothers and their partners, the offspring of

teen mothers generally fare little worse than offspring born to older parents with similar

background characteristics.

         While previous work has emphasized the importance of considering the underlying

background characteristics of teen mothers, we conclude that when considering the outcomes of

children born to teen mothers, the underlying characteristics of the fathers also play an important

role in explaining their worse outcomes in both the short and long run. That is, a significant part



4 Unobservable characteristics would have to be more important than (and in many cases, more than twice as
important as) all of the observable characteristics in explaining the negative selection into teen motherhood. Given
our use of a fixed effect strategy that controls for all background characteristics of the family, combined with the
fact that other work has found family background to be one of the most important predictors of delinquent behavior
and educational background, this seems very unlikely.


                                                         6
of the reason that the children of teen mothers have worse outcomes is because their fathers have

lower levels of human capital and earnings, likely resulting in fewer child investments. More

precisely, our decomposition analysis indicates that the quality of the fathers explains as much of

the difference in child outcomes as economic resources. This is the first work to emphasize this

linkage. Our results suggest that policies that consider the role that fathers play in teenage

childbearing and its consequences may be more effective than those that consider mothers only.



    I.       Background Literature

         In developed countries, the teen birth rate ranges from a low of 4.1 per 1000 women aged

15-19 in Switzerland to 40 in the US as of 2009 (Kearney and Levine, 2012). In Norway, the

setting of our study, the teen birth rate is 9.5 which is in the middle of the distribution. In the

US, teen mothers are twice as likely to drop out of high school and receive public assistance than

mothers who delay childbearing, with similar patterns observed in Europe. 5 However, teen

mothers are more likely to come from disadvantaged families from which offspring on average

accumulate less schooling and earn less in adulthood, regardless of teen childbearing. For

example, using data from the 2003 PSID, Kearney and Levine (2015) report that 20% of US

women give birth before the age of 20, but among those born into poverty, 49% give birth before

the age of 20. The same pattern is observed in Norway: teen childbearing is twice as likely in

low SES families as high SES families. 6 As a result, studies of the effect of teen child bearing on

maternal outcomes have either included comprehensive controls for parent background




5
  For research based in the UK see Francesconi, 2008; for patterns in Sweden see Olausson et al., 2001, for Norway
see Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2008, and Mølland, 2016, and for cross-country comparisons throughout Europe
see Robson and Berthoud (2003). See also Perper, Petersen, and Manlove, 2010.
6
  Teen mothers also have less educated mothers, mothers who were more likely to be teenagers themselves when
they gave birth and are less likely to live with both parents (Abma, Martinez ,and Copen, 2010)


                                                        7
(including family fixed effects) or exploited arguably exogenous variation in teen parenthood

that derives from shocks such as miscarriages or access to family planning. 7 The evidence from

this work shows that most, if not all, of the negative relationship between teen childbearing and a

mother’s future outcomes is attributable not to any causal impact of teen parenting on women’s

outcomes, but to the negative selection into teen parenting.

         As with the literature on maternal outcomes, the research on child outcomes also suggests

that selection into teen parenting is an important factor in explaining the worse child outcomes of

those born to teen mothers. Several studies have documented that once one includes additional

controls for maternal background, the estimated OLS relationship between teen motherhood and

child outcomes declines (Shaw, Lawlor and Najman, 2006; Card, 1981; Jaffe, Caspi, Moffitt,

Belsky, and Silva, 2001).

         A small number of studies have sought ways to more comprehensively control for family

background/maternal selection. These have taken one of three approaches: 1) including maternal

family fixed effects, thereby comparing outcomes of children born to sisters – one of whom had

a teen birth and one of whom delayed birth until at least age 20 (i.e., comparing outcomes of

cousins); 2) exploiting a natural experiment that results in plausibly exogenous variation in the

timing of first birth; 3) including child sibling fixed effects, thereby comparing outcomes of

children born to the same mother – one born before she turned 20 and one after. This work, with



7
  These include papers that use family fixed effects by Geronimus and Korenman (1992) and Holmlund (2005).
Work that exploits variation in teen motherhood derived from miscarriages includes Hotz, Mullen and Sanders
(1997), Hotz, McElroy and Sanders (2005), Fletcher and Wolf (2009), Ashcraft, Fernandez-Val and Lang (2013)
and Lang and Weinstein (2015). Ribar (1994), using age at menarche as an instrument for teen parenthood, finds
that the relationship between teen parenting and maternal educational attainment is small. Klepinger, Lundberg and
Plotnick (1999) use access to family planning and abortion as an instrument for teen fertility and find that teen
motherhood substantially and negatively affects labor market outcomes of mothers. Research that has used
propensity score matching methods to address underlying differences between teen and non-teen mothers has
produced estimates that are smaller than the cross-sectional estimates but still negative and significant (Lee, 2010
and Levine and Painter, 2005).


                                                          8
one exception, is based on survey data which are rich in terms of maternal and child

characteristics, but suffers from small sample sizes, attrition and measurement error, which can

increase bias and decrease precision.

       Geronimus, Korenman and Hillemeier (1994), Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1995) and Lopez

Turley (2003) address negative selection into teen parenthood by including maternal family fixed

effects and comparing outcomes of children born to sisters. All these studies use data from the

NLSY or PSID to examine the role of teen motherhood (Geronimus, Korenman, and Hillemeier,

1994; Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1995) and maternal age at birth (Lopez Turley, 2003), on child

outcomes including birth weight, cognitive test scores and behavioral problems. In all three

studies, the authors find that the inclusion of sister fixed effects and maternal AFQT reduces the

negative association between maternal age at birth and child short and medium-term outcomes to

statistical insignificance in most cases. The main limitations of these studies are the small

sample sizes (roughly 130 teen mothers with sisters in the NLSY, for example) and relatively

short follow-up periods for the child outcomes.

       Recent work exploits the school starting age rules in Sweden that generate variation in

age at first birth. Frederiksson, Huttunen and Ockert (2017) show that those born after school

entry cut off (and therefore older when they start and finish school) are more likely to postpone

pregnancies and thus are older when giving birth to their children. Using data on a cohort of

women born in Sweden 1932-1944, the authors find no evidence that the children of those born

after the school entry cutoff fare any better than those born before the school entry cutoff.

However, interpretation of these results is complicated by the fact that school starting ages also

affect maternal education which has been shown to affect child outcomes directly (Currie and

Moretti, 2003).




                                                  9
         Francesconi (2008) uses sibling fixed effects to compare the outcomes of children born to

the same mother when she was young versus when she was older. Not surprisingly, he finds

little difference in child outcomes as this analysis is complicated by the confounding of birth

order as well as the generally limited spacing between births that generates little variation in the

environments and resources faced by children born to the same mother.

         Our work advances the current literature by using a large population-based dataset that

allows us to consider long run outcomes in addition to short and medium run outcomes. There

are several major advantages of these data. First, our large sample size (42,000 teen births to

sister pairs) allows us to generate more precise estimates. Second, a reliance on birth records

instead of survey self-reporting of teen pregnancy reduces potential bias from any misreporting

of teen pregnancy. Third, our estimates are less likely to be biased by any non-random attrition

which can be substantial in surveys such as the NLSY or PSID, especially for the longer run

outcomes. Finally, we have information on fathers and so can examine to what extent the poorer

outcomes of children of teen mothers are due to the selection of fathers.



   II.      Data

         Our empirical approach requires information on three generations of individuals. Our

sample consists of all live singleton births in the Norwegian Birth Register (1967 - 2009).

Importantly, both mothers and fathers of the children are known. We restrict the sample to first-

born children and keep cases where the mother is aged between 15 and 45 at the time of birth.

   We further restrict the sample to mothers born between 1950 and 1980 for whom we know

the identity of the maternal grandparents (this information is not widely available for mothers

born before 1950). Finally, because we include maternal grandparent fixed effects (equivalent to




                                                 10
a sister FE), we restrict the sample to mothers who have at least one full sister in the sample. Our

base sample consists of 303,085 observations on first-born children for whom we observe both

their parents and their maternal grandparents. 8 Of these births, 14% or 42,432, are to teen

mothers. Table 1 shows means for the full sample and for the sample for whom we have

information on at least two sister sibling mothers. The means for the two groups are generally

quite similar, suggesting little to no non-random selection into the analysis sample.



    A. Measures of Maternal Quality

         We have limited information on the economic circumstances of mothers when they were

growing up. Our main measure of family background is an indicator for whether the maternal

grandfather (the mother's father) had “high” education, defined as completing high school and

measured when the mother was aged 16. Our primary approach is to control for maternal quality

using grandparent fixed effects, which automatically controls for all differences in family

background characteristics and human capital that are shared across sisters. However, there may

also be differences within sister pairs that correlate with teen motherhood and affect child

outcomes. To examine this, we consider a measure of maternal quality that varies within sister

pairs: whether a mother started academic high school at age 16. This is a measure of pre-existing

achievement and orientation towards academic study (68% of mothers started academic high

school at 16) and the decision is made prior to the vast majority of teen births – only 0.1% of

births are before age 16 and only 0.7% of births occur before age 17.




8
  By limiting our sample to first born children, we ignore any effects of teen motherhood on other children. Since
teen mothers have higher completed fertility and previous work has documented worse outcomes for higher birth
order children (Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2005), this would suggest that teen motherhood also negatively
affects the outcomes of later born children.


                                                         11
    B. Measures of Paternal Quality

    The birth certificate register contains information on the father of the child. Due to strictly

enforced rules of paternal child support, 97-98 percent of the fathers are reported in the birth

register, enabling us to link them with additional information available in other registers. We

utilize three measures of paternal quality. The first is a measure of his father’s education (i.e.,

the paternal grandfather’s education). This serves as a proxy for his family background. The

second is whether the father started academic high school, measured at age 16. The third set of

measures derive from Norwegian military records and include the height, weight, and IQ score of

the father. These are measured when the father is between the ages of 18 and 20. In Norway,

military service is compulsory for every able young man and, before entering the service, their

medical and psychological suitability is assessed. The IQ score is reported in stanine (Standard

Nine) units, a method of standardizing raw scores into a nine point standard scale that has a

discrete approximation to a normal distribution, a mean of 5, and a standard deviation of 2. 9 This

information is available from 1969 to 2010, covering men born between about 1950 and 1991.

As a result of this cohort restriction, this information is missing for 18% of the sample. We also

examine the relationship between teen birth and paternal age. 10



    C. Resources and Investments in the Child




9
  The IQ measure is the mean score from three IQ tests -- arithmetic, word similarities, and figures (see Sundet,
Barlaug, and Torjussen, 2004 for details). The arithmetic test is quite similar to the arithmetic test in the Wechsler
Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) (Sundet, Barlaug, and Torjussen, 2004; Cronbach 1964), the word test is similar to
the vocabulary test in WAIS, and the figures test is similar to the Raven Progressive Matrix test (Cronbach 1964).
The correlation between this IQ measure and the WAIS IQ score has been found to be 0.73 (Sundet, Barlaug, and
Torjussen, 2004).
10
   We also have information on completed education of fathers but do not use it in our main specifications as it may
be partly determined by the teenage birth.


                                                         12
           We use information on the birth year of the child and on household income of the mother

to construct family income when the child is aged 1, 5, 10, and 15. Information on spouses

(needed to construct family income) is available from 1970 through 2015 so we have information

on family income when the child is aged 3 or older for our full sample.

           To explore whether and how teen motherhood might influence behavior that affects their

children, we estimate whether teen mothers are more likely to smoke during pregnancy.

Smoking during pregnancy has been shown to be extremely harmful to the fetus (Rubin et al.,

1986, Bernstein et al., 2005). We have information on smoking from the Birth Register for

mothers who give birth between 1999 and 2009. Women report smoking status to doctors at a

free, recommended consultation around gestational week 8-12. 11 The response rate in our data

for this smoking question is 83%, with about 15% reporting smoking during pregnancy.



      D. Child Outcomes

      An advantage of our register data is that we can examine short, medium and long-run child

outcomes for large samples of children.



Short run outcomes:

           We study the birth weight of the child. This is available in birth registers from 1967 to

2009. Birth weight is the most widely used measure of health at birth and low birth weight has

been linked to poorer outcomes in adulthood (Black, Devereaux and Salvanes, 2007).



Medium run outcomes:



11   Some women report it slightly later because their first consultation is after week 12.


                                                            13
        We have two measures of achievement and cognitive abilities during the teenage years.

The first is the grade point average (GPA) from middle school (which is completed by most

Norwegians around age 16). This information covers years 2002 to 2015 and, hence, cohorts

1986-1999. The GPA ranges from 0 to 6 and has a mean of 4.07 and standard deviation of 0.82.

This is a good measure of achievement during core schooling. 12 The second measure is cognitive

test scores from military tests at ages 18-20 for all men. Additionally, we have information on

male height at 18-20 as measured by the military.



Long run outcomes:

        Our long-run offspring outcomes include completed education by 2014. This requires

restricting the sample to persons aged at least 25 in our data, which corresponds to birth cohorts

1967-1989. To have educational information for a larger range of cohorts, we also construct an

indicator for whether the person has completed high school (either vocational or academic). We

can measure this for persons aged at least 20 by 2014, which corresponds to birth cohorts 1967 to

1994.

        Our principal measure of economic welfare is earnings at age 30 (calculated using

available data on earnings up to 2015). 13 This outcome is available for cohorts born between

1967 and 1985. We also have access to information on whether someone used social assistance

between 1992 and 2010. Social assistance is means-tested support for people who do not have

an adequate source of income but have not accumulated the right to unemployment benefits or

other support earned through the labor market. It is widely used by young people of both genders



12
   After middle school, students choose between two different tracks for high school; the academic track and the
vocational track. The academic track is a preparation for university and other higher educational studies.
13
   We deflate earnings and other monetary amounts to 2010 NOK (Norwegian Krone).


                                                        14
and is a useful measure of difficulty obtaining stable employment in the labor market. We use

these data to generate a measure of whether someone ever used social assistance during this

period and limit our sample to birth cohorts 1967-1990. The mean for this variable is about 19%.

          Finally, we use the birth records to calculate whether each of the female children in our

sample subsequently had a teenage birth herself. This information is available for the 1967-1990

cohorts (as we have birth information up to 2009) and the mean is about 6%.



   III.      Empirical Strategy and Results

          Our analysis proceeds in several steps. First, we examine selection into teen motherhood.

We do so by establishing how teen childbearing is correlated with the mother’s family

background factors as well as her own maternal characteristics. Evidence of strong negative

selection into teen motherhood would imply strong potential bias in OLS estimates of the impact

of teen motherhood on child outcomes. Second, we demonstrate that fathers of children born to

teen mothers are systematically different from other fathers. Third, we estimate cross-sectional

and sister fixed effects models of the effect of teen childbearing on child outcomes, controlling

for underlying characteristics of teen mothers. We argue that the fixed effects estimates, while

smaller than cross sectional estimates, represent an upper bound of the true causal estimates if

negative selection on unobservables still remains. We then assess the likelihood that the lower

bound of the causal effect includes zero. To do so, we calculate how much selection on

unobservables must remain for the true effect to be zero. Finally, we consider the mechanisms

behind any estimated effects of teen motherhood on child outcomes and contrast the importance

of father characteristics to that of household financial resources.

          To maintain comparability between OLS and specifications with sister fixed effects, we




                                                  15
restrict the sample in each regression to observations where there are at least two sisters for

whom the dependent variable is non-missing. In all specifications we include an indicator

variable for teenage first birth with the omitted category defined as first births at all other ages. 14



             A. Selection into Teen Motherhood

         We consider how the pre-determined characteristics of mothers relate to whether they

have a teen birth by individually regressing multiple maternal background characteristics on an

indicator for teen birth. Each regression includes, at a minimum, year-of-birth FE for the mother.

The background characteristics include 1) maternal family background as proxied by whether her

father completed high school, 2) whether the mother started academic high school at age 16, a

good measure of the pre-existing orientation of the mother towards academic study, and 3) the

birth order of the mother. 15

         The results, reported in Table 2, confirm negative selection into teen motherhood.

Mothers who have a teen birth are disproportionately drawn from families in which the father

has less education. Among non-teen mothers, 31 percent have a father with at least a high school

education. Among teen mothers, that declines by 15 percentage points (Table 2, column 1). For

this outcome we cannot include a family fixed effect as the maternal grandfather is common to

sibling mothers.

         We also consider negative selection within sister pairs by regressing whether the mother

started academic high school on teen birth. We find that, when this is the dependent variable, the

coefficient on teen birth is -0.25 (Table 2, column 2) relative to a mean of 0.70; when we add



14
  We later show estimates where we disaggregate teen births further by exact age of the mother.
15
  There is an extensive literature indicating that there is a first birth advantage across many outcomes. See, for
instance, Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2005).


                                                          16
sister fixed effects, the coefficient falls to -0.09. This is consistent with previous findings that

while much of the selection into teen childbearing is shared by siblings, there is also selection

within-families in terms of who has a teen birth (Holmlund, 2005). In column 3 of Table 2, we

find that teen mothers are 3 percentage points less likely to be first-borns. This falls to 1.5

percentage points when we include sister fixed effects.

        We conclude that while sister fixed effects and controls for individual academic

achievement at age 16 do serve to reduce bias from negative selection into teen motherhood,

there is still some negative selection that occurs within family that likely biases our estimates of

the impact of teen motherhood on child outcomes. In a later section we explore how likely it is

that omitted variables explain all the remaining negative effects by conducting exercises as

detailed by Altonji, Elder and Taber(2005) and most recently Oster (2017). These exercises

require assumptions about the degree of negative selection explained and unexplained by our

controls.



            B. Selection of Fathers

        To our knowledge, this is the first paper to consider the quality of the fathers of children

born to teen mothers and the role this plays in explaining offspring outcomes. To do so, we

regress multiple measures of paternal quality on an indicator for teen birth. The basic controls

included in all regressions are indicator variables for the year of birth and gender of the child, we

then include sister fixed effects, thereby limiting our comparison to the fathers of children born

to sisters, and then the sister-specific maternal control. Our first dependent variable is whether

the paternal grandfather (the father of the father of the child) has finished high school education

(Table 3) which yields an estimated coefficient on teen birth of -0.067 showing that fathers of




                                                  17
children born to teen mothers are negatively selected on family background. When we include

sister fixed effects, the teen birth coefficient falls to -0.007, indicating that most of the paternal

selection on this particular measure is common across sisters and not unique to teen mothers.

         We test further for paternal selection using more direct measures of paternal human

capital -- whether the father started academic high school, cognitive test scores and height of the

father from military enlistment exams at ages 18-19, as well as the father's age at first birth (of

his child.) Using these measures of paternal quality, we find much stronger evidence that the

fathers of children born to teen mothers are negatively selected, even within sister pairs. Fathers

of children born to teen mothers are five percentage points less likely to have started academic

high school, they have IQ scores that are 25 percent of a standard deviation lower, are shorter at

age 18, and are themselves 2.5 years younger when the child is born. Our results imply that

fathers of teen mothers are negatively selected. In a later section we show that this negative

selection on paternal quality explains a significant share of the negative relationship between

teen childbearing and offspring outcomes.



             C. Impact of Teen Motherhood on Child Outcomes

         We begin by characterizing the relationship between teen motherhood and child

outcomes including only our “basic” controls: year-of-birth indicators for the child and a gender

dummy for the child. 16 We report estimates for child short, medium and long run outcomes: birth

weight, middle school GPA, IQ score and height at age 18 (for boys), completed years of

education, child earnings at age 30, whether the child used welfare, and whether the child had a


16 An alternative would be to include year-of-birth indicators for the mother. Given there can be cohort effects in the
outcome variables, it is preferable to control for year-of-birth of the child. Essentially, we are leveraging the
different birth years of the sister (mothers) to allow a comparison of the outcomes of cousins born in the same year
but to mothers of different ages.


                                                          18
teen birth herself (for girls). In each regression, (including OLS regressions) we restrict the

sample to cases where there are at least two sisters with non-missing values of the dependent

variable.

       In column (1) of Table 4, we show estimates for child birth weight. Without fixed effects

(and therefore comparing children of teen mothers to all other children), the estimate on teen

birth is -35, indicating that children of teen mothers weigh about 35 grams less on average, a

modest effect. Once the fixed effects are included, this becomes a very small and statistically

insignificant effect of 4 grams. The small negative effect of teen motherhood on birth weight in

the cross section appears to be due entirely to selection rather than reflect a causal effect,

consistent with previous findings (Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1995).

       In column (2), the dependent variable is middle school GPA, a variable that is between 0

and 6 and has a standard deviation of 0.82. The cross-sectional effect of -0.52 is therefore very

large. Once the fixed effects and the control for mother high school track are added, the

coefficient falls to -0.14 or about 17% of a standard deviation. Likewise, in column (3) we see

that teen birth is associated with boys scoring 0.67 less on average in the IQ test at age 18-20.

The standard deviation is about 1.75 so, once again, this is a sizeable effect. With controls, it

falls to 0.23 (13% of a standard deviation). For height of boys, adding the controls reduces the

negative effect of teen birth from 1.2 cm (mean of 180 cm) to 0.61 cm.

       When we study educational outcomes, we see a similar pattern. Children born to teen

mothers have, on average, 1.3 fewer years of completed schooling (mean of 13.12) and are 15

percentage points less likely to finish high school (compared to a mean of 0.80). However,

adding the FE and maternal controls reduces these effects by about 60%, yielding an effect size

of about half a year for years of schooling, and six percentage points for high school completion.




                                                  19
         Children of teen mothers earn about 11% less at age 30 but this falls to only 4% when

controls are added. Social assistance usage is much higher for children of teen mothers (16

percentage points, compared to a mean usage of 0.16) and this effect is halved after adding

controls. Finally, daughters of teen mothers are 7 percentage points more likely to have a teen

birth themselves, but this falls to 3 percentage points when controls are included.

         Overall, without controlling for differences in maternal background, we estimate a large

negative relationship between teen birth and child outcomes. When we include sister FE

to compare the outcomes of children of sisters where one sister had her first birth as a teenager

and the other did not, the estimated effects fall considerably but, except for birth weight, do not

disappear and in many cases remain economically meaningful. Adding an indicator variable for

whether the sister began academic high school at age 16 as a proxy for both previous academic

achievement and future expectations or aspirations leads to little further change in the estimated

effects, suggesting that within-sister heterogeneity may have limited effects on our estimates.



Assessing Omitted Variable Bias

         While we have controlled for important confounders related to family background of the

mother, there are likely other unobservables for which we cannot control. Therefore, the above

estimates can only be considered an upper bound. 17 To assess the likelihood that selection on

unobservables is responsible for the entirety of the estimated effects, we use the methodology of

Altonji, Elder and Taber (2005) and the recent contribution of Oster (2017). Defining some

notation, let 𝛽𝛽̇ be the estimate from the baseline regression with only cohort and gender controls



17
  If there are spillover effects of teen pregnancy on younger siblings, then our sister fixed effects estimates may be
downward biased. We have re-estimated after excluding all teen births that are not to the youngest sister to minimize
the role of these spillovers. The estimates (in Appendix Table 1) are similar to those from the full sample.


                                                         20
and 𝛽𝛽� be the estimate when we include the sibling fixed effects and the maternal control.

Equivalently, let 𝑅𝑅̇ be the 𝑅𝑅 2 from the baseline regression and 𝑅𝑅� be the 𝑅𝑅 2 from the regression

with the sibling fixed effects and maternal control (the total 𝑅𝑅 2 not the within 𝑅𝑅 2 ).

        Oster emphasises two different parameter choices: 𝛿𝛿 and 𝑅𝑅 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 . 𝛿𝛿 is the relative

importance of selection on unobservables to selection on observables. She argues that 1 is

probably an upper bound as researchers are likely to control for the most relevant variables. 18

𝑅𝑅 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 is our determination of what the R-squared would be if we could include all relevant

variables (it may not be 1 due to measurement error in the dependent variable or variation in the

dependent variable due to factors subsequent to the birth). Oster suggests using 𝑅𝑅 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 = 1.3𝑅𝑅� as

a reasonable choice. We assume this value for 𝑅𝑅 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 and use the formulas in Oster (2017) to

estimate how large 𝛿𝛿 (selection on unobservables relative to observables) would need to be for

our estimates to be consistent with a true coefficient value of zero. These are also reported in

Table 4 and indicate that 𝛿𝛿 would need to be over 1 for 7 of our 8 child outcomes for the true

effect to be zero (and over 2 for 4 of the 8). In other words, if unobservable characteristics of the

mothers are driving the effects we estimate, selection on unobservables would have to be greater

than selection on observables which include, in this case, all family background characteristics,

observable and unobservable, that are common across sisters and a mother-specific measure of

human capital at age 16. We think that very unlikely. While not definitive, our interpretation is

that there is a small, but non-negligible, negative effect of teen childbearing on child outcomes.

The only exception is birth weight where, consistent with previous work (Rosenzweig and

Wolpin, 1995), there is no evidence of any adverse effect.


18 Duncan, Boisjoly and Harris (2001) show that family background matters more than peers, classmates or
neighbors in explaining adolescent delinquency, suggesting that family background is likely a very important (if not
the most important) factor in predicting teen childbearing.


                                                        21
More Detailed Age Categories

   We have thus far treated all teen births as equivalent. Here, we break down teen births into

two categories: age 15-17 (3% of first births) and age 18-19 (11% of first births). We expect that

the negative effects of teen motherhood are likely greater for those born to the youngest mothers

who are the least mature and for whom the disruption of child birth is likely to have a greater

impact on their own maternal human capital accumulation and future earnings.

   We present the estimated effects on child outcomes using only the basic controls (Appendix

Table 2, top panel) and the full set of sister FE and the maternal control in the bottom panel.

When we include the full set of controls, we find that children born to the youngest teens fare

between 15 and 74% worse than those born to older teens, depending on the outcome. For

example, overall, the children of teen mothers have an IQ score that is 0.23 points lower (11 %

of a standard deviation), but if they were born to a mother aged 15-17, it is 0.35 points lower (18

% of a standard deviation), and if they born to a mother aged 18-19 it is 0.19 points lower (9 %

of a standard deviation).

   Could the larger estimated effects for the children of young teens simply reflect greater

negative selection into pregnancy at younger ages? Examining how the estimates change when

we control for maternal characteristics may provide some insight into this. If the estimated

effects decline further for the youngest teens than for oldest teens, that would be consistent with

greater negative selection into teen pregnancy at early ages generating greater bias. Comparing

the estimates in the top and bottom panels of Appendix Table 2 does not support this. When we

include controls for maternal characteristics, the estimated effects based on the cross section

decline at roughly similar rates for the 15-17 year-olds as for the 18-19 year-olds.




                                                 22
             D. Mechanisms and Mediation Analysis

         We have suggested paternal selection as a possible reason for teen childbearing effects

but a more standard explanation is that teen mothers have fewer financial resources, particularly

when the child is young. In Table 5, we report the effects of having a teen first birth on the

natural log of family earnings at various ages of the first child. The negative effect of teen birth

is large when the child is young and persists but becomes smaller by age 15. Once we include

sister fixed effects and whether the mother started academic high school as controls, the

estimates decline in magnitude but remain sizeable and display the same decline over time. With

all controls included, we find that family income of a child born to a teen mother is 40% lower

when the child is aged 5, and 17% lower at age 15. This is consistent with previous work

showing an initially large difference in earnings for teen mothers, but eventual convergence over

time (Hotz et al, 2005). 19 Interestingly, we find that for the difference in family earnings at age

15, three fifths of this effect is driven by declines in the mother’s own earnings and two fifths

from declines in her spouse’s earnings.

         Not only do teen mothers have fewer resources, they are also less likely to make healthy

investments, as proxied by higher smoking rates in pregnancy (Table 5, Column 5). While the

effect declines when we include family fixed effects, the coefficient still suggests that a woman

who has a teen birth is about 17 percentage points more likely to smoke during pregnancy than

her sister who has a birth at a later age. 20



19
   In Appendix Table 3, we show that teen mothers are less likely to be married when the child is growing up and
that teen mothers have larger completed family sizes. These factors may also lead to a reduction in investments in
the child.
20
   Teen mothers are also less likely to show up for the pre-natal visit at which smoking is measured. Indeed,
accounting for controls, information on smoking is 9 percentage points less likely to be available for teen
pregnancies.


                                                         23
        Our estimates suggest that both paternal selection and maternal resources are plausible

mechanisms for the negative effect of teenage pregnancy on child outcomes. We assess this

quantitatively by examining how the coefficient on teen birth changes when we add these

variables as additional controls. In this analysis, we exclude children born after 2000 as we do

not have information on family earnings at age 15 for them. In practice, this affects the sample

used to study birth weight but none of the other samples.

        We report our baseline estimates (the specification used in Table 3, row 3) in the first row

of Table 6A. Next, we add controls for paternal characteristics. The controls we add are as

follows: indicator variables for whether the father started academic high school, indicator

variables for whether the paternal grandfather finished high school, indicator variables for

father’s score on the cognitive test, a linear term for height, and indicator variables for father's

age at birth of child (< 19, 19, 20 - 22, 23-25, 26-30, 31-35, 36+). 21 Note that all these variables

are plausibly pre-determined at the time of the child’s birth. Adding these extra controls

substantially reduces the absolute value of the teen birth coefficient, indicating that paternal

selection is an important mechanism.

        In the next row of Table 6A, we exclude the father characteristics and instead add

controls for log family income at ages 5, 10, and 15. In about 5% of cases, family income is

missing or reported as zero, we set log income to zero in these cases and add controls for

whether the family had positive income.

        Finally, we report estimates where we include both the father characteristics and the

family income controls. For short run outcomes, the estimated effects are either small and

positive, in the case of birth weight, or zero in the case of middle school GPA. However, for the


21
  We "dummy out" missing control variables to maintain sample sizes. The estimates are similar if we drop
observations with missing values.


                                                       24
longer run outcomes (IQ scores, schooling, earnings at age 30, welfare use and subsequent teen

birth) the estimated effects decline by roughly 50% when we include controls for family

resources and paternal human capital and remain significantly different from zero. In sum, we

find that maternal characteristics can explain all of the effects on short run outcomes (birth

weight), and that maternal/paternal characteristics and family income can explain all of the

effects on medium run outcomes (middle school GPA) and about half of the effects on long run

outcomes.



Decomposition

       The above analysis suggests that the adverse causal effect of teen childbearing on child

outcomes can be largely accounted for by the characteristics of the child's father and by family

resources during childhood. To assess the relative importance of these two factors, we perform a

Gelbach decomposition that provides an accounting that is invariant to the order in which the

controls are included (Gelbach, 2016). This exercise allows us to estimate the relative

contribution to reducing the effect of the teen mother coefficient of (1) paternal controls and (2)

family resources.

       The estimates are presented in the bottom panel of Table 6A. Paternal characteristics are

most influential on height (not surprisingly given the strong genetic heritance of height) and

cognitive test scores as well as completed schooling. Family resources seem to explain more of

the estimated effects on offspring earnings at age 30 and welfare use. We explore whether the

importance of paternal characteristics increases when the father is married to the mother at age

15 (a proxy for his presence in the home). We hypothesize that paternal presence matters little




                                                 25
for height, more for IQ and the most for outcomes like schooling, GPA, earnings and welfare

use.

         To test this, we stratify the sample by whether the mother was married to the father of the

child when the child was 15 years old. 22 The results of the stratified Gelbach decomposition are

presented in Table 6B. The results are roughly consistent with our hypothesis: paternal

characteristics explain more of the negative effect of teen childbearing on child outcomes when

the father is married to the mother at age 15. The main exceptions are height, which is not

surprising, but also log earnings of the child at age 30, which is.



             E. Heterogeneous Effects by Maternal Socio-Economic Status (SES)

    We hypothesize that the negative effects of teen motherhood on children’s outcomes will be

smaller for those born to low SES mothers. This hypothesis is based on previous work showing

that the black-white infant mortality differential is smaller among infants born to young mothers.

Researchers have attributed this to the health of African American women deteriorating faster

than that of white women, an explanation that is referred to as the “weathering hypothesis”

(Geronimus, 1992). In a similar vein, we argue that because the social and economic trajectories

of high and low SES women increasingly diverge as mothers age, delaying child bearing should

generate greater advantage for high SES mothers.

    To test this empirically, we regress child outcomes on an indicator for teen birth and the full

set of controls (family FE and the maternal-specific control) and an interaction term between



22
   Teen births account for 13 percent of children in homes with a married father, and 21 percent of children in homes
with an unmarried father. While differences in maternal characteristics between these two family types are minimal,
fathers who are married are more likely to have started academic high school (0.55 vs. 0.48) and have higher
average IQ scores (5.67 vs. 5.00). Not surprisingly, family earnings are higher in families with a married father and
the differences increase as the child ages. Child outcomes, including IQ scores, schooling and earnings at age 30 are
all lower for children in unmarried homes.


                                                         26
teen birth and an indicator for whether the maternal grandfather had a high degree of education

(our proxy for maternal background SES). To control for changes over time in both educational

attainment of fathers and the returns to their education that could bias estimates, we also include

an interaction between teen birth and child year of birth. For all child outcomes (Table 7, Panel

A), the coefficient on the interaction term, teen birth*grandfather high education, is negative and

large, sometimes doubling the negative effect of teen birth, except for birth weight which is

small. However, the estimates are only statistically significant for three outcomes: middle school

GPA, welfare use, and IQ scores among boys. The effect of teen motherhood on IQ score, for

example, is to reduce it by -0.22 (12% of a standard deviation) for those with low SES mothers,

increasing to -0.42 (24% of a standard deviation) for those with high SES mothers.

   Moreover, the worse outcomes observed for these children are not because their mothers

were more negatively selected. We test this by regressing whether the teen mother started

academic HS and whether she is a first-born child on an indicator for teen mother, family FE,

and an interaction between teen motherhood with grandfather education. Within families, teen

motherhood is not more negatively selected in high SES families than it is in low SES families

(Table 7, panel B, columns 1 & 2). If anything, the negative selection into teen motherhood as

measured by birth order is smaller for high SES families (Table 7, panel B, column 2).

However, the male partners are much more negatively selected when the teen mothers come

from high SES families relative to low SES families. The fathers are much more likely to come

from low SES backgrounds, they are less likely to have finished academic high school, they

score lower on IQ tests and are younger themselves (Table 7, Panel B, columns 3-8). The results

underscore the important role that fathers play in explaining the negative outcomes of children

born to teen mothers.




                                                27
      IV. Conclusions

           We have built on the previous literature by using three generations of population data to

study the effects of teenage childbearing on the outcomes of children. A major advantage of our

analysis is that our administrative data likely suffer from little measurement error as they contain

information from birth registers rather than self-reports of pregnancy. The large sample sizes

enable us to obtain precise estimates and, by linking administrative registers, we avoid attrition

bias that plagues panel data sets that have been used to study these issues. We are also able to

link to a wider range of medium- and long-run child outcomes than have been studied in the past.

Finally, our data also include information on paternal characteristics which is mostly absent from

previous analyses based on survey data. 23

           Our estimates suggest that cross-sectional analysis significantly over-estimates the

adverse consequences of teen childbearing on the next generation. Our preferred estimates using

maternal sister fixed effects suggest, however, that there are relatively small negative long-run

consequences for children. Our rich administrative data allow us to study mechanisms that have

not been fully explored in the previous literature. We find that paternal selection plays an

important role – a major reason that children of teen mothers do worse is that their fathers are

more likely to have lower education levels and cognitive scores. We also find evidence that

lower family resources during childhood may play an important role. The adverse consequences

of teenage childbearing are larger for mothers from higher socio-economic groups. Consistent

with this, we find that adverse paternal selection is greater for higher SES moms. This

underscores the importance of the role of fathers in mediating the effects of teen childbearing on



23   This is because survey data only capture fathers if they co-reside with the mother.


                                                            28
child outcomes. Policies that target young, first time mothers, such as the Nurse Family

Partnership program in the United States, should also consider providing services to the fathers if

their objective is to improve long term offspring outcomes.




                                                29
                                          References


Abma, J.C., G. M. Martinez, and C. E. Copen. 2010. “Teenagers in the United States: Sexual
activity, contraceptive use, and childbearing, National Survey of Family Growth 2006-2008.
National Center for Health Statistics.” Vital Health Stat, 23, 1-47.

Almond, D. and J. Currie. 2011. “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 25, 153-72.

Altonji, J. G., T. Elder, and C. Taber. 2005. “Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables:
Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic Schools.” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 151–184.

Ashcraft, F.-V., and K. Lang. 2013. ”The Consequences of Teenage Childbearing: Consistent
Estimates When Abortion Makes Miscarriage Non-random.” The Economic Journal, 123, 875–
905.

Bernstein, I. M., J. A. Mongeon, G. J. Badger, L. Solomon, S. H. Heil, and S. T. Higgins. 2005.
“Maternal Smoking and its Association with Birth Weight.” Obstetrics and gynecology, 106,
986-91.

Black, S. E., P.J. Devereux, and K. G. Salvanes. 2005. “The More the Merrier? The Effects of
Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXX,
669-700.

Black, S. E., P.J. Devereux, and K. G. Salvanes. 2007. “From the Cradle to the Job Market? The
Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes of Children.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122
(1), 409-439.

Black, S. E., P.J. Devereux, and K. G. Salvanes. “Staying in the Classroom and Out of Maternity
Ward? The Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on Teenage Births.” Economic Journal, 118,
1025-1054.

Card, J. J., 1981. “Long-term consequences for children of teenage parents.”
Demography, 18,137-156.

Carneiro, P., I. Lopez Garcia, K. G. Salvanes, and E. Tominey, 2015. “Intergenerational Mobility
and the Timing of Parental Income.” CEMMAP Working Paper CWP66/15.

Chetty, R., J. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. Schanzenbach, and D.Yagan. 2011. “How Does
Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 126, 1593-1660.

Cronbach, L.J. 1964. Essentials of Psychological Testing, 2nd Edition, London, UK: Harper and
Row.




                                               30
Deming, D. 2009. “Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development: Evidence
from Head Start,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 111-134.

Duncan, G., J. Boisjoly, and K. M. Harris. 2001.“Sibling, Peer, Neighbor and Schoolmate
Correlations as Indicators of the Importance of Context for Adolescent Development”
Demography, 38 (3): 437-447.

Fletcher, J., and B. L. Wolf. 2009. “Education and Labor Market Consequences of Teenage
Childbearing: Evidence Using the Timing of Pregnancy Outcomes and Community Fixed
Effects.” J. Human Resources, 44, 303-325.

Francesconi, M. 2008. Adult Outcomes for Children of Teenage Mothers. Scandinavian Journal
of Economics, 110: 93–117.

Fredriksson, P., K. Huttunen, and B. Ockert. 2017. “Maternal Age and Birth Outcomes.”, memo,
Aalto University.

Gelbach, J. B. 2016.“When Do Covariates Matter? And Which Ones, and How Much?” Journal
of Labor Economics, 34, 509–543.

Geronimus, A. T. 1992. "The Weathering Hypothesis and the Health of African-American
Women and Infants: Evidence and Speculations". Ethnicity & Disease. 2 (3): 207–221.

Geronimus, A. T., and S. Korenman. 1992. “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teen
Childbearing Reconsidered.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 1187–1214.

Geronimus, A. T., S. Korenman, and M. M. Hillemeier. 1994. “Does Young Maternal Age
Adversely Affect Child Development? Evidence from Cousin Comparisons in the United
States.” Population and Development Review, 20 (Sep., 1994), 585-609.

Grogger J, and S. Bronars. 1993. “The socioeconomic consequences of teenage childbearing:
findings from a natural experiment,” Family Planning Perspectives. 25, 156-61.

Hodgkinson, S. Lee Beers, L., C. Southammakosane, and A. Lewin. 2014. “Addressing the
Mental Health Needs of Pregnant and Parenting Adolescents.” Pediatrics, 133, 114-122.

Hofferth, S. L. 1987. Chapter 6 Social and Economic Consequences of Teenage
Childbearing. National Research Council (US) Panel on Adolescent Pregnancy and
Childbearing; Hofferth SL, Hayes CD, editors. Risking the Future: Adolescent Sexuality,
Pregnancy, and Childbearing, Volume II: Working Papers and Statistical Appendices.
Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 1987.

Holmlund, H. 2015. “Estimating Long-Term Consequences of Teenage Childbearing: An
Examination of the Siblings Approach.” Journal of Human Resources, XL, 716-743.




                                              31
Hotz J., S. W. McElroy, and S. G. Sanders. 2005. “Teenage Childbearing and its Life Cycle
Consequences: Exploiting a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Human Resources, 40, 683–715.

Hotz, V. J., C. H. Mullin, and S. G. Sanders. 1997. “Bounding Causal Effects Using Data from a
Contaminated Natural Experiment: Analyzing the Effects of Teenage Childbearing.” Review of
Economic Studies, 64, 575-603.

Jaffe, S., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T.., Belsky, J., and P Silva. 2001. “Why are Children Born to Teen
Mothers at Risk for Adverse Outcomes in Young Adulthood? Results from a 20-year
Longitudinal Study.” Development and Psychopathology, 13, 377-397.

Kearney, M., and P. Levine. 2012. “Why is the Teen Birth Rate in the United States so High and
Why does it Matter?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(2), 141-166.

Kearney, M., and P. Levine. 2015. “Investigating Recent Trends in the U.S. Teen Birth
Rates,” Journal of Health Economics, 41, 15-29.

Kingston., D., M. Heaman, D. Fell, and B. Chalmers, on behalf of the Maternity Experiences
Study Group of the Canadian Perinatal Surveillance System, Public Health Agency of Canada.
2012. “Comparison of Adolescent, Young Adult, and Adult Women’s Maternity Experiences
and Practices” Pediatrics Apr 2012, .2011-1447.

Klepinger D., S. Lundberg, and R. Plotnick. 1999. “How Does Adolescent Fertility Affect the
Human Capital and Wages of Young Women?” Journal of Human Resources, 34, 421–448.

Lang, K., and R. Weinstein, 2015."The Consequences of Teenage Childbearing before Roe v.
Wade." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7, 169-97.

Levine D. I., and G. Painter. 2003. “The Schooling Costs of Teenage Out-of-Wedlock
Childbearing: Analysis with a Within-School Propensity-Score-Matching Estimator.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 85, 884–900.

Lee D., 2010. “The Early Socioeconomic Effects of Teenage Childbearing: A propensity score
matching approach.” Demographic Research, 23,697–736.

López Turley, R. N. 2003. “Are Children of Young Mothers Disadvantaged Because of Their
Mother's Age or Family Background?” Child Development, 74, 465–474.

Mølland, E. (2016). “Benefits from Delay? The Effect of Abortion Availability on Young
Women and their Children.” Labour Economics, 43, 6-28.

Olausson, P. O., B. Haglund, G. Ringbäck Weitoft, S. Cnattingius. 2001. “Teenage Childbearing
and Long-Term Socioeconomic Consequences: A Case Study in Sweden.” Family Planning
Perspectives 33 (2), 70-74.




                                                32
Otterblad, Petra, Olausson, Bengt, Haglund, Gunilla Ringbäck, WeitoftSven Cnattingius. 2001.
“Teenage childbearing and long-term socioeconomic consequences: a case study in Sweden.”
Family Planning Perspectives, 33,70-74

Oster, E. 2017. “Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and validation,”
Journal of Business Economics and Statistics.

Perper, K., K. Peterson, and J. Manlove. 2010. “Diploma Attainment Among Teen Mothers.”
Child Trends Fact Sheet Publication 2010-01.

Raaum, O., K. G. Salvanes, and E.Ø. Søresnen, 2006. “The Neighbourhood is Not What it Used
to be.” Economic Journal, 116, 200-222.

Robson, K. and R. Berthoud. 2003. “Teenage Motherhood in Europe: A Multi-Country Analysis
of Socioeconomic Outcomes.” European Sociological Review, 19, 451–466.

Reid, V., and M. Meadows-Oliver. 2007. “Postpartum Depression in Adolescent Mothers: An
Integrative Review of the Literature.” Journal of Pediatric Health Care, 21, 289 – 298.

Ribar. D. C. 1994. “Teenage fertility and high school completion.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 6, 413–424.

Rosenzweig, M., and K. I. Wolpin. 1995. “Sisters, Siblings, and Mothers: The Effect of Teen-
Age Childbearing on Birth Outcomes in a Dynamic Family Context.” Econometrica, 63, 303-
26.

Rubin, D. H., J. M. Leventhal, P. A. Kraisilnikov, B. Weile, and A. Berget. 1986. “Effects of
Passive Smoking on Birth Weight.” The Lancet, 328, 415-417.

Shaw M, D.A. Lawlor, and J. M. Najman. 2006. “Teenage Children of Teenage Mothers:
Psychological, Behavioural and Health Outcomes from an Australian Prospective Longitudinal
Study.” Soc Sci Med, 62 , 2526–2539.

Solon, G., M. Page, and G. Duncan (2000). “Correlations Between Neighboring Children In
Their Subsequent Educational Attainment.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 82. 383-
392.

Sundet, J.M., D.G. Barlaug, and T.M. Torjussen. 2004. "The End of the Flynn Effect? A Study
of Secular Trends in Mean Intelligence Test Scores of Norwegian Conscripts During Half a
Century." Intelligence , XXXII, 349-362.




                                               33
Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                       Full Sample               Analysis Sample
                                            N         Mean               N           Mean
 Teen Birth                              649133         0.13          303085           0.14
 Age at birth                            649133        24.96          303085          24.70
 Mother year of birth                    649133      1964.73          303085        1964.22
 Father year of birth                    649133      1961.82          303085        1961.29
 Maternal grandfather high school        636805         0.31          298675           0.28
 Paternal grandfather high school        609886         0.28          286222           0.26
 Mother started academic HS              649133         0.70          303085           0.68
 Father started academic HS              649133         0.57          303085           0.55
 Mother first-born                       649133         0.40          303085           0.31
 Father Cognitive Score                  501194         5.44          236654           5.41
 Father Height                           536403       179.65          253994         179.56
 Father age at birth                     649133        28.36          303085          28.12
 First child aged 15-17                  649133         0.03          302834           0.03
 First child aged 18-19                  649133         0.10          302834           0.11
 First child aged 20-24                  649133         0.37          302834           0.38
 First child aged 25-29                  649133         0.33          302834           0.32
 First child aged 30+                    649133         0.17          302834           0.16
 Married when child is 1                 647133         0.52          301951           0.53
 Married when child is 5                 644847         0.64          300900           0.65
 Married when child is 10                600854         0.66          286830           0.67
 Married when child is 15                522726         0.66          257463           0.67
 Total number of children                463387         2.28          233378           2.33
 Log family earnings child aged 1        597116        11.76          278914          11.72
 Log family earnings child aged 5        613532        12.25          286262          12.22
 Log family earnings child aged 10       579647        12.57          276831          12.56
 Log family earnings child aged 15       506763        12.77          250162          12.79
 Smoked during pregnancy                 131176         0.16           48825           0.15
 Child Characteristics
 Female                                  649133         0.49          303085           0.49
 Year of birth                           649133      1990.18          303085        1989.41
 Birth Weight                            648330      3465.00          302709        3458.81
 Middle School GPA                       277259         4.07          140159           4.07
 Cognitive Score at 18 (boys)            154755         5.20           77821           5.14
 Height at 18 (boys)                     167880       180.04           84532         179.94
 Years of Schooling                      298094        13.12          149241          13.04
 Finished High School                    362844         0.80          183464           0.80
 Log earnings age 30                     205699        12.59           99858          12.60
 Welfare use                             327134         0.19          164379           0.19
 Child teen birth                        158267         0.06           79847           0.06
The analysis sample is restricted to cases where there are at least two sisters who are mothers in
the data.



                                                34
Table 2: Relationship between Maternal Characteristics and Teen Birth

                             (1)                       (2)                      (3)
                          Maternal                Mother started          Mother first-born
                       grandfather high           academic HS
                           school

 Basic Controls
 Teen Birth                 -0.145***                 -0.247***                  -0.031***
                             (0.002)                   (0.003)                    (0.002)
 R2                           0.028                     0.059                      0.049

 Add Sister FE
 Teen Birth                                           -0.092***                  -0.015***
                                                       (0.003)                    (0.003)
 R2                                                     0.611                      0.540
 N                           298418                    302834                     302834
Basic controls include indicators for mother’s year of birth and child gender.
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                              35
Table 3: Relationship between Paternal Characteristics and Teen Birth

                                 (1)                   (2)               (3)                  (4)                (5)
                               Paternal              Father             Father               Father         Father age at
                             grandfather             started           Cognitive             Height             birth
                             high school            academic            Score
                                                       HS

 Basic Controls
 Teen Birth                    -0.065***            -0.175***           -1.014***          -1.474***          -4.257***
                                (0.002)              (0.003)             (0.013)            (0.043)            (0.021)
 R2                              0.046                0.048               0.041              0.013              0.296

 Add Sister FE
 Teen Birth                     -0.007*             -0.058***           -0.465***          -0.813***          -2.587***
                                (0.003)              (0.004)             (0.017)            (0.062)            (0.033)
 R2                              0.521                0.542               0.560              0.493              0.689

 Add Sister FE and Maternal Control
 Teen Birth              -0.005                     -0.052***           -0.449***          -0.795***          -2.587***
                        (0.003)                      (0.004)             (0.018)            (0.062)            (0.033)
 R2                       0.521                       0.546               0.563              0.493              0.689


 N                              275235               302834              201692              226995            302834

Basic controls include indicator variables for child year of birth and child gender and are included in all regressions.
Maternal control is an indicator for whether the mother started academic high school at age 16.
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                        36
Table 4: Effect of Teen Birth on Child Outcomes (First-born Children)

                             (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)        (9)
                            Birth           Middle       Cognitive        Height        Years of      Finished         Log             Welfare    Child
                            Weight          School        Score                         School          High         earnings           use       teen
                                             GPA                                                       School         age 30                      birth

 Basic Controls
 Teen Birth                -34.622***      -0.523***      -0.670***      -1.225***     -1.276***      -0.153***      -0.105***     0.163***      0.069***
                             (3.198)        (0.009)        (0.024)        (0.086)       (0.018)        (0.003)        (0.007)      (0.003)       (0.004)
 R2                           0.012          0.105          0.026          0.007         0.068          0.030          0.058        0.069         0.054

 Add Sister FE
 Teen Birth                   -4.137       -0.150***      -0.247***      -0.624***     -0.490***      -0.062***      -0.043***     0.081***      0.033***
                             (4.367)        (0.013)        (0.034)        (0.118)       (0.026)        (0.004)        (0.010)      (0.004)       (0.006)
 R2                            0.535         0.641          0.579          0.575         0.575          0.513          0.505        0.543         0.522

 Add Sister FE and Maternal Characteristic
 Teen Birth           -3.349    -0.139***                 -0.226***      -0.610***     -0.473***      -0.060***      -0.042***     0.080***      0.033***
                     (4.370)     (0.013)                   (0.033)        (0.118)       (0.026)        (0.004)        (0.010)      (0.004)       (0.006)
 R2                    0.535      0.643                     0.582          0.575         0.577          0.514          0.505        0.543         0.522


 Delta (𝛽𝛽 = 0)              0.36            1.02            1.63           3.32         1.74           2.06           1.95             2.82      2.75
 N                          302201          87059           33461          38765        114981         150589         65598            131283    35654

Basic controls include indicator variables for child year of birth and child gender and are included in all regressions.
Maternal Characteristic consists of an indicator for whether the mother started academic high school at age 16.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Delta (𝛽𝛽 = 0) represents the ratio of selection on unobservables to selection on observables that is consistent with a zero effect.
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                        37
Table 5: Effect of Teen Birth on Resources and Investments

                         (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)
                    Log family           Log family           Log family          Log family            Smoked
                   earnings child       earnings child       earnings child        earnings              during
                       aged 1               aged 5              aged 10          child aged 15         pregnancy

 Basic Controls
 Teen Birth     -0.977***                  -0.644***            -0.480***           -0.362***           0.259***
                 (0.010)                    (0.008)              (0.006)             (0.006)            (0.044)
 R2               0.300                      0.268                0.208               0.147              0.013

 Add Sister FE
 Teen Birth           -0.676***            -0.392***            -0.267***           -0.181***           0.181***
                       (0.012)              (0.010)              (0.008)             (0.007)            (0.054)
 R2                     0.674                0.649                0.613               0.581              0.585

 Add Sister FE and Maternal Characteristic
 Teen Birth      -0.673***      -0.389***                       -0.264***           -0.177***            0.170**
                  (0.012)        (0.010)                         (0.008)             (0.007)             (0.053)
  2
 R                 0.674          0.649                           0.613               0.582               0.590

 N                     264411               275540               259802              223898              21341
Basic controls include indicator variables for child year of birth and child gender and are included in all regressions.
Maternal characteristic consists of an indicator for whether the mother started academic high school at age 16.
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                        38
Table 6A: Mechanisms: Father Characteristics and Family Resources as Mediating Variables
                   (1)          (2)               (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)                                      (7)         (8)          (9)
                  Birth   Middle School       Cognitive    Height     Schooling     Finished                                Log earnings   Welfare    Child teen
                Weight         GPA               Score                                HS                                      age 30        use         birth
 Sister FE and Maternal Characteristic
 Teen Birth      -0.486     -0.140***         -0.227***   -0.616***   -0.475***    -0.061***                                 -0.042***     0.080***    0.033***
                (4.515)      (0.013)            (0.033)    (0.118)     (0.026)      (0.004)                                   (0.010)      (0.004)     (0.006)
  2
 R               0.534        0.643              0.582      0.575       0.577        0.514                                     0.505        0.543       0.522
 Add Father Controls
 Teen Birth      6.776      -0.064***         -0.128***    -0.288*    -0.330***    -0.046***                                  -0.036**     0.066***    0.024***
                (4.826)      (0.013)            (0.035)    (0.117)     (0.027)      (0.005)                                    (0.011)     (0.005)     (0.006)
  2
 R               0.537        0.665              0.612      0.637       0.591        0.519                                      0.506       0.545       0.523
 Add Family Resources
 Teen Birth      8.336      -0.071***         -0.179***   -0.550***   -0.358***    -0.043***                                  -0.024*      0.061***    0.028***
                (4.563)      (0.013)            (0.034)    (0.119)     (0.026)      (0.004)                                   (0.010)      (0.004)     (0.006)
  2
 R               0.535        0.655              0.586      0.575       0.588        0.523                                     0.508        0.555       0.524
 Add Father Controls and Family Resources
 Teen Birth    12.695**       -0.025           -0.106**    -0.262*    -0.255***    -0.034***                                  -0.023*      0.052***    0.020***
                (4.850)      (0.013)            (0.035)    (0.117)     (0.027)      (0.005)                                   (0.011)      (0.005)     (0.006)
  2
 R               0.538        0.672              0.613      0.638       0.598        0.526                                     0.509        0.557       0.525
 GELBACH Decomposition: Total Change
                 13.18        0.115              0.122      0.351       0.220        0.027                                     0.019       -0.028      -0.013
 Contribution of Paternal Characteristics to Total Change
                  5.40        0.060              0.093      0.316       0.122        0.011                                     0.002       -0.010      -0.008
 Contribution of Family Resources to Total Change
                  7.78        0.055              0.029      0.034       0.098        0.015                                     0.017       -0.018      -0.004
 N              239975        87125              33475      38782      115032       150674                                     65623       131342      35662
All regressions include the basic controls, maternal grandparent fixed effects, and controls for maternal characteristic.
Only birth cohorts up to 2000 are included.
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                                                        39
Table 6B: Mechanisms: Father Characteristics as Mediating Variables, Stratified by Whether Father Married to Mother at Age 15

Panel A: Cases where fathers are not married to the mothers when the child is aged 15
                 (1)              (2)                (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)          (7)             (8)             (9)
                Birth      Middle School         Cognitive     Height Schooling Finished     Log earnings age     Welfare       Child teen
                Weight           GPA               Score                              HS            30             use            birth

 GELBACH Decomposition: Total Change
                 14.15         0.067               0.082       0.428        0.103   0.017          0.010           -0.015        -0.014
 Contribution of Paternal Characteristics to Total Change
                  7.60         0.040               0.077       0.410        0.061   0.010          0.006           -0.005        -0.011
 Contribution of Family Resources to Total Change
                  6.55         0.027               0.005       0.018        0.042   0.007          0.004           -0.009        -0.003
 N               55982         24326                5608       6798         20354   29808          9298            25030          6290


Panel B: Cases where fathers are married to the mothers when the child is aged 15

                 (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)      (5)       (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)
                Birth       Middle School       Cognitive      Height Schooling Finished     Log earnings age     Welfare       Child teen
                Weight          GPA              Score                             HS               30             use            birth

 GELBACH Decomposition: Total Change
                  4.92         0.093               0.113       0.245        0.172   0.013          0.010           -0.016        -0.014
 Contribution of Paternal Characteristics to Total Change
                  3.87         0.071               0.090       0.223        0.124   0.008          0.000           -0.011        -0.012
 Contribution of Family Resources to Total Change
                  1.04         0.022               0.022       0.022        0.048   0.005         0.010            -0.005        -0.003
 N              103324         30283               16026       18359        56994   71214         35134            63087         16649




                                                                       40
      Table 7: Exploring Heterogeneity in the Effects of Teen Childbearing on Child Outcomes by Maternal Grandfather Education (SES)

 Panel A: Teen Birth and Child Outcomes by Maternal Grandfather Education (SES)
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)                 (7)               (8)             (9)
                                              Middle
                              Birth                         Cognitive                                      Finished          Log earnings          Welfare        Child teen
                                              School                         Height       Schooling
                              Weight                         Score                                        High School          age 30               use             birth
                                               GPA
 Teen Birth                    14.421          -0.121        -0.219*          -0.244          -0.096          -0.013            -0.119***          0.083***        0.058***
                              (10.705)        (0.086)         (0.09)         (0.311)         (0.069)         (0.011)             (0.031)           (0.012)         (0.015)

 Teen
 Birth*Grandfather             -0.741        -0.090**        -0.196*         -0.229           -0.119          -0.009             -0.022            0.031**          -0.028
 High Education
                              (10.979)        (0.031)        (0.092)         (0.312)         (0.074)         (0.011)             (0.033)           (0.012)         (0.015)

 Teen Birth*(YOB-
                               -1.146            0            0.001          -0.028          -0.028***      -0.003***            0.007**               0            -0.002
 1966)
                              (0.602)         (0.003)        (0.006)         (0.022)         (0.005)         (0.001)             (0.002)           (0.001)         (0.001)

 N                            297798          86112           32820           38016          112697          147767              64207             128708           35004
 R2                            0.534          0.643           0.583           0.575           0.577           0.514              0.505              0.542           0.521

All regressions include the basic controls (indicator variables for child year of birth and child gender), maternal grandparent fixed effects, and controls for maternal
characteristic.
YOB relates to child year-of-birth.
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                                                        41
Panel B: Selection on Maternal and Paternal Characteristics by Maternal Grandfather Education (SES)
                              (1)              (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)                              (7)
                               Maternal Selection                                          Paternal Selection
                                                                Paternal                         Father
                       Mother started Mother first-                         Father started                                                     Father age at
                                                              grandfather                      Cognitive      Father Height
                        academic HS           born                          academic HS                                                            birth
                                                              high school                        Score
                                  ***              ***                                ***
Teen Birth                 -0.085          -0.056                0.004        -0.065           -0.217***        -0.909***                       -0.815***
                            (0.007)         (0.007)             (0.008)         (0.01)           (0.05)          (0.174)                         (0.078)

Teen
Birth*Grandfather                   -0.012              0.018                  -0.021*            -0.037***              -0.145**    -0.133      -0.169*
High Education
                                   (0.009)             (0.009)                 (0.009)             (0.01)                (0.044)     (0.152)     (0.085)

Teen Birth*(MYOB-
                                    0.000             0.003***                  0.000              0.001*                -0.011***   0.007      -0.107***
1949)
                                   (0.000)             (0.000)                 (0.000)             (0.001)               (0.003)     (0.009)     (0.004)

N                                  298418              298418                  271405              298418                199578      224501      298418
R2                                  0.611               0.54                    0.521               0.546                 0.562       0.493       0.69
All regressions include indicators for mother’s year of birth and child gender and maternal grandparent fixed effects.
MYOB refers to the year of birth of the mother.
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                      42
Appendix Table 1: Effect of Teen Birth on Child Outcomes (First-born Children)
Results when teen pregnancies excluded if they are not for the youngest sister

                             (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)       (8)         (9)
                            Birth           Middle       Cognitive        Height        Years of      Finished         Log       Welfare     Child
                            Weight          School        Score                         School          High         earnings     use        teen
                                             GPA                                                       School         age 30                 birth

 Basic Controls
 Teen Birth                -39.366***      -0.551***      -0.737***      -1.253***     -1.396***      -0.169***      -0.113***   0.177***   0.078***
                             (4.122)        (0.011)        (0.030)        (0.108)       (0.022)        (0.004)        (0.008)    (0.004)    (0.005)
 R2                           0.012          0.100          0.026          0.006         0.067          0.030          0.054      0.067      0.058

 Add Sister FE
 Teen Birth                   2.491        -0.194***      -0.278***      -0.530**      -0.619***      -0.077***      -0.042**    0.088***   0.045***
                             (6.320)        (0.016)        (0.047)        (0.167)       (0.036)        (0.006)        (0.014)    (0.006)    (0.008)
 R2                           0.541          0.638          0.581          0.578         0.582          0.521          0.509      0.550      0.529

 Add Sister FE and Maternal Characteristic
 Teen Birth           3.604     -0.179***                 -0.251***      -0.515**      -0.599***      -0.075***      -0.041**    0.088***   0.044***
                     (6.324)     (0.016)                   (0.047)        (0.167)       (0.036)        (0.006)        (0.014)    (0.006)    (0.008)
  2
 R                    0.541       0.641                     0.585          0.578         0.585          0.522          0.509      0.550      0.529


 N                          269435          83115           27563          31937         95282         127277         52776      109495     29235

Basic controls include indicator variables for child year of birth and child gender and are included in all regressions.
Maternal Characteristic consists of an indicator for whether the mother started academic high school at age 16.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                        43
Appendix Table 2: Effect of Teen Birth on Child Outcomes (First-born Children): Using More Detailed Age Categories (Basic Controls)

                               (1)              (2)                 (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)         (9)
 Age of Mother at             Birth        Middle School         Cognitive     Height     Schooling   Finished High   Log earnings   Welfare    Child teen
 Child Birth:               Weight             GPA                 Score                                 School         age 30         use         birth
 15-17                     -47.952***        -0.622***           -0.838***    -1.459***   -1.575***     -0.195***      -0.140***     0.232***    0.127***
                             (6.014)          (0.021)             (0.044)      (0.151)     (0.031)       (0.006)        (0.012)      (0.006)     (0.009)

 18-19                     -30.927***         -0.502***          -0.621***    -1.156***   -1.187***     -0.141***       -0.095***    0.143***    0.052***
                             (3.466)           (0.010)            (0.026)      (0.094)     (0.020)       (0.003)         (0.008)     (0.003)     (0.004)

 N                           302201            87059               33461       38765       114981        150589          65598       131283       35654
 R2                           0.012            0.105               0.027       0.007        0.069         0.031          0.058        0.071       0.058
Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

Effect of Teen Birth on Child Outcomes (First-born Children): Using More Detailed Age Categories (omitted category is 20-24)
Sister FE with additional maternal characteristic as control

                                (1)             (2)                  (3)        (4)          (5)            (6)            (7)          (8)         (9)
 Age of Mother at              Birth       Middle School          Cognitive    Height     Schooling   Finished High   Log earnings   Welfare    Child teen
 Child Birth:                 Weight           GPA                  Score                                School          age 30        use         birth
 15-17                        -7.620         -0.190***            -0.353***   -0.462*     -0.560***     -0.079***       -0.048**     0.113***    0.078***
                              (7.939)         (0.027)              (0.061)    (0.208)      (0.043)       (0.008)        (0.018)      (0.008)     (0.011)

 18-19                        -2.274           -0.129***          -0.194***   -0.649***   -0.451***     -0.056***      -0.040***     0.072***    0.022***
                              (4.647)           (0.014)            (0.035)     (0.125)     (0.027)       (0.005)        (0.011)      (0.005)     (0.006)

 N                            302201            87059               33461      38765       114981        150589          65598       131283      35654
 R2                            0.535            0.643               0.582      0.575        0.577         0.514          0.505        0.543      0.523
Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                   44
Appendix Table 3: Effect of Teen Birth on Marital Status and Completed Family Size

Basic Controls
                             (1)                    (2)                     (3)             (4)             (5)
                     Married when              Married when            Married when    Married when   Completed Family
                     Child is 1                 Child is 5              Child is 10     Child is 15         Size
 Teen Birth              -0.294***              -0.229***                -0.185***       -0.149***       0.232***
                          (0.002)                (0.003)                  (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.007)
 N                        301354                 299546                   276030          235354          213163
 R2                        0.145                  0.086                    0.054           0.038           0.056

Add Fixed Effects
                            (1)                     (2)                     (3)             (4)             (5)
                       Married when            Married when            Married when    Married when   Completed Family
                        Child is 1              Child is 5              Child is 10     Child is 15         Size
 Teen Birth             -0.168***               -0.130***                -0.103***       -0.074***       0.179***
                         (0.003)                 (0.004)                  (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.009)
 N                       301354                  299546                   276030          235354          213163
 R2                       0.637                   0.584                    0.552           0.533           0.560

Add Sister FE and Maternal Characteristic
                        (1)                  (2)                            (3)             (4)             (5)
                   Married when         Married when                   Married when    Married when   Completed Family
                     Child is 1           Child is 5                    Child is 10     Child is 15         Size
 Teen Birth          -0.167***            -0.130***                      -0.103***       -0.074***       0.180***
                      (0.003)              (0.004)                        (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.009)
 N                    301354               299546                         276030          235354          213163
 R2                    0.637                0.584                          0.552           0.533           0.560
Sample is restricted to women born by 1970 when studying completed family size.
Standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                  45
