                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                EXPENDITURE VISIBILITY AND CONSUMER BEHAVIOR:
                                NEW EVIDENCE

                                          Ori Heffetz

                                      Working Paper 25161
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25161


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2018




I thank participants in the Cornell Behavioral/Experimental Economics Lab Meetings for useful
early feedback and ideas, Cornell’s Survey Research Institute for conducting the telephone
survey, Nadia Streletskaya and Lin Xu for programming the web survey, Inbal Dekel, Matan
Gibson, Ofer Glicksohn, Guy Ishai, and Daniel Reeves for providing excellent research
assistance, and Eve Sihra and conference/seminar participants at the Princeton Workshop on
Public Economics, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, Bar-Ilan U, Ben-Gurion U, and
UC Berkeley for helpful comments. This research project was supported by the Israel Science
Foundation (grant no. 1680/16), and by the S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ori Heffetz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Expenditure Visibility and Consumer Behavior: New Evidence
Ori Heffetz
NBER Working Paper No. 25161
October 2018
JEL No. D12,D83,D91,Z13

                                         ABSTRACT

Expenditure visibility—the extent to which a household’s spending on a consumption category is
noticeable to others—is measured in three new surveys, with ~3,000 telephone and online
respondents. Visibility shows little change across time (ten years) and survey methods. Four
different notions, or dimensions, of visibility are measured: the noticeability of above-average
spending on a category; that of below-average spending; and the positivity/negativity of
impressions made by above- and below-average spending. Jointly, these visibility measures
explain up to three quarters or more of the observed variation in total-expenditure elasticities
across consumption categories in U.S. data. Possible theoretical explanations are explored.


Ori Heffetz
S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
324 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
oh33@cornell.edu
1       Introduction
The sociocultural visibility of consumer expenditures has for centuries been considered an
important determinant of consumer behavior.1 Intuitively, one’s costly diamond is more
conspicuous to others than one’s costly life-insurance policy—a difference that could explain
differences in demand patterns across the two commodities. The theoretical implications of
this intuition have been investigated in modern consumer-choice theory (e.g., Frank 1985,
Ng 1987, Ireland 1994). Empirical applications, however, require substituting intuition with
more systematic data that would place different expenditures on a quantitative visibility
scale. A diamond and an insurance policy may be easy to place, somewhere close to extreme
visibility and non-visibility, respectively; but how visible are expenditures on housing, health,
education, or charity? And how stable are measures of their visibility—do they change over
time, across survey methods, or across visibility-definition variations? Most importantly,
how much does it all matter for explaining household expenditure patterns? Relevant data
for answering these questions have only recently started to be collected. As discussed shortly,
while researcher demand is rising, supply is still limited.
    This paper’s contribution is twofold: it collects new data to help address the data gap; and
it applies its new data to help explain household consumption behavior. Its first part intro-
duces three new visibility surveys, conducted in 2014–2015 among ∼3,000 U.S. respondents.
They replicate existing visibility measures and, more importantly, generate new measures
that are readily applicable in empirical work. The paper’s second part imports these new
measures into an existing application, and finds that they dramatically increase our power
to explain observed cross-commodity variation in total-expenditure elasticities.
    Table 1’s top panel summarizes published efforts to date to measure expenditure visibility
with surveys. The earliest (from the mid-1990s) is an informal survey of twenty female
students, measuring the social visibility of four cosmetics products (Chao and Schor 1998).
It was followed in 2004 by a random-digit-dialing (RDD) telephone survey of 480 adults
in the continental U.S. (Heffetz 2011). This 2004 survey was the first generally applicable,
    1
     Smith, Marx, Veblen, Duesenberry, and many others wrote famous passages or entire books on social
comparisons and signaling, in the specific context of consumer expenditures. Social comparisons/signaling
more generally, as well as public display vs. private behavior, pride vs. modesty (or shame), and appearance
vs. truth, feature heavily in the writings of much earlier authors, such as Plato.


                                                     2
national visibility survey; it asked respondents how quickly they would notice a newly met
person’s above-average expenditures on each of 31 consumption categories that together cover
virtually the entire basket of U.S. household expenditures in the Bureau of Labor Statistics’s
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). Several later surveys were conducted online, using
convenience samples of students. They include a 2007 survey inspired by the 2004 survey,
asking 320 students a similar question about above-average expenditures, but replacing speed
of noticing with closeness of interaction, and reclassifying the 31 CEX categories into 18
(Charles et al. 2009); a 2010 replication in India of the 2007 survey, asking 163 students
regarding 20 categories from the India Human Development Survey (IHDS; Khamis et al.
2012); and a 2011 survey of 108 students in Germany, asking which of a collection of 16
items are easily observable (Hillesheim and Mechtel 2013).

                                     Table 1: Visibility Surveys


Year     Described in                      N     Sample                     Mode         Expendituresa
≤1996    Chao & Schor (1998)               20    Female Harvard students    Informal      4 Cosmetics
2004/5   Heffetz (2011)                   480    RDD Cont. U.S. (18+)       Telephone    31 CEX
2007     Charles et al. (2009)            320    UChicago grad students     Online       18 CEX
2010     Khamis et al. (2012)             163    Delhi Sc. Econ. students   Online       20 IHDS
2011     Hillesheim & Mechtel (2013)      108    U of Tübingen students    Online       16 Various
2014     )                                500    RDD Cont. U.S. (18+)       Telephone    o
                                                                                           31 CEX
2014       This paper                   1,079b   o                          o
                                                   ClearVoice U.S. (18+)      Online
2015                                    1,426c                                           17 Clothing CEX
   a
     Cosmetics: lipstick, mascara, eyeshadow, and facial cleanser. CEX: broad categories from the U.S.
Consumer Expenditure Survey. IHDS: broad categories from the India Human Development Survey. Various:
a mix of expenditures, income, vacation/leisure time, and personal characteristics (e.g., attractiveness).
Clothing CEX: clothing-only expenditure subcategories in the CEX.
   b
     Four different visibility treatments, between-subjects design.
   c
     Two different visibility treatments, between-subjects design.


   These surveys were motivated by research questions closely related to Veblen’s (1899)
idea that the rich advertise their wealth by conspicuously consuming more than others.
They therefore focus on measuring a specific notion of visibility: the noticeability of larger-
than-average spending. But the measures they provide have been used in a broader set
of subsequent empirical applications. The 2004 and 2007 U.S./CEX visibility measures
have been used, for example, to assess whether consumption utility is relative vs. absolute
(Kamakura and Du 2012); to investigate the importance of conspicuous consumption under


                                                    3
alternative political regimes (East vs. West Germany after reunification, Friehe and Mechtel
2014); to investigate the links from inequality in visible expenditure to violent crime (Hicks
and Hicks 2014), and from property crime to distortions in conspicuous- vs. inconspicuous-
consumption allocation decisions (Mejı́a and Restrepo 2016); to assess the hypothesis of
“trickle-down consumption,” i.e., that rising income and consumption among high-income
households since the early 1980s have induced lower-income households to consume a larger
share of their income (Bertrand and Morse 2016); and to distinguish between alternative
mechanisms that may drive consumption network/peer effects (De Giorgi, Frederiksen, and
Pistaferri 2016). These U.S. visibility measures have in addition been used in other recent
applications in more limited ways, e.g., to classify particular expenditures as high- or low-
visibility. For example, Cosaert (2018) estimates the diamondness (Ng 1987) of more and
less visible goods. Finally, the 2010 India/IHDS measure is starting to be used as well (e.g.,
Jaikumar and Sarin 2015, Bellet and Sihra 2018).
   Table 1’s bottom panel lists the three new U.S. visibility surveys introduced in this
paper’s first part. We provide full details in section 2. The first new survey is a 2014
national telephone survey that replicates the 2004 survey, resulting in a second comparable
datapoint, ten years apart. It thus provides evidence on the stability of the original survery-
based visibility measure and, therefore, on the robustness of findings across the above range
of applications that use the original 2004 measure. The second and third are new web surveys
conducted in 2014 and 2015, respectively. Relative to the first 2014 survey, they vary the
interview mode—online vs. telephone—and the national survey sample type—convenience
vs. RDD. Relative to each other, they vary the set of expenditures and its granularity, using
the original 31 broad CEX categories (in 2014) vs. a new set of 17 clothing-only subcategories
(in 2015).
   Most importantly, the new online surveys vary the visibility question itself, including four
(in 2014) and two (in 2015) different question variants, aimed to measure different notions of
visibility. Therefore, in addition to providing evidence on the sensitivity of visibility measures
to underlying survey-implementation details, these new surveys generate measures of notions
of visibility that have not been previously measured. The new measures are designed to be
both compatible with past applications and readily applicable in future ones.


                                                4
    Section 3 analyzes the data from the new surveys. Three main findings are highlighted,
along with their implications for empirical research. First, using the original 2004 visibil-
ity question, we record remarkable stability in results across the 2004 and 2014 telephone
surveys (correlation = 0.99 across the two benchmark visibility measures; N = 31 expen-
ditures). Such stability, ten years and many technology-based sociocultural developments
apart, suggests that the empirical work above that uses visibility measures is on rather sta-
ble grounds. In particular, it allays potential concerns regarding those of the papers (e.g.,
Bertrand and Morse, 2016) that match 2004 visibility data with expenditure data dating
back to 1980, i.e., almost a quarter-century earlier.
    Second, we similarly record stability across the two telephone surveys and the 2014 online
survey (correlation = 0.97 across either the 2004 or 2014 telephone visibility measure and
the online measure). Overall, these two findings suggest that the original visibility question
captures a stable property of expenditures, that has not recently changed much across time
(10 years) and technology, and that appears largely invariant to interview mode and survey
sample. This in turn opens the door for data-collection efforts to measure new notions of
visibility and track them over time; such efforts need be neither frequent nor expensive.2
    The third finding, and the main contribution of this paper’s first part (i.e., the data part),
relates to such new notions of visibility that the 2014–2015 online surveys measure for the first
time. They expand the main visibility notion that has been measured and used to date—an
upward noticeability notion, based on a question about the noticeability of more-than-average
expenditures, referred to below as a Notice More (NM) question.3 The new notions are
based on a question about the noticeability of less-than-average expenditures (Notice Less,
NL), measuring downward noticeability; and two questions about the positivity/negativity of
impressions made by more- and less-than-average expenditures, conditional on their being
noticed (Impressions More and Less, IM and IL).
    The 2014 online survey thus has a 2×2 between-subjects design, yielding four visibility
measures: NM, NL, IM, and IL; the 2015 clothing-only survey focuses on NM and NL. The
   2
     The cost per respondent in the 2014 national RDD telephone survey was roughly twenty times higher
than that in the 2014 online survey. Such a cost multiple appears typical.
   3
     Versions of such an NM question are used in the 2004, 2007, and 2010 surveys in table 1’s top panel
(and in all the new surveys in its bottom panel). For the different versions’ wordings, see subsection 2.1.2.




                                                     5
new measures are motivated by the idea that spending more vs. less than average on a com-
modity may be differently noticeable and may make different impressions conditionally on
being noticed. Indeed, unlike the first two findings above—of close to perfect correlations
(0.97–0.99) across replications of the NM question that differ in survey mode, sample, and
decade—the correlations across the four randomly assigned treatments within the same 2014
survey are lower, varying in absolute value from 0.42 to 0.92. The lower correlations, and
a qualitative expenditure-by-expenditure assessment of the four measures (in section 3.2),
suggest that the new questions do capture distinct notions, or aspects, of visibility, not pre-
viously measured. This in turn raises the possibility that models and empirical applications
of consumer behavior that incorporate visibility but only consider NM visibility may miss
an important part of the story. This possibility is investigated next, in the context of one
application.
    The paper’s second part demonstrates that the new visibility measures can substantially
increase the explained portion of cross-expenditure variation in demand patterns.4 It focuses
on the empirical attempt to explain cross-expenditure variation in Engel curves—specifically,
in income elasticities—with measurable properties of expenditures. In their “Retrospectives:
Engel Curves,” Chai and Moneta (2010) observe that such an explanation has not yet been
offered, and comment: “it may be tempting to conclude, as Houthakker (1967 [1992]) did,
that any proper explanation of variation observed in Engel curves requires researchers to go
‘far outside economics.’” However, as mentioned in the opening paragraph above, economic
models have incorporated a broader set of topics since Houthakker’s pessimistic prediction
half a century ago. A Stone-Geary application of Ireland’s (1994) conspicuous consumption
model, for example, endogenously predicts income elasticity to be higher if a good is visible
and lower if it is not—as shown in Heffetz (2011), where it is also shown empirically that
income elasticities can indeed be predicted from NM visibility.
    Section 4 demonstrates the value for empirical research of the new visibility measures by
revisiting that application (for which the 2004 visibility survey was originally conducted).
The original main finding was that weighted univariate OLS regressions of the total-expenditure
   4
     As discussed shortly, “explained portion” here refers to R2 in a linear regression. No causality inferences
are implied. Indeed, the possibility of reverse causality is explored formally in section 5.




                                                       6
elasticities of 29 expenditure categories on their NM visibility measure result in large co-
efficients and, importantly, high R2 ’s. A benchmark whole-population specification had
R2 = 0.18, meaning that one-sixth to one-fifth of the cross-expenditure variation in elastici-
ties was explained by the 2004 NM visibility measure alone (the top three income quintiles
had R2 ’s in the range 0.19–0.32). Section 4 first replaces the original 2004 (telephone) NM
measure with the 2014 (online) NM measure, and the original CEX expenditure data with
updated expenditure data on 31 categories, and essentially replicates the original findings
(R2 = 0.17; top quintiles’ R2 = 0.19–0.28). It then adds the new NL, IM, and IL measures
as additional (or alternative) regressors.
    Section 4’s main finding is that in multivariate regressions on more than one visibil-
ity measure, explanatory power increases dramatically.       With two regressors—NM and
NL, or NM and IM—R2 = 0.43–0.59 (top two quintiles: 0.55–0.68); with all four regres-
sors, R2 = 0.73 (0.80–0.81). Moreover, the coefficient estimates suggest that the differ-
ence NM−NL strongly predicts elasticities. We argue that this difference (between upward
and downward noticeability) may capture noticeability’s discretionary, or active component.
The replicability and robustness of these findings are demonstrated using CEX data on 17
clothing-only subcategories and the new 2015 NM and NL clothing-only visibility measures.
    Section 5 presents two stylized formal examples that explore the potential role of causal-
ity in these NM−NL findings. The examples offer potential explanations in both directions:
from visibility to high elasticity—with an alternative to Ireland’s model (since it cannot
accommodate the difference between upward and downward visibility)—and from high elas-
ticity to visibility—i.e., a reverse-causality interpretation. They are used to interpret the
empirical findings, and to conclude that while strong visibility-elasticity associations are a
robust empirical fact, its underlying mechanism remains an open question for future research.
    Section 6 concludes.



2     Three New Visibility Surveys: Design
This paper’s new visibility surveys share the common structure of past surveys. It is based on
two components: a list of expenditure categories, and a visibility question. Each respondent


                                              7
answers the visibility question repeatedly, each time for a different expenditure category
from the list, until the list is exhausted.


2.1     2014 Telephone and Online Surveys

As the bottom panel of table 1 shows, this paper’s two new 2014 surveys differ in interview
mode and survey sample. However, they are identical in the list of 31 expenditures they
ask about, and they share a similar NM (Notice More) visibility question, which they also
share with the original 2004 survey. In addition, the 2014 online survey includes three new
visibility questions. We now discuss these survey-design details.


2.1.1   31 Expenditure Categories

Table 2 lists the 31 expenditure categories that respondents are asked about in the 2014
telephone and online surveys. The list is identical to the original 2004 list in all but two
categories: Ot1 and Ot2 (rows 28 and 29); for these, the table also lists the two original 2004
categories, for comparison. The 2004 list was based on Harris and Sabelhaus’s (2005) list
of consumption categories, that was designed to cover virtually all expenditures in the raw
CEX (Interview Survey) data.
   Appendix A.1 provides detail regarding the construction of the 2014 category list from
the 2004 list. Here we note, first, that as with the original 2004 list, the order of words
in each category’s description reflects the relative empirical importance (in the CEX data)
of the items within that category. Second, we note that although the decade that followed
2004 saw many newly available goods and services replace older ones within many of the
31 categories, all but two of the original category descriptions are sufficiently broad to be
unaffected. The two exceptions underwent only minuscule modifications, related to specific
technologies mentioned in their descriptions (e.g., CDs, internet).


2.1.2   Notice More (NM) Question

Figure 1 reproduces a screenshot of the 2014 online survey’s Notice More (NM) question.
It is identical to the question in the 2014 telephone survey, which in turn is identical to



                                              8
                    Table 2: Expenditure Categories in 2014 Surveys


1.  FdH            food and nonalcoholic beverages at grocery, specialty and convenience stores.
2.  FdO            dining out at restaurants, drive-thrus, etc, excl. alcohol; incl. food at school.
3.  Cig            tobacco products like cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco.
4.  AlH            alcoholic beverages for home use.
5.  AlO            alcoholic beverages at restaurants, bars, cafeterias, cafes, etc.
6.  Clo            clothing and shoes, not including underwear, undergarments, and nightwear.
7.  Und            underwear, undergarments, nightwear and sleeping garments.
8.  Lry            laundry and dry cleaning.
9.  Jwl            jewelry and watches.
10. Brb            barbershops, beauty parlors, hair dressers, health clubs, etc.
11. Hom            rent, or mortgage, or purchase, of their housing.
12. Htl            lodging away from home on trips, and housing for someone away at school.
13. Fur            home furnishings and household items, like furniture, appliances, tools, linen.
14. Utl            home utilities such as electricity, gas, and water; garbage collection.
15. Tel            home telephone services, not including mobile phones.
16. Cel            mobile phone services.
17. HIn            homeowners insurance, fire insurance, and property insurance.
18. Med            medical care, incl. health insurance, drugs, dentists, doctors, hospitals, etc.
19. Fee            legal fees, accounting fees, and occupational expenses like tools and licenses.
20. LIn            life insurance, endowment, annuities, and other death-benefits insurance.
21. Car            the purchase of new and used motor vehicles such as cars, trucks, and vans.
22. CMn            vehicle maintenance, mechanical and electrical repair and replacement.
23. Gas            gasoline and diesel fuel for motor vehicles.
24. CIn            vehicle insurance, like insurance for cars, trucks, and vans.
25. Bus            public transportation, both local and long distance, like busses and trains.
26. Air            airline fares for out-of-town trips.
27. Bks            books incl. school books, newspapers and magazines, toys, games, and hobbies.
28. Ot1            computers, TVs, visual, audio, musical and sports equipment, music, games, etc.
    (Ot1 in 2004   computers, games, TVs, video, audio, musical and sports equipment, tapes, CDs.)
29. Ot2            cable TV, internet, pets and veterinarians, sports, country clubs, movies, concerts.
    (Ot2 in 2004   cable TV, pets and veterinarians, sports, country clubs, movies, and concerts.)
30. Edu            education, from nursery to college, like tuition and other school expenses.
31. Cha            contributions to churches or other religious organizations, and other charities.




                                                 9
that in the original 2004 telephone survey. While the language surrounding its response
options is slightly adjusted to improve on-screen readability in the online version, the five
response options themselves do not change.5 In all surveys, respondents answer this question
31 times, each time with one of the 31 expenditure categories from table 2 appearing where
the category “jewelry and watches” appears in figure 1. The order of the 31 categories is
randomized for each respondent.
    The question asks respondents regarding quickness of noticing an above-average expen-
diture of a newly met person who lives in a household similar to the respondent’s. The focus
on a similar-household person is motivated by both relevance and practicality: social (non-
family) interactions often involve people of roughly similar neighborhood, age, education,
income, household composition, etc., and it makes little sense to ask, e.g., a young, urban,
unmarried male about the expenditures of a retired rural couple (for further discussion and
a formal model, see Heffetz 2012, section 3.2). Importantly, the question conveys that the
reason for said above-average expenditure is tastes rather than needs: “they like to, and do,
spend more.” In effect, respondents are asked to imagine a tastes-driven exogenous shock
to a typical similar household’s expenditure. This is important because some expenditures
(e.g., medical care) could be above average due to a need (e.g., deteriorating health), in which
case they may be noticed quickly due to the noticeability of the circumstances rather than
that of the expenditure itself. The question’s wording aims to mitigate this potential issue.
   5
       Specifically, the original response options were read as a follow-up question by the telephone interviewer:
        “Would you notice it almost immediately upon meeting them for the first time, a short while
        after, a while after, only a long while after, or never?”
As figure 1 shows, the online response options start with the self-statement “I would notice it. . . ” and
contain slightly more repetition. The only purpose of this adjustment is to make the question as clear as
possible in the online version where—in contrast with the telephone version—respondents do not have a
chance to ask an interviewer for clarification.
   For completeness and comparison, we also reproduce here the wording in the other U.S./CEX survey listed
in table 1’s top panel, namely the 2007 survey (Charles et al. 2009, robustness appendix):
        “Consider a person who lives in a household and community roughly similar to yours. How
        closely would you have to interact with this person in order to observe that they consistently
        spend more than average on each of the following categories?”
Response options in that survey “ranged from 1 (indicating that higher than average spending could be
observed if the respondent did not interact socially with the person at all) to 5 (indicating that spending
would never be observed).”
  Finally, the wording in the 2010 survey that was conducted in India (Khamis et al., 2012; see table 1)
combines elements from both the 2004 and 2007 surveys.



                                                        10
                   Figure 1: 2014 Online Survey, Notice More (NM) Question




2.1.3     Notice Less (NL), Impressions More (IM), and Impressions Less (IL)

Unlike the 2004 and 2014 telephone surveys, which include only the above Notice More (NM)
question, the 2014 online survey includes three additional question versions:

 Notice Less (NL): identical to the NM version in figure 1, except for one word; “more”
        (third line, first word) is replaced with “less.” This version therefore asks how quickly
        one would notice spending less than average on a category.

 Impressions More (IM): see figure 2 for a screenshot. The first two sentences are identical
        to those in the NM version, and the rest of the question is modified. Instead of asking
        respondents how quickly they would notice an above-average expenditure, respondents
        are asked whether and how their views/impressions would be affected conditionally on
        noticing it.

 Impressions Less (IL): identical to the IM version in figure 2, except for one word; “more”
        (third line, first word) is replaced with “less.” This version therefore asks whether and


                                                11
     how one’s impressions would be affected by noticing spending less than average on a
     category.


              Figure 2: 2014 Online Survey, Impressions More (IM) Question




   The 2014 online survey thus has a 2×2 between-subjects design: each respondent is
randomly assigned to one of the four versions [Impressions vs. Notice]×[More vs. Less].
They then answer their assigned question version for each of the 31 expenditure categories
(randomly ordered).
   The discussion above regarding the wording of the NM question can now be generalized.
The phrase “they like to, and do” remains unchanged in all four versions, conveying a
shock to tastes rather than to needs. This becomes even more important for the NL than
for the NM question, as spending less than average on an expenditure could simply result
from a lower-than-average budget (which, again, may itself be visible, e.g., due to visible
circumstances). Furthermore, when asking about respondents’ impressions of someone who
spends more/less than average on a category (IM and IL), it is important to clarify that the
spender is driven by tastes rather than needs.


                                            12
2.2     2015 Online Clothing-Only Survey

Clothing as an expenditure category plays a central role in socioculturally-related consump-
tion. Constantly changing social and cultural conventions prescribe different clothing for
different circumstances, depending on occasion, event, date, social position, professional
role, gender, age, culture, and place. As fashions change, what was acceptable yesterday
may be (socioculturally) unwearable today. Beyond its sociocultural role, however, clothing
is a relatively homogenous expenditure category in terms of its production processes and
materials, durability, availability to consumers, and its main (non-sociocultural) purpose,
i.e., covering and protecting the wearer’s body. At the same time, expenditures on different
clothing subcategories are not all equally noticeable and are therefore not all equally subject
to sociocultural considerations.
    Of the 31 expenditure categories in table 2, two cover clothing. Together, the two ag-
gregate data on more than 70 individual CEX expenditure items. Table 3 presents a finer
reclassification of these items into 17 clothing-only subcategories.6 The third new survey
introduced in this paper (see table 1’s bottom row) repeats the 2014 online survey’s NM and
NL treatments, but uses these 17 clothing-only subcategories (randomly ordered). The clas-
sification into these subcategories (in table 3) reflects an attempt to balance two opposing
considerations: on the one hand, an aspiration to classify into a separate subcategory any
item that may differ in visibility from other items; on the other hand, a need to avoid sub-
categories that are so specific that few households in the CEX data spend positive amounts
on them.7
   6
      The two clothing categories in table 2 are Clo (row 6, “clothing and shoes, not including underwear,
undergarments, and nightwear”) and Und (row 7, “underwear, undergarments, nightwear and sleeping gar-
ments”). The seventeen subcategories in table 3 include fourteen that disaggregate Clo, plus the following
three that disaggregate Und: nightwear (Nwr, row 8), socks (Soc, row 15), and underwear (Uwr, row 17).
    7
      The clothing-only survey does not include IM and IL treatments. This design decision, namely, to refrain
from asking about positive/negative impressions in the clothing context, aims to avoid unintentionally making
respondents feel uncomfortable. For example, it aims to avoid asking about impressions related to noticing
that someone spent more or less on clothing subcategories explicitly assigned to men, women, boys, girls,
or infants, as such impression questions may have unintended connotations. (Sex/age-based subcategories
constitute more than half of the 17 subcategories in table 3, as it seemed plausible at the survey-design stage
that they may have different visibility levels.)




                                                      13
              Table 3: Clothing-Only Expenditure Subcategories in 2015 Survey


 1.      Acc          clothing accessories like belts, purses, scarves, hats, EXCLUDING jewelry/shoes.
 2.      Sts          suits, sport coats, and tailored jackets (for men and women).
 3.      Boy          boys’ clothes like pants, shorts, shirts, and sweaters, EXCLUDING shoes.
 4.      Grl          girls’ clothes like shirts, pants, shorts, dresses, and skirts, EXCLUDING shoes.
 5.      Men          men’s clothes like pants, shorts, shirts, sweaters and vests, EXCLUDING shoes.
 6.      Wmn          women’s clothes like pants, shorts, dresses, shirts, and sweaters, EXCL. shoes.
 7.      Inf          infants’ diapers and clothes, including outerwear, accessories, and footwear.
 8.      Nwr          nightwear such as pajamas and robes.
 9.      Oth          sewing/quilting materials, luggage, luggage carriers, wigs, and hairpieces.
 10.     Owr          outerwear like coats, jackets and furs.
 11.     ShB          boys’ shoes.
 12.     ShG          girls’ shoes.
 13.     ShM          men’s shoes.
 14.     ShW          women’s shoes.
 15.     Soc          socks, stockings and hose (for men and women).
 16.     Spo          athletic clothing like swimsuits, warm-up suits, and uniforms, EXCLUDING shoes.
 17.     Uwr          underwear and undergarments, EXCLUDING socks.



3       New Visibility Measures: Results
The 2014 telephone survey was conducted by the Survey Research Institute (SRI) at Cornell
University from May 3 to 29, 2014. The phone sample, provided to SRI by Marketing
Systems Group, is a random-digit-dial (RDD) list of cellphone and landline numbers drawn
from the continental United States. 500 adult respondents (18+) were interviewed; response
rate = 15%.8 The demographic composition of respondents appears generally similar (in first
moments) to that of the Census population, but black, Hispanic, and Western-U.S. residents
are underrepresented, while higher-education, higher-income, and Northeastern residents are
overrepresented (appendix table A.1). Median interview time was 11 minutes.
    The 2014 and 2015 online surveys were conducted on Qualtrics from June 11 to 23,
2014 and from July 7 to 11, 2015, respectively. Respondents were recruited by ClearVoice
Research, targeting the U.S. adult population. 1,079 and 1,426 respondents completed the
surveys.9 The two samples, while not random, appear generally similar to the Census pop-
    8
       This calculation of response rate corresponds with the American Association of Public Opinion Re-
search Response Rates #3 and #4 (AAPOR, 2016). (The two response-rate definitions differ in how partial
interviews are treated, but the 2014 survey had no partial interviews.) Since telephone-survey respondents
self-select into participation, a low-response-rate sample should not be thought of as “representative.”
     9
       The 1,079 2014 web respondents were randomly assigned into the four visibility-question treatments



                                                   14
ulation on demographics, but in the 2014 survey black respondents are underrepresented
while Hispanic and high-education respondents are overrepresented (appendix table A.2),
and in the 2015 survey black and Hispanic respondents are underrepresented while married,
high-education, high-income, and Northeastern respondents are overrepresented (table A.3).
Median survey-completion times were 8 minutes in 2014 (31 categories) and 5 minutes in
2015 (17 clothing-only subcategories).
    Figures 3 and 4 compare visibility measures across surveys and treatments. All measures
are constructed the way the original 2004 measure was: the five response options (in figures 1
and 2 and in footnote 5) are coded 0 (bottom response), 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1 (top response);
the coded responses are then averaged to create a visibility score for each expenditure cate-
gory, across all respondents in a given survey/treatment. Appendix tables A.5–A.11 report
all averaged scores, their standard errors (SE), and the category rankings they imply, for
each of the seven new visibility measures reported in this paper.10 The centers of the gray
capped crosses in figures 3 and 4 represent these scores, and the caps represent their SEs,
for a pair of surveys/treatments (one per axis) in each graph. 3-letter expenditure labels are
taken from tables 2 and 3 above. Dashed lines show 45◦ lines, and solid lines show SD lines.


3.1     Notice-More Scores Across Time, Mode, and Sample

We start with the graph at the top left of figure 3. It compares the NM visibility scores from
the 2004 (horizontal axis) and 2014 (vertical axis) telephone surveys. The 31 capped crosses
effectively lie on the SD line, which itself is slightly flatter than the 45◦ line, suggesting
that the 2014 scores essentially replicate the 2004 scores, but show slightly smaller cross-
expenditure variance (perhaps due to slightly noisier responses).
as follows: NM = 277 respondents, NL = 263, IM = 272, and IL = 267. The 1,426 2015 clothing-only
respondents were randomly assigned into NM = 713 and NL = 713.
   10
      For completeness and backward compatibility with the original 2004 NM measure (Heffetz 2011, table
3), these seven appendix tables also report scores, SEs, and ranks for two additional, alternatively constructed
measures: “Top Two Responses” and “Top Three Responses.” These alternative measures report the fraction
of responses that are in the top two and three (out of five) response options, respectively. They thus only
assume an ordinal interpretation of the five response options, instead of the cardinal interpretation implied by
the above linear-coding-based score. As with the original 2004 NM question, the three alternative measures
are, with few exceptions, highly correlated with each other for each of the new visibility questions. Following
all past work that uses the original NM measure, the rest of this paper uses the averaged scores, which
aggregate more information and have the smallest SEs across the three methods.



                                                      15
                                                                                   Figure 3: Comparing Six Visibility Measures


                                             .75                                                                                                                         .7
                                                                                                             Car
   2014 Telephone Survey, Notice More (NM)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Car




                                                                                                                             2014 Online Survey, Notice More (NM)
                                                                                                                  Cig
                                                                                                            Clo                                                                                                                   Jwl Cig
                                                                                                         Jwl
                                                                                                        Ot1                                                              .6                                                   Fur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Clo
                                              .6                                                          Fur                                                                                                                    Ot1
                                                                                                  FdO
                                                                                                AlO
                                                                                              Ot2AlH                                                                                                                       AlO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AlHFdO
                                                                                             EduBrb                                                                      .5                                            Brb
                                                                                              Bks                                                                                                                         Ot2
                                                                                       FdH
                                                                                     Hom
                                                                                   Cel
                                                                                  Htl                                                                                                                               FdH
                                             .45                                 Bus                                                                                                                         Air Htl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bks
                                                                               CMnAir                                                                                                                          Bus
                                                                             Gas                                                                                         .4                                  CMn Cel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edu
                                                                           Med
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Hom
                                                                        Utl                                                                                                                               Med
                                                                           Lry                                                                                                                              Gas
                                              .3                       Tel Cha                                                                                                                  Tel
                                                                                                                                                                                               Cha
                                                                                                                                                                         .3                       Lry
                                                              CIn                                                                                                                                   Utl
                                                                 Fee
                                                                                                                                                                                           CIn
                                                                                                                                                                                         Fee
                                                       HIn
                                                                                                                                                                                   HIn
                                                      LIn                                                                                                                       LIn
                                                   Und                                                                                                                   .2
                                             .15                                                                                                                               Und

                                                     .15        .3       .45         .6      .75                                                                                   .2     .3      .4      .5      .6       .7
                                                       2004 Telephone Survey, Notice More (NM)                                                                                     2014 Telephone Survey, Notice More (NM)




                                                                                                    Car                                                                  .65        Cha
                                                                                                                                                                                   Edu
                                                                                                                             2014 Online Survey, Impressions More (IM)




                                                                                          Jwl             Cig
                                              .6
   2014 Online Survey, Notice More (NM)




                                                                                                                Fur
                                                                                                    Clo
                                                                                                    Ot1                                                                   .6               Bks
                                                                                                                                                                                                 LIn
                                                                                                                                                                                     HIn
                                                                                                                                                                                     Med         CMn
                                                                                          AlO FdO
                                                                                              AlH                                                                                                CIn    BusFur
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fur
                                                                                           Brb                                                                           .55                                        Ot1
                                              .5                                           Ot2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Htl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hom
                                                                                                                                                                                         Und                FdH
                                                                                                                                                                                               Lry Clo
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fee              Ot2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Car
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Brb Air
                                                                                     Bks FdH                                                                                                                    UtlTel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FdO
                                                                         Air Htl                                                                                          .5                                        Jwl
                                                                                   Bus                                                                                                                                Cel
                                              .4                                 Edu    Cel
                                                                                      CMn
                                                                                     Hom
                                                                          Med                                                                                            .45                                                 AlO
                                                                 Cha       TelGas
                                              .3                                    Lry                                                                                                                                             AlH
                                                                             Utl
                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                       Fee       CIn
                                                           HIn
                                                    LIn
                                              .2                                                                                                                         .35                                                         Cig
                                                    Und


                                                      .2             .3          .4           .5                                                                                    .53         .57         .61         .65
                                                             2014 Online Survey, Notice Less (NL)                                                                                   2014 Online Survey, Impressions Less (IL)



Notes: Visibility measures (first column of appendix tables A.6–A.9), based on author’s visibility surveys.
Capped ranges: standard errors (second column of appendix tables). Dashed line: 45◦ line. Solid line: SD
line.



                    Table 4 reports score correlations across all pairs of of 2004 and 2014 surveys/treatments.
The correlation across the 2004 and 2014 telephone NM scores is 0.99.
                    We conclude from the graph and the close-to-perfect correlation that the NM visibility



                                                                                                                        16
                       Table 4: Correlations Across Six Visibility Measures


                           2004            2014            2014           2014           2014         2014
                         Telephone       Telephone        Online         Online         Online       Online
                            NM              NM             NM              NL             IM           IL

 2004   Telephone NM       1.00
 2014   Telephone NM       0.99            1.00
 2014   Online NM          0.97            0.97            1.00
 2014   Online NL          0.93            0.93            0.92          1.00
 2014   Online IM         −0.38           −0.39           −0.42         −0.45           1.00
 2014   Online IL          0.57            0.59            0.59          0.61          −0.79           1.00



of the 31 expenditure categories remained effectively unchanged in the decade from 2004 to
2014.11 This may be surprising in light of the dramatic change from 2004 to 2014 in how
individuals communicate with others, including about consumption—recall, for example,
that communication media such as the iPhone, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram all but did
not exist in 2004.
    Looking at specific expenditures, in both years, the most upward-visible expenditures are
those on cars (Car), tobacco products (Cig), clothes and shoes (Clo), jewelry and watches
(Jwl), recreation equipment (Ot1), and home furnishings (Fur) (in this exact order in 2014,
and in roughly this order in 2004); and the least upward-visible expenditures are those on
underclothes and nightwear (Und), life insurance (LIn), and homeowner, fire, and property
insurance (HIn) (in this exact order in both years).
    Next, the graph at the top right of figure 3 compares the 2014 telephone (horizontal) and
online (vertical) NM surveys. It again shows an effective replication, although scores move
around slightly more, and in the online survey they show slightly lower cross-expenditure
variance and larger within-expenditure SEs. This may at least in part reflect the smaller
sample size in the online survey (277 respondents, compared with 500 in the telephone
survey). Table 4 shows that the correlation between the 2014 online NM measure and either
the 2004 or 2014 telephone NM measures is 0.97. Together, these two graphs and three
  11
     In principle, the new identical survey ten years later turns the original visibility cross-section into a
[31 expenditures]×[2 time points] panel—indeed, when designing the 2014 survey, the potential for creating
such a panel was an important design consideration. In practice, however, we find essentially no cross-time
variation.



                                                     17
pairwise correlations suggest remarkable stability of the NM score, across time (a 10-year
interval), survey mode (telephone vs. online), and sample (RDD vs. convenience sample).


3.2    Notice-More, Notice-Less, Impressions-More, and Impressions-
       Less Scores

The two bottom graphs in figure 3 focus on the 2014 online survey. They present the four
measures resulting from its four treatments: at the bottom left, NL (horizontal) against NM
(vertical); at the bottom right, IL (horizontal) against IM (vertical). The four rightmost
(“Online”) columns of table 4 report the six pairwise correlations across the four measures.
   We start with the correlations. Ranging (in absolute value) from 0.42 to 0.92, they
suggest that the different visibility notions that the four survey-question variants attempt to
capture yield measures that are correlated but distinct. As expected, the most correlated are
the two noticeability measures (NM and NL, correlation = 0.92) and the two impressions
measures (IM and IL, −0.79). Thus, upward noticeability—the quickness of noticing a
more-than-average expenditure (NM)—is highly correlated with downward noticeability—
the quickness of noticing a less-than-average expenditure (NL). In simple words, what is
noticeable upwards, is likely also noticeable downwards. Similarly (though slightly less, and
flipping sign), the impressions made by a more- vs. less-than-average expenditure, assuming
it is noticed, are highly negatively correlated; what makes a better impression upwards,
likely makes a worse impression downwards. At the same time, as the graphs show (and
as discussed shortly), behind these high correlations lie meaningful patterns for specific
expenditures, which demonstrate the distinctiveness of the different measures.
   Finally, the Online columns of table 4 also show that the four pairs that mix a noticeability
with an impressions measure are the least correlated (0.42–0.61 in absolute value)—but they
still show significant correlations. Looking at the signs, noticeability and impressions are
negatively correlated: expenditures that are noticed quickly (both upwards and downwards)
are on average those that make a worse impression when spent more on, and a better
impression when spent less on.
   Returning to figure 3’s bottom two graphs—which compare the most highly correlated



                                              18
measures, i.e., NL with NM, and IL with IM—we next discuss the patterns that lie beyond
the high correlations.


3.2.1      Upward, Downward, and Discretionary Noticeability

We start with NL and NM, at the bottom left graph of figure 3. First, no expenditure
lies significantly below the 45◦ line, suggesting that on average, upward noticeability is at
least as high as downward noticeability for effectively all expenditures. Second, while most
expenditures effectively lie on either the 45◦ or the SD lines, several expenditures lie far
above the 45◦ line, as well as significantly above the SD line, including jewelry and watches
(Jwl), air travel (Air), and hotels (Htl). These expenditures are significantly more noticeable
upwards than downwards, in absolute score values as well as relative to other expenditures.
Notice that these are not necessarily among the most noticeable (upward or downward)
expenditures.
   To get a sense of the cross-expenditure variation in the (mostly nonnegative) difference
between upward and downward noticeability, compare expenditures on jewelry and watches
(Jwl) with those on food for home consumption (FdH, whose location on the NM-vs.-NL
graph is close to the 45◦ line, on a vertical line below Jwl); or compare expenditures on air
travel and hotels (Air, Htl) with those on home utilities (Utl, just below the 45◦ line, vertically
below Htl). Jewelry expenditures are as downward noticeable as home-food expenditures;
air travel/hotel expenditures are slightly less downward noticeable than utilities.12 However,
jewelry expenditures are significantly more upward noticeable than food expenditures, and
similarly, air travel and hotel expenditures are significantly more upward noticeable than
home utilities.13
   These examples seem consistent with the Veblenian notion that some expenditures—e.g.,
jewelry, air travel and hotels, but not home food and utilities—are actively used as signals by
households. Such active signaling involves, in addition to above-average spending on certain
categories, also actively making such spending additionally (upward) noticeable, beyond the
passive (downward) noticeability of these categories in the absence of active advertising.
  12
       NL scores (table A.7): Jwl and FdH = 0.42; Utl = 0.33, Htl = 0.32, and Air = 0.30; all SEs = 0.02.
  13
       NM scores (table A.6): Jwl = 0.62 vs. FdH = 0.45; Htl = 0.44, Air = 0.43 vs. Utl = 0.29; all SEs = 0.02.




                                                       19
Active advertising could involve, for example, discretionary brand/designer namedropping
(for jewelry) and photo sharing (for travel); by discretionary we mean that such extra no-
ticeability is actively promoted only when one’s spending on the relevant categories is above
average.
   Such active advertising of some expenditures by above- but not by below-average-spending
households makes their upward noticeability higher than their downward noticeability. Of
course, even without active (or discretionary) advertising of expenditures by households
that spend on them below -average, below-average expenditures could be (passively, down-
ward) noticeable—as suggested by high-NL expenditures such as home furnishings (Fur),
tobacco products (Cig), recreation equipment (Ot1), clothes (Clo), and cars (Car). From
this perspective, high-NL expenditures are downward noticeable even in the absence of active
advertising: society has the means to find out when a household spends less than average on
these categories—for example, because they are physically visible. Under this interpretation,
upward (NM) visibility could be generally (though perhaps not in all cases) thought of as
the sum of two components: passive downward (NL) visibility, plus a discretionary, active
component (the difference NM−NL).
   In summary, the NM-vs.-NL graph is consistent with the notion that while they are not
the most passively (NL) noticeable, expenditures on jewelry and watches (Jwl), air travel
(Air), and hotels (Htl) are the most actively, or discretionarily, (NM−NL) noticeable. As
it turns out, together with cars (Car) and education (Edu), these categories are the most
luxurious commodities, i.e., they have the highest total-expenditure elasticities among the
31 expenditures in U.S. household data. We return to this point in our empirical application
in section 4 below.


3.2.2   Impressions

Finally, the bottom-right graph in figure 3 compares IM and IL. The score values on the axes
show less cross-expenditure variation in the impressions questions than in the noticeability
questions. In particular, the IL score (horizontal axis) varies in a relatively narrow range:
from a lowest score = 0.53 for education (Edu), homeowner, fire, and property insurance
(HIn), charitable donations (Cha), and healthcare expenditures (Med), to a highest score =


                                             20
0.65 for tobacco products (Cig) and alcohol for home consumption (AlH) (appendix table
A.9). That this narrow range lies entirely above 0.50 means that on average, survey re-
spondents indicate that willingly spending less on anything makes a positive impression on
them if it is noticed. Said positive impression is only very slightly positive for below-average
spending on positive-externality expenditures such as education, various insurances, dona-
tions, and health; and is more positive for negative-externality and “sin” expenditures such
as tobacco and alcohol.
    IM score values (vertical axis) vary more, but virtually the entire variation comes from
some of the above expenditures, which again lie in the extremes. Specifically, the only
expenditures that make on average a (statistically significantly) negative impression (IM <
0.50) when spending more-than-average on, are tobacco products (Cig), alcohol for home use
(AlH), and Alcohol outside the home (AlO). All other expenditures’ IM scores are roughly at
or above 0.50, with charities (Cha) and Education (Edu) at the top with IM = 0.64, followed
by books and other expenditures (Bks, 0.60) and life insurance (LIn, 0.59) (appendix table
A.8). The remainder 24 expenditures—more than three quarters of the 31 expenditures—
have IM scores in the narrow (rounded) range from 0.50 to 0.57.
    In summary, respondents appear on average reluctant to report that something makes
a negative impression on them—including spending above or below average on almost any
category—with the exception of above-average spending on tobacco and alcohol. Within the
positive half of the impressions scales, there is modest variation, with positive-externality and
“merit” expenditures such as charity and education being on the end of the range opposing
that of the negative-externality and sin expenditures.14
  14
     More generally, as a comparison of the Top Two Responses and the Top Three Responses fractions in
appendix tables A.8 and A.9 shows, in response to both the IM and IL questions regarding almost all of
the 31 expenditure categories, a majority of respondents choose the middle response option “On average, it
would likely make neither a positive nor a negative impression on me.” (The main exception is tobacco
products (Cig), for which in both the IM and IL questions the middle response option is still chosen by 42%
of respondents.) Thus, respondents overwhelmingly report that in most cases, others’ expenditure patterns,
if they noticed them, would not affect their impressions. This could of course reflect a cultural norm of
refraining from expressing criticism of others’ lifestyle choices.




                                                    21
3.3     Notice-More and Notice-Less Scores for Clothing

Figure 4 is identical to the NM-vs.-NL graph at the bottom left of figure 3, except that it
replaces results from the 2014 31-broad-categories online survey with those from the 2015
17-clothing-only-subcategories survey. We summarize these results, and offer possible inter-
pretations, in three points that echo the NM-NL discussion above regarding the 31 broad
categories. First, the correlation between the NM and NL measures is very high (correlation
= 0.95, N = 17; reported in the figure’s notes). The most noticeable clothing expenditures
are those on women’s clothes (Wmn), men’s clothes (Men), suits, sport coats, and tailored
jackets (for men and women) (Sts), and outerwear like coats, jackets and furs (Owr). The
least noticeable are underwear and undergarments (Uwr), nightwear (Nwr), and socks, stock-
ings and hose (for men and women) (Soc).15 Second, all 17 clothing expenditures lie at or
above the 45◦ line, suggesting that upward noticeability is never lower than downward no-
ticeability for clothing subcategories. Third, in spite of the high correlation, expenditures
vary in how far above the 45◦ line they are (at a given NL score).
    To get a sense of the variation, consider clothing accessories like belts, purses, scarves,
and hats (Acc)—the category that is the farthest above both the 45◦ and the SD lines. Its
downward noticeability is similar to that of boys’ shoes (ShB), girls’ shoes (ShG), and infant
clothing (Inf). However, its upward noticeability is significantly above them.16 Interpret-
ing NL as the passive noticeability that is inherent in commodities (socioculturally, or even
merely physically), and the difference NM−NL as an additional active-signaling component
of noticeability, this example is consistent with the notion that while accessories, boys’ and
girls’ shoes, and infant clothing are all roughly as passively visible as each other, accessories
are actively (or discretionarily) used as a signal significantly more than these other cate-
gories. As we will see in the next section, accessories (Acc), together with suits, sport coats,
and tailored jackets (Sts), are the most luxurious—i.e., with the highest total-expenditure
  15
      NL and NM scores, respectively (appendix tables A.11 and A.10): most noticeable: Wmn = 0.43 &
0.54, Men = 0.41 & 0.50, Sts = 0.41 & 0.53, Owr = 0.40 & 0.55; least noticeable: Uwr = 0.15 & 0.15, Nwr
= 0.19 & 0.20, Soc = 0.20 & 0.22; all SEs = 0.01.
   Notice that these clothing-subcategory scores are generally lower than their aggregate-category scores for
clothing (Clo) and underclothing (Und) in figure 3 (appendix tables A.6 and A.7). This may reflect the
notion that the more differentiated a category is, the less likely a given respondent is to notice it.
   16
      NL and NM scores, respectively (tables A.11 and A.10): Acc = 0.33 & 0.48, ShB = 0.32 & 0.37, ShG
= 0.33 & 0.38, Inf = 0.34 & 0.37; all SEs = 0.01.


                                                     22
                     Figure 4: Comparing Two Clothing Visibility Measures


                                                                                                                              Owr




                             2015 Online Survey, Clothing, Notice More (NM)
                                                                                                                                   Wmn
                                                                                                                               Sts

                                                                              .5                                               Men
                                                                                                              Acc     ShW

                                                                                                                        Grl
                                                                                                              Spo

                                                                                                                ShM Boy
                                                                              .4
                                                                                                             ShG
                                                                                                             ShBInf

                                                                                                 Oth

                                                                              .3



                                                                                           Soc
                                                                              .2         Nwr

                                                                                   Uwr

                                                                                          .2              .3               .4
                                                                                    2015 Online Survey, Clothing, Notice Less (NL)


                           Notes: Visibility measures (first column of appendix
                           tables A.10–A.11), based on author’s visibility sur-
                           vey. Capped ranges: standard errors (second column
                           of appendix tables). Dashed line: 45◦ line. Solid line:
                           SD line. NM-NL correlation = 0.95 (N = 17).



elasticities—among the 17 clothing subcategories.



4        Visibility and Elasticity: Empirical Application
We demonstrate the value for empirical research of the new visibility measures by revisiting
the original application for which the 2004 visibility survey was conducted (Heffetz 2011).
The main finding in that application was that weighted univariate OLS regressions (with
expenditure shares as weights) of the total-expenditure elasticities of 29 expenditure cate-
gories on their (NM) visibility measure yield large coefficients and high R2 ’s.17 A benchmark
whole-population specification had R2 = 0.18. The top three income quintiles had R2 ’s in
the range 0.19 to 0.32, while the bottom two quintiles had much lower R2 ’s.
    17
      While the 2004 survey measured the visibility of the 31 expenditure categories discussed above, the
CEX data extracts used in the original application to estimate elasticities did not report underclothes and
cell phone expenditures separately from clothing and telephone expenditures, respectively. The analysis of
visibility and elasticities was therefore based on only 29 categories.


                                                                                                       23
    These original findings suggest that a single NM visibility measure explains almost one-
fifth (all households) or one-third (higher quintiles) of the observed cross-expenditure varia-
tion in elasticities. In this section, we show that NM together with one or more of the new
visibility measures as additional regressors, can explain around two to three times more of
said variation.


4.1     31 Broad-Expenditure Categories

Table 5, column (1) reproduces the original benchmark whole-population (“All Households”)
specification.18 It replaces the original 2004 visibility measure with the 2014 online NM
measure, and the original 29 expenditure elasticities and weights, estimated from 2003–2005
CEX data, with 31 elasticities and weights estimated from 2012–2014 data. Specifically,
elasticities and weights in table 5 are based on all 9,026 households with full-year CEX records
who started reporting quarterly expenditures in 2012:2–2014:1 (and whose last interview was
therefore in 2013:1–2014:4).19 See appendix A.2 for additional CEX-data detail.
    The estimates in table 5, column (1) essentially replicate the original 2004 estimates. The
coefficient on the visibility measure, which was 1.81 (SE = 0.74) in the original data, is now
slightly but insignificantly larger, at 2.15 (SE = 0.87; p-value from a zero-coefficient t-test
= 0.02); R2 was 0.18 and is now 0.17 (adjusted R2 = 0.14). Appendix tables A.16–A.20
replicate table 5 separately for each income quintile. R2 at the top three quintiles, which
was originally in the range 0.19–0.32, is now in essentially the same range, 0.19–0.28; R2 at
the bottom two quintiles maintains its substantially lower range (was: 0.01–0.08; now: 0.04
in both).
    Columns (2), (3), and (4) replace the NM regressor with the new NL, IM, and IL mea-
  18
     See Heffetz (2011), p. 1112, table 4, panel A, column A.
  19
     Average elasticities are estimated as follows. For each expenditure, an Engel curve is estimated non-
parametrically, using a kernel-weighted local linear smoother (e.g., Fan 1992) at 99 annual-total-expenditure
points. The points correspond with the 1st to 99th total-expenditure percentiles in the sample of 9,026
households. Appendix figures A.1 and A.2 report these Engel curves in levels and shares, respectively. Then,
the slopes of the 98 lines that connect the estimated 99 Engel-curve points are calculated, and 98 local
total-expenditure elasticities are calculated from these slopes. Average elasticities for all households and by
quintile are constructed from these 98 elasticities, using the CEX survey weights. These average elasticities,
reported in appendix table A.12, are used as dependent variable in the regressions in table 5 (and in the
by-quintile versions of table 5). The corresponding average expenditure shares, reported in appendix table
A.13, are used as weights in these regressions.



                                                      24
                         Table 5: Elasticity and Four Visibility Measures


                           (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)      (9)


 NM (Notice More)         2.15                                3.01     9.60                        10.42
                         (0.87)                              (0.77)   (1.52)                       (1.52)
 NL (Notice Less)                  0.85                               −11.81     2.42             −12.64
                                  (1.38)                              (2.20)    (1.50)            (2.43)
 IM (Impressions More)                      5.11              7.76                        4.62      7.12
                                           (2.51)            (2.16)                      (3.39)    (2.01)
 IL (Impressions Less)                              −4.30                       −6.94    −0.86      5.90
                                                    (2.93)                      (3.28)   (3.84)    (2.70)

 Observations              31       31      31       31        31       31        31       31        31
 R2                       0.17     0.01    0.13     0.07      0.43     0.59      0.15     0.13      0.73
 Adj. R2                  0.14    −0.02    0.10     0.04      0.39     0.56      0.09     0.06      0.68
 F -test (p-value)        0.02    0.54     0.05     0.15      0.00     0.00      0.10     0.15      0.00
Notes: Weighted OLS regressions. Dependent variable: average total-expenditure elasticity for all house-
holds (first column of appendix table A.12), estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts. Weights:
average expenditure shares (first column of appendix table A.13), estimated from the same data. Indepen-
dent variables: visibility measures (first column of appendix tables A.6–A.9), based on author’s visibility
survey. All regressions include a constant (not reported). Standard errors in parentheses.



sures, respectively. The new IM measure in column (3) has a statistically suggestive coeffi-
cient (5.11, p = 0.051), with explanatory power not too far below that of the NM measure
(R2 = 0.13, adj. R2 = 0.10). Appendix tables A.16–A.20 show that unlike the NM measure,
the new IM measure’s R2 does not disappear at low quintiles and does not grow at higher
quintiles; rather, it fluctuates in the range R2 = 0.09–0.19, with no apparent systematic
cross-quintile pattern.
    Unlike NM and IM in columns (1) and (3), the new NL and IL measures in columns (2)
and (4) explain little if any of the variation in elasticities on their own, that is, as single
visibility measures in univariate regressions. We next turn to multivariate regressions.
    The rest of table 5 shows the explanatory power of combinations of visibility measures.
We highlight four main findings. First, column (5) combines NM and IM, the two More(-
than-average-spending) measures. Relative to each of the two separate univariate regressions
in columns (1) and (3), the coefficients are larger and more tightly estimated (p = 0.001 for



                                                    25
both) and, importantly, R2 ’s roughly triple (R2 = 0.43; adj. R2 = 0.39). (In line with the
patterns above in tables A.16–A.20, they increase to R2 = 0.55–0.56 (adj. R2 = 0.52–0.53)
at the top two quintiles.) The pattern in column (5) is thus consistent with the idea that
elasticities are associated both with upward noticeability and (conditional on being upwardly
noticeable) with upward impressions.
    Second, column (6) combines the two Notice(ability) measures, NM and NL. The two
coefficients are several times larger than as single regressors, are opposite in sign from each
other, and are of roughly the same magnitude.20 R2 increases to 0.59 (adj. R2 = 0.56), that
is, it between triples and quadruples from column (1). (It generally increases with quintile
in tables A.16–A.20.) Overall, column (6) appears roughly consistent with the notion that
elasticity is associated with the difference NM−NL.21
    Third, Columns (7) and (8) combine the two Less (NL, IL) and the two Impressions
(IM, IL) measures, respectively. R2 = 0.15 and 0.13 (adj. R2 = 0.09 and 0.06), and the
coefficients in neither column are highly statistically significant (the four coefficient p-values
are, respectively, 0.12, 0.04, 0.19, and 0.83; the two joint-coefficient F -test p-values are 0.10
and 0.15). Overall, these two pairs of visibility measures explain dramatically less than the
two pairs in columns (5) and (6).
    Finally, column (9) combines all four visibility measures. With 31 observations and four
correlated regressors, results are at best suggestive and should be interpreted with caution.
Explanatory power is very high: R2 = 0.73 (adj. R2 = 0.68); it again generally increases
with quintile (tables A.16–A.20), reaching R2 = 0.80–0.81 (adj. R2 = 0.77–0.78) at the top
two quintiles. The NM and NL coefficients are slightly larger (in absolute value) than in
column (6); the IM coefficient is essentially as large as it is in column (5); and they are
   20
      Statistically, the two coefficients are clearly different from zero (p < 0.0005 for both), and are sugges-
tively different from each other in absolute value (p = 0.04). To interpret coefficient sizes, recall from figure
3 and table A.6, for example, that the NM-score increases from underclothing (Und = 0.19, rank = 31) to
clothing (Clo = 0.59, rank = 5), or from car insurance (CIn = 0.25, rank = 27) to cars (Car = 0.64, rank =
1), are roughly 0.4. (The entire NM range, from rank 31 to 1, is 0.45.) With a coefficient of 9.60 on NM in
column (6), these NM differences are thus associated with an elasticity difference of 3.8 when NL is controlled
for. That is more than twice the observed (estimated) elasticity difference between car insurance and cars
in our data (see table A.12). (A similar exercise regarding the NL coefficient yields a similar conclusion.
Relative to NM, the entire NL range, roughly 0.36 (figure 3 and table A.7), is 20% shorter, while the column
(6) NL coefficient, 11.81, is roughly 20% larger.)
   21
      Indeed, in a univariate specification (not reported) similar to those in columns (1)–(4) except that the
(single) regressor is the difference (NM−NL), coeff = 8.04, SE = 1.42, R2 = 0.52, and adj. R2 = 0.51.



                                                       26
all highly statistically significant (p ≤ 0.001 for each of the three).22 The IL coefficient is
slightly smaller than the IM coefficient, has the same (positive) sign, and a larger p-value
(p = 0.04). Relative to columns (5) and (6), column (9) is thus statistically suggestive that
once upward noticeability, downward noticeability, and upward impressions are controlled
for, high elasticity may be positively associated with downward impressions.
    In summary, the estimates in table 5 show that of the (all-households) cross-expenditure
variation in elasticities, visibility can explain anywhere from 17% with a single NM measure—
replicating the main result in Heffetz (2011)—to 73% with a combination of four measures.
(These percentages are still higher at high quintiles.) Most of the variation—59%—is ex-
plained by the two noticeability measures, NM and NL. Indeed, the data seem consistent
with the notion that what explains (or is explained by) the variation in elasticities is, to a
large extent, the difference NM−NL. As discussed in the previous section, this difference can
be interpreted as the discretionary (or active) component of noticeability.


4.2     Replication: 17 Clothing-Only Expenditure Subcategories

The finding in table 5 (columns 6 and 9), that elasticity is associated with the visibility
difference NM−NL, was not expected at the survey-design stage. A main motivation for the
2015 clothing-only visibility survey was to explore the replicability of this finding. Table 6
replicates the specifications from table 5’s columns (1), (2), and (6), but replaces the 2014
broad-category NM and NL visibility measures with the 2015 clothing-only NM and NL
measures, and, correspondingly, the 31 broad-category elasticities and weights with the 17
clothing-only elasticities and weights.23
    While neither coefficient sizes nor R2 ’s are directly comparable, and while based on only
  22
      To interpret the size of the IM coefficient, recall from figure 3 and table A.8 that the entire IM range
from tobacco products (Cig = 0.34, rank = 31) to charities and education (Cha, Edu = 0.64, rank = 1, 2) is
roughly 0.30. With a coefficient of 7.12 on IM, the entire tobacco-to-education upward-impression difference
is associated with an elasticity difference of 2.1—almost exactly the observed tobacco-education elasticity
difference.
   23
      The 17 clothing-only average elasticities and weights are estimated using the same methods, and based
on the same 2012–2014 CEX data, used for estimating the 31 broad-category elasticities and weights. See
subsection 4.1 and appendix A.2 for further detail, and appendix figures A.3 and A.4 for the estimated
clothing-only Engel curves. The clothing-only average elasticities, used as dependent variable in the regres-
sions in table 6, are reported in appendix table A.14. The corresponding average expenditure shares, used
as weights in these regressions, are reported in appendix table A.15.



                                                     27
                     Table 6: Clothing Elasticity and Two Visibility Measures


                        (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)

                        -----------All Households -----------         Q1       Q2       Q3       Q4       Q5

 NM (Notice More)      0.85                            2.85          −2.06     0.98     4.04     5.95     4.54
                      (0.36)                          (1.03)         (2.76)   (1.16)   (1.50)   (1.62)   (1.35)
 NL (Notice Less)                     0.83            −2.91           3.61    −0.22    −4.58    −7.20    −4.88
                                     (0.54)           (1.42)         (3.83)   (1.61)   (2.10)   (2.23)   (1.83)

 Observations           17             17                17            17      17       17       17       17
 R2                    0.28           0.14              0.44          0.08    0.28     0.38     0.50     0.50
 Adj. R2               0.23           0.08              0.36         −0.06    0.18     0.29     0.43     0.42
 F -test (p-value)     0.03           0.14              0.02          0.57    0.10     0.03     0.01     0.01
Notes: Weighted OLS regressions. Dependent variable: average total-expenditure elasticity, for all house-
holds and by total-expenditure quintile (appendix table A.14), estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX
extracts. Weights: average expenditure shares (appendix table A.15), estimated from the same data. In-
dependent variables: visibility measures (first column of appendix tables A.10–A.11), based on author’s
visibility survey. All regressions include a constant (not reported). Standard errors in parentheses.



17 observations, table 6’s columns (1), (2), and (3) show that the findings from table 5’s
corresponding columns (1), (2), and (6) generally replicate. In univariate all-households
regressions, NM is a strong predictor of the variation in elasticities, both in absolute terms
(R2 = 0.28, adj. R2 = 0.23; column 1) and relative to not-statistically-significant NL (R2 =
0.14, adj. R2 = 0.08; column 2). Relative to table 5’s columns (1), the NM coefficient is
smaller, but its R2 is larger. In an all-population regression on both NM and NL, the two
coefficients more than triple, and become almost identical in size and opposite in sign (zero-
coefficient t-test p = 0.02 and 0.06, respectively; equal-absolute-value-coefficients F -test
p = 0.91; R2 = 0.44, adj. R2 = 0.36; column 3). These estimates are hence again consistent
with the idea that elasticity is explained by the difference NM−NL.24
    Columns (4)–(8) replicate the specification in column (3) for each income quintile. Simi-
larly to the corresponding broad-category analysis (in appendix tables A.16–A.20), here too
R2 ’s generally increase with income quintile. At the fourth and fifth quintiles (columns 7
  24
     Even more than in the 31-broad-categories analysis above, here a univariate specification like those in
columns (1) and (2) except that the (single) regressor is the difference (NM−NL) has explanatory power
similar to the regression in column (3): coeff = 2.79, SE = 0.81, p < 0.005; R2 = 0.44, and adj. R2 = 0.41.



                                                                28
and 8), F -test p-value = 0.01, R2 = 0.50 (adj. R2 = 0.42–0.43), the coefficients on NM and
NL are roughly double what they are in column (3), and they remain roughly equal to each
other and opposite in sign.
     Since the variation in elasticity and visibility across these 17 clothing-only subcategories
is unrelated to the corresponding variation across the original 31 expenditure categories,
we view these findings as an independent qualitative replication of the original, broad-
expenditure NM and NL findings.25



5        Visibility and Elasticity: Possible Interpretations
The findings in the previous section are consistent with the notion that what explains much
of—or is explained by—the cross-expenditure variation in elasticities is variation in the
difference NM−NL. As discussed above, this difference may be interpreted as the active, or
discretionary, component of sociocultural visibility. That is, it may be the part of visibility
that households can actively control, or manipulate.
     In the next two subsections, we formally sketch two alternative stylized theoretical ex-
amples that illustrate two alternative mechanisms that could account for this finding: from
visibility to elasticity, and from elasticity to visibility. The correlational evidence presented
in this paper appears consistent with both directions of causality, and cannot identify their
relative empirical importance. Intuitively, the two alternative accounts are:

    1. From (discretionary) visibility to elasticity. The scope for discretionary/active
         visibility is assumed to vary exogenously across expenditures. For example, due to the
         physical features of commodities (compare accessories with underwear); the locational
         context of their use (compare suits with pajamas); or the cultural/normative accept-
         ability of making them public (compare school tuition and fees with legal or accounting
         fees). Elasticities do not vary across expenditures in the absence of visibility; their ob-
    25
     To make the clothing-only replication mechanically independent of the original application, appendix
table A.21 reproduces table 6 based on only the 14 clothing subcategories that disaggregate the original
clothing-and-shoes (Clo) category—that is, dropping the three subcategories that disaggregate the original
underclothes-and-nightwear (Und) category: nightwear (Nwr), socks (Soc), and underwear (Uwr). Results
remain essentially the same (in fact, R2 ’s at the top two quintiles further increase to 0.58–0.68).




                                                   29
        served variation is (essentially by assumption) due entirely to variation in discretionary
        visibility.26

   2. From elasticity to (reported) visibility. Elasticities are assumed to vary exoge-
        nously across expenditures. For example, due to some yet-to-be-developed theory
        of Engel curves, perhaps à la Maslow (1943). Visibility does not vary—all expendi-
        tures are equally visible, or equally knowable/estimable from other visible information.
        The observed cross-expenditure variation in our visibility measures, that are based on
        responses to survey questions, is due entirely to cross-expenditure variation in expen-
        diture distributions among the population of households, which in turn is a direct
        mechanical outcome of said exogenous variation in elasticities.27


5.1      From Visibility to Elasticity

Consider a familiar setup: the linear expenditure system (LES). Households have Stone-
Geary utility,
                                                  Y
                                            U=     (xi − γi )βi ,
                                                    i

where subscript i denotes good i, xi is its expenditure, and the parameters γi and βi are,
respectively, i’s minimum required expenditure and i’s normalized importance in the utility
                         P                            P
function; βi > 0 ∀i, and i βi = 1. With income y > i γi and prices normalized to 1, the
                      P                                                P 
budget constraint is i xi = y, expenditure on good i is xi = γi + βi y − j γj , and good
   26
      This account, from discretionary visibility (NM−NL) to elasticity, is fundamentally different from the
account in Heffetz (2011). That account is based on Ireland’s (1994) signaling-by-consuming two-good
model, where one good is perfectly visible, in the sense that its expenditure is public knowledge; the other
good is perfectly non-visible, in that its expenditure is private knowledge; and consumers’ spending on the
visible good signals their privately known income type. That Spencian model, where 0/1 visibility denotes
private/public knowledge, cannot accommodate the different notions of upward and downward visibility—let
alone the difference between the two. (Indeed, the original application had only the 2004 NM measure, which
was implicitly assumed to capture said unidimensional, private/public notion of visibility.)
   27
      This interpretation of the data is rather different from the idea that high-elasticity expenditures become
socioculturally visible simply due to society’s (apparently obsessive) fascination with what the rich consume.
Like our interpretation, that alternative idea too is consistent with our finding that elasticity is correlated
with the active, or discretionary component of visibility—assuming that component is measured as the
difference between upward and downward noticeability. While we view that explanation as a plausible
complement to our interpretation, for simplicity we leave it out of our stylized example below.




                                                        30
i’s income elasticity is

                                    dxi y     y          βy
                             i ≡         = βi =         i P .
                                    dy xi     xi γi + βi y − j γj

    One can easily add structure to this standard framework to generate a cross-expenditure
correlation between active visibility and elasticity. For example, assume no cross-expenditure
differences in the γ’s—that is, γi ≡ γ > 0 ∀i—and no cross-expenditure differences in the
β’s except for differences due to cross-expenditure differences in active visibility—that is,
βi ∝ β(NMi − NLi ), with β(·) a strictly increasing function.28 Then, by assumption, in the
absence of sociocultural visibility considerations, all expenditures enter symmetrically into
the utility function. But the presence of sociocultural considerations causes expenditures
with higher active visibility to be more important in the utility function.
    Under these assumptions,
                                                       βi y
                                         i =                    ,
                                                βi y + γ − βi nγ

where n denotes the number of goods. Thus, goods with βi T 1/n have i T 1. In words,
goods whose β is above, equal to, or below their “fair share” of normalized importance are
luxuries, unit-elasticity, or necessities, respectively. More generally, elasticity increases with
β, which by assumption increases with active visibility.


5.2     From Elasticity to Visibility

We now consider an alternative simple setup where all expenditures are equally visible.
We focus on a single expenditure that has exogenous, constant income elasticity. We then
show that, under arguably plausible assumptions, the difference between the upward and
downward noticeability of that expenditure as reported in a visibility survey increases and
decreases with that expenditure’s income elasticity. Since we focus on a single expenditure,
in this subsection we drop the subscript i.
  28
      We require γ > 0 to allow for cross-expenditure differences in elasticity. (Otherwise, the Stone-Geary
utility reduces to the Cobb-Douglas special case, where i ≡ 1 ∀i.)




                                                    31
    Assume that a household’s income y is drawn from a log-normal distribution,


                                         Y ∼ Lognormal µ, σ 2 ,
                                                             



and that some expenditure x has constant income elasticity ,


                                                   x = Cy  ,


with some positive C.29,30 Then, x too is distributed log-normally, with transformed param-
eters,31
                                    X ∼ Lognormal µ + ln C, (σ)2 .
                                                                  


That is,  multiplicatively scales both µ and σ, with the usual implied effects on x’s mean,
variance, and other statistical properties. Of particular interest for our purposes, the skew-
ness of x,                     "               3 #
                                    X − mean            
                                                             (σ)2
                                                                        p
                                                                               2
                           E        √                  = e           +2   e(σ) − 1,
                                     variance

increases with  in exactly the same way that it increases with σ. Thus, with unit elasticity
( = 1), expenditure x is as positively skewed as income y. With elasticity smaller or larger
than unity—that is, with x a necessity or a luxury—the distribution of x is, respectively,
                                                                                           y
   29
      Formally, the assumption of constant  is expressed as the differential equation dx
                                                                                        dy x = , whose general
                    
solution is x = Cy .
   30
      This purposefully simple example focuses on a single expenditure with constant elasticity over a limited
income range. In general, elasticity cannot be constant at levels different from unity for all expenditures, and
the elasticity of even a single expenditure cannot be constant at a level above unity at all income levels. (To
see this, remember that for the budget constraint to hold, elasticities weighted by their expenditure shares
must sum to 1 at all income levels. In particular, even a single expenditure that grows faster than income
will at some point exceed income.)
   31
      To see this, start with the PDF of y,
                                                   1       1 ln y−µ 2
                                        fY (y) = √      e− 2 ( σ ) .
                                                y 2πσ 2


Then, since x (y) = Cy  is monotonic, the PDF of x is
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                 x  1
                                                                                        
                     d              d                       d                                  1          1 1−
           fX (x) =    FY (y (x))       y (x) = fY (y (x))    y (x) = fY                                    x 
                    dy             dx                      dx                    C             C          
                         1          1 ln x−(ln C+µ) 2
                  = q            e− 2 (      σ     ) .
                               2
                    x 2π (σ)




                                                        32
less or more positively skewed than the income distribution, in the same way that it would
be under a corresponding change in σ.
    How may x’s skewness affect survey respondents’ reports when asked about x’s upward
and downward noticeability? The NM and NL visibility survey questions ask respondents to
report how quickly they would notice a new household’s expenditure that is above or below
average. Under the assumption that all expenditures are equally visible, cross-expenditure
differences in survey responses may be driven entirely by cross-expenditure differences in
distributional properties. It is plausible, for example, that when asked how quickly they
would notice an above- or below-average expenditure, respondents essentially ask themselves
by how much expenditures drawn randomly from the part of x’s distribution that is above
or below the average expenditure (in our case, µ + ln C) would deviate from that average.
If such deviations from the average expenditure are typically large (formally, they are large
in expectation), the respondent assesses and reports that they would typically be noticed
more quickly; if they are small, she reports that they would be noticed more slowly.
    By definition, skewness is a measure of the expectation of the normalized difference be-
tween such above-mean and below-mean (cubed) deviations. Under our assumptions, it is
therefore a plausible measure of the difference between (survey-based, reported) upward and
downward noticeability, NM−NL. But as shown above, cross-expenditure variation in skew-
ness originates in our assumed setup from cross-expenditure variation in income elasticity.
It follows that cross-expenditure variation in elasticity could drive at least part of the ob-
served cross-expenditure variation in the difference between upward and downward reported
visibility.32
   32
     This account is also consistent with two additional features of our data. First, that x is at least weakly
positively skewed at any elasticity  is consistent with the general tendency in our data for an expenditure’s
upward noticeability to be higher than its downward noticeability (see figures 3 and 4). Second, it is easy
to verify that the variance of x also increases with , consistent with the tendency of both upward and (to
a lesser extent, and not statistically significantly) downward noticeability to be higher for higher-elasticity
expenditures (see columns (1) and (2) in tables 5 and 6).




                                                      33
6        Conclusion
What explains observed preferences? For example, why do households with different incomes
spend differently on different things? (Or: What explains cross-good variation in income
elasticities?) Building on past research, this paper presents new empirical evidence on the
relationship between the total-expenditure elasticity and the visibility of different household
expenditures. It thus provides evidence that bears on one particular class of explanations
of observed preferences: those that relate to the sociocultural aspects of consumption. Such
evidence is pertinent to questions regarding the extent to which demand patterns can be ex-
plained by sociocultural phenomena that may include, among others, consumption-oriented
status seeking, social signaling and social learning, peer effects, fashion cycles, conspicuous
consumption, and related phenomena.
     A common necessary condition for these phenomena is that one’s consumer expenditures
be knowable to others—in our phrasing, that expenditures be visible. It is by obtaining infor-
mation on others’ expenditures that individuals can confer expenditure-based social status,
interpret expenditure-based signals, learn, be influenced by peer consumption, and adhere to
the demands of fashion. Moreover, in some settings, their knowability and communicability
allow consumer expenditures to play almost language-like roles, reinforcing hierarchy (e.g.,
through dress), signifying special occasions (e.g., with a wedding ring, or a birthday cake),
and more generally facilitating individuals’ attempt to tell their story and express who they
are—either as part of their search for better economic and social outcomes, or as part of
their search for meaning in their lives.33
     Houthakker’s conclusion that explaining observed variation in Engel curves would require
researchers to go “far outside economics” (quoted in the introduction above from Chai and
Moneta 2010) could be reevaluated nowadays, fifty years after it was made. On the one
hand, as our formal explorations in section 5 suggest, we are still some way from providing a
satisfactory theory of Engel curves. On the other hand, as our empirical analysis in section 4
suggests, much of the observed cross-expenditure variation in Engel curves can be explained
    33
     See Heffetz (2012, Introduction) for a related discussion, and Baudrillard (1970) and Douglas and
Isherwood (1979) for the idea that consumption activity is best understood as a cultural ritual that carries
and communicates symbolic meanings.




                                                    34
by (or explain) the difference between upward and downward sociocultural noticeability,
especially when combined with measures of impression quality.
   More generally, expenditure visibility is a potentially important, yet mostly unexplored,
feature of consumer expenditures, that appears highly correlated with hitherto unexplained
variation in a range of consumer behaviors. The data presented in this paper confirm that it
is empirically measurable; show it to be remarkably stable across two decennial survey waves,
across interview modes, and across respondent samples; and, importantly, show that it is
multidimensional. Such evidence in turn suggests that one-off (or infrequent) online surveys
using a simple design and a relatively small convenience sample may be an inexpensive way
to generate highly applicable visibility data. In addition to the applications discussed in the
introduction, we would like to see the existing visibility data (surveyed in table 1) applied
in new domains. Moving beyond existing data, we would like to see new visibility data
collected: in new places; on new, finer consumption categories; and eliciting new, subtler
notions of visibility.



References
AAPOR (2016). Standard Definitions: Final Dispositions of Case Codes and Outcome Rates
   for Surveys. 9th edition. The American Association for Public Opinion Research.

Baudrillard, Jean (1970). The Consumer Society: Myths & Structures. 1998 Edition, Sage
   Publications, London.

Bellet, Clément, and Eve Sihra (2018). “The Conspicuous Consumption of the Poor: For-
   going Calories for Aspirational Goods.” Working Paper.

Bertrand, Marianne and Adair Morse (2016). “Trickle-Down Consumption.” Review of
   Economics and Statistics 98(5): 863–879.

Chai, Andreas, and Alessio Moneta (2010). “Retrospectives: Engel Curves.” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 24(1): 225–240.

Chao, Angela and Juliet B. Schor (1998). “Empirical tests of status consumption: Evidence
   from women’s cosmetics.” Journal of Economic Psychology 19, 107–131.



                                              35
Charles, Kerwin, Erik Hurst and Nikolai Roussanov (2009). “Conspicuous Consumption and
   Race.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2), 425–467.

Cosaert, Sam (2018). “Revealed Preferences for Diamond Goods.” American Economic
   Journal: Microeconomics 10(2), 83–117.

De Giorgi, Giacomo, Anders Frederiksen, and Luigi Pistaferri (2016). “Consumption Net-
   work Effects.” NBER Working Paper 22357.

Douglas, Mary and Baron Isherwood (1979). The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology
   of Consumption. New edition 1996, Routledge, London.

Fan, Jianqing (1992). “Design-adaptive nonparametric regression.” Journal of the American
   Statistical Association 87: 998-1004.

Frank, Robert H. (1985). “The demand for unobservable and other nonpositional goods.”
   American Economic Review 75(1): 101–116.

Friehe, Tim and Mario Mechtel (2014). “Conspicuous consumption and political regimes:
   Evidence from East and West Germany.” European Economic Review 67: 62–81.

Harris, Ed, and John Sabelhaus (2005). “Consumer Expenditure Survey Family-Level Ex-
   tracts.” http://www.nber.org/data/ces_cbo.html.

Heffetz, Ori (2011). “A Test of Conspicuous Consumption: Visibility and Income Elastici-
   ties.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(4): 1101–1117.

Heffetz, Ori (2012). “Who Sees What? Demographics and the Visibility of Consumer Ex-
   penditures.” Journal of Economic Psychology, 33(4): 801–817.

Hicks, Daniel L. and Joan Hamory Hicks (2014). “Jealous of the Joneses: conspicuous
   consumption, inequality, and crime.” Oxford Economic Papers 66(4): 1090–1120.

Hillesheim, Inga and Mario Mechtel (2013). “How much do others matter? Explaining
   positional concerns for different goods and personal characteristics.” Journal of Economic
   Psychology 34: 61–77.

Ireland, Norman J. (1994). “On Limiting the Market for Status Signals.” Journal of Public
   Economics 53(1): 91–110.

Jaikumar, Saravana, and Ankur Sarin (2015). “Conspicuous consumption and income in-



                                             36
   equality in an emerging economy: evidence from India.” Marketing Letters 26: 279–292.

Kamakura, Wagner A., and Rex Yuxing Du (2012). “How economic contractions and ex-
   pansions affect expenditure patterns.” Journal of Consumer Research 39(2): 229–247.

Khamis, Melanie, Nishith Prakash, and Zahra Siddique (2012). “Consumption and social
   identity: Evidence from India.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 83(3):
   353–371.

Maslow, Abraham H. (1943). “A Theory of Human Motivation.” Psychological Review
   50(4): 370–396.

Mejı́a, Daniel and Pascual Restrepo (2016). “Crime and conspicuous consumption.” Journal
   of Public Economics 135: 1–14.

Ng, Yew-Kwang (1987). “Diamonds are a government’s best friend: burden-free taxes on
   goods valued for their values.” American Economic Review 77(1): 186–191.

Veblen, Thorstein (1899). The Theory of the Leisure Class. Reprint 1965, MacMillan, New
   York.




                                          37
A                                  Web Appendix

        Expenditure Visibility and Consumer Behavior:
                                       New Evidence

                                            Ori Heffetz
                                        October 7, 2018

A.1      Additional Survey-Design Detail: 31 Expenditure Categories

Construction of the original 31-category list for the 2004 survey was based on Harris and
Sabelhaus’s (2005) CEX extracts, as detailed in Heffetz (2004). In the decade from 2004 to
2014, household expenditure shares in the CEX decreased for some items—formally, universal
classification codes, or UCCs, of which there are several hundreds in the CEX—as increasing
shares were redirected toward newly available goods and services. While this transition from
older goods and services to newer substitutes affected expenditures on specific items/UCCs—
in some cases dramatically, as obsolete goods and services were entirely replaced by superior
alternatives—its effects on the 31-category list was limited. For example, while consumers
increasingly switch from printed to digital books and magazines, the original category Bks
(“Books, including school books, newspapers and magazines. . . ”) needed no modification.
    After carefully reviewing the original list and comparing it with the most recently avail-
able data on consumer expenditures at the time of redesigning the survey (e.g., BLS, 2013),
we made slight modifications to only two of the 31 categories in the original list. Specifi-
cally, in the category Ot1 (Recreation 1) we replaced “video . . . equipment” with “visual
. . . equipment” and “tapes, CDs” with “music” (generalizing from specific, outdated tech-
nologies to broader categories); and we replaces “games” with “games, etc.” and moved
“games” from right after “computers” to right after “music” (viewing games more as exam-
ples of content—as is music—and less as examples of equipment—as are computers).1 And
    1
     Replacing specific outdated technologies with more general categories, rather than with current tech-
nologies, is intended also to minimize the potential need to update the list again in the future.


                                                    1
in the category Ot2 (Recreation 2) we added “internet” (and replaced “and” with “,”).2
    In summary, our updated list of 31 consumption categories is identical to the original
2004 list in all but two categories (Ot1 and Ot2), which in turn saw only slight modifications.
Importantly, the two modified categories maintain the spirit of the original categories. For
example, they are not longer than the original categories, and they rely on familiar examples
rather than on more technical expressions (we avoided “information technology,” “commu-
nications devices,” etc.). That said, since modifying even a single word in a survey question
could potentially have great consequences, one should pay special attention to these two
categories when interpreting the data.


References A.1

BLS (2013). “Table 1 (2011-2012 Weights). Relative importance of components in the
    Consumer Price Indexes: U.S. city average, December 2013.” https://www.bls.gov/
    cpi/tables/relative-importance/2013.pdf.

Heffetz, Ori (2004). “Conspicuous Consumption and the Visibility of Consumer Expen-
    ditures.” Working Paper, Princeton University. http://nber.org/~heffetz/papers/
    conspicuous.pdf.


A.2      Additional CEX-Data Detail

The analysis of household expenditures in the original 2004 visibility-elasticity application
(Heffetz, 2011) was based on “10,400 households for which full-year expenditure data exist in
the 2003:3–2004:2 and 2005:1–2005:4 CEX extracts from Harris and Sabelhaus (2005).” As
documented in that paper, those CEX extracts, which surround the time during which the
2004 visibility survey was conducted, are not available online; they were kindly provided by
Ed Harris, though without documentation. The documentation and data that are publicly
   2
     The addition of “internet” was motivated by the “Communication” category in the BLS (2013) table,
where “Internet services and electronic information providers” account for 0.7% of expenditures. The location
of “internet” right after “Cable TV” reflects our intended interpretation of “internet” as referring to internet
services for the home (which are often purchased as a combined package with cable TV), rather than as
mobile internet services. Relatedly, we hope that the category Cel (“mobile phone services,” unmodified
from the original list) is perceived by respondents as including mobile internet services (which are often
purchased as a combined package with mobile call and text services).



                                                       2
available in Harris and Sabelhaus (2005) end in 2003:2.3
    The updated 2014 application in the present paper requires creating from the raw CEX
data (available on the Bureau of Labor Statistics website, at https://www.bls.gov/cex/
pumd_data.htm#stata) new full-year CEX extracts that match the structure of the original
extracts. For this purpose, we created new programs, based on the Harris and Sabelhaus
original programs and documentation. The new programs include two main updates. The
first involves adding all the new UCCs that were added to the CEX after 2003—i.e., after
the last year that is still covered by the Harris and Sabelhaus (2005) documentation—and
assigning them to the 31 original expenditure categories. (The updated assignments, along
with all the new and updated programs and documentation we created, are included in our
data package.) With the updated UCCs, the new programs create 2012:2–2014:1 full-year
CEX extracts. These eight extracts cover all households who started reporting expenditures
in 2012:2–2014:1, and whose last interview was therefore conducted during 2013–2014 (since
households report expenditures in four consecutive quarterly interviews). The analysis in
the present paper (section 4) is based on the 9,026 households with full-year expenditure
data in these extracts.
    Our second main update involves classifying the two (updated) clothing categories, Clo
and Und, into 17 new subcategories that are used in the 2015 online clothing-only visi-
bility survey. (See section 2.2 for details on this reclassification, table 3 for the list of 17
subcategories, and our data package for the assignment of UCCs into subcategories.)


References A.2

BLS (2016). “2015 Changes. Interview Survey and Diary Survey Consumer Expendi-
    ture Public Use Microdata. August 30, 2016.” https://www.bls.gov/cex/pumd/2015/
    changes.pdf.
   3
     As noted in Heffetz (2011, footnote 16): “Notice that due to the BLS’s decennial sample frame rebasing
in 2005, households that began the survey in 2004:3 and 2004:4 cannot be tracked for the entire year and
hence are not included in our data.” Another sample redesign a decade later, in 2015, resulted in a similar
issue: households whose participation in the CEX spanned the 2015 sample redesign (because they began
the relevant four quarterly interviews in 2014:3 and 2014:4) could not be tracked for a full year (BLS, 2016).




                                                      3
A.3      Additional Tables and Graphs

                 Table A.1: 2014 Telephone Survey, Respondent Demographics


                                                        Visibility Survey                  Census Etc.a

                                        Observationsb            Value       (SE)             Value
  Mean values:
  Age                                        495                  46.0       (0.8)             46.4
  Household sizec                            498                  2.9        (0.1)             2.6
  Children under 18 in household             498                  0.7        (0.0)             0.6
  Percent distribution:
  Female                                     500                  49.4       (2.2)             51.5
  Black                                      495                  9.9        (1.3)             12.0
  Hispanic                                   499                  8.8        (1.3)             14.2
  Married                                    497                  48.5       (2.2)             51.4
  Employed                                   499                  62.5       (2.2)             58.6
  Education                                  496
   Elementary (0-8)                                               0.8        (0.4)             5.6
   High school (9-12)                                             22.6       (1.9)             37.8
   College (13-16)                                                53.6       (2.2)             47.5
   Graduate school (17 or more)                                   23.0       (1.9)              9.2
  Total household income:                    474
   Less than $20,000                                              12.7       (1.5)             19.9
   $20,000 to $40,000                                             17.3       (1.7)             21.7
   $40,000 to $60,000                                             13.5       (1.6)             16.8
   $60,000 to $100,000                                            24.5       (2.0)             21.2
   $100,000 or more                                               32.1       (2.1)             20.4
  Region:                                    498
   Northeast                                                      22.3       (1.9)             18.3
   Midwest                                                        23.9       (1.9)             21.7
   South                                                          37.1       (2.2)             37.0
   West                                                           16.7       (1.7)             23.0
Sources: author’s visibility survey; 2010 American Community Survey, 2010 Census, and 2011 Current
Population Survey.
   a
      Entire-population estimates for Household size, Children under 18 in household, and Total household
income; 18+-population estimates for all other variables; see appendix table A.4 for further detail.
    b
      Number of respondents reporting demographic characteristic (out of a total of 500 respondents).
    c
      Top-coded at 8 (in visibility survey).




                                                   4
                   Table A.2: 2014 Online Survey, Respondent Demographics


                                                        Visibility Survey                  Census Etc.a

                                        Observationsb            Value       (SE)             Value
  Mean values:
  Age                                       1076                  47.2       (0.5)             46.4
  Household sizec                           1075                  2.7        (0.0)             2.6
  Children under 18 in household            1066                  0.6        (0.0)             0.6
  Percent distribution:
  Female                                    1079                  53.7       (1.5)             51.5
  Black                                     1079                  9.1        (0.9)             12.0
  Hispanic                                  1077                  21.9       (1.3)             14.2
  Married                                   1078                  48.5       (1.5)             51.4
  Employed                                  1074                  53.0       (1.5)             58.6
  Education                                 1079
   Elementary (0-8)                                               0.0        (0.0)             5.6
   High school (9-12)                                             22.5       (1.3)             37.8
   College (13-16)                                                60.8       (1.5)             47.5
   Graduate school (17 or more)                                   16.7       (1.1)              9.2
  Total household income:                   1078
   Less than $20,000                                              16.9       (1.1)             19.9
   $20,000 to $40,000                                             24.8       (1.3)             21.7
   $40,000 to $60,000                                             18.7       (1.2)             16.8
   $60,000 to $100,000                                            22.9       (1.3)             21.2
   $100,000 or more                                               16.7       (1.1)             20.4
  Region:                                   1052
   Northeast                                                      18.9       (1.2)             18.3
   Midwest                                                        20.1       (1.2)             21.7
   South                                                          36.6       (1.5)             37.0
   West                                                           24.4       (1.3)             23.0
Sources: author’s visibility survey; 2010 American Community Survey, 2010 Census, and 2011 Current
Population Survey.
   a
      Entire-population estimates for Household size, Children under 18 in household, and Total household
income; 18+-population estimates for all other variables; see appendix table A.4 for further detail.
    b
      Number of respondents reporting demographic characteristic (out of a total of 1079 respondents).
    c
      Top-coded at 8 (in visibility survey).




                                                   5
             Table A.3: 2015 Online Survey, Clothing, Respondent Demographics


                                                        Visibility Survey                  Census Etc.a

                                        Observationsb            Value       (SE)             Value
  Mean values:
  Age                                       1418                  49.2       (0.4)             46.4
  Household sizec                           1423                  2.7        (0.0)             2.6
  Children under 18 in household            1412                  0.6        (0.0)             0.6
  Percent distribution:
  Female                                    1425                  51.4       (1.3)             51.5
  Black                                     1425                  8.3        (0.7)             12.0
  Hispanic                                  1426                  9.5        (0.8)             14.2
  Married                                   1425                  63.0       (1.3)             51.4
  Employed                                  1424                  59.6       (1.3)             58.6
  Education                                 1425
   Elementary (0-8)                                               0.1        (0.1)             5.6
   High school (9-12)                                             17.1       (1.0)             37.8
   College (13-16)                                                58.2       (1.3)             47.5
   Graduate school (17 or more)                                   24.6       (1.1)              9.2
  Total household income:                   1424
   Less than $20,000                                              10.0       (0.8)             19.9
   $20,000 to $40,000                                             14.0       (0.9)             21.7
   $40,000 to $60,000                                             14.7       (0.9)             16.8
   $60,000 to $100,000                                            27.8       (1.2)             21.2
   $100,000 or more                                               33.4       (1.2)             20.4
  Region:                                   1400
   Northeast                                                      23.2       (1.1)             18.3
   Midwest                                                        18.6       (1.0)             21.7
   South                                                          35.4       (1.3)             37.0
   West                                                           22.8       (1.1)             23.0
Sources: author’s visibility survey; 2010 American Community Survey, 2010 Census, and 2011 Current
Population Survey.
   a
      Entire-population estimates for Household size, Children under 18 in household, and Total household
income; 18+-population estimates for all other variables; see appendix table A.4 for further detail.
    b
      Number of respondents reporting demographic characteristic (out of a total of 1426 respondents).
    c
      Top-coded at 8 (in visibility survey).




                                                   6
Table A.4: Data Source and Variable Construction for Census Etc Column in Tables A.1–A.3

 Variable      Tables                                      Source                Notes
 Age           Table PCT12: SEX BY AGE - Universe:         2010 Census Sum-      Calculated mean for 18
               Total population                            mary File 1           years and over.
 Household     Table DP-1: Profile of General Population   2010 Census Sum-      Given as the average
 size          and Housing Characteristics                 mary File 1           household size.
 Children      Table DP-1: Profile of General Population   2010 Census Sum-      Including other rela-
 under 18 in   and Housing Characteristics                 mary File 1           tive and non-relative
 household                                                                       children under 18.
 Female        Table DP-1: Profile of General Population   2010 Census Sum-      Calculated for 18 years
               and Housing Characteristics                 mary File 1           and over.
 Black         Table QT-PL: Race, Hispanic or Latino,      2010 Census Na-       Calculated for 18 years
               Age, and Housing Occupancy: 2010            tional   Summary      and over.
                                                           File of Redistrict-
                                                           ing Data
 Hispanic      Table QT-PL: Race, Hispanic or Latino,      2010 Census Na-       Calculated as Hispanic
               Age, and Housing Occupancy: 2010            tional   Summary      or Latino (of any race)
                                                           File of Redistrict-   for 18 years and over.
                                                           ing Data
 Married       Table B12002: SEX BY MARITAL STA-           2010        Ameri-    Calculated as married,
               TUS BY AGE FOR THE POPULATION               can    Community      excluding separated,
               15 YEARS AND OVER - Universe: Popu-         Survey      1-Year    for 18 years and over.
               lation 15 years and over                    Estimates
 Employed      Table B01001: SEX BY AGE - Universe:        2010        Ameri-    Calculated percent em-
               Total population. Table B21005: AGE BY      can    Community      ployed for 18 years and
               VETERAN STATUS BY EMPLOYMENT                Survey      1-Year    over.
               STATUS FOR THE CIVILIAN POPU-               Estimates
               LATION 18 TO 64 - Universe: Popula-
               tion 16 years and over. Table B23001:
               SEX BY AGE BY EMPLOYMENT STA-
               TUS FOR THE POPULATION 16 YEARS
               AND OVER - Universe: Population 16
               years and over
 Education     Table B15001: SEX BY AGE BY EDUCA-          2010        Ameri-    Calculated   distribu-
               TIONAL ATTAINMENT FOR THE POP-              can    Community      tion for 18 years and
               ULATION 18 YEARS AND OVER - Uni-            Survey      1-Year    over.
               verse: Population 18 years and over         Estimates
 Total         Table HINC-06: Income Distribution to       Current Popula-       Total household     in-
 household     $250,000 or More for Households: 2010       tion Survey, 2011     come.
 income                                                    Annual       Social
                                                           and     Economic
                                                           Supplement
 Region        Table PCT12: SEX BY AGE - Universe:         2010 Census Sum-      Chose geographic units
               Total population                            mary File 1           as regions. Calculated
                                                                                 for 18 years and over.




                                                  7
         Table A.5: 2014 Telephone Survey, Notice More (NM) Scores and Rankings


 Expenditure Category      Avg. Coded Response            Top Two Responses        Top Three Responses

                         Score    (SE)     [Rank]       Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]   Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]
 Car (cars)               0.72    (0.01)     [ 1]       0.69    (0.02)    [ 1]    0.83    (0.02)    [ 1]
 Cig (cigarettes)         0.68    (0.02)     [ 2]       0.67    (0.02)    [ 2]    0.78    (0.02)    [ 3]
 Clo (clothing)           0.66    (0.02)     [ 3]       0.63    (0.02)    [ 3]    0.79    (0.02)    [ 2]
 Jwl (jewelry)            0.63    (0.02)     [ 4]       0.60    (0.02)    [ 4]    0.75    (0.02)    [ 5]
 Ot1 (recreation 1)       0.62    (0.01)     [ 5]       0.56    (0.02)    [ 5]    0.77    (0.02)    [ 4]
 Fur (furniture)          0.59    (0.01)     [ 6]       0.50    (0.02)    [ 7]    0.73    (0.02)    [ 7]
 FdO (food out)           0.57    (0.01)     [ 7]       0.51    (0.02)    [ 6]    0.75    (0.02)    [ 6]
 AlO (alcohol out)        0.56    (0.02)     [ 8]       0.49    (0.02)    [ 8]    0.70    (0.02)    [ 9]
 Ot2 (recreation 2)       0.56    (0.01)     [ 9]       0.47    (0.02)    [10]    0.72    (0.02)    [ 8]
 AlH (alcohol home)       0.55    (0.02)     [10]       0.48    (0.02)    [ 9]    0.68    (0.02)    [10]
 Brb (barbers etc)        0.53    (0.02)     [11]       0.45    (0.02)    [11]    0.65    (0.02)    [13]
 Edu (education)          0.52    (0.01)     [12]       0.43    (0.02)    [12]    0.65    (0.02)    [12]
 Bks (books etc)          0.50    (0.01)     [13]       0.40    (0.02)    [13]    0.67    (0.02)    [11]
 FdH (food home)          0.49    (0.01)     [14]       0.37    (0.02)    [16]    0.64    (0.02)    [14]
 Hom (rent/home)          0.48    (0.02)     [15]       0.40    (0.02)    [14]    0.57    (0.02)    [16]
 Cel (cell phone)         0.46    (0.02)     [16]       0.40    (0.02)    [15]    0.56    (0.02)    [17]
 Htl (hotels etc)         0.45    (0.01)     [17]       0.34    (0.02)    [18]    0.60    (0.02)    [15]
 Bus (public trans.)      0.44    (0.02)     [18]       0.35    (0.02)    [17]    0.53    (0.02)    [18]
 CMn (car repair)         0.42    (0.01)     [19]       0.30    (0.02)    [20]    0.52    (0.02)    [20]
 Air (air travel)         0.41    (0.02)     [20]       0.30    (0.02)    [21]    0.52    (0.02)    [19]
 Gas (gasoline)           0.40    (0.02)     [21]       0.31    (0.02)    [19]    0.48    (0.02)    [21]
 Med (health care)        0.38    (0.01)     [22]       0.25    (0.02)    [22]    0.46    (0.02)    [22]
 Utl (home utilities)     0.34    (0.02)     [23]       0.24    (0.02)    [23]    0.41    (0.02)    [23]
 Lry (laundry)            0.33    (0.02)     [24]       0.24    (0.02)    [24]    0.38    (0.02)    [24]
 Tel (home phone)         0.31    (0.02)     [25]       0.21    (0.02)    [25]    0.37    (0.02)    [25]
 Cha (charities)          0.30    (0.01)     [26]       0.20    (0.02)    [26]    0.36    (0.02)    [26]
 CIn (car insur.)         0.27    (0.01)     [27]       0.17    (0.02)    [27]    0.32    (0.02)    [27]
 Fee (legal fees)         0.25    (0.01)     [28]       0.13    (0.01)    [28]    0.27    (0.02)    [28]
 HIn (home insur.)        0.20    (0.01)     [29]       0.11    (0.01)    [29]    0.21    (0.02)    [29]
 LIn (life insur.)        0.17    (0.01)     [30]       0.10    (0.01)    [30]    0.18    (0.02)    [30]
 Und (underwear)          0.16    (0.01)     [31]       0.09    (0.01)    [31]    0.16    (0.02)    [31]
Source: author’s visibility survey (500 respondents).




                                                    8
         Table A.6: 2014 Online Survey, Notice More (NM) Measures and Rankings


 Expenditure Category      Avg. Coded Response            Top Two Responses        Top Three Responses

                         Score    (SE)     [Rank]       Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]   Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]
 Car (cars)               0.64    (0.02)     [ 1]       0.61    (0.03)    [ 1]    0.83    (0.02)    [ 1]
 Cig (cigarettes)         0.62    (0.02)     [ 2]       0.58    (0.03)    [ 3]    0.76    (0.03)    [ 4]
 Jwl (jewelry)            0.62    (0.02)     [ 3]       0.59    (0.03)    [ 2]    0.77    (0.03)    [ 2]
 Fur (furniture)          0.60    (0.02)     [ 4]       0.52    (0.03)    [ 5]    0.75    (0.03)    [ 5]
 Clo (clothing)           0.59    (0.02)     [ 5]       0.52    (0.03)    [ 4]    0.74    (0.03)    [ 6]
 Ot1 (recreation 1)       0.57    (0.02)     [ 6]       0.47    (0.03)    [ 6]    0.77    (0.03)    [ 3]
 AlO (alcohol out)        0.52    (0.02)     [ 7]       0.41    (0.03)    [ 9]    0.70    (0.03)    [ 7]
 AlH (alcohol home)       0.52    (0.02)     [ 8]       0.41    (0.03)    [ 8]    0.68    (0.03)    [ 9]
 FdO (food out)           0.52    (0.02)     [ 9]       0.42    (0.03)    [ 7]    0.69    (0.03)    [ 8]
 Brb (barbers etc)        0.50    (0.02)     [10]       0.39    (0.03)    [10]    0.67    (0.03)    [10]
 Ot2 (recreation 2)       0.49    (0.02)     [11]       0.36    (0.03)    [11]    0.64    (0.03)    [11]
 FdH (food home)          0.45    (0.02)     [12]       0.30    (0.03)    [14]    0.63    (0.03)    [12]
 Bks (books etc)          0.44    (0.02)     [13]       0.31    (0.03)    [12]    0.58    (0.03)    [14]
 Htl (hotels etc)         0.44    (0.02)     [14]       0.29    (0.03)    [16]    0.58    (0.03)    [13]
 Air (air travel)         0.43    (0.02)     [15]       0.31    (0.03)    [13]    0.57    (0.03)    [15]
 Bus (public trans.)      0.42    (0.02)     [16]       0.30    (0.03)    [15]    0.56    (0.03)    [17]
 Edu (education)          0.40    (0.02)     [17]       0.24    (0.03)    [20]    0.56    (0.03)    [16]
 Cel (cell phone)         0.39    (0.02)     [18]       0.26    (0.03)    [18]    0.52    (0.03)    [18]
 CMn (car repair)         0.39    (0.02)     [19]       0.25    (0.03)    [19]    0.49    (0.03)    [19]
 Hom (rent/home)          0.37    (0.02)     [20]       0.27    (0.03)    [17]    0.46    (0.03)    [20]
 Med (health care)        0.34    (0.02)     [21]       0.19    (0.02)    [24]    0.42    (0.03)    [21]
 Gas (gasoline)           0.33    (0.02)     [22]       0.20    (0.02)    [23]    0.41    (0.03)    [22]
 Tel (home phone)         0.32    (0.02)     [23]       0.23    (0.03)    [21]    0.40    (0.03)    [23]
 Cha (charities)          0.32    (0.02)     [24]       0.21    (0.02)    [22]    0.40    (0.03)    [25]
 Lry (laundry)            0.30    (0.02)     [25]       0.17    (0.02)    [26]    0.40    (0.03)    [24]
 Utl (home utilities)     0.29    (0.02)     [26]       0.18    (0.02)    [25]    0.35    (0.03)    [26]
 CIn (car insur.)         0.25    (0.02)     [27]       0.16    (0.02)    [27]    0.30    (0.03)    [27]
 Fee (legal fees)         0.25    (0.02)     [28]       0.14    (0.02)    [29]    0.29    (0.03)    [28]
 HIn (home insur.)        0.22    (0.02)     [29]       0.13    (0.02)    [31]    0.25    (0.03)    [29]
 LIn (life insur.)        0.21    (0.02)     [30]       0.14    (0.02)    [28]    0.24    (0.03)    [30]
 Und (underwear)          0.19    (0.02)     [31]       0.14    (0.02)    [30]    0.21    (0.02)    [31]
Source: author’s visibility survey (277 respondents).




                                                    9
          Table A.7: 2014 Online Survey, Notice Less (NL) Measures and Rankings


 Expenditure Category      Avg. Coded Response            Top Two Responses        Top Three Responses

                         Score    (SE)     [Rank]       Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]   Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]
 Fur (furniture)          0.55    (0.02)     [ 1]       0.46    (0.03)    [ 2]    0.68    (0.03)    [ 1]
 Cig (cigarettes)         0.52    (0.02)     [ 2]       0.51    (0.03)    [ 1]    0.61    (0.03)    [ 5]
 Ot1 (recreation 1)       0.50    (0.02)     [ 3]       0.39    (0.03)    [ 4]    0.63    (0.03)    [ 3]
 Clo (clothing)           0.49    (0.02)     [ 4]       0.41    (0.03)    [ 3]    0.63    (0.03)    [ 2]
 Car (cars)               0.49    (0.02)     [ 5]       0.35    (0.03)    [ 7]    0.62    (0.03)    [ 4]
 AlH (alcohol home)       0.45    (0.02)     [ 6]       0.38    (0.03)    [ 5]    0.57    (0.03)    [ 8]
 FdO (food out)           0.45    (0.02)     [ 7]       0.36    (0.03)    [ 6]    0.60    (0.03)    [ 6]
 Brb (barbers etc)        0.43    (0.02)     [ 8]       0.31    (0.03)    [12]    0.57    (0.03)    [ 7]
 Ot2 (recreation 2)       0.43    (0.02)     [ 9]       0.31    (0.03)    [11]    0.56    (0.03)    [ 9]
 Jwl (jewelry)            0.42    (0.02)     [10]       0.34    (0.03)    [ 8]    0.52    (0.03)    [12]
 FdH (food home)          0.42    (0.02)     [11]       0.29    (0.03)    [13]    0.56    (0.03)    [10]
 AlO (alcohol out)        0.42    (0.02)     [12]       0.32    (0.03)    [10]    0.56    (0.03)    [11]
 Cel (cell phone)         0.40    (0.02)     [13]       0.32    (0.03)    [ 9]    0.51    (0.03)    [13]
 CMn (car repair)         0.38    (0.02)     [14]       0.25    (0.03)    [20]    0.49    (0.03)    [14]
 Hom (rent/home)          0.38    (0.02)     [15]       0.28    (0.03)    [14]    0.47    (0.03)    [16]
 Bks (books etc)          0.38    (0.02)     [16]       0.26    (0.03)    [17]    0.48    (0.03)    [15]
 Lry (laundry)            0.36    (0.02)     [17]       0.27    (0.03)    [15]    0.46    (0.03)    [17]
 Bus (public trans.)      0.36    (0.02)     [18]       0.27    (0.03)    [16]    0.46    (0.03)    [18]
 Edu (education)          0.34    (0.02)     [19]       0.19    (0.02)    [23]    0.43    (0.03)    [20]
 Gas (gasoline)           0.34    (0.02)     [20]       0.26    (0.03)    [18]    0.44    (0.03)    [19]
 Utl (home utilities)     0.33    (0.02)     [21]       0.25    (0.03)    [19]    0.41    (0.03)    [21]
 Htl (hotels etc)         0.32    (0.02)     [22]       0.18    (0.02)    [25]    0.38    (0.03)    [23]
 Tel (home phone)         0.32    (0.02)     [23]       0.21    (0.03)    [21]    0.41    (0.03)    [22]
 Med (health care)        0.31    (0.02)     [24]       0.19    (0.02)    [24]    0.38    (0.03)    [24]
 Air (air travel)         0.30    (0.02)     [25]       0.16    (0.02)    [27]    0.36    (0.03)    [25]
 Cha (charities)          0.26    (0.02)     [26]       0.19    (0.02)    [22]    0.29    (0.03)    [27]
 CIn (car insur.)         0.26    (0.02)     [27]       0.17    (0.02)    [26]    0.30    (0.03)    [26]
 HIn (home insur.)        0.22    (0.02)     [28]       0.13    (0.02)    [30]    0.25    (0.03)    [28]
 Fee (legal fees)         0.21    (0.02)     [29]       0.14    (0.02)    [28]    0.24    (0.03)    [29]
 Und (underwear)          0.20    (0.02)     [30]       0.13    (0.02)    [29]    0.22    (0.03)    [30]
 LIn (life insur.)        0.19    (0.02)     [31]       0.12    (0.02)    [31]    0.22    (0.03)    [31]
Source: author’s visibility survey (263 respondents).




                                                    10
       Table A.8: 2014 Online Survey, Impression More (IM) Measures and Rankings


 Expenditure Category      Avg. Coded Response            Top Two Responses        Top Three Responses

                         Score    (SE)     [Rank]       Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]   Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]
 Cha (charities)          0.64    (0.01)     [ 1]       0.47    (0.03)    [ 1]    0.94    (0.01)    [ 8]
 Edu (education)          0.64    (0.01)     [ 2]       0.46    (0.03)    [ 2]    0.96    (0.01)    [ 1]
 Bks (books etc)          0.60    (0.01)     [ 3]       0.38    (0.03)    [ 3]    0.95    (0.01)    [ 6]
 LIn (life insur.)        0.59    (0.01)     [ 4]       0.33    (0.03)    [ 4]    0.96    (0.01)    [ 2]
 HIn (home insur.)        0.57    (0.01)     [ 5]       0.27    (0.03)    [ 6]    0.95    (0.01)    [ 4]
 Med (health care)        0.57    (0.01)     [ 6]       0.25    (0.03)    [ 8]    0.95    (0.01)    [ 3]
 CMn (car repair)         0.57    (0.01)     [ 7]       0.27    (0.03)    [ 7]    0.95    (0.01)    [ 5]
 CIn (car insur.)         0.56    (0.01)     [ 8]       0.24    (0.03)    [12]    0.94    (0.01)    [ 9]
 Bus (public trans.)      0.56    (0.01)     [ 9]       0.25    (0.03)    [10]    0.94    (0.01)    [10]
 Fur (furniture)          0.56    (0.01)     [10]       0.25    (0.03)    [ 9]    0.93    (0.02)    [11]
 Ot1 (recreation 1)       0.55    (0.01)     [11]       0.28    (0.03)    [ 5]    0.87    (0.02)    [21]
 Htl (hotels etc)         0.55    (0.01)     [12]       0.24    (0.03)    [11]    0.91    (0.02)    [15]
 Hom (rent/home)          0.54    (0.01)     [13]       0.19    (0.02)    [17]    0.92    (0.02)    [13]
 Und (underwear)          0.54    (0.01)     [14]       0.16    (0.02)    [25]    0.94    (0.01)    [ 7]
 FdH (food home)          0.54    (0.01)     [15]       0.18    (0.02)    [21]    0.92    (0.02)    [12]
 Clo (clothing)           0.53    (0.01)     [16]       0.20    (0.02)    [15]    0.88    (0.02)    [19]
 Fee (legal fees)         0.53    (0.01)     [17]       0.18    (0.02)    [22]    0.92    (0.02)    [14]
 Ot2 (recreation 2)       0.53    (0.01)     [18]       0.20    (0.02)    [16]    0.86    (0.02)    [23]
 Lry (laundry)            0.53    (0.01)     [19]       0.19    (0.02)    [20]    0.90    (0.02)    [16]
 Car (cars)               0.53    (0.01)     [20]       0.21    (0.02)    [14]    0.87    (0.02)    [22]
 Air (air travel)         0.52    (0.01)     [21]       0.17    (0.02)    [23]    0.88    (0.02)    [20]
 Brb (barbers etc)        0.52    (0.01)     [22]       0.23    (0.03)    [13]    0.83    (0.02)    [26]
 Tel (home phone)         0.52    (0.01)     [23]       0.15    (0.02)    [26]    0.89    (0.02)    [18]
 Gas (gasoline)           0.52    (0.01)     [24]       0.14    (0.02)    [27]    0.89    (0.02)    [17]
 Utl (home utilities)     0.51    (0.01)     [25]       0.16    (0.02)    [24]    0.86    (0.02)    [24]
 FdO (food out)           0.51    (0.01)     [26]       0.19    (0.02)    [18]    0.82    (0.02)    [27]
 Jwl (jewelry)            0.51    (0.01)     [27]       0.19    (0.02)    [19]    0.81    (0.02)    [28]
 Cel (cell phone)         0.50    (0.01)     [28]       0.14    (0.02)    [29]    0.84    (0.02)    [25]
 AlO (alcohol out)        0.44    (0.01)     [29]       0.14    (0.02)    [28]    0.68    (0.03)    [29]
 AlH (alcohol home)       0.42    (0.01)     [30]       0.12    (0.02)    [30]    0.64    (0.03)    [30]
 Cig (cigarettes)         0.34    (0.02)     [31]       0.09    (0.02)    [31]    0.51    (0.03)    [31]
Source: author’s visibility survey (272 respondents).




                                                    11
        Table A.9: 2014 Online Survey, Impression Less (IL) Measures and Rankings


 Expenditure Category      Avg. Coded Response            Top Two Responses        Top Three Responses

                         Score    (SE)     [Rank]       Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]   Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]
 Cig (cigarettes)         0.65    (0.02)     [ 1]       0.46    (0.03)    [ 1]    0.88    (0.02)    [23]
 AlH (alcohol home)       0.65    (0.01)     [ 2]       0.45    (0.03)    [ 2]    0.94    (0.01)    [12]
 AlO (alcohol out)        0.63    (0.01)     [ 3]       0.42    (0.03)    [ 3]    0.94    (0.01)    [11]
 Hom (rent/home)          0.62    (0.01)     [ 4]       0.37    (0.03)    [ 6]    0.96    (0.01)    [ 3]
 Cel (cell phone)         0.62    (0.01)     [ 5]       0.38    (0.03)    [ 5]    0.95    (0.01)    [ 6]
 Ot2 (recreation 2)       0.61    (0.01)     [ 6]       0.40    (0.03)    [ 4]    0.92    (0.02)    [16]
 FdO (food out)           0.61    (0.01)     [ 7]       0.37    (0.03)    [ 9]    0.95    (0.01)    [ 9]
 Ot1 (recreation 1)       0.61    (0.01)     [ 8]       0.36    (0.03)    [10]    0.96    (0.01)    [ 2]
 Jwl (jewelry)            0.61    (0.01)     [ 9]       0.34    (0.03)    [12]    0.95    (0.01)    [ 7]
 Car (cars)               0.61    (0.01)     [10]       0.37    (0.03)    [ 7]    0.94    (0.01)    [10]
 Gas (gasoline)           0.61    (0.01)     [11]       0.35    (0.03)    [11]    0.95    (0.01)    [ 8]
 Tel (home phone)         0.61    (0.01)     [12]       0.33    (0.03)    [13]    0.96    (0.01)    [ 1]
 Air (air travel)         0.60    (0.01)     [13]       0.33    (0.03)    [14]    0.96    (0.01)    [ 5]
 Utl (home utilities)     0.60    (0.01)     [14]       0.37    (0.03)    [ 8]    0.90    (0.02)    [19]
 Brb (barbers etc)        0.59    (0.01)     [15]       0.31    (0.03)    [15]    0.93    (0.02)    [15]
 FdH (food home)          0.59    (0.01)     [16]       0.31    (0.03)    [17]    0.92    (0.02)    [17]
 Fur (furniture)          0.59    (0.01)     [17]       0.31    (0.03)    [16]    0.94    (0.01)    [13]
 Bus (public trans.)      0.58    (0.01)     [18]       0.28    (0.03)    [22]    0.96    (0.01)    [ 4]
 Htl (hotels etc)         0.58    (0.01)     [19]       0.29    (0.03)    [18]    0.93    (0.02)    [14]
 Fee (legal fees)         0.57    (0.01)     [20]       0.25    (0.03)    [26]    0.92    (0.02)    [18]
 Clo (clothing)           0.56    (0.01)     [21]       0.28    (0.03)    [20]    0.89    (0.02)    [21]
 CMn (car repair)         0.56    (0.01)     [22]       0.28    (0.03)    [21]    0.83    (0.02)    [29]
 LIn (life insur.)        0.55    (0.01)     [23]       0.25    (0.03)    [25]    0.90    (0.02)    [20]
 CIn (car insur.)         0.55    (0.01)     [24]       0.28    (0.03)    [19]    0.87    (0.02)    [25]
 Lry (laundry)            0.55    (0.01)     [25]       0.26    (0.03)    [23]    0.87    (0.02)    [24]
 Bks (books etc)          0.54    (0.01)     [26]       0.24    (0.03)    [28]    0.87    (0.02)    [26]
 Und (underwear)          0.54    (0.01)     [27]       0.21    (0.02)    [31]    0.88    (0.02)    [22]
 Med (health care)        0.53    (0.01)     [28]       0.25    (0.03)    [24]    0.80    (0.02)    [31]
 Cha (charities)          0.53    (0.01)     [29]       0.22    (0.03)    [30]    0.84    (0.02)    [28]
 HIn (home insur.)        0.53    (0.01)     [30]       0.23    (0.03)    [29]    0.84    (0.02)    [27]
 Edu (education)          0.53    (0.01)     [31]       0.25    (0.03)    [27]    0.81    (0.02)    [30]
Source: author’s visibility survey (267 respondents).




                                                    12
  Table A.10: 2015 Online Survey, Clothing, Notice More (NM) Measures and Rankings


 Expenditure Category      Avg. Coded Response            Top Two Responses        Top Three Responses

                         Score    (SE)     [Rank]       Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]   Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]
 Owr (outerwear)          0.55    (0.01)     [ 1]       0.44    (0.02)    [ 2]    0.69    (0.02)    [ 1]
 Wmn (women)              0.54    (0.01)     [ 2]       0.46    (0.02)    [ 1]    0.68    (0.02)    [ 2]
 Sts (suits etc)          0.53    (0.01)     [ 3]       0.44    (0.02)    [ 3]    0.66    (0.02)    [ 3]
 Men (men)                0.50    (0.01)     [ 4]       0.38    (0.02)    [ 6]    0.64    (0.02)    [ 4]
 ShW (women’s shoes) 0.49         (0.01)     [ 5]       0.38    (0.02)    [ 5]    0.64    (0.02)    [ 5]
 Acc (accessories)        0.48    (0.01)     [ 6]       0.39    (0.02)    [ 4]    0.60    (0.02)    [ 6]
 Grl (girls)              0.45    (0.01)     [ 7]       0.35    (0.02)    [ 7]    0.59    (0.02)    [ 7]
 Spo (sports)             0.44    (0.01)     [ 8]       0.32    (0.02)    [ 9]    0.57    (0.02)    [ 8]
 Boy (boys)               0.41    (0.01)     [ 9]       0.29    (0.02)    [10]    0.53    (0.02)    [ 9]
 ShM (men’s shoes)        0.41    (0.01)     [10]       0.32    (0.02)    [ 8]    0.51    (0.02)    [10]
 ShG (girls’ shoes)       0.38    (0.01)     [11]       0.29    (0.02)    [11]    0.49    (0.02)    [12]
 Inf (infants)            0.37    (0.01)     [12]       0.28    (0.02)    [12]    0.49    (0.02)    [11]
 ShB (boys’ shoes)        0.37    (0.01)     [13]       0.26    (0.02)    [13]    0.48    (0.02)    [13]
 Oth (luggage etc)        0.34    (0.01)     [14]       0.25    (0.02)    [14]    0.40    (0.02)    [14]
 Soc (socks)              0.22    (0.01)     [15]       0.14    (0.01)    [16]    0.26    (0.02)    [15]
 Nwr (nightwear)          0.20    (0.01)     [16]       0.15    (0.01)    [15]    0.22    (0.02)    [16]
 Uwr (underwear)          0.15    (0.01)     [17]       0.11    (0.01)    [17]    0.18    (0.01)    [17]
Source: author’s visibility survey (713 respondents).


   Table A.11: 2015 Online Survey, Clothing, Notice Less (NL) Measures and Rankings


 Expenditure Category      Avg. Coded Response            Top Two Responses        Top Three Responses

                         Score    (SE)     [Rank]       Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]   Frac.   (SE)     [Rank]
 Wmn (women)              0.43    (0.01)     [ 1]       0.33    (0.02)    [ 1]    0.55    (0.02)    [ 1]
 Men (men)                0.41    (0.01)     [ 2]       0.30    (0.02)    [ 2]    0.52    (0.02)    [ 2]
 Sts (suits etc)          0.41    (0.01)     [ 3]       0.30    (0.02)    [ 3]    0.50    (0.02)    [ 3]
 Owr (outerwear)          0.40    (0.01)     [ 4]       0.28    (0.02)    [ 4]    0.50    (0.02)    [ 4]
 Grl (girls)              0.38    (0.01)     [ 5]       0.28    (0.02)    [ 5]    0.49    (0.02)    [ 5]
 ShW (women’s shoes) 0.37         (0.01)     [ 6]       0.28    (0.02)    [ 6]    0.46    (0.02)    [ 6]
 Boy (boys)               0.37    (0.01)     [ 7]       0.27    (0.02)    [ 7]    0.45    (0.02)    [ 7]
 ShM (men’s shoes)        0.34    (0.01)     [ 8]       0.24    (0.02)    [11]    0.41    (0.02)    [10]
 Inf (infants)            0.34    (0.01)     [ 9]       0.25    (0.02)    [ 8]    0.42    (0.02)    [ 8]
 ShG (girls’ shoes)       0.33    (0.01)     [10]       0.24    (0.02)    [ 9]    0.40    (0.02)    [12]
 Spo (sports)             0.33    (0.01)     [11]       0.20    (0.02)    [13]    0.42    (0.02)    [ 9]
 Acc (accessories)        0.33    (0.01)     [12]       0.21    (0.02)    [12]    0.40    (0.02)    [11]
 ShB (boys’ shoes)        0.32    (0.01)     [13]       0.24    (0.02)    [10]    0.39    (0.02)    [13]
 Oth (luggage etc)        0.24    (0.01)     [14]       0.17    (0.02)    [14]    0.26    (0.02)    [14]
 Soc (socks)              0.20    (0.01)     [15]       0.14    (0.01)    [15]    0.23    (0.02)    [15]
 Nwr (nightwear)          0.19    (0.01)     [16]       0.14    (0.01)    [16]    0.22    (0.02)    [16]
 Uwr (underwear)          0.15    (0.01)     [17]       0.12    (0.01)    [17]    0.18    (0.01)    [17]
Source: author’s visibility survey (713 respondents).




                                                    13
Table A.12: Average Total-Expenditure Elasticity: All Households & by Quintile (31 Cat.)


                              All            Q1            Q2            Q3           Q4             Q5

 FdH (food home)              0.53          0.54           0.57         0.56          0.50          0.47
 FdO (food out)               1.16          1.30           1.27         1.17          1.05          1.03
 Cig (cigarettes)            −0.02          0.37           0.10         0.18         −0.20         −0.60
 AlH (alcohol home)           0.99          0.68           0.99         1.28          1.08          0.88
 AlO (alcohol out)            1.42          1.21           1.54         1.66          1.38          1.26
 Clo (clothing)              1.21          1.26            1.25         1.33          1.19          1.01
 Und (underwear etc.)         1.06          0.79           1.16         1.19          1.20          0.90
 Lry (laundry)                0.60         −0.15          −0.05         0.51          1.17          1.55
 Jwl (jewelry)                1.99          1.52           1.90         2.61          2.14          1.65
 Brb (barbers etc.)           1.30          1.38           1.58         1.29          1.24          0.98
 Hom (rent/home)              0.82          1.00           0.89         0.77          0.72          0.75
 Htl (hotels etc.)           2.27          2.39            2.38         2.29          2.36          1.89
 Fur (furniture)             1.45          1.23            1.84         1.64          1.42          1.08
 Utl (home utilities)         0.55          0.85           0.57         0.49          0.40          0.47
 Tel (home telephone)         0.51          0.67           0.56         0.49          0.30          0.52
 Cel (cell phone)            0.78          1.01            1.03         0.90          0.54          0.37
 HIn (home insurance)         1.59          2.05           1.76         1.34          1.34          1.48
 Med (health care)            1.08          1.31           1.26         1.12          0.93          0.77
 Fee (legal fees)             1.06          1.26           1.21         0.99          1.03          0.80
 LIn (life insur.)           1.52          0.98            1.52         1.72          1.80          1.53
 Car (cars)                  2.67          2.65            2.86         3.23          2.73          1.77
 CMn (car repair)             1.33          1.63           1.58         1.36          1.14          0.89
 Gas (gasoline)              0.83          1.36            1.02         0.84          0.54          0.37
 Cin (car insur.)             0.93          1.53           1.08         0.78          0.69          0.59
 Bus (public trans.)          0.93         −0.09          0.34          1.00          1.66          1.73
 Air (air travel)             2.00          1.96           2.29         1.94          1.96          1.85
 Bks (books etc.)             1.29          1.10           1.21         1.55          1.35          1.20
 Ot1 (recreation 1)           1.51          1.52           1.54         1.61          1.63          1.24
 Ot2 (recreation 2)           1.11          0.99           1.10         1.11          1.19          1.17
 Edu (education)             2.17          1.45            1.67         2.86          2.58          2.18
 Cha (charities)              1.58          1.63           1.69         1.53          1.53          1.49
Notes: Average total-expenditure elasticity, for all households and by total-expenditure quintile (31 cate-
gories). Estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts.




                                                    14
Table A.13: Average Expenditure Shares (percent): All Households & by Quintile (31 Cat.)


                              All           Q1            Q2             Q3            Q4            Q5

 FdH (food home)             12.68         18.34         14.02          12.13         10.52          8.08
 FdO (food out)               4.62          3.78          4.53           4.77          5.04          5.02
 Cig (cigarettes)             0.92         1.68           1.09          0.84           0.64          0.30
 AlH (alcohol home)           0.44         0.48           0.40          0.42           0.49          0.43
 AlO (alcohol out)            0.27         0.19           0.21          0.27           0.33          0.36
 Clo (clothing)              1.65           1.37         1.46            1.71         1.85           1.89
 Und (underwear etc.)         0.11         0.11           0.09           0.11          0.11          0.11
 Lry (laundry)                0.22         0.42           0.21          0.15           0.15         0.19
 Jwl (jewelry)                0.13         0.05           0.08          0.10           0.19          0.26
 Brb (barbers etc.)           0.55          0.37          0.50           0.59          0.63          0.66
 Hom (rent/home)             31.42         34.79         34.17          32.45         29.38         25.93
 Htl (hotels etc.)           0.61          0.13          0.34           0.47          0.78           1.37
 Fur (furniture)              1.52         0.91           1.24          1.56           1.86          2.09
 Utl (home utilities)         6.00          8.10          6.96           6.03          5.01          3.75
 Tel (home telephone)         1.00          1.44          1.13           1.00          0.81          0.59
 Cel (cell phone)            2.08          2.21          2.27           2.28          2.06          1.56
 HIn (home insurance)         1.57          0.82          1.36           1.70          1.75          2.28
 Med (health care)            7.81          6.53          7.85           8.39          8.49          7.82
 Fee (legal fees)             1.38          1.22          1.43           1.45          1.43          1.38
 LIn (life insur.)           0.61          0.39          0.42           0.57          0.69           1.01
 Car (cars)                  4.40          0.65          1.46           2.98          6.32          11.06
 CMn (car repair)             1.79         1.18           1.68          1.93           2.13          2.07
 Gas (gasoline)              6.02          5.97          6.83           6.71          5.97           4.53
 Cin (car insur.)             1.98         1.79           2.33          2.17           1.98          1.64
 Bus (public trans.)          0.38          0.59          0.28           0.28          0.30          0.48
 Air (air travel)             0.54         0.17           0.36          0.48           0.65          1.08
 Bks (books etc.)             0.54         0.44           0.45          0.50           0.63          0.69
 Ot1 (recreation 1)           1.11         0.67           0.84          1.12           1.29         1.68
 Ot2 (recreation 2)           3.51         3.27           3.34          3.43           3.58         3.99
 Edu (education)             1.51          0.52          0.63           0.88          1.97           3.71
 Cha (charities)              2.58         1.42           2.04          2.54           2.98          3.98
 Total                      100.00        100.00         100.00        100.00        100.00         100.00
Notes: Average expenditure shares (%), for all households and by total-expenditure quintile (31 categories).
Calculated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts.




                                                    15
Table A.14: Average Total-Expenditure Elasticity: All Households & by Quintile (17 Sub.)


                                All            Q1            Q2             Q3             Q4            Q5

 Acc (accessories)             1.43           1.75           1.20          1.47           1.58           1.17
 Sts (suits etc.)              1.62           1.08           1.70          2.03           1.76           1.42
 Boy (boys)                    1.09           1.67           1.11          1.06           0.91           0.73
 Grl (girls)                   1.29           1.69           1.45          1.29           1.16           0.88
 Men (men)                     1.18           0.99           1.26          1.36           1.25           1.01
 Wmn (women)                   1.28           1.32           1.36          1.31           1.23           1.14
 Inf (infants)                 0.88           1.52           1.18          0.83           0.50           0.34
 Nwr (nightwear)               1.15           1.08           1.33          1.23           1.09           0.99
 Oth (luggage etc.)            1.39           1.31           1.25          1.54           1.63           1.20
 Owr (outerwear)               1.23           1.00           1.33          1.37           1.30           1.12
 ShB (boys’ shoes)             1.08           1.94           1.04          0.99           0.81           0.67
 ShG (girls’ shoes)            1.19           1.78           1.28          1.10           0.95           0.88
 ShM (men’s shoes)             1.05           0.87           1.00          1.30           1.17           0.85
 ShW (women’s shoes)           1.11           1.08           1.14          1.18           1.13           1.00
 Soc (socks)                   1.06           0.74           1.16          1.28           1.18           0.87
 Spo (sports)                  1.40           1.03           1.50          1.65           1.53           1.25
 Uwr (underwear)               0.99           0.68           1.02          1.14           1.16           0.93
Notes: Average total-expenditure elasticity, for all households and by total-expenditure quintile (17 clothing-
only subcategories). Estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts.


Table A.15: Average Expenditure Shares (percent): All Households & by Quintile (17 Sub.)


                                All            Q1            Q2             Q3             Q4            Q5

 Acc (accessories)             0.05           0.04           0.04          0.05           0.06           0.08
 Sts (suits etc.)              0.05           0.03           0.03          0.05           0.07           0.09
 Boy (boys)                    0.10           0.09           0.10          0.11           0.11           0.10
 Grl (girls)                   0.11           0.07           0.10          0.11           0.13           0.12
 Men (men)                     0.26           0.23           0.23          0.26           0.30           0.30
 Wmn (women)                   0.44           0.34           0.38          0.47           0.48           0.54
 Inf (infants)                 0.12           0.10           0.14          0.14           0.12           0.08
 Nwr (nightwear)               0.03           0.03           0.02          0.03           0.03           0.03
 Oth (luggage etc.)            0.03           0.03           0.03          0.03           0.04           0.05
 Owr (outerwear)               0.10           0.08           0.08          0.10           0.10           0.12
 ShB (boys’ shoes)             0.04           0.04           0.04          0.05           0.04           0.04
 ShG (girls’ shoes)            0.03           0.03           0.03          0.04           0.04           0.03
 ShM (men’s shoes)             0.12           0.12           0.10          0.11           0.13           0.12
 ShW (women’s shoes)           0.14           0.14           0.13          0.15           0.15           0.16
 Soc (socks)                   0.02           0.02           0.02          0.02           0.02           0.02
 Spo (sports)                  0.05           0.03           0.04          0.05           0.06           0.07
 Uwr (underwear)               0.06           0.06           0.05          0.06           0.06           0.06
 Total clothing                1.76           1.48           1.55          1.82           1.96           2.00
Notes: Average expenditure shares (%), for all households and by total-expenditure quintile (17 clothing-
only subcategories). Calculated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts.


                                                      16
         Table A.16: Elasticity and Four Visibility Measures: First Income Quintile


                            (1)     (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)


 NM (Notice More)        −0.84                                   −0.33      4.06                       5.90
                         (0.79)                                  (0.83)    (1.90)                     (2.33)
 NL (Notice Less)                  −2.15                                   −7.44    −1.80             −9.88
                                   (1.07)                                  (2.68)   (1.20)            (3.51)
 IM (Impressions More)                        3.62                3.33                        3.11     3.80
                                             (1.82)              (1.98)                      (2.26)   (2.18)
 IL (Impressions Less)                                 −3.33                        −1.66    −1.09     4.83
                                                       (2.32)                       (2.54)   (2.81)   (3.30)

 Observations              31        31       31        31         31        31       31       31       31
 R2                       0.04      0.12     0.12      0.07       0.13      0.25     0.14     0.13     0.33
 Adj. R2                  0.00      0.09     0.09      0.03       0.06      0.19     0.07     0.06     0.23
 F -test (p-value)        0.30      0.05     0.06      0.16       0.15      0.02     0.13     0.15     0.03
Notes: Weighted OLS regressions. Dependent variable: average total-expenditure elasticity for first total-
expenditure quintile (Q1 column of appendix table A.12), estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX
extracts. Weights: average expenditure shares (Q1 column of appendix table A.13), estimated from the
same data. Independent variables: visibility measures (first column of appendix tables A.6–A.9), based on
author’s visibility survey. All regressions include a constant (not reported). Standard errors in parentheses.



        Table A.17: Elasticity and Four Visibility Measures: Second Income Quintile


                           (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)


 NM (Notice More)         0.94                                   1.76      7.74                        8.71
                         (0.87)                                 (0.81)    (1.74)                      (1.97)
 NL (Notice Less)                 −0.41                                   −10.24     0.91             −11.12
                                  (1.22)                                  (2.40)    (1.33)            (2.99)
 IM (Impressions More)                       4.93                6.45                         3.65     5.83
                                            (2.13)              (2.13)                       (2.73)   (2.17)
 IL (Impressions Less)                                −4.82                         −5.76    −2.31     4.26
                                                      (2.43)                        (2.80)   (3.04)   (3.00)

 Observations              31       31        31       31        31         31       31       31        31
 R2                       0.04     0.00      0.16     0.12      0.28       0.42     0.13     0.17      0.54
 Adj. R2                  0.01    −0.03      0.13     0.09      0.22       0.38     0.07     0.11      0.47
 F -test (p-value)        0.29    0.74       0.03     0.06      0.01       0.00     0.13     0.07      0.00
Notes: See table A.16 notes; replace first with second income quintile.




                                                      17
         Table A.18: Elasticity and Four Visibility Measures: Third Income Quintile


                           (1)     (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)         (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)


 NM (Notice More)         2.63                                3.54        10.74                      11.52
                         (0.96)                              (0.88)       (1.76)                     (1.92)
 NL (Notice Less)                  1.37                                  −12.43     3.22             −13.13
                                  (1.49)                                 (2.47)    (1.60)            (2.98)
 IM (Impressions More)                      4.82              7.95                           3.62     6.77
                                           (2.88)            (2.46)                         (3.82)   (2.41)
 IL (Impressions Less)                              −4.56                          −8.03    −2.02     5.01
                                                    (3.16)                         (3.47)   (4.15)   (3.17)

 Observations              31       31       31       31       31          31       31       31        31
 R2                       0.21     0.03     0.09     0.07     0.42        0.58     0.18     0.10      0.68
 Adj. R2                  0.18    −0.01     0.06     0.03     0.38        0.55     0.13     0.03      0.63
 F -test (p-value)        0.01    0.37      0.10     0.16     0.00        0.00     0.06     0.24      0.00
Notes: See table A.16 notes; replace first with third income quintile.




        Table A.19: Elasticity and Four Visibility Measures: Fourth Income Quintile


                           (1)     (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)         (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)


 NM (Notice More)         3.20                                4.21        11.58                      12.10
                         (0.94)                              (0.80)       (1.57)                     (1.45)
 NL (Notice Less)                  2.00                                  −13.45     4.05             −13.73
                                  (1.59)                                 (2.30)    (1.72)            (2.36)
 IM (Impressions More)                      5.85              9.70                           5.94     8.96
                                           (3.12)            (2.36)                         (4.38)   (2.14)
 IL (Impressions Less)                              −4.36                          −8.96     0.16     6.58
                                                    (3.55)                         (3.84)   (4.82)   (2.76)

 Observations              31       31       31       31       31          31       31       31        31
 R2                       0.28     0.05     0.11     0.05     0.55        0.68     0.21     0.11      0.81
 Adj. R2                  0.26     0.02     0.08     0.02     0.52        0.65     0.15     0.04      0.78
 F -test (p-value)        0.00     0.22     0.07     0.23     0.00        0.00     0.04     0.20      0.00
Notes: See table A.16 notes; replace first with fourth income quintile.




                                                    18
          Table A.20: Elasticity and Four Visibility Measures: Fifth Income Quintile


                              (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)      (8)     (9)


 NM (Notice More)          1.90                                                  2.83           8.21                            8.14
                          (0.73)                                                (0.58)         (1.23)                          (1.03)
 NL (Notice Less)                        0.82                                              −10.38           2.56               −9.66
                                        (1.20)                                             (1.85)          (1.34)              (1.73)
 IM (Impressions More)                                 5.88                      8.79                                  6.99     8.58
                                                      (2.28)                    (1.80)                                (3.44)   (1.79)
 IL (Impressions Less)                                            −4.11                                    −7.37       1.68     5.46
                                                                  (2.71)                                   (3.11)     (3.84)   (2.28)

 Observations                31           31            31          31           31              31          31         31      31
 R2                         0.19        0.02           0.19        0.07         0.56            0.62        0.18       0.19    0.80
 Adj. R2                    0.16        −0.02          0.16        0.04         0.53            0.59        0.12       0.13    0.77
 F -test (p-value)          0.01         0.50          0.02        0.14         0.00            0.00        0.06       0.05    0.00
Notes: See table A.16 notes; replace first with fifth income quintile.




       Table A.21: Clothing Elasticity and Two Visibility Measures: 14 Subcategories


                          (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)          (7)       (8)

                          -----------All Households -----------           Q1             Q2              Q3           Q4        Q5

 NM (Notice More)       1.33                             3.07          −3.07            1.20             4.38         6.55      5.58
                       (0.60)                           (1.14)         (2.76)          (1.22)           (1.63)       (1.74)    (1.28)
 NL (Notice Less)                       0.94            −2.72           2.10            0.14            −4.04        −6.72     −4.56
                                       (0.94)           (1.56)         (3.83)          (1.73)           (2.28)       (2.33)    (1.65)

 Observations             14             14                14            14               14             14           14        14
 R2                      0.29           0.08              0.44          0.15             0.31           0.44         0.58      0.68
 Adj. R2                 0.23           0.00              0.34         −0.00             0.19           0.34         0.50      0.62
 F -test (p-value)       0.05           0.34              0.04          0.40             0.13           0.04         0.01      0.00
Notes: This table replicates table 6, but drops the three clothing-only subcategories that disaggregate the
original underclothes-and-nightwear (Und) category: nightwear (Nwr), socks (Soc), and underwear (Uwr).
Weighted OLS regressions. Dependent variable: average total-expenditure elasticity, for all households and
by total-expenditure quintile (appendix table A.14), estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts.
Weights: average expenditure shares (appendix table A.15), estimated from the same data. Independent
variables: visibility measures (first column of appendix tables A.10–A.11), based on author’s visibility survey.
All regressions include a constant (not reported). Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                  19
                                               Figure A.1: 31 Engel Curves: Expenditure Levels


                          FdH (food home)                                FdO (food out)                                  Cig (cigarettes)                         AlH (alcohol home)
    10,000




                                                   10,000




                                                                                                                                              1,000
                                                                                                    200 400
                                                                                                       300
          5,000




                                                         5,000




                                                                                                                                                    500
          0




                                                         0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                    0      50,000   100,000                         0     50,000   100,000                         0      50,000   100,000                    0     50,000   100,000


                          AlO (alcohol out)                               Clo (clothing)                               Und (underwear etc.)                          Lry (laundry)
                                                   0 1,000 3,000




                                                                                                    200




                                                                                                                                              400
          600




                                                         2,000
    400




                                                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                    200
          0 200




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                    0      50,000   100,000                         0     50,000   100,000                         0      50,000   100,000                    0     50,000   100,000


                            Jwl (jewelry)                               Brb (barbers etc.)                               Hom (rent/home)                           Htl (hotels etc.)




                                                                                                          40,000
                                                   1,000




                                                                                                                                              4,000
          600
    400




                                                                                                    20,000




                                                                                                                                                    2,000
                                                         500
          0 200




                                                         0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                    0      50,000   100,000                         0     50,000   100,000                         0      50,000   100,000                    0     50,000   100,000


                           Fur (furniture)                              Utl (home utilities)                           Tel (home telephone)                        Cel (cell phone)




                                                                                                                                              2,000
    0 1,000 3,000




                                                                                                         400 800
                                                   4,000




                                                                                                    0 200 600
          2,000




                                                                                                                                                    1,000
                                                         2,000
                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                    0      50,000   100,000                         0     50,000   100,000                         0      50,000   100,000                    0     50,000   100,000


                        HIn (home insurance)                            Med (health care)                                Fee (legal fees)                           LIn (life insur.)
                                                   10,000




                                                                                                    2,000




                                                                                                                                              2,000
    4,000




                                                                                                         1,000




                                                                                                                                                    1,000
                                                         5,000
          2,000
          0




                                                         0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0



                    0      50,000   100,000                         0     50,000   100,000                         0      50,000   100,000                    0     50,000   100,000


                             Car (cars)                                 CMn (car repair)                                  Gas (gasoline)                            Cin (car insur.)
          20,000




                                                   0 1,000 3,000




                                                                                                         5,000




                                                                                                                                              2,000
                                                         2,000
    10,000




                                                                                                                                                    1,000
          0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                    0      50,000   100,000                         0     50,000   100,000                         0      50,000   100,000                    0     50,000   100,000


                         Bus (public trans.)                              Air (air travel)                               Bks (books etc.)                         Ot1 (recreation 1)
                                                   0 1,000 3,000




                                                                                                                                              0 1,000 3,000
    1,000




                                                                                                    1,000
                                                         2,000




                                                                                                                                                    2,000
          500




                                                                                                         500
          0




                                                                                                         0




                    0      50,000   100,000                         0     50,000   100,000                         0      50,000   100,000                    0     50,000   100,000


                         Ot2 (recreation 2)                              Edu (education)                                  Cha (charities)
    10,000




                                                   0 5,000 15,000




                                                                                                    10,000
                                                         10,000
          5,000




                                                                                                         5,000
          0




                                                                                                         0




                    0      50,000   100,000                         0     50,000   100,000                         0      50,000   100,000




Notes: Total annual expenditures (horizontal axis) and category expenditures (vertical axis) are in US$.
Estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts.




                                                                                               20
                                            Figure A.2: 31 Engel Curves: Expenditure Shares


                       FdH (food home)                            FdO (food out)                                Cig (cigarettes)                      AlH (alcohol home)
    25                                          6                                            3                                       .55
                                                5                                                                                      .5
    20                                                                                                                               .45
                                                4                                            2                                         .4
    15                                          3
    10                                                                                       1
     5
     0                                          0                                            0                                            0
                 0       50,000   100,000                0         50,000    100,000                  0         50,000    100,000                 0     50,000   100,000


                       AlO (alcohol out)                            Clo (clothing)                            Und (underwear etc.)                      Lry (laundry)
    .4                                            2                                          .13
                                                                                             .12                                     .8
                                                                                             .11
                                                                                               .1
    .3                                          1.5                                                                                  .6
    .2                                            1                                                                                  .4
    .1                                                                                                                               .2
     0                                               0                                            0                                   0
             0          50,000    100,000                    0      50,000   100,000                      0      50,000   100,000             0        50,000    100,000


                         Jwl (jewelry)                           Brb (barbers etc.)                            Hom (rent/home)                         Htl (hotels etc.)
    .4                                          .7                                           35                                        2
                                                .6                                           30
    .3                                          .5                                           25                                      1.5
                                                .4                                           20                                        1
    .2                                          .3
    .1                                                                                                                                .5
     0                                           0                                               0                                     0
             0          50,000    100,000                0         50,000    100,000                      0      50,000   100,000                 0     50,000   100,000


                         Fur (furniture)                         Utl (home utilities)                         Tel (home telephone)                     Cel (cell phone)
       2                                        8                                              2                                     2.5
     1.5                                        6                                            1.5                                       2
                                                                                                                                     1.5
       1                                        4                                              1
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                2                                             .5
         0                                      0                                              0                                          0
                 0       50,000   100,000                0         50,000    100,000                      0      50,000   100,000                 0     50,000   100,000


                     HIn (home insurance)                        Med (health care)                              Fee (legal fees)                        LIn (life insur.)
    3                                           9                                            1.4                                     1.2
                                                8                                            1.2                                       1
                                                7
    2                                           6                                              1                                      .8
                                                5                                             .8                                      .6
    1                                                                                         .6                                      .4
    0                                           0                                                 0                                       0
             0          50,000    100,000                0         50,000    100,000                      0      50,000   100,000                 0     50,000   100,000


                           Car (cars)                             CMn (car repair)                              Gas (gasoline)                          Cin (car insur.)
    15                                            2                                          7                                       2.5
                                                                                             6                                         2
    10                                          1.5                                          5
                                                                                             4                                       1.5
                                                  1                                          3                                         1
        5
                                                 .5
        0                                         0                                          0                                            0
                 0       50,000   100,000                    0      50,000   100,000                  0         50,000    100,000                 0     50,000   100,000


                      Bus (public trans.)                           Air (air travel)                            Bks (books etc.)                      Ot1 (recreation 1)
     1                                          1.5                                          .8                                        2
    .8                                                                                       .6                                      1.5
    .6                                               1
                                                                                             .4                                        1
    .4                                              .5
    .2                                                                                                                                .5
     0                                               0                                       0                                         0
             0          50,000    100,000                    0      50,000   100,000                  0          50,000   100,000                 0     50,000   100,000


                       Ot2 (recreation 2)                         Edu (education)                               Cha (charities)
     4.5                                        8                                            6
       4
     3.5                                        6
       3                                                                                     4
                                                4
                                                2                                            2
         0                                      0                                            0
                 0       50,000   100,000                0         50,000    100,000                  0         50,000    100,000




Notes: Total annual expenditures (horizontal axis) are in US$. Category expenditure shares (vertical axis)
are in percent of total expenditures. Estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts.




                                                                                        21
                   Figure A.3: 17 Clothes-Only Engel Curves: Expenditure Levels


                Acc (accessories)                   Sts (suits etc.)                    Boy (boys)




                                     200
    100




                                                                       100
                                       100
      50




                                                                           50
      0




                                       0




                                                                           0
            0    50,000   100,000            0      50,000   100,000             0    50,000   100,000


                    Grl (girls)                       Men (men)                       Wmn (women)




                                                                       1,000
    200




                                     400
      100




                                                                           500
                                       200
      0




                                       0




                                                                           0
            0    50,000   100,000            0      50,000   100,000             0    50,000   100,000


                   Inf (infants)                   Nwr (nightwear)                   Oth (luggage etc.)
    100




                                                                       100
                                       50
      50




                                                                           50
      0




                                       0




                                                                           0
            0    50,000   100,000            0      50,000   100,000             0    50,000   100,000


                 Owr (outerwear)                  ShB (boys' shoes)                  ShG (girls' shoes)
    200




                                       50




                                                                           50
      100
      0




                                       0




                                                                           0




            0    50,000   100,000            0      50,000   100,000             0    50,000   100,000


                ShM (men's shoes)                ShW (women's shoes)                    Soc (socks)
    200




                                       300




                                                                           30
                                     200




                                                                       20
      100




                                       100




                                                                           10
      0




                                       0




                                                                           0




            0    50,000   100,000            0      50,000   100,000             0    50,000   100,000


                   Spo (sports)                    Uwr (underwear)
                                     100
    100




                                       50
      50
      0




                                       0




            0    50,000   100,000            0      50,000   100,000




Notes: Total annual expenditures (horizontal axis) and category expenditures (vertical axis) are in US$.
Estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts.




                                                        22
                   Figure A.4: 17 Clothes-Only Engel Curves: Expenditure Shares


                Acc (accessories)                           Sts (suits etc.)                           Boy (boys)
     .08                              .15
                                                                                 .1
     .06                                                                       .08
                                       .1
     .04                                                                       .06
                                      .05                                      .04
     .02                                                                       .02
       0                                0                                         0
            0    50,000   100,000                0          50,000   100,000                0        50,000    100,000


                    Grl (girls)                               Men (men)                              Wmn (women)
     .12                                .3                                     .6
       .1                             .25                                      .5
     .08                                .2                                     .4
     .06                                                                       .3
     .04

       0                                0                                      0
            0    50,000   100,000                0          50,000   100,000            0           50,000     100,000


                   Inf (infants)                            Nwr (nightwear)                         Oth (luggage etc.)
     .15                              .032
                                        .03                                    .05
                                      .028
                                      .026
                                      .024                                     .04
      .1
                                                                               .03
     .05                                                                       .02
                                                                               .01
       0                                     0                                   0
            0    50,000   100,000                    0      50,000   100,000                0        50,000    100,000


                 Owr (outerwear)                          ShB (boys' shoes)                         ShG (girls' shoes)
     .12                                                                       .04
                                      .04
       .1                                                                      .03
     .08                              .03
                                      .02                                      .02

                                      .01                                      .01
       0                                0                                           0
            0    50,000   100,000                0          50,000   100,000                0        50,000    100,000


                ShM (men's shoes)                        ShW (women's shoes)                           Soc (socks)
     .14                              .16
                                      .15                                      .022
     .13                              .14                                        .02
     .12                              .13                                      .018
     .11                              .12




       0                                0                                               0
            0    50,000   100,000                0          50,000   100,000                    0     50,000   100,000


                   Spo (sports)                            Uwr (underwear)
     .07                              .09
     .06                              .08
     .05                              .07
                                      .06
     .04                              .05
     .03


       0                                0
            0    50,000   100,000                0          50,000   100,000




Notes: Total annual expenditures (horizontal axis) are in US$. Category expenditure shares (vertical axis)
are in percent of total expenditures. Estimated from 2012:2–2014:1 full-year CEX extracts.




                                                                23
