NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEW TECHNOLOGIES, GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS, AND DEVELOPING ECONOMIES
Dani Rodrik
Working Paper 25164
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25164

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018

This is a background paper written for the Pathways for Prosperity Commission (hosted at the
Blavatnik School of Government, Oxford University). I am grateful to Pol Antras, Stefan Dercon,
Robert Lawrence, and Toby Phillips for helpful discussion or feedback. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

New Technologies, Global Value Chains, and Developing Economies
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 25164
October 2018
JEL No. O30,O40
ABSTRACT
Many of the exports of developing countries are channeled through global value chains (GVCs),
which also act as conduits for new technologies. However, new capabilities and productive
employment remain limited so far to a tiny sliver of globally integrated firms. GVCs and new
technologies exhibit features that limit the upside and may even undermine developing countries’
economic performance. In particular, new technologies present a double whammy to low-income
countries. First, they are generally biased towards skills and other capabilities. This bias reduces
the comparative advantage of developing countries in traditionally labor-intensive manufacturing
(and other) activities, and decreases their gains from trade. Second, GVCs make it harder for lowincome countries to use their labor cost advantage to offset their technological disadvantage, by
reducing their ability to substitute unskilled labor for other production inputs. These are two
independent shocks that compound each other. The evidence to date, on the employment and
trade fronts, is that the disadvantages may have more than offset the advantages.

Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 J.F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu

NEW TECHNOLOGIES, GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS, AND THE DEVELOPING ECONOMIES
Dani Rodrik 1
Harvard University
September 2018
Introduction
Do new technologies present an opportunity or a threat to developing economies? For the
optimists, the knowledge economy, artificial intelligence, and advances in robotics represent a historical
chance for developing economies to leapfrog to a more advanced-economy status. Others worry about
the ability of poor countries to compete in a world economy in which others have much greater capacity
to capitalize on new technologies. In many ways, this debate is similar to the discussion about the
impact of technology on labor markets and inequality within rich nations. There too, optimists and
pessimists are divided about the consequences for low-skilled workers. Will technology lift all boats by
providing opportunities for overall productivity gains? Or will those gains be captured by a small
minority of highly skilled workers, professionals, and large corporations?
New technologies tend to reduce prices of goods and services to which they are applied. They
also lead to the creation of new products. Consumers benefit from these improvements, regardless of
whether they live in the developed world or the developing one. Mobile phones represent a clear
example: they have enabled easy and cheap communication among people separated by geographic
distance. In a clear case of leapfrogging, they give poor people in developing nations access to longdistance communications without their governments having to make costly investments in land lines
and other infrastructure. Likewise, mobile banking provided through cell phones extends access to
financial services to remote areas without bank branches.
These and similar examples are clear instances of technology working to improve the lives of
poor people. But for technology to make a real and sustained contribution to development it must not
only provide better and cheaper products, it must also lead to more better-paying jobs. In other words,
it must help developing nations qua producers as well as qua consumers. A model of growth that Tyler
Cowen (2016) has called “cell phones instead of automobile factories” begs the question: how do people
in the developing world afford to purchase the cell phones in the first place? The new products and
services may be cheaper, but without ever-more productive jobs, workers in the developing world are
bound to lag.
1

This is a background paper written for the Pathways for Prosperity Commission (hosted at the Blavatnik School of
Government, Oxford University). I am grateful to Pol Antras, Stefan Dercon, Robert Lawrence, and Toby Phillips for
helpful discussion or feedback.

1

Consider again the examples of mobile telephony and banking. To some extent these are
producer services as well as consumer services; communications and finance are inputs into production.
Therefore they provide benefits on the production side as well. For example, a well-known study has
documented how the spread of mobile phones in the Indian state of Kerala enabled fishermen to
arbitrage price differences across local markets, increasing their profits by 8 percent on average as a
result (Jensen 2007). Kenya’s ubiquitous mobile banking service M-Pesa appears to have enabled poor
women to move out of subsistence agriculture into non-farm businesses, providing a significant bump
up the income ladder at the very bottom (Suri and Jack, 2016).
New digital technologies have been playing a significant role in transforming large-scale farming
in Latin America and elsewhere. Big data, GPS, drones, and high-speed communication have enabled
improved extension services; optimized irrigation, pesticide and fertilizer use; provided early-warning
systems; and enabled better quality control and more efficient logistics and supply-chain management
(Deichmann et al., 2016). These in turn raise farm productivity and facilitate diversification into nontraditional crops with better returns.
GVCs, Trade, and disappointing impacts
The introduction of these new technologies in production in developing countries often takes
place through global value chains (GVCs). GVCs are in effect part and parcel of the new technology.
Improvements in communication and information technologies have enabled large firms based in
advanced nations, whether retailers or manufacturers, to divide the production chain into specific tasks
that can then be dispersed around the globe to take advantage of lower costs. GVCs in turn serve as the
vehicle for the dissemination of technology from the lead firms to their suppliers. A common view is that
the nature of global trade in modern agriculture, manufacturing and tradable services has been
fundamentally transformed by GVCs.
In principle, GVCs benefit developing nations by easing entry into global markets. They allow
firms in developing countries to access global markets by producing specific tasks without having to
develop side industries as a precondition. The required inputs and services do not have to be locally
produced; they can be imported. This makes it easier for international corporations to locate, say,
specific auto components or a narrow stage of production in consumer electronics in developing
countries.
But the questions hang around all these possibilities. Are the productive gains are large enough?
Can they be disseminated sufficiently quickly throughout the rest of the economy? (Note again the
2

parallel with the advanced-country debate.) Any optimism about the scale of contribution by GVCs has
to be tempered by three sobering facts. First, the expansion of GVCs seems to have ground to a halt in
recent years. Second, developing-country participation in GVCs, and indeed in world trade in general,
has remained quite limited, with the notable exception of certain Asian countries. Third, and perhaps
most worryingly, the domestic employment consequences of recent trade trends have been quite
disappointing.
Consider first global trends in GVCs. As Figure 1 shows, the importance of GVCs in global trade
rose steadily since the mid-1990s until the global financial crisis. A noticeable drop occurred in the
immediate aftermath of the crisis, as world trade took a big hit. Though some recovery has since taken
place, the trend has been essentially flat from 2011 on. This is true for both “simple GVCs” (in which
domestic-factor content crosses the border once) to more complex GVCs (in which domestic-factor
content crosses the border more than one time). Similarly, Timmer et al. (2016) find that the global
fragmentation of production has been in decline since 2011, which has in fact contributed to the
reduction in world trade ratios since then. This reversal seems to be due to a number of interrelated
factors, including the saturation of possibilities of fragmentation of production, increasing risks and
costs associated with trade, the reshoring of Chinese production, and the global shift in demand away
from goods and towards (less tradable) services. These recent trends do not seem transitory. Therefore,
neither trade levels nor GVC networks are likely to become more buoyant in the near future.
Turn next to trade performance of developing countries. Outside of Asia, trade integration levels
have not increased overall; in many countries they have come down. Too many countries depend on
commodity exports, and trade shares in GDP still closely follow commodity cycles. Figure 2 shows that
export-GDP ratios have fallen in many sub-Saharan African countries in the 1995-2013 period. The list of
negative performers on trade includes not only oil exporters but also others such as Kenya, Ethiopia, and
Uganda. Participation in GVCs has continued to increase in Vietnam, Bangladesh and India since the
global financial crisis, but it has declined in many African countries from already comparatively low
levels (Figure 3).
What is curious about this mixed trade performance is that it took place during an era of
unprecedentedly high growth among the low-income countries of sub-Saharan Africa. Usually high
growth is associated with export-oriented industrialization and integration into global production chains,
as in Asia. Clearly, the recent pattern elsewhere has been different. In the most rapidly growing subSaharan Africa countries such as Ethiopia, industrialization and trade have barely kept up with GDP.
Instead, growth appears to have been driven mainly by domestic demand ̶ spurred by foreign transfers,
3

public investment, or increases in rural incomes due to improved agricultural policies (in infrastructure,
fertilizer, irrigation). As my co-authors and I have shown, productivity growth in modern manufacturing
and services in aggregate has tended to lag (Diao et al., 2017). In other words, whatever role integration
into global production networks may have played in these countries, the aggregate, economy-wide
effects have been relatively small.
Nowhere is this clearer than in employment. A database compiled at the World Bank allows us
to examine the levels and trends in employment associated with exports in a wide range of countries
(Cali et al., 2016). The key novelty in the database is the estimation of the number of directly and
indirectly created jobs, through the use of input-out tables. This is especially important in a context in
which the production process is significantly fragmented. For example, the employment impact of
exports may be underestimated when export-oriented firms outsource the production of some their
inputs to other providers in the home economy. The report reveals that manufacturing exports are a
significant creator of jobs. Lower-income countries tend to have higher employment per dollar of
exports, consistent with more labor-intensive production patterns. In addition, most of the jobs created
by exports in the developing countries are in service sectors that export very little themselves. But
perhaps the most important finding is that the job intensity of exports has steadily declined since
around 2001 in both advanced and developing nations. This is perhaps not very surprising for the
advanced nations, where skill-biased technological change has been ubiquitous and the leading cause of
declining employment shares in manufacturing industries. It is more puzzling and disappointing in lowincome countries, where one would have expected to see the beneficial employment consequences of
diversification out of natural resource exports and transition into labor-intensive manufactures.
Figure 4 displays the experiences of three developing countries at different levels of income:
Ethiopia, Philippines, and Thailand. The top panel shows all exports, while the bottom panel shows
manufactured exports only. Both pictures tell the same story of a very sharp decline in the job intensity
of exports. The periods covered differ due to different availability of data. In the comparatively short
period of seven years (2004-2011), the number of jobs created in Ethiopia per dollar of exports appears
to have more than halved from 243 to 110. This is a substantial drop. The drop in job intensity for
manufactures is similar, though from a higher level: from 419 to 234. The other two countries, which
have data for longer periods, also show large declines since 2001, although not as sharp as in Ethiopia.
These results are unlikely to be due to the particularities of data sources in these specific countries as
other developing countries show similar downward trends as well.

4

A possible objection to these findings is that they might be a statistical artifact caused by the
presence of GVCs. The domestic value added (and hence number of jobs) created per dollar of gross
exports naturally declines when countries participate in GVCs and more of the inputs that go into export
production are supplied by imports. The reduction in the domestic value-added share in exports is
perhaps compensated by higher volume of (gross) exports. This does not seem likely; as we have seen,
developing-country participation in GVCs has not increased sharply, and trade shares in GDP have not
taken off. More direct evidence is provided in Figure 5, which shows the total number of jobs that go
into exports (both direct and indirect) as a share of total employment. In all three countries, the shares
go down, and quite significantly. In Ethiopia and the Philippines, the percentage of export-related jobs
has been halved. The decline in Thailand, while not as dramatic, is still visible. Again, these countries are
not outliers; they seem to be representative of general trends among developing economies. See also
Figure 6, which shows the relationship between employment creation and GVC participation across a
broad range of countries. The relationship is, if anything, negative.
It appears that exports are creating fewer and fewer jobs, and GVCs are certainly not helping.
This is disappointing from a number of perspectives. It puts a damper on the idea of trade as an engine
of growth. It suggests that the technological and organizational benefits associated with exports are not
being disseminated throughout the economy. And since exports tend to be associated with betterpaying jobs, it raises concerns about wage levels and inclusion.
The World Bank recently reported the results of an interesting empirical exercise in which
exports were divided into two types of goods, called “GVC products” and “non-GVC products.” The
former refers to goods that are typically traded within production networks. An export performance
index for each group was regressed on a number of country characteristics, including proximity to major
markets, natural resources, human and physical capital, institutional quality, logistics/connectivity, and
wage competitiveness. For non-GVC products, wage competitiveness was the only item on the list that
significantly correlated with export performance. For GVC products, by contrast, all of the factors
strongly correlated with export performance – with the glaring exception of wage competitiveness
(World Bank 2016, p. 34). These results are a striking indication of GVCs’ adverse impact on developing
countries’ comparative advantage. GVCs demand skills and capabilities that are in short supply in
developing countries, and undercut their traditional comparative advantage in unskilled labor.
GVCs, skills, and complementarity

5

Virtually every policy-oriented treatment of GVCs emphasizes the importance of complementary
skills and capabilities, if the potential of trade and GVC participation is to be transformed into reality.
Developing nations must upgrade their educational systems and technical training, improve their
business environment, and enhance their logistics and transport networks in order to make fuller use of
GVCs, goes the usual refrain. But such admonishments miss the point. They tend to highlight more the
inherent shortcomings of the new technologies and their deployment through GVCs rather than their
potential contribution to economic development. Pointing out that developing countries need to
advance on all those dimensions is not news; nor is it helpful development advice. It is akin to saying
development requires development.
Trade and technology present an opportunity when they are able to leverage existing
capabilities, and thereby provide a more direct and reliable path to development. To see the point,
consider why industrialization has been historically such a forceful engine for economic growth.
Manufacturing traditionally had three characteristics that together made it special among all economic
activities. First, manufacturing know-how was relatively easy to transfer across countries and, in
particular, from rich to poor nations. Manufacturing is probably alone in exhibiting unconditional
economic convergence on a long-term basis: countries that start with lower labor productivity in
manufacturing tend to exhibit higher productivity growth over subsequent decades. Remarkably, this
productivity convergence occurs regardless of a country’s policies, institutions, or geography (Rodrik
2013). Better institutions and policies can of course increase the speed of convergence. But what is
striking in the data is that even countries with poor economic management experience productivity
convergence within their manufacturing sectors. (This raises the obvious question of why entire
economies do not converge if manufacturing does. The answer is that the countries that do not
converge are those that are unable to pull their labor into manufacturing sufficiently rapidly – i.e.,
industrialize.)
Second, manufacturing is tradable. There is always an external market, and domestic
manufacturing production does not need to be constrained by demand (and incomes) at home. The
significance of this is that manufacturing can scale up even if productivity in the rest of the economy
remains very low. Non-tradables, by contrast, are constrained by the size of the home market, which in
turn depends on productivity in the rest of the economy. A productivity boost in a specific non-tradable
sector would eventually fizzle out as the sector’s terms of trade turn against it. With manufacturing,
growth can continue virtually indefinitely as domestic production supplies world markets.

6

Third, the industrialization model faced few constraints on the supply side as well.
Manufacturing needs physical capital and equipment, which can be scarce in a developing economy. But
traditionally the main variable input was unskilled labor. Factories producing simple garments, toys, or
even automotive vehicles could operate by employing uneducated workers with few skills other than
those acquired on the job, and basic manual dexterity. Developing countries have essentially an
unlimited supply of unskilled workers in the countryside. So labor-intensive manufacturing was
especially suitable to developing countries and could expand without running into supply-side
bottlenecks.
These three characteristics collectively rendered manufactures a fantastic escalator to higher
incomes for developing nations. You could start with very poor initial conditions, get a few things right
to stimulate the domestic production of a narrow range of labor-intensive manufactures – and voila!
You had a growth engine going. There was no need to reform all sectors or improve institutions across
the board. That harder work could be done over the course of economic development, as economic
growth relaxed budget constraints and capabilities gradually accumulated.
Note, however, that I used the past tense for two of these characteristics: ready access to
technological know-how and low-skill intensity of manufacturing production. Manufacturing remains
tradable, but technological changes have significantly dampened its other two advantages for
developing countries. In the next section I examine these technological changes and their impact more
closely.
Technology and shifts in comparative advantage
Skill-biased technological progress has been ongoing in the manufacturing sectors of advanced
economies for decades. Two immediate consequences of this were a steady loss of jobs in
manufacturing (as a share of total employment) and a rise in the skill premium (the wage differential
between skilled and unskilled workers). In addition, since productivity growth was more rapid in
manufacturing than elsewhere, the relative price of manufactured products fell.
In a world in which markets are globalized, the relative price change in advanced countries is
transmitted to developing countries as well. Insofar as developing countries are consumers of
manufactures, this represents an improvement in their terms of trade, and is beneficial. For capital
goods and many high-tech products, this has been certainly the case. But insofar as developing countries
have an existing or latent comparative advantage in manufactured products, this relative decline in
prices represents a loss. Moreover, lower relative prices for manufactures depress the profitability of
7

industrial investments in low-income countries, and renders industrialization more difficult. So to the
extent that industrialization is already disadvantaged by learning externalities or coordination failures,
the adverse impact on developing countries is magnified.
For most developing countries these technology-driven, adverse profitability trends have been
compounded by the greater openness of their market to imports from China and other Asian
manufacturing champions. In earlier decades when transport costs were higher and trade policies more
restrictive, domestic markets enjoyed a certain amount of segmentation from global markets. There was
more room for import substitution and local entrepreneurship in basic manufactures such as simple
consumer products. Today imports from low-cost Asian producers have made it very difficult for new
industries to be started at small scale and with initial cost disadvantages.
More recent trends in the technology of production portend more bad news for developing
countries. Automation, robotics, and 3D printing are all essentially labor saving. They will increase
demand for skilled labor to the extent that there is complementarity between these new technologies
and skilled labor, and reduce demand for unskilled labor – the one resource that all low-income
countries have in abundance. 2 When shoes, say, can be cheaply produced with 3D printing, major
brands will be less interested in offshoring to developing countries where labor is cheap. Re-shoring will
be more common.
In other words, many if not most of the newest technologies imply that the comparative
advantage of low-income countries in standard manufactures will tend to dissipate. Skill-biased
technological change requires developing countries to double up their investment in human capital, just
to stay where they are. This is the conundrum of “complementary skills and capabilities” that I have
already described.
But a second feature of new technologies, especially those associated with GVCs, also seems
noteworthy. The introduction of new technologies also makes it more difficult for unskilled labor to
substitute for other production inputs, including skilled labor, capital, and other capabilities. In other
words, the elasticity of substitution between unskilled labor and other factors of distribution drops.
Consider a manufacturing operation in a developing economy. Whether or not it is foreignowned, the technology will normally be imported from advanced countries. It will require certain types
of machinery, software, and workers to operate. But the blueprints may allow some flexibility in terms
of how different factors of production are combined. In particular, since unskilled workers are relatively
2

In a production function with two factors of production, skilled and unskilled labor, technological change that
effectively augments unskilled-labor is skill-biased (i.e., increases relative demand for skilled labor) as long as the
elasticity of substitution is less than 1 in absolute value. See also discussion below.

8

cheap, the owners of the factory may want to economize on physical and human capital and use more
unskilled workers. Some tasks that are automated in the advanced economies (e.g., packing) may be
produced by manual labor in the developing economy. In economics jargon, this is called an adjustment
in production technique along an isoquant. Using data over the 1973-1990 period, Blum (2010) shows
that such adjustments are quantitatively very important. He finds that changes in relative factor
endowments across countries are accommodated mainly by shifts in production techniques within
sectors rather than output mix per se. In other words, an increase in the supply of unskilled workers
results in such workers being used more intensively across the entire economy.
My argument is that newer technologies make it harder for this kind of factor substitution to be
made, especially in the more advanced firms where production is integrated in GVCs. This is because of
the demanding precision and quality standards associated with these technologies. It is often impossible
to satisfy these standards by substituting manual work, which necessarily introduces irregularities in
production. GVCs also imply that the governance of production environment shifts from local
governments, producers, and consumers to international firms, resulting in local firms becoming more
dependent on global firms’ requirements. Offshoring increases the ability of producers in the advanced
nations to substitute for domestic labor, by moving offshore. But by increasing the stringency of
production requirements, it makes unskilled labor in developing countries less substitutable for other
capabilities.
This can be true even in activities that are not technologically sophisticated and considered to
be labor-intensive. Consider, for example, African horticulture. Standards imposed by purchasers in the
advanced countries are very stringent:
“Standards have been one of them most significant drivers of evolving horticulture GVC and RVC
dynamics, in many ways creating the rules for participation and upgrading. Along with the rise of
European supermarket GVCs, lead supermarkets have increasingly used standards to govern
their supply chains based on Western consumer preferences, such as quality, appearance,
hygiene, safety, and traceability. Adherence to supermarket horticulture standards is often a
double-edged sword – especially in Africa…. On the one hand, it offers substantial opportunity
for producer upgrading into higher value added activities (examples of product, process, cold
chain, and functional upgrading can be found in Kenyan FFV chains), and in some cases, social
upgrading for workers through increased social protections (examples of more permanent
employment contracts, unionization and collective bargaining can be found in Ugandan floral
cuttings chains). On the other hand, it limits participation to only those producers with the
necessary investments needed for compliance.” (Goger et al. 2014; references omitted.)

9

As the authors observe, this explains why it has been very difficult for agricultural smallholders in
general (producing fruits and vegetables) to plug themselves into GVCs. No amount of manual labor can
make up for the deficit due to the lack of complementary skills and capabilities. The benefits accrue
mostly to the workers employed in established, formal enterprises. (African consumer markets are, by
contrast, less demanding. So there are fewer barriers to entry for smallholders serving African retail
chains.) Similar difficulties have been noted for labor-intensive manufacturing (AfDB 2014).
An indication that GVCs stimulate convergence in production techniques is that trends in factor
shares exhibit very similar patterns in the developed and developing world. Figure 7 shows changes in
the value-added shares of capital and three different types of labor (low-skilled, medium-skilled, highskilled) in manufacturing GVCs for a broad cross-section of countries. In the developed world, the share
of skilled labor has increased while the share of low-skilled labor has come down in all of the countries
included in the table. This is a familiar pattern, associated with the reduction in relative demand for lowskilled workers in the North. Somewhat more surprisingly, the pattern with respect to the declining
share of low-skilled labor is virtually the same in the developing world. If anything, the fall in the lowskilled labor share has been faster outside the developed world than within.
To be more precise, think of a production function with a parametric elasticity of substitution
denoted by 𝜎𝜎. This can be expressed as

𝜎𝜎−1
𝜎𝜎

𝑦𝑦 = 𝐴𝐴 �𝛼𝛼(𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎)

+ (1 − 𝛼𝛼)𝑆𝑆

𝜎𝜎
𝜎𝜎−1 𝜎𝜎−1
𝜎𝜎

�

,

where 𝑦𝑦 is output, 𝐿𝐿 is unskilled labor, 𝑆𝑆 is a composite of other production inputs (capital, skills,

capabilities), and 𝛼𝛼 is a parameter capturing the distribution of factor shares. 𝐴𝐴 denotes the factor-

neutral efficiency level while 𝑎𝑎 is a parameter capturing unskilled labor-augmenting technological
change. I shall assume 𝜎𝜎 <1, which means unskilled labor and other production inputs are gross

complements. This is consistent with the empirical literature (see Lawrence 2015 and the literature cited
therein). The lower limit of 𝜎𝜎 is 0, at which point there is no substitutability between 𝐿𝐿 and 𝑆𝑆 and the

production function takes the Leontief form with fixed input requirements.

We are concerned with two distinct changes in the shape of this production function: (a) an
increase in 𝑎𝑎, and (b) a reduction in 𝜎𝜎. The first makes labor more productive and increases relative

demand for 𝑆𝑆 (under the assumption that 𝜎𝜎 <1); it stands for conventional skill-biased technological

change. The second makes unskilled labor less substitutable for other production inputs, and captures
the increasing stringency of production standards just discussed.

10

It is easiest to see the joint consequences of these changes with some illustrative calculations.
Associated with the production function above is a cost function, which can be calibrated to trace out
the production costs of firms in advanced and developing economies. This in turn informs us about the
viability of production in developing countries as the parameters of interest change. I assume wages of
low-skilled workers in developing countries are 20 percent of those in advanced countries and that 𝐴𝐴 is

half as large in the former on average (and normally distributed with a standard deviation of 40 percent
around the mean). Production functions in rich and poor nations are identical otherwise. I start with
initial values 𝑎𝑎 =1 and 𝜎𝜎 = 0.8 and calibrate the rest of the parameters such that roughly 50 percent of

developing countries are viable in the baseline equilibrium. (Viable means their unit costs are no higher
than in advanced countries.)
The consequences of changes in 𝑎𝑎 and 𝜎𝜎 can be seen graphically in Figure 8. The percentage of

developing country firms that are viable steadily declines as 𝑎𝑎 increases and 𝜎𝜎 falls. Equally important,

the two effects are multiplicative and reinforce each other. Consider the impact of labor-augmenting
technological change that increases 𝑎𝑎 from 1 to 3. When 𝜎𝜎 = 0.8, the percentage of viable firms is

reduced modestly from 55 percent to 46 percent. But when 𝜎𝜎 = 0.4, the percentage of viable firms is

more than halved from 42 percent to 19 percent. Similarly, reductions in 𝜎𝜎 imply a much bigger

competitive penalty for developing countries when 𝑎𝑎 is higher. Note that these calculations are

undertaken for a fixed set of wages in developing countries (relative to rich nations). Equilibrium will
require wages to be adjusted so as to increase the viability of developing country firms. So another way
to interpret these results is they give us orders of magnitude about the scale of the (downward)
adjustment in wages needed to restore developing country competitiveness in the aftermath of
technological changes.
Labor-augmenting (and skill-biased) technological change has been well documented in the
literature. Is there similar evidence about the reduction in the elasticity of substitution I have posited?
There isn’t a whole lot of systematic evidence about such a trend over time, in part because empirical
analyses tend to treat 𝜎𝜎 as a deep parameter that does not change. However, in unpublished work,

Robert Lawrence has shown that 𝜎𝜎 is lower in post-2000 U.S. manufacturing compared to the pre-2000
period (Lawrence, forthcoming). It is also possible to infer something from the cross-sectional studies.

These studies can be read as suggesting that technologically more sophisticated activities tend to have
lower 𝜎𝜎’s. Raval (2108, Fig. 4) finds that 𝜎𝜎 is significantly larger in garments and textiles than it is in

electrical machinery (but still well below unity). Baccianti’s (2013) estimates provide a broadly similar
rank ordering. Oberfield and Raval (2014, Fig. 9) find (industry-level) 𝜎𝜎 is much lower in the United
11

States than in three developing countries, with India having the highest 𝜎𝜎. In light of these results, it is

reasonable to suppose that adoption of the technologies used in advanced economies will tend to lower
𝜎𝜎 in developing economies.

A complementary perspective to this line of argument is offered by Acemoglu and Zilibotti’s

(2001) work on inappropriate technologies. These authors start from the same observation that
developing countries need to import their technologies from advanced nations. They posit that the
direction of technological change depends on relative factor prices. Since skills are relatively abundant in
rich countries, new technologies will tend to be optimized for use with skilled workers. When they are
used with low-skilled workers, their productivity will be lower. Developing countries will therefore pay a
productivity penalty even when they have costless access to the most recent technologies. As Acemoglu
and Zilibotti show, such a technology-skill mismatch is not a disadvantage that can be fully remedied by
deploying additional low skill workers.
None of this is to suggest that the deployment of new technologies will not have a direct
positive role on productivity growth, and perhaps also employment generation, in developing countries.
The potential for productivity gains from digitalization in Africa is very well described in Banga and te
Velde (2018), which also offers an optimistic take on job prospects. But the discussion here suggests that
new technologies disproportionately favor rich economies, well-endowed in skills and capital, rather
than developing economies. So they make it harder for poorer economies to latch on to more advanced
products, and they also weaken their comparative advantage in the older, more traditional industries.
The net effects remain uncertain in practice.
Can services be the new escalator?
I discussed previously the features of manufacturing that turned it into an escalator for lowincome countries, at least before recent technological trends. What will replace it if manufacturing
becomes increasingly skill- and technology-intensive and can no longer absorb unskilled labor? GVCs
encompass agriculture and services in addition to manufacturing. With respect to agriculture, no doubt
developing countries have significant potential for productivity increase in the countryside through
better use of inputs, application of new technologies, and diversification into new crops. But it is very
unlikely that agriculture could absorb labor, rather than release it, during the process of economic
development – even if the new technologies were not labor-saving. The budget shares of food and other
agricultural products tend to decline during economic growth. One way or another, growing economies
have to create jobs for unskilled workers outside of agriculture and in urban areas.
12

One consequence of premature industrialization in developing countries (Rodrik 2015) is that
employment in urban services has been expanding much faster and at lower levels of income. Can
services substitute for weak industrialization (or deindustrialization) and drive economic growth? Ghani
and O’Connell (2014) state the case for services. Services are increasingly traded, and the volume of
trade has been expanding more rapidly than in trade for goods. Second, thanks in part to GVCs,
productivity in services is often no longer stagnant and can increase rapidly. Third, many services are
able to absorb large amounts of employment. Finally, services are friendlier to the environment, and a
service-led growth pattern would be greener.
In most developing countries services do tend to exhibit, on average, higher labor productivity
than traditional agriculture. The movement of labor from the countryside to urban services improves
economy-wide productivity. As we show in Diao et al. (2017), this has been an important source of high
economic growth in low-income countries recently. However, services are a hodgepodge of very diverse
activities. Some, such as tourism, IT, or finance, are indeed highly tradable. They share with
manufacturing the feature that they are technologically dynamic, offering possibilities of (unconditional)
productivity convergence with advanced nations. Others, such as many personal and retail services, are
non-tradable, technologically stagnant, and dominated by small informal enterprises. The trouble is that
very few in the first category can absorb significant amounts of unskilled labor. Business services, which
offer great potential in trade and GVCs, are easily the most skill-intensive across GVC categories (Figure
9). They do not have much potential for generating employment for low-skilled workers.
With respect to traditional services such as retail and wholesale, some countries have had
success in increasing productivity, often by allowing foreign firms in. But the consequent reorganization
of these activities around larger, more capital-intensive producers often tends to be detrimental to
employment. A large part of the problem in such services (e.g. retail trade) is the preponderance of
small, low-productivity firms that absorb the excess supply of labor. When these firms are driven out,
employment is hit. Figure 10 shows the correlation between labor productivity growth and employment
generation across countries for two major service sectors: wholesale and retail trade and personal and
community services. The negative correlation in both sectors is striking: service sectors that have the
best productivity performance typically shed labor; labor-absorbing sectors typically have the worst
productivity performance. This regularity dovetails with the finding in Diao et al. (2017) on highperforming low-income countries. The problem with labor moving into urban services is that too often
the expansion of services comes at the cost of lagging productivity over time. African countries that had

13

the higher rates of labor movement into services were also those that had the worse productivity
performance in services (Diao et al. 2017).
So we are back in the same conundrum: where will the jobs come from?
Concluding remarks
It is often said that GVCs and new technologies increase opportunities for developing countries
to access global markets by making it easier for them to engage in production of particular tasks without
developing domestic supply chains. While that may be true, GVCs and new technologies also exhibit
features that limit the upside and may even undermine developing countries’ economic performance. In
particular, I have argued that new technologies present a double whammy to low-income countries.
First, they are generally biased towards skills and other capabilities. This bias reduces the comparative
advantage of developing countries in traditionally labor-intensive manufacturing (and other) activities,
and decreases their gains from trade. Second, GVCs make it harder for low-income countries to use their
labor cost advantage to offset their technological disadvantage, by reducing their ability to substitute
unskilled labor for other production inputs. From an economic standpoint, these are two independent
shocks that compound each other. In other words, each shock increases the costs of the other. The
evidence to date, on the employment and trade fronts, is that the disadvantages may have more than
offset the advantages.
GVCs have of course made inroads in developing countries, in manufacturing, services, and
agriculture. Many of the exports of developing countries are channeled through GVCs, which also act as
conduits for new technologies. But the affected sectors and activities remain a very small part of the
domestic economy. New capabilities and productive employment remain limited to a tiny sliver of
globally integrated firms.
A direct implication of this line of reasoning is that development strategies should focus
somewhat less on international economic integration and considerably more on what we might call
“domestic integration.” The key challenge is to disseminate throughout the rest of the economy the
capabilities already in place in the most advanced parts of the productive sector. Improving the
economy’s fundamentals through investment in human capital and governance certainly helps. But, in
addition, countries may require more proactive policies of government-business collaboration targeted
at strengthening the connection between the highly productive global firms, potential local suppliers,
and the domestic labor force. This collaboration would be underpinned by a simple quid pro quo:
government assistance in removing specific bottlenecks these firms face in return for their greater use
of domestic resources, including most importantly, domestic labor. The principles governing such
14

proactive policies have been laid out in discussions of “new industrial policy” (e.g., Rodrik 2007, 2008),
though, of course, the policies in question would not concentrate exclusively on manufacturing.
The hallmark of this new industrial policy is that it focuses on getting the process right. Good
policies are more likely to come out of the appropriate institutional setting than from a top-down,
technocratic framework. Incentive systems that select sectors for promotion and apply pre-designated
interventions – such as export subsidies, credit allocations, etc. – have served some East Asian countries
well. But they have not produced many successes elsewhere.
Instead, we need to think of productive policies as an on-going process of strategic collaboration
between private and public sectors, with the following goals in mind:
•

learning: what are the constraints faced by firms in different activities?

•

experimentation: what are the best ways of removing/compensating for the constraints?

•

coordination: are all relevant branches of government around the table and on board?

•

monitoring and evaluation: how well are the policy changes/interventions doing?

•

policy revision: does the learning get incorporated into new policies?

Under this model of decision-making, the government’s relationship to firms does not take an arms’
length form, as in the top-down model. But neither is the government captured by rent-seeking firms.
The firms are responsible for developing plans of action that are in line with public objectives (e.g.,
employment expansion). In return, the government helps unblock private-sector constraints, while
remaining accountable to society at large.
This is a tough balance to strike, but there are examples of it working. See for example the
sectoral round tables in Peru, as discussed by Ghezzi (2017). What remains unclear, however, is whether
such policies can be implemented at sufficient scale to make a big enough dent in the challenge of
domestic productive integration.

15

REFERENCES
Acemoglu Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Productivity Differences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May
2001.
African Development Bank (AfDB) et al., Global Value Chains and Africa’s Industrialisation African
Economic Outlook 2014.
Baccianti, Claudio, “Estimation of Sectoral Elasticities of Substitution Along the International Technology
Frontier,” ZEW - Centre for European Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 13-092, 2013.
Banga, Karishma, and Dirk Willem te Velde, “Digitalisation and the Future of Manufacturing in Africa,”
SET Discussion Paper, March 2018 (https://set.odi.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/SET_Digitalisationand-future-of-African-manufacturing_Final.pdf).
Blum, Bernardo S., “Endowments, Output, and the Bias of Directed Innovation,” Review of Economic
Studies, 77, 2010, 534–559.
Cali, Massimiliano, et al., “The Labor Content of Exports Database,” Policy Research Working Paper
7615, World Bank, March 2016.
Cowen, Tyler, “Economic Development in an “Average is Over’ World,” paper prepared for the Asian
Development Bank, April 8, 2016.
Deichmann, Uwe, Aparajita Goyal, Deepak Mishra, “Will Digital Technologies Transform Agriculture in
Developing Countries?” Policy Research Working Paper 7669, World Bank, May 2016.
Diao X, McMillan M. Rodrik D, “The Recent Growth Boom in Developing Economies: A Structural-Change
Perspective,” 2017.
Gereffi Gary, and Karina Fernandez-Stark, Global Value Chain Analysis: A Primer, 2nd Edition, Duke
University, 2106.
Ghani, Ejaz, and Stephen D. O’Connell, “Can Service be a Growth Escalator in Low Income Countries?”
Policy Research Working Paper 6971, World Bank, July 2014.
Ghezzi, Piero, “Mesas Ejecutivas in Peru: Lessons for Productive Development Policies,” Global Policy
Journal, July 2017, pp. 369-380.
Goger, Annelies, et al., “Capturing the Gains in Africa: Making the most of global value chain
participation,” Duke Center on Globalization, Governance, and Competitiveness, 2014.

16

International Monetary Fund, “Trade Integration and Global Value Chains in Sub-Saharan Africa : In
Pursuit of the Missing Link,” March 2016.
Farole, Thomas, “Do Global Value Chains Create Jobs?” IZA World of Labor, no. 291, 2016.
Jensen, Robert, “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance, and Welfare in the
South Indian Fisheries Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 122, No. 3, August 2007, pp. 879924.
Lawrence, Robert Z., “Recent Declines in Labor's Share in US Income: A Preliminary Neoclassical
Account,” NBER Working Paper No. 21296, June 2015.
Lawrence, Robert Z., “Changing Labor Shares,” John F. Kennedy School of Government, unpublished,
forthcoming.
Oberfield, Ezra, and Devesh Raval, “Micro Data and Macro Technology,”NBER Working Paper No. 20452,
September 2014.
Raval, Devesh, “The Micro Elasticity of Substitution and Non-Neutral Technology,” Federal Trade
Commission, July 2018.
Rodrik, Dani, “Industrial Policy for the 21st Century,” in Rodrik, One Economics, Many Recipes, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2007.
Rodrik, Dani, “Normalizing Industrial Policy,” Commission on Growth and Development Working Paper
No. 3, 2008.
Rodrik, Dani, “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1),
February 2013, 165-204.
Rodrik, Dani, “Premature Deindustrialization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 21(1), March 2016.
Suri, Tavneet, and William Jack, “The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile money,”
Science, Vol. 354, Issue 6317, 9 Dec 2016, pp. 1288-1292.
Timmer, Marcel P., et al. “Slicing Up Global Value Chains,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 28, no.
2, Spring 2014.
Timmer, Marcel P., G.J. de Vries, and K. de Vries, “Patterns of Structural Change in Developing
Countries,” Groningen Growth and Development Center Research Memorandum 149, 2014(b).
Timmer, Marcel P., Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, “An Anatomy of the Global Trade
Slowdown based on the WIOD 2016 Release,” December 2016.
World Bank, “Factory Southern Africa? SACU in Global Value Chains,” Washington, D.C., 2016

17

World Bank et al., Measuring and Analyzing the Impact of GVCs on Economic Development, Washington,
D.C., 2017.

18

Figure 1: Trends in GVCs

Source: World Bank et al., 2017, p. 43.

19

Figure 2: Trade integration trends in Sub-Saharan Africa

Source: IMF, 2016.
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Departmental-Papers-Policy-Papers/Issues/2016/12/31/TradeIntegration-and-Global-Value-Chains-in-Sub-Saharan-Africa-In-Pursuit-of-the-Missing-43673

20

Figure 3: GVCs in Africa and comparator countries

Source: Brookings Institution, 2017 (https://www.brookings.edu/wpcontent/uploads/2017/08/africagvcfig2.png)

21

Figure 4: Employment associated with exports in three countries

Source: Author’s calculations from World Bank Labor Contents of Exports Database (Cali et al., 2016).

22

Figure 5: Jobs that go into exports as a share of total employment

Source: Same as Figure 4.

23

Figure 6: Relationship between GVCs and employment creation

Source: Farole, 2016.

24

Figure 7: Changes in factor composition in manufacturing GVCs

25

Figure 8

Notes: The calculations are based on a CES production function with an elasticity of substitution that is
less than 1 (in absolute value). The chart shows the consequences of changes in two parameters: (i) the
elasticity of substitution σ, on the horizontal axis; and (ii) the labor augmentation parameter for
unskilled labor, a (which makes technological progress increasingly skill-biased), as downward shifts in
the curve. The calculations assume fixed wages and an overall, factor-neutral productivity differential in
favor of developed countries of 100%. Share of firms that are viable is calculated by comparing unit
costs in developed and developing countries, assuming factor-neutral productivity in the developing
world is distributed normally with standard deviation of 40% around the mean. Wages are calibrated so
that 55% of developing country firms are viable in an initial equilibrium where σ = 0.8 and a = 1.

26

Figure 9: Skill intensity across GVC types

Source: Gereffi and Fernandez-Stark (2016).

27

Figure 10: Productivity growth and employment shares in two service sectors

Wholesale and retail trade
growth rate of labor productivity, annualized
-.04
-.02
0
.02
.04
.06

1990-2005
SGP
MYS
SWE
USA
PER

TWN

ITA FRA

HKG

CHL

GBRDNK
ARG
NLD

KOR
IDN

PHL
ESP
MEX

BRA
COL

THA
CRI
VEN

0

.1

.05
change in employment share

Community and personal services
growth rate of labor productivity, annualized
-.05
0
.05
.1

1990-2005
MUS

BWA

ZMB

ETH
ZAF
PER
GHA
SEN
COL
SWE
NLD
ESPUSA
CHLGBR THANGA
ARG
VEN
FRA
MEX
IDN

CRI

TWN
SGPMYS

HKG
BRA
KOR

DNK
TZA
MWI
ITA
KEN

-.05

0
.05
change in employment share

Source: Author’s calculation from Timmer et al. (2014b)

28

.1

