NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE IN SOCIAL LEARNING
Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Benjamin Golub
He Yang
Working Paper 25169
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25169

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018

We thank Ran Abramitzky, Nageeb Ali, Marcella Alsan, Abhijit Banerjee, Emily Breza, Leo
Bursztyn, Gabriel Carroll, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, Georgy Egorov, Greg Fischer, Alex
Frankel, Maitreesh Ghatak, Rema Hanna, Matthew O. Jackson, Navin Kartik, Asim Khwaja,
Scott Kominers, Michael Kremer, Horacio Larreguy, Jeremy Magruder, Ted Miguel, Melanie
Morten, Kaivan Munshi, Ben Olken, Juan Ortner, Andrei Shleifer, Charlie Sprenger, Rob
Townsend, Nils Wernerfelt, Juan Pablo Xandri, Leeat Yariv, as well as participants at the
Berkeley Development Seminar, the MIT/Harvard Development Seminar, the Princeton
Behavioral Seminar, the Chicago Booth Micro Seminar, the LSE CEP-STICERD Applications
Seminar, the Stanford Junior Faculty Workshop, the Coalition Theory Network Workshop, and
the Workshop on Information and Social Economics at Caltech. We are grateful to Linh To for a
very helpful detailed reading of an earlier draft. Financial support from the NSF under grants
SES-1156182 and SES-1559469, SCID at SIEPR, and IRiSS is gratefully acknowledged. We
thank Alokik Mishra, Devika Lakhote, Tithee Mukhopadhyay, Gowri Nagraj, Jimmy Narang,
Aneesha Parvathaneni, and Vedika Vyas for their excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Benjamin Golub, and He Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Signaling, Shame, and Silence in Social Learning
Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Benjamin Golub, and He Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 25169
October 2018
JEL No. D02,D03,D8,D83,D85,D91,O1,O12,O17,Z13
ABSTRACT
We examine how a social stigma of seeking information can inhibit learning. Consider a Seeker
of uncertain ability who can learn about a task from an Advisor. If higher-ability Seekers need
information less, then a Seeker concerned about reputation may refrain from asking to avoid
signaling low ability. Separately, low-ability individuals may feel inhibited even if their ability is
known and there is nothing to signal, an effect we term shame. Signaling and shame constitute an
overall stigma of seeking information. We distinguish between the constituent parts of stigma in a
simple model and then perform an experiment with treatments designed to detect both effects.
Seekers have three days to retrieve information from paired Advisors in a field setting. The first
arm varies whether needing information is correlated with ability; the second varies whether a
Seeker's ability is revealed to the paired Advisor, irrespective of the seeking decision. We find
that low-ability individuals do face large stigma inhibitions: there is a 55% decline in the
probability of seeking when the need for information is correlated with cognitive ability. The
second arm allows us to assess the contributions of signaling and shame, and, under structural
assumptions, to estimate their relative magnitudes. We find signaling to be the dominant force
overall. The shame effect is particularly pronounced among socially close pairs (in terms of
network distance and caste co-membership) whereas signaling concerns dominate for more
distant pairs.
Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall Stanford,
CA 94305
and NBER
arungc@stanford.edu
Benjamin Golub
Harvard University
Littauer Center, 308
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
ben.golub@gmail.com

He Yang
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
heyang.um@gmail.com

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

1

1. Introduction
Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise; and he that shutteth
his lips is esteemed as a man of understanding.
Proverbs 17:28
Information and advice from others can be crucial in making people aware of opportunities
and guiding them to better choices—at work, in financial decisions, and in many other
situations (Duflo and Saez, 2003; Jensen, 2010; Cole and Fernando, 2014). Indeed, various
interventions and policies—especially in environments where formal information channels
are missing or unsuited to people’s needs—seek to leverage social learning in order to spread
information widely.1 An important consideration is that to learn something, a person often
needs to ask. This action of asking for or seeking information, in turn, is endogenous and
may be inefficiently inhibited.2
We surveyed 122 villagers in rural Karnataka, India about their social learning practices
and what inhibitions they face. We focused on several topics: financial products, farming
practices, and health decisions. First, the survey revealed that active learning was considerably less common than passive learning: 49% reported actively asking friends in their village
for information on these topics; meanwhile, 95% reported hearing such information without
asking from friends3 and 90% from media sources (newspapers, TV, and Internet sources).
Second, and more importantly, we found that 88% of the time, respondents reported that
they felt a limit on the number of times they could approach a member of their community
for information; in 64% of these cases, they reported that the cause of their reluctance was
a desire not to appear uninformed or weak. These responses suggest that people trade off
the value of seeking information against concerns about their image, and that there may be
a social stigma of asking questions.
An essential feature of such an inhibition is that it involves others’ beliefs about the asker—
for instance, whether he is a competent, self-sufficient, or hardworking person. There are two
mechanisms by which the prospect of bad assessments may inhibit people—a distinction that
goes back at least to Goffman’s (1963) seminal study of social stigma. One mechanism—a
signaling concern—is about managing others’ beliefs. For instance, a pupil concerned about
how others perceive him may be reluctant to ask a teacher or a peer basic questions about
an assignment, fearing that this person could infer that the pupil is slow or lazy.4 But
1

Examples in the context of economic development include financial and agricultural extension (Conley and
Udry, 2010; Banerjee et al., 2013; Beaman et al., 2018).
2
For modeling of other endogenous decisions that enable information flow, see Niehaus (2011), Acemoglu
et al. (2014), Galeotti et al. (2013), and Calvo-Armengol et al. (2015).
3
E.g., in conversations initiated by others, or by hearing others’ conversations.
4
See Bénabou and Tirole (2006) for a seminal model of signaling in a variety of contexts, with an emphasis
on self-signaling. The effects of signaling in an educational context have recently been studied by Bursztyn
et al. (2016).

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

2

there is another way stigma can inhibit interaction, which is not about managing beliefs but
managing interactions in view of compromised beliefs. To illustrate, the pupil in the example
may simply dislike interacting with those who have a negative assessment of him, no matter
how this assessment came about. In particular, such feelings can occur even when signaling
concerns are irrelevant, because a bad attribute (such as a pupil’s ignorance) is apparent to
the potential Advisor irrespective of his seeking decision. We may call this type of inhibition
shame. Signaling and shame can both stigmatize the asking of questions. Moreover, their
effects depend in subtle ways on the distribution of ability (or other prized attributes) across
a population, and people’s assessment of others on those dimensions.5
In this paper, we focus on two questions. First, does a stigma of asking questions meaningfully inhibit learning? How does it compare with frictions arising from other salient
social boundaries in the community, such as caste? Second, what are the roles and magnitudes of the constituent parts of stigma? Understanding which forces matter—and in which
relationships—is especially valuable in understanding how stigma reacts to changes in policy. Strategic signaling concerns can be alleviated by reducing information asymmetries—for
instance, by facilitating interaction between people who know each other’s abilities well, or
even by revealing that someone is in need of information. Shame and related obstacles, on
the other hand, could be worsened by such an intervention.
In Section 2 we present a model of a decision about whether to seek advice, which is
designed to distinguish the two components of stigma introduced above and study their
distinct but overlapping effects. In the model, a Seeker (he) is deciding whether to ask a
question of an Advisor (she), who may be uncertain about the Seeker’s ability. The Seeker
cares about (i) the instrumental payoff of getting advice, which may depend on his own
ability; (ii) a reputational payoff based on the Advisor’s belief about his ability, which is
affected by his seeking decision because of (i); and, finally, (iii) an interaction payoff arising
from the social interaction in which the advice is sought, which also depends on the Advisor’s
assessment of the Seeker’s ability. The reputational payoff creates signaling concerns while
(iii) brings in the possibility of what we have called a shame effect. We use the model to
derive predictions about the behavioral consequences of the signaling and shame effects.
The model shows that the two effects are very different in how they operate, and how they
depend on priors and information. The signaling effect will not be present if information
5

Goffman’s (1963) discussion of the two forces distinguishes the situation of the “discreditable,” who is
inhibited by the possibility of revealing a bad attribute, and the “discredited,” who is inhibited by the
knowledge that is already possessed by those he may interact with; see also his analysis of self-presentation
and “face” in Goffman (1959, 1967). In naming shame, we are guided by psychological studies of the selfconscious emotions, which define shame as involving “negative feelings about the stable, global self, (‘I’m a
dumb person’),” (Lewis, 1971; Tracy and Robins, 2007), concern about being judged as deficient, and social
withdrawal and concealment of the defective self (Lindsay-Hartz, 1984; Wong and Tsai, 2007). We discuss
these connections further in Section 2.2.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

3

about ability is symmetric—for instance, if a Seeker’s low ability is evident regardless of his
seeking decision. On the other hand, the potential for an interaction made unpleasant by the
Advisor’s adverse beliefs about the Seeker is strengthened when low ability is obvious. The
two effects therefore imply different responses to changes in the environment. Importantly,
in a signaling model that does not include the interaction payoff, estimates of the signaling
effect can be seriously biased. The model permits us to articulate these observations and
set the stage for our empirical analysis of signaling and shame effects in an experiment.
At a technical level, by using a smooth distribution of the (privately known) instrumental
value of seeking, we obtain simple equations characterizing equilibrium, which are suited to
structural estimation, as we discuss below.
Our experiment varies both whether there is scope for signaling in the task (whether
ability matters), and what the Advisor knows about the Seeker. The treatment arms activate
signaling and shame concerns in different ways (and sometimes not at all), which allows us
to assess their distinctive contributions to inhibiting information-seeking. We now describe
the experimental setting, which is presented in full in Section 3. The experiment takes place
in Karnataka, India, across 70 villages with 1247 total subjects. The main decision-maker
in the experiment is a Seeker. On the first day of the experiment, the Seeker is told that
on the third day, he or she will have the opportunity to win a prize by guessing which of
two boxes contains it.6 The Seeker has a choice about how to get clues about which box
is correct. He or she is entitled to a certain number of clues (independent hints that are
correct with some probability). There is also an alternative option: the Seeker can opt
to access a larger number of clues (some number k 0 > k, which the seeker is told). This
option, however, requires a physical visit to a named individual—the Advisor paired to that
particular Seeker—to obtain a voucher for the clues. The Seeker has three days to do this,
before we draw the clues and elicit the guess on the third day. Our goal in conducting the
experiment in the field is to situate the act of getting information in a context similar to
typical informational interactions in our subjects’ lives.
There are two treatment arms: {Random, Skill} and {Private, Revealed}. Treatment is
randomly assigned at the village level. The first arm varies whether k, which determines
the Seeker’s valuation of advice,7 is Random or based on Skill. In the Random treatment, k
is independent of any attribute of the Seeker. In the Skill treatment, it is proportional to
the Seeker’s performance on a cognitive ability test (a simple version of Raven’s Progressive
Matrices). The second arm varies whether the Seeker’s ability score and identity are kept
Private or Revealed by us to the Advisor, irrespective of the Seeker’s actions. Importantly,
in both arms, the Seeker and the Advisor have both been made familiar with the test, all the
6

The prize, which is a lottery over a mobile phone and various cash amounts, has an expected value of over
a day’s wage.
7The other number, k 0 , is independent of any attribute of the Seeker or the Advisor.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

4

rules of the game, and how k is determined—though the actual realized value of k is known
only to the Seeker.
The outcome we focus on in our analysis is the Seeker’s decision of whether to forgo his or
her own clues in order to visit the paired Advisor over the course of the three days. In our
main analysis, we hold fixed a low-ability Seeker, his or her need for information (k, own clue
count), and the quality of advice to be received (k 0 , Advisor’s clue count). Thus, we compare
behavior across individuals with the same attributes.8 By comparing seeking rates across
treatments, we measure the effects of stigma—both signaling and shame inhibitions—and
analyze how these two forces depend on the circumstances. We now give an overview of
the key effects we set out to measure and the measurements we obtain of them. These are
presented in detail starting in Section 4.
We focus on the the stigma of seeking information that is caused by need being abilitydependent. We measure this as the reduction in seeking rates when we go from the (Random,
Private) to the (Skill, Private) treatment. We observe a large decline in the probability of
seeking (55%). This is the effect we are most interested in practically, as it reflects the
inhibition that arises when ability is implicated in a task. What accounts for the reduction?
When a Seeker chooses to seek in (Skill, Private), the Advisor’s belief that the Seeker has
high ability moves from the prior to a lower posterior. (In our data, the imputed reduction
in the belief turns out to be approximately 9pp, on average.) As we have discussed above,
the reduction in seeking could come from the signaling effect (to avoid this drop in beliefs),
the shame effect (to avoid interaction given this drop), or a combination.
Thus, the next step is to examine magnitude of the shame inhibition. Our basic measurement of shame is the comparison of (Random, Private) to (Random, Revealed)—a comparison in which there is no room for signaling to play a role. We see a 65% decline in the
probability of seeking advice for a low-ability Seeker, holding everything else fixed. Note
that in this case, the Advisor completely learns that a Seeker has a low ability score (when
this is the case), so her beliefs that the Seeker is of high ability move from her prior to a zero
probability. This is much greater than the movement that is typically caused by signaling
that one has a lower ability than the Advisor thought—which ordinarily does not result in
certainty ex post. Thus, while this difference allows us to identify the presence of a shame
effect, we must be careful in scaling this number to assess how much of the stigma effect
discussed in the last paragraph is due to shame.
By placing more structure on the problem—making parametric assumptions on payoffs
and distributions of shocks—we can address these issues. To our knowledge, there is little
8We

focus on low-ability seekers because, in the Skill treatments, they are the ones who have few clues and
therefore need to seek. If we had conditioned only on having a low clue count, a complication would be that
the composition of this group varies across treatments: in the Skill treatment it consists only of those with
a low ability score, but in the Random treatment there is a representative mix of ability scores.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

5

structural estimation of signaling in social behavior.9 Since in an experimental setup we are
able to directly compare seeking rates by type in (Random, Private), (Skill, Private), and
(Random, Revealed), we can estimate the model’s parameters. We find that both signaling
and shame effects are sizeable, and the signaling disutility is eight times the size of the shame
disutility for the same change in beliefs under our structural assumptions, which is consistent
with the reduced-form results.
In Section 5, we turn to the dependence of the effects on social structure. With detailed
data on all respondents’ network links, as well as their subcastes, we study whether stigma,
signaling, and shame vary with the social distance between the Seeker and the Advisor. We
find that the main deterrent among those who are linked or of the same caste is shame. For
instance, there is an 81% decline (16.3pp on a base of 20.1%) in the probability of seeking due
to the shame effect among co-caste members. Building on our structural exercise, we find
that signaling effects among the socially proximate are small and not statistically different
from zero. This is consistent with the fact, which we document, that the socially proximate
have stronger priors about each other’s abilities. These stronger priors leave less room for a
signaling effect. Meanwhile, among the socially distant (strangers or individuals of different
castes), the signaling parameter is much larger than the shame parameter, indicating that
signaling is the dominant force.
Taken together, our findings suggest that the endogenous formation of a communication
network in a given social environment will depend in subtle ways on the kind of information
being shared and associated signaling and shame concerns. These can create sizeable distortions in who talks to whom and in whether information can flow between different parts of
the community at all.
Signaling and shame operate differently and have different practical implications. We
point out various implications in Section 6. One of them is that interaction payoff frictions
are potentially more persistent, while reputational distortions are more transient. This is
because the updating of beliefs resolves uncertainty and limits future signaling concerns,
whereas shame need not be self-limiting in this way.
Moreover, the forces we have identified can have considerable implications for the outcomes
of information exchange and aggregation processes, and policies related to them. Consider,
for example, how policymakers may attempt to spread information. One practical strategy
is to offer a private learning environment that avoids the stigma concerns we have discussed.
This has recently been implemented in the experiment of Cole and Fernando (2014) via a
“hotline”—a remote consulting service for production advice. If farmers can call in to request
information without their actions being observed by peers, there is less room for strategic
9See

Fang (2006) for a structural approach in the classical context of job market signaling.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

6

signaling concerns to operate. Thus, in addition to the other benefits of providing expert
advice, endogenous seeking behavior may be more favorable for learning.10
Another aspect of information dissemination strategy is whether to broadcast information
to everyone in a community (e.g., via a loudspeaker or the radio) or to provide information
to a small set of seeds (e.g., via an extension program). Beyond their direct impact on who
is informed, these policies can affect stigma concerns and thus seeking behavior: Broadcasts
typically make it common knowledge that everyone was informed, while seeding interventions
often make it common knowledge that only a few people have new information. Thus, in
the broadcast case, needing clarification can be a signal of being unwilling or unable to learn
on one’s own. Signaling inhibitions can arise around this. Therefore, if social learning is
an important part of comprehension, broadcasting can actually lead to less conversation
and less knowledge. Banerjee et al. (2018) apply this perspective to study an information
intervention about the rule changes during the 2016 Indian demonetization, where we varied
how we delivered information to villages, as we discuss further in Section 6.
Related Literature. One literature that this paper relates to, as we have already mentioned, focuses on image concerns in information/skill acquisition (Fryer and Austen-Smith,
2005; Bursztyn and Jensen, 2015; Bursztyn et al., 2016). Spence’s (1973) seminal study of
signaling focused on education. The perspective there was that seeking education is a signal
(to potential employers, for instance) of a high ability, since education has lower costs for
more able types. More recently, researchers have studied signaling concerns that can deter
information-seeking, especially in the context of education. Fryer and Austen-Smith (2005)
examine a dual-audience signaling model, where the signal that the labor market rewards
may be one that an agent’s local community penalizes: having a relatively high type from
the perspective of the labor market can correspond to having a relatively low “social type,”
which is what peers care about. Of course, peers may also reward signaling high ability.
Bursztyn et al. (2016) (henceforth BEJ) perform carefully designed experiments in three
schools designed to examine whether, empirically, peer perceptions inhibit the seeking of
education. They find that the type of community matters a great deal for the mechanism of
a signaling effect: In one type of school, students are concerned with avoiding signaling low
ability, while in another, they are reluctant to reveal a disposition to exert high academic
effort. We parallel BEJ in distinguishing subtly different effects: the reputation-based and
interaction-based distortions to asking. These are quite different in terms of their economics
and policy implications (as we discuss throughout) but may be confounded. In terms of
practical focus, the signaling is bilateral (as opposed to public in BEJ) and thus quite
sensitive to the nature of the relationship between the people involved—a dependence we
10On

the other hand, in principle a shame inhibition can still operate even in an interaction with a remote
consulting service, though may be lower.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

7

explore in detail. Finally, in terms of empirical design, we study the signaling and shame
effects across many communities (70 villages), with treatment being assigned at the village
level.11 This allows us to deal with the fact that within a cluster (a village or a school), there
may be common shocks or other correlations. We conduct inference with suitable clustering
to identify how properties of the task (e.g., whether ability is relevant) and the pairwise
relationship in question (e.g., whether two people are friends) affect signaling and shame
concerns.
More broadly, within economics, we relate to recent empirical literatures which focus
on signaling, image, and status in a number of domains: conspicuous consumption (Charles
et al., 2009; Heffetz, 2011), commercial transactions (Goldfarb et al., 2015), productive effort
(Besley and Ghatak, 2008; Ellingsen and Johannesson, 2008; Ashraf et al., 2014) professional
education (Bursztyn et al., 2017), and political behavior (DellaVigna et al., 2016), among
others. The survey of Bursztyn and Jensen (2017) offers a comprehensive overview. In
Section 2.2 we discuss how the payoffs we model relate to important literatures in sociology
and psychology on stigma, signaling, and shame.
Our paper relates to a separate literature on information flow and learning in networks
(Conley and Udry (2010); Banerjee et al. (2013); Kremer and Miguel (2007); Foster and
Rosenzweig (1995); Beaman et al. (2018)). Though exogenous transmission of information
is a common baseline assumption, Niehaus (2011) argues that social learning endogenously
filters information due to individuals’ incentives to pass information or not. We focus on the
other side of this interaction: Agents in our setting take an active decision to obtain information from a peer. Since this decision is shaped by agents’ attributes and signaling/shame
concerns, our analysis suggests new sources of inefficiency and new externalities that are relevant to deciding whether organic communication will spread information successfully. This
ties into recent work on endogenous network formation that has studied networks formed in
equilibrium (Galeotti et al., 2013; Calvo-Armengol et al., 2015) and conditions for learning
to occur in them (Acemoglu et al., 2014).
2. Model
We formulate a simple model of decisions to seek information in the presence of reputational and interaction payoffs.
2.1. Environment. The model focuses on a decision taken by an agent called a Seeker. The
Seeker either does or does not have a choice to make: for instance, an opportunity to invest
in a new technology. With probability q := P(C = 1), the Seeker does have a choice and
11I.e.,

we tell the same rules to all individuals in the village (e.g., that skill is relevant to the task, if it is a
Skill treatment village). At the same time, the task is uniquely labeled for every Seeker-Advisor pair, so the
interaction still occurs at a pair level.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

8

hence has a demand for information. (The uncertainty here captures the fact that people do
not always need information, and so there may not be much to infer from their not seeking
it.)
Conditional on having a demand for information, the Seeker has a decision, d ∈ {0, 1},
to make: whether or not to seek advice from an Advisor, where d = 1 represents seeking.
This is the key decision we focus on. The Seeker has an expected instrumental payoff, V (1),
of seeking; we normalize the instrumental payoff of not seeking to V (0) = 0 and will often
abbreviate V (1) as V . The quantity V is the increase in expected payoff (from later making
the choice, e.g., an investment) that is obtained by seeking advice, net of all immediate
material costs incurred to actually seek it (e.g., the opportunity cost of time). The payoff
V is privately known to the Seeker.12 From the perspective of others, V is random. Its
distribution depends on the Seeker’s ability (or skill) type, a ∈ {H, L} (high or low).13 Let
Fa be the c.d.f. of V for a Seeker of ability a, and let Ga be the complementary c.d.f.
The Advisor (she) has a prior about the ability, a, of the Seeker (he): π := P(a = H).14
The Advisor observes the decision, d, of whether to seek. If there is asymmetric information
about the Seeker’s ability (i.e., if the Advisor does not know a), then the Advisor will update
her beliefs about it based the Seeker’s decision. The Seeker cares about this updating,
potentially in two ways, which we now discuss.
The Seeker’s full utility, as a function of whether he chooses to seek (d = 1) or not (d = 0)
is
(2.1)

U (d)

=

V (d)
| {z }

instrumental

+

ϕ (P(a = H | d))
|

{z

reputational

}

+

d · ψ (P(a = H | d)),
|

{z

interaction

}

and involves three kinds of payoffs. From left to right we label these terms the (i) instrumental
payoff; (ii) the reputational payoff; and (iii) the interaction payoff. We have discussed the
instrumental payoff. The reputational payoff corresponds to the the Seeker caring about
P(a = H | d), the Advisor’s assessment15 of the Seeker’s ability, which is evaluated in view
of the Seeking decision d. Finally, there is the interaction component, which reflects that
the Seeker may derive more or less utility from the seeking interaction with the Advisor that

12Of

course, the realization of V need not resolve all uncertainty regarding the value of information or the
cost of getting it: it is simply an expectation based on the Seeker’s private information of his need for advice
and other relevant facts.
13The binary-type simplification makes for a simpler and more intuitive exposition. The theory extends
readily to more types.
14This is the belief that a = H conditional on the Seeker having the chance to seek information (C = 1). In
our experiments, we will see that this prior is varied by revealing or not revealing the Seeker’s identity and
score on the ability test.
15Here we follow a standard and tractable parameterization—see, e.g., Bernheim (1994), Bénabou and Tirole
(2006), and Ali and Lin (2013).

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

9

occurs when d = 1 depending on what the Advisor thinks of him during that interaction.
We discuss the interpretations and foundations for these payoffs below in Section 2.2.
We assume that both ϕ(·) and ψ(·) are continuous, bounded functions [0, 1] → R. For any
function f depending on d, define ∆f (d) = f (1) − f (0) and then rewrite (2.1) as
(2.2)

∆U (d)

=

∆V (d)

+

∆ϕ (P(a = H | d))

+

ψ (P(a = H | d)) .

This clarifies the difference between the reputational and interaction parts of the payoff:
reputational payoffs are about ∆ϕ, i.e., about changing the beliefs of the Advisor by changing
his information from d = 0 to d = 1 (indeed, if ϕ is linear, this part is simply proportional
to the change in beliefs). In contrast, the interaction payoff makes this instance of seeking
advice more or less pleasant depending on the final level of the Seeker’s belief, irrespective
of whether or how that level is changed by the Seeker’s decision.
Under the assumptions we will make later, both the reputational and interaction terms
will deter seeking.16 In our context, the part of the decrease caused by the ϕ term is called
the signaling effect on seeking, while the part caused by the final d · ψ term is the shame
effect. The total of these terms (on payoffs or seeking rates, depending on context) will be
called the stigma effect. We discuss these terms and their interpretations further in Section
2.2 below.


A tuple of primitives π, q, (Fa )a∈{H,L} , ϕ, ψ is called an environment.
2.2. Interpretation. Our focus is on situations where a behavior or trait is stigmatized.
An especially clear distinction between the signaling and shame parts of stigma is drawn in
Goffman (1963):
“The term stigma and its synonyms conceal a double perspective: does the
stigmatized individual assume his differentness is known about already [or
not]? In the first case one deals with the plight of the discredited, in the
second with that of the discreditable. This is an important difference, even
though a particular stigmatized individual is likely to have experience with
both situations.” (Goffman, 1963)
Goffman and the literature that follows him (see, e.g., Scambler (1998); Page (2015)) have
emphasized that both kinds of concerns prompt the deliberate management of interactions,
but in different ways and with different consequences. Modeling the preferences underlying
such behavior immediately leads to the payoff terms we have described above—in particular, an interaction term in addition to a signaling term. The specification (2.1), in turn,
highlights that the payoffs underlying these concerns may differ in their magnitudes, and
these differences will be important in understanding both behavior and reaction to policy.
We now discuss these terms in turn.
16That

is, there would be more seeking, uniformly across individuals’ types, if either ϕ or ψ were set to zero.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

10

2.2.1. Reputational payoff. The reputational payoff reflects the Seeker’s concern with managing the Advisor’s beliefs. One simple foundation for this, and one that we believe is relevant
in many applications, is that the Seeker will have access to materially valuable future opportunities if the Advisor thinks well of him. (Appendix D fleshes this out and relates it to
our functional forms.) Alternatively, the reputational term may come simply from a hedonic
valuation of others’ esteem, aggregated over the time during which their assessment of the
Seeker will be relevant. In the introduction, we have mentioned some entry points into the
extensive literature on reputational concerns and signaling effects, so we will not reiterate
that here.17
2.2.2. Interaction payoff. The interaction payoff, in contrast, pertains only to the particular
act of seeking that the decision d controls; it describes the utility of the actual engagement
as a function of how the Advisor will be assessing the Seeker. The associated payoffs have
several psychological interpretations. Earlier, we labeled the inhibition associated with a
negative interaction payoff (for low-ability types) as shame. This is likely to be the more apt
interpretation when the question at hand or the knowledge required is basic in the relevant
context: For example, few people in a literate community take special pride in the ability
to read directions, but illiterate people are often ashamed that they cannot.18 However,
in other cases the more natural description is that the interaction term captures pride in
being seen to have a trait that is especially good. The shame interpretation ties into a
literature in psychology. This literature views shame as a negative emotion prompted by
one’s own inadequacies. As we mentioned in the introduction, shame is seen as relating
to persistent aspects of the self, such as intelligence, subject to external evaluation and
judgment. Shame is especially salient with respect to social interactions, and when it is
activated, social withdrawal often occurs (Tracy and Robins, 2007; Wong and Tsai, 2007).19
There is also freedom of interpretation as to whether the interaction payoff comes to the
agent from an external source or from within. In the external case, the payoff may arise
from how the Advisor treats the Seeker in view of his inferred ability (to take an extreme
example, explicitly shaming or praising him). In the internal case, it comes from how the
Seeker feels about the situation of asking, even if the interaction is not visibly affected by the
17As

is often the case, reputational concerns can be reinterpreted through the lens of self-signaling (insofar
as the act of seeking serves as a memorable reminder of one’s ability). Within our experiment, because
ability score is always clearly revealed to the Seeker, our interpretation is that external reputation concerns
are likely the dominant ones there.
18In our empirical analysis, we study the deterrent for those who performed badly on the cognitive ability
test, which seems to fit in this category.
19There is increasing evidence that interactions themselves may affect utility in a trait-dependent way, even
when traditional reputational concerns seem hard to rationalize. To take just two examples, in Goldfarb
et al. (2015), shoppers are shown to avoid an interaction with a cashier where they may have to mispronounce
a product name; in Andreoni et al. (2017), conditional on not giving to charity, people are shown to value
not having an interaction in which that choice is salient.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

11

Advisor’s beliefs. The interaction payoff in practice is likely to be a combination of these.20
Note, however, that this part of the payoff must be related somehow to this particular act
of seeking. If the Seeker feels bad about his low ability irrespective whether he seeks or not,
that is not reflected in his interaction payoff. It would, instead, be a separate, d-independent
term in (2.1), which we omit from our analysis as it does not affect the decision to seek.21
2.3. Basic analysis. We will study the Bayes-Nash equilibria of our model. This is a
specification of behavior in which the Seeker is best-responding to a given belief-updating
function of the Advisor, and this belief updating is consistent (in the sense of Bayesian
inference) with the actual behavior of the Seeker.22
We make an assumption about how the privately known value of seeking, V , compares
across the two types. Recall that the c.d.f. of this random variable a Seeker of ability a is
Fa .
Assumption 1. FL first-order stochastically dominates FH , and it does so strictly, in the
sense that FL (v) < FH (v) for every v.
This says that the value to low-ability types from seeking exceeds (in distribution) the value
to high-ability types; they need help less. For example, a less able farmer may have more
difficulty using a new fertilizer without help. A less intelligent or experienced student may
need help making sense of instructions. In addition, high-ability types may face higher
opportunity costs of time, which is part of V (the net material value of seeking).
This assumption corresponds to our focus on “basic” questions, and holds by construction
in the experiments we conduct.23
Before proceeding, we make a technical assumption to simplify the analysis.
20Adam

Smith’s discussion of image concerns (Theory of Moral Sentiments, I.iii.2) is at least partly about
interaction payoffs, as opposed to instrumental signaling. He argues that the main motive of “bettering our
condition” is “to be observed. . . to be taken notice of with sympathy. . . and approbation”—a sentiment he
calls vanity. He stresses the value of basking in the positive assessment of others, beyond securing their
good opinion: “The rich man glories in his riches” and “has, every moment, an opportunity of interesting
mankind, and of rendering himself the object of the observation and fellow-feeling of every body about him”).
Similarly, (lack of) social image is seen as a constant source of pain for the disadvantaged: “The poor man,
on the contrary, is ashamed of his poverty. . . . [Others] turn away their eyes from him, or if the extremity of
his distress forces them to look at him, it is only to spurn so disagreeable an object from among them.”
21Our experiments always make comparisons within ability type, differencing this variation out.
22One interpretation of this two-player game is as an Advisor facing a population of Seekers, with a distribution of valuations and attributes. The formal definition of the solution concept is in Appendix A.1.
23In general, asking questions (or some other social behavior) could signal high ability rather than low ability,
or it could have more complex informational content. For instance, some pupils are eager to ask certain kinds
of questions in class to signal how much they understand. Though the assumptions we work with in the
sequel are specific to our setting and experiments, the basic point that information-acquisition is distorted
by signaling concerns would hold—with suitable modifications—in other environments.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

12

Assumption 2. For both ability types a ∈ {H, L}, the random variable V has an atomless
distribution (i.e., its c.d.f. Fa is continuous) whose support contains the positive reals (i.e.,
Fa (v) < 1 for all v > 0).
The first basic result is:
Proposition 1 (Equilibrium Existence and Characterization). Under Assumptions 1 and
2, an equilibrium exists and every equilibrium is in cutoff strategies, where an agent seeks if
and only if V ≥ v for some v.24 An equilibrium is characterized by a cutoff v (used by all
Seekers, independent of the value of a) which is a solution to
(2.3)

v = ϕ (Pv (a = H | d = 0)) − ϕ (Pv (a = H | d = 1)) − ψ (Pv (a = H | d = 1)) ,

where Pv (a = H | d = ·) are uniquely determined by the posterior odds ratios
(2.4)
Pv (a = H | d = 0)
π 1 − qGH (v)
Pv (a = H | d = 1)
π GH (v)
=
=
.
1 − Pv (a = H | d = 0)
1 − π 1 − qGL (v)
1 − Pv (a = H | d = 1)
1 − π GL (v)
The cutoff v is positive, meaning that V > 0 is necessary (but not sufficient) for an agent to
seek.
Note that this model considers a Seeker (or a population of Seekers) about whom the
prior is fixed at π. Once we apply this model to the real world, different people will induce
different priors in Advisors, then the cutoff will depend on one’s identity and covariates
The key ideas of the proof are as follows. (Details of all proofs are in Appendix A.) First,
since the payoffs that depend on d (reputational and interaction) enter additively, it is clear
that the best-response d (taking Advisor’s beliefs as given) is increasing in the instrumental
payoff V . Under the assumption of no atoms, in any best response the Seeker uses a cutoff
strategy: if C = 1 (so that there is a choice to make), a Seeker seeks if and only if his value
is high enough: V ≥ v.25 Actual ability type does not enter an agent’s utility function at
the time of the seeking decision, and is not observed by the Advisor; these facts imply that
a does not matter for the cutoff v.26 Given the cutoff, one can compute the probability that
the agent’s type is high conditional on not seeking, and conditional on seeking. The quantity
on the right-hand side of (2.3) is the decrease induced by seeking in the reputational and
interaction payoffs. The cutoff type v is indifferent between this and the expected value v

24We

identify two strategy profiles if outcomes are different across them with probability zero.
we are using a tie-breaking rule, which does not matter if we are willing to ignore zero-probability
events.
26Ability plays a role only in determining the ex ante distribution of the gains to seeking V , whose realization
the Seeker knows when deciding. This will, of course, affect signaling implications.
25Here

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

13

he will get from the information. It only remains to verify that a positive cutoff v solving
(2.3) exists. This follows by the Intermediate Value Theorem.27
It will be convenient to assume ψ(π) ≤ 0: Interacting with the Advisor when one’s ability is
perceived to be worse than the prior is costly. This is essentially without loss of generality—
relaxing the assumption would shift seeking payoffs by a constant.
Proposition 2 (Inferences in Equilibrium). Under Assumptions and 1 and 2, in any equilibrium of the signaling game, the mass of high-ability agents choosing to seek (d = 1) is
strictly smaller than the mass of low-ability agents choosing to seek (d = 0). Therefore, not
seeking signals high ability: if v is the equilibrium cutoff, then
Pv (a = H | d = 0) > Pv (a = H | d = 1).
The proof is simply that with any cutoff, as long as it is the same for both types (as must
be the case in equilibrium), Assumption 1 guarantees that the mass of high-ability agents
choosing to seek is strictly smaller than the corresponding mass of low-ability agents. The
conclusion then follows by Bayes’ rule.
To make predictions corresponding to some of our treatment arms, as well as the effect
of pre-existing familiarity between the Seeker and the Advisor, we study some boundary
cases of our problem. In particular, we wish to explore how equilibria behave as we vary
two important aspects of the environment: making the Advisor’s priors precise, and making
the marginal value of seeking unrelated to ability type. In both cases, the signaling effect
disappears and both ability types have the same behavior. Actually, since this result is
immediate, we will actually show a bit more—that behavior is approximately the same for
any environment close enough to one with known ability or ability-irrelevance.
Proposition 3 (Known Ability or Ability-Irrelevance). Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2
hold. Take a sequence of environments satisfying either
(1) π → 0 or π → 1, fixing all other parameters; or
(2) the distribution FH converges to FL in the total variation norm, fixing all other parameters.
For any sequence of equilibria corresponding to those environments, the cutoff v converges
to 0 and the seeking decision becomes uninformative:
Pv (a = H | d = 0) → Pv (a = H | d = 1).

27Note

that at v = 0, the left-hand side of (2.3) is zero while right-hand side is positive; as v → +∞, the
left-hand side tends to +∞ while the right-hand side remains bounded.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

14

2.4. A parameterized family. To illustrate how equilibrium is found graphically, develop
an intuition for its dependence on primitives, and set the stage for what can be said about
uniqueness, we introduce a parametric family of environments. Fix “basic” functions ϕb and
b which will then be scaled.28 For some real numbers λ, γ > 0, let ϕ = λϕ
b
b and ψ = γ ψ.
ψ,
Thus (2.1) becomes:
U (d)

=

V (d)

+

λϕb (P(a = H | d))

+

γd · ψb (P(a = H | d)) .

Then (2.3) becomes
v = λ [ϕb (Pv (a = H | d = 0)) − ϕb (Pv (a = H | d = 1))] − γ ψb (Pv (a = H | d = 1)) .
To see how the equilibria are affected by parameters, it is convenient to divide through by λ
and obtain
v
γ
= ϕb (Pv (a = H | d = 0)) − ϕb (Pv (a = H | d = 1)) − ψb (Pv (a = H | d = 1)) .
λ
λ
Then, fixing λ/γ, we can visualize the dependence of equilibria on the magnitude of stigma
by looking at intersections between the scaled return to seeking information, v/λ, and the
right-hand side, which we define as R(v).
Figure 1 presents plots where we vary λ and γ and study the resulting equilibria. In Panel
A with λ ∈ {3, 10} and γ = 1, we see that there is a unique equilibrium (point of intersection)
in each case. Further, when image matters considerably (λ = 10), the equilibrium is one in
which the threshold to seek is very high and therefore the incurred reputation loss is high
as well. Meanwhile the equilibrium when λ = 3 has the threshold for seeking quite low, and
accordingly the reputational cost is low. Panel B repeats the exercise but we set λ = 5.5 to
demonstrate that multiple equilibria are possible. Here A is the “good” equilibrium where
the threshold to seeking is low and there is essentially no reputation cost. In contrast,
in equilibrium B, the threshold to seek is considerably higher and therefore an individual
incurs a larger reputational cost. (An equilibrium is stable when R(v) has a smaller slope, in
absolute value, than 1/λ at the point of intersection.) Finally in Panel C we look at the same
case as in Panel B except that we remove the shame effect. This flattens the reputational
cost functions; note that this reduces the threshold to seek in B and therefore reduces the
reputation cost of seeking as well.
2.5. Uniqueness. Finally, we briefly turn to the issue of uniqueness. In general, our model
may feature multiple stable29 equilibria. This reflects the realistic feature that, despite
fundamental parameters being the same in two communities, the same actions may have
28The

exact functional forms are unimportant. But, for the sake of concreteness, in this example we take
the foundation for ϕ
b from Appendix D, with the c.d.f. H(x) given by x/(1 + x) and then we set ψb = ϕ.
b
29A stable solution is one for which best-response dynamics converge back to it after a slight perturbation,
and corresponds to the right-hand side of (2.3) having a slope between −1 and 1 at the equilibrium.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

15

different meanings due to culture or custom. This is manifested formally in equation (2.3)
potentially having multiple solutions v. (See Figure 1 for an illustration.) However, we can
give conditions for this not to happen. For simplicity, focus on a signaling-only model. Let
b where λ > 0 is a parameter and ϕ
b is a continuous, bounded function [0, 1] → R.
ϕ = λϕ,
As in the previous section, this allows us to fix a function ϕb representing the reputational
payoff and vary the importance of it by varying λ. Let µ be the supremum of the derivative
in v of
ϕb (Pv (a = H | d = 0)) − ϕb (Pv (a = H | d = 1))
over all v ≥ 0.
Proposition 4 (Equilibrium Uniqueness). Fix all aspects of the environment except λ. Fix
a constant ε > 0. If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then: (i) If λ < µ−1 there is a unique
equilibrium cutoff. (ii) There is a constant λ such that, if λ > λ, the equilibrium probability
of seeking is at most ε (so there is an essentially unique equilibrium with no seeking).
Thus, when signaling concerns are low or high, there is a unique or essentially unique
equilibrium. However, with intermediate signaling concerns, it is possible that there are
multiple equilibria, and these will be welfare-ranked. The restriction to a reputational payoff
only (i.e. ϕ, not ψ) is not essential to these statements.30 We will return to these questions
in Section 7.
2.6. Summary and implications. We now summarize some implications of our model
that yield key predictions in the experiment.31
(1) In (Skill, Private), high-ability Seekers, on average, will seek less than low-ability
Seekers; Advisors will update their beliefs, upon observing seeking, in the direction
of low ability.
(2) If shame is present, In Revealed treatments, low-ability types seek less than highability types even though beliefs are not updated conditional on seeking.
(3) In the Random or Revealed treatments, or when the Seeker is well-known to the
Advisor (so that there is little asymmetric information about ability), high- and lowability types have similar seeking rates.
(4) In the (Skill, Private) treatment, both types seek less than in (Random, Private).
We close with a few further theoretical observations that the model allows us to make.
30A

version can be readily derived in the setting of the previous section, though the constants are a bit
uglier.
31We have discussed the version of the theory where F and F differ from each other. This is relevant
H
L
in the Skill treatment, where one’s need for advice depends on ability. There is also a (trivial) version of
the model where FH = FL , which is relevant for the Random treatments, where ability does not affect skill
endowment.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

16

Shame and signaling are very different in how they operate. Signaling, because it is about
the change in beliefs that an interaction induces, is inherently bounded in how many times it
can deter Seeking: once ability is revealed, it plays no role. Similarly, if the task in question
is one where ability is easy to diagnose, signaling can play no role. But shame can be a
severe obstacle in both situations.
Signaling and shame effects also depend on social context in different ways. Signaling
is most powerful when there is substantial asymmetric information. In particular, between
strangers, the act of asking could update beliefs from the population prior to a fairly precise
posterior, and so signaling is likely to be a strong deterrent in such interactions, and weak
when the Seeker’s type is known. On the other hand, shame can be strong even without
updating of beliefs, and in particular can be very strong between friends, who are likely to
know that ability is low when this is the case.
Sections 6 and 7 extend this discussion and explore further implications.

3. Setting and experimental design
3.1. Setting and background. We conducted surveys and experiments with 1247 subject
pairs in 70 villages in Karnataka, India. The majority of villagers have occupations in
agriculture, sericulture, and dairy production. This is a setting where villagers rely on
word-of-mouth learning to obtain information useful for production, so understanding what
obstacles impede social learning is important.
Prior to our experiment, we conducted surveys with 122 respondents in four villages not
from our sample, but in the same region. Our goal was to learn about the frictions villagers
face in social learning. Among other questions, we asked them about how they get information from their networks on a number of topics (financial products, farming inputs, and
health practices). We found that passive learning was considerably more common than active
learning: 95% of respondents reported hearing information passively from friends and 90%
from broadcast media (newspapers, TV, and the Internet). In contrast, only 49% reported
actively asking friends in their own village for information about the above-mentioned topics.
Our further questions were aimed at understanding what factors might deter active seeking. In particular, we probed whether the respondents felt constrained in seeking information.
We did this by asking whether they felt there were limits on the number of times one could
approach another villager for information. In 88% of surveys, they reported feeling a limit on
the number of times they could approach a member of their community to ask for farming,
health, or financial advice. In 64% of these cases, our respondents reported that they chose
not to seek out information to avoid appearing weak or uninformed. This is consistent with
some sort of stigma (signaling, shame, or a mix) being an important force in this context.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

17

Finally, respondents also told us that the constraints keep them from the information
that would be most valuable. About 70% of respondents told us they consider it important
to talk to others before making consequential decisions about financial products, farming,
and health practices. We then asked respondents to consider (i) the best person in the
village whom they felt comfortable approaching for advice about the topic as well as (ii) the
best person in the village to ask for advice if, hypothetically, they did not feel constrained.
About 60% of the respondents said that they already knew everything relevant known by
the approachable people. However, 70% of the respondents said that the unconstrained-best
person to ask for advice did know more information. Overall, our survey evidence points to
stigma as a potentially important force that constrains the seeking of information.
Turning now specifically to the 70 villages in which we conducted our experiment: We
had previously collected data on networks among households to help us identify whether two
subjects are socially connected, in what ways, and to what extent.32 Our measures of the
frequency or intensity of social interaction allow us to examine how frictions in social learning
vary with social distance—a crucial variable in combination with demographic covariates.
3.2. Design. In every village, we selected approximately 18 people as Seekers and 18 as
Advisors, drawing randomly from our village census, and formed Seeker-Advisor pairs. The
roles of Seeker and Advisor were randomly assigned. The experiment is at the pair—that is,
Seeker-Advisor—level (though, as we describe below, treatment is randomized at the village
level). We stratified the sample into friend pairs, co-caste pairs, and pairs belonging to
neither class.33
The experiment took place over three days in each village. At a high level, on Day 1
we collected baseline data and introduced the guessing game Seekers would play on Day 3.
Between Day 1 and Day 3, each Seeker had the opportunity to increase the number of clues
he would have access to in the guessing game by visiting his paired Advisor. On Day 3, the
guessing game was played.
In more detail: On Day 1, we approach both Seekers and Advisors and collect demographic
data in a baseline survey. We also administer—separately to all participants—a simple test
of cognitive ability based on the Raven’s Progressive Matrices.34 The test score maps to the
ability variable in our theory. We inform the Seekers that on Day 3, each will play a game
32

This data was collected and analyzed in Banerjee et al. (2016). Specifically, we collected data on (i)
social relationships (whose house the subject visits and who visits their house to socialize), (ii) financial
relationships (with whom they engage in borrowing/lending of small amounts of money or material goods
such as kerosene or rice), and (iii) advising relationships (whom they talk to for advice regarding a financial,
health, or farming decision).
33
We reweight observations appropriately when we conduct the pooled analysis.
34
For the instrument, see Appendix ??. The ability test occurs before subjects knew know treatment they
are in, at the same time as we obtain informed consent. The participants are informed of the possible
treatments. Therefore, importantly, the subjects know that their score and identity may be revealed to
another member of their community, irrespective of their seeking decisions. Since they are informed of this

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

18

for a prize. The game is to guess which of the two boxes contains a cellphone. The prize is
a cellphone worth Rs. 1350, or one of several cash prizes. The exact prize is determined by
a dice roll, but everyone is guaranteed to win something for guessing correctly; the expected
cash value of the random prize is Rs. 180, which is over a day’s wage in the area.
In addition to being told about the game, on Day 1 the Seeker is also given a choice about
clues for the guessing game. Each clue is an independent, identically distributed draw of a
chit from a bag which has the label of the box with the prize with probability 0.55, and the
wrong box otherwise. The Seeker has the right to get k clues without doing anything else.
(We discuss the determination of k shortly.) He can, instead, decide to have a voucher for k 0
clues, typically more than k, delivered to his paired Advisor. The paired Advisor’s clues are
usable only by the paired Seeker.35 If the Seeker chooses this option, he has to physically
visit the Advisor between Day 1 and Day 3 to obtain the voucher. Our main outcome of
interest is which of these two options the Seeker chooses. On Days 1-3, the Seekers are able
to seek information from their paired Advisors, if they chose to do so. On Day 3, we revisit
the village to solicit the Seekers’ guesses and distribute prizes.
Our experiment has a simple 2×2 design, randomized at the village level.36 The treatment
arms are as follows:
(1) What determines quality of information:
• Random: The number of clues that the Seeker is endowed with, k, is drawn
uniformly at random from {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}.
• Skill: k is increasing in the Seeker’s score on an ability test—the Raven’s Matrices Test (see Figure B.2 in Appendix B for the exact schedule).
In either case, if the seeker decides to forego his k clues, he can obtain, by visiting
the Advisor, an entitlement to k 0 clues. The number k 0 is drawn uniformly at random
from {4, 5, 6, 7, 8}. This number is known to the Seeker at the time of his decision.
Typically k 0 > k.37
(2) Whether the Seeker’s ability is known:
• Private: we do not reveal a Seeker’s test score to the paired Advisor.
before randomization, we do not need to worry about endogenous variation in effort on the Raven’s test
depending on treatment.
35This is because every Seeker–Advisor pair has a uniquely labeled game. For example, one Seeker has to
guess whether the “cat” or “dog” box has the prize and another has to decide whether the “tree” or “river”
box has the prize, and so on. Therefore, each Advisor had unique clues that were only usable by her Seeker,
and further, the Advisor had no intrinsic use for the clues herself.
36We randomize at the village level, as opposed to the pair level, to guard against the scenario that players
in the same village would discuss the rules of the game and get confusing information.
37In about 14% of cases, we had k 0 ≤ k; very little seeking occurred (about 3% within this group) when k 0
was equal to k and no seeking occurred when k 0 was strictly less than k.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

19

• Revealed: irrespective of the seeking decision, the Seeker’s identity, test score,
and percentile are immediately revealed to the paired Advisor.38
We emphasize the following to all participants, making it clear that they all receive the
same briefing: (i) the treatment that the subjects are assigned to; (ii) the fact that all
subjects in our study have taken a Raven’s Matrices Test, and therefore both Seekers and
Advisors are familiar with it.
3.2.1. Measurement of effects. The design schematic is presented in Figure 2. The outcome
we focus on is the Seeker’s decision of whether to forgo his or her own clues in order to visit
the paired Advisor over the course of the three days. In looking at this outcome variable, our
main effects can be measured most directly by comparing the outcome across treatment cells,
holding fixed the ability of the individual (test score), the need for clues (k), and the number
of clues that the Advisor has (k 0 ). In our preferred specifications, we operationalize this by
using Seeker-by-Advisor clue count fixed effects (i.e., (k, k 0 ) fixed effects) and conditioning
on the sample of Seekers with low test scores. In discussing comparisons next, we will take
for granted that we are conditioning on all these, unless noted otherwise.
First, by comparing (Random, Private) to (Skill, Private), we can estimate a total stigma
effect that arises when ability is relevant, compared to a benchmark situation where ability
is not relevant (with ability being held private in both cases). Recall from (2.1) that stigma
here consists of the effects of both signaling (from the reputational payoff) and shame (from
the interaction payoff).
Second, by comparing (Random, Private) to (Random, Revealed), we can estimate the
shame effect. Recall that in the latter treatment, we reveal the ability type of the a low-score
individual, irrespective of the seeking decision d. Thus, the signaling term cannot contribute
to difference and payoffs, and the incremental utility of seeking in (2.2) is only affected by
the shame term, d · ψ (0) . Note that this is a pure shame effect, and it is maximal in that
beliefs are fully updated to reflect the true ability of the seeker. While comparisons to (Skill,
Revealed) are not part of our core design, we leave open the possibility that there may be
a Skill-Revealed interaction.39 After presenting our results, we discuss the interpretation of
such a term in Section 6.3.1.
Third, by putting some additional structure on the problem, we can estimate the relative
magnitudes of the signaling and shame effects as components of the stigma detected in our
first measurement. Suppose the utility of seeking decision d is given by


U (d) = αd + βP (kd ) + λP (a = H | d) + γd P (a = H | d) −
38We

1
− u,
2


implemented this with one surveyor stationed with the Seeker and another with the Advisor, in all
treatments, so that the revelation would be immediate. This avoided any doubt as to when the Advisor
would learn the Seeker’s attributes.
39“Interaction” here is distinct, of course, from the sense in “interaction payoff.”

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

20

where P (kd ) is the probability of guessing correctly given kd signals under decision d, and
where u is drawn from a Type I extreme value distribution. Then the incremental value of
seeking is
1
−
2
where  has a logistic distribution and is independent across individuals. The idea, informally,
is that by comparing (Random, Private) to (Random, Revealed), we identify γ, since P(a =
H | d) = 0 for low-ability types.40 With this in hand, we can use the comparison of (Random,
Private) and (Skill, Private) to back out λ. To do this, we use the differential seeking rates
in our treatment to back out how much information seeking conveys, which gives us values
of ∆d P (a = H | d).
Fourth, we are particularly interested in how the signaling and shame effects, and their
total impact, vary with aspects of the social context. We will thus estimate these effects
by interacting them with measures of social proximity (whether individuals are friends, of
whether they are of the same caste). We also estimate our structural model separately for
the socially proximate and socially distant to tease out the relative magnitudes γ and λ in
each case, and explain how the results may reflect differences in the affective strength of these
relationships (relevant to shame) and the precision of prior beliefs (relevant to signaling).


∆d U (d) = αd + β∆d P (kd ) + λ∆d P (a = H | d) + γ P (a = H | d = 1) −



3.3. Sample statistics. Table 1 presents the sample statistics. We have comparable numbers of male and female subjects: 54% of the Seekers and 53% of the Advisors are female.
Though we do have rich jati (subcaste) data, because major divisions occur at broad
categories, as is standard we look at caste blocks of General, OBC, Scheduled Caste (SC)
and Scheduled Tribe (ST). In our analysis we treat General and OBC as upper caste and
SC/ST as lower caste. 61% of the Seekers and 56% of the Advisors are General or OBC
Caste—the remainder are SC or ST.
We also have a wide distribution of ability as measured by the Raven’s Matrix test, scored
out of 15. The mean Seeker score is 9.5 with a standard deviation of 3.2, and similarly the
mean is 9.2 (3.3) for Advisors.
Turning to the network data, the subjects have on average 8.6 links overall.41 Within-caste
links far outnumber across-caste links both in social and informational relationships.
4. Results
This section presents our results. We start with some preliminaries on the updating of
perceptions based on the test score and the raw seeking rates. Then we report the effects
40Assume

for this discussion α and β have been identified, just so we can focus on the intuition. We explain
parameter identification formally in Appendix C.
41Recall footnote 32. Subjects have 6.7 friendship links, 5.7 informational links, 6.6 within-caste, and 2.1
across-caste links on average.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

21

of our treatments on seeking, controlling for all relevant heterogeneity. Next, we conduct a
more detailed examination of how people make inferences. We conclude with a structural
estimation of the parameters of our model.
4.1. Preliminaries.
4.1.1. Do people update perceptions from the test score? We first show that the score on the
Raven’s Matrix Test can effectively update people’s beliefs about the test-taker’s ability.
Working with a separate survey sample of 399 subjects (drawn from the same population
as the subjects in our main experiment), we asked them to score the intelligence of several
other subjects (an average of three per respondent) on a 0-100 scale. Three days later, we
revealed to them these subjects’ Raven’s matrices scores and asked them for a revised score.
We regress the outcome of whether there was an increase in this intelligence rating on the
Raven’s matrix score that we revealed to the subject. Table 2 presents the results. Column
1 only uses surveyor and caste controls, Column 2 adds village fixed effects, and Column 3
uses respondent fixed effects. Note that the the regression identifies the effect of seeing a
higher Raven’s matrix score on the probability of increasing the score given to the test-taker.
We find that a one standard deviation increase in a person’s reported score corresponds to
a 3-4pp increase in this probability, on a base of 39% (roughly a 10% effect size).
4.1.2. A first look: Raw probabilities of seeking. The mean seeking rate across all treatments
is 14%, while among those with a low skill and a low clue count (those we will focus on in
our main analysis), it is 21%. In Figure 3, we graphically compare the probability of seeking
for high-skill and low-skill Seekers, without conditioning on the number of clues obtained
by the Seekers. Here, high-skill Seekers are defined as those having an ability score above
the median42 and the low-skilled are defined to be the rest. We see that in the (Random,
Private) treatment, the seeking rate is roughly the same for the two types of Seekers. This
is because the distribution of the clues is random and independent of Seekers’ skill, and so
the need for seeking is expected to be similar.43 In the (Skill, Private) treatment, however,
the high-skilled Seekers seek significantly less often—they have less need for seeking as they
obtain more clues by performing better on the skill test.
4.2. Treatment effects on seeking rates. Our main sample conditions on low-skilled
Seekers (below the median score on the ability assessment) who received low clue counts (a
below-median number of clues). Thus, the subjects across the different treatment cells are
comparable, and the only thing that varies is the treatment condition.
42In

our entire sample, which corresponds to a score of at least 10 out of 15.
course, this needn’t have been the case: the taste for seeking advice could have turned out to be
correlated with ability, and so even absent any signaling concerns, one ability type would have done more
seeking.
43Of

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

22

Given this sample, we estimate, for Seeker i with Advisor j in village v:
(4.1)

Seekijv = α + β1 SkillTreatmentv + β2 RevealTreatmentv
+ β3 SkillTreatmentv × RevealTreatmentv + ijv .

Table 3 presents the results of the regression analysis. We add Seeker score as well as
Seeker-by-Advisor clue count fixed effects across specifications.44
4.2.1. Stigma: Do low-skill Seekers seek less in the Skill treatment?
We first measure the total stigma effect, if any, making low-skill Seekers in the (Skill,
Private) treatment seek less than they do in the (Random, Private) treatment. Recall that
we are comparing low-skill Seekers across treatments who are offered the same number of
clues (either by random chance in control, or deterministically in treatment) in order to hold
the need to ask constant in the comparison.
Table 3 presents the results. We focus on β1 in equation (4.1). We find that moving to
the (Skill, Private) treatment from (Random, Private) leads to a 11.5pp drop (column 3,
p = 0.04) in the probability that the Seeker seeks on a base of 20.9% for the (Random,
Private) treatment. The effect remains robust as we add various fixed effects. Relative to
column 1, column 2 adds fixed effects for the Seeker’s score on the skill test, and column 3
additionally adds fixed effects for the Seeker-by-Advisor clue counts. This demonstrates that
in fact there is a 55% decline in the probability of seeking advice for a low ability individual
simply due to stigma, holding everything else fixed.
4.2.2. Shame: Revealing Seeker ability to Advisor. We now look at what happens when we
reveal the Seeker’s ability score to the Advisor. Without a shame inhibition, this would allow
the low-skilled Seekers to resume seeking at the same rate as in control, since there would
be nothing left to signal. On the other hand, if there is an interaction payoff and a shame
effect, then revealing the ability score will discourage seeking relative to (Random, Private).
To examine whether there is a shame effect, we first focus on the estimates in Table 3 of
β2 from equation (4.1). We find evidence of such an effect: if in the Random treatment one
reveals the Seeker’s score to the Advisor, then the Seeker is 13.6pp less likely to seek on a
base of 20.9% (column 3, p = 0.08). This effect is large: the shame effect leads to a 65%
decline in the probability of seeking advice for a low ability individual, holding everything
else fixed.
It is important to note that the shame effect measured here by comparing (Random,
Private) and (Random, Revealed) comes from moving the Advisor’s belief that the Seeker’s
ability is high from the prior to full revelation—i.e., P(a = H | d) = 0 for a low-ability
individual. In contrast, when we move from (Random, Private) to (Skill, Private), the
44We

also control for surveyor fixed effects and phase of experiment and we reweight in order to compensate
for the stratification and have the estimates representative of the population distribution.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

23

corresponding shift is smaller: from π to the equilibrium assessment of the Seeker conditional
on his seeking, P(a = H | d) ∈ (0, 1). In other words, because in equilibrium a mix of high
and low types will seek, the conditional probability of being a high type given a seeking
decision will be some non-extreme value, which we examine in more detail below. So when
shame is present, it will have less than the full impact we have measured above.
4.3. Inferences in equilibrium and structural estimates. Now that we have an estimate of the “full” shame effect, we can return to understanding the components of stigma in
the more realistic case we are primarily interested in, where stigma consists of both signaling
and shame effects. The first step is to study the size of the shift in beliefs driving both these
effects. Thus, in this subsection we begin by examining the information content of seeking
decisions. That is, we compute the conditional probabilities of seeking for both types of
agent and the implied likelihood ratio45 that is relevant for updating beliefs about Seeker
ability. We then place more structure on the problem, making parametric assumptions about
ϕ(·) and ψ(·). Putting these pieces together allows us to decompose the stigma effect into
its constituent parts.
4.3.1. Inferences in equilibrium. Recall the predictions of Section 2.6. The second prediction,
based on Proposition 2, is essential to the mechanics of the signaling equilibrium: low-skilled
types seek more, so that seeking is a signal of low ability. To check whether this holds in the
data, we then compare the seeking behavior of low-skill and high-skill types in the (Skill,
Private) treatment. In our sample, due to ties, 53.2% of Seekers had high skill. We examine
the behavior of both types of Seekers in the skill treatment. We find that 12.9% of the
low-skill Seekers chose to seek (averaging across all clue counts, etc.), whereas only 7.9% of
high-skill Seekers chose to seek. The difference is statistically significant.
Given the base rate (53.2% have high skill) and these seeking rates, we can compute
the Bayesian posteriors conditional on seeking. Given that someone chooses to seek, the
posterior odds ratio that he has a high type is
P(a = H | y = 1)
π P(y = 1 | a = H)
π
=
=
× 0.612.
P(a = L | y = 1)
1 − π P(y = 1 | a = L)
1−π
If we use the population base rate π = 53.2% as the base rate and solving for P(a = H | y = 1)
in this case gives 41%. Thus, conditional on a random individual seeking, the probability
assigned to high ability falls from the base rate of 53.2% to 41%.
It is also instructive to do a similar computation in the (Random, Private) treatment,
where there ought to be no signaling motive. Both types seek more frequently in (Random,
Private) as compared to (Skill, Private). Figure 3 presents this graphically. We can compute
45That

is,

P(a=H|d=1)
P(a=L|d=1) .

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

24

analogously
P(a = H | y = 1)
π P(y = 1 | a = H)
=
= 0.98.
P(a = L | y = 1)
1 − π P(y = 1 | a = L)
Here we have P(a = H | y = 1) = 49.5%: conditional on seeking, the probability that one is
high-skill essentially stays at 1/2.
This suggests that the basic force operating in the theory is present in the data, and gives
a sense of the magnitude of the belief updating induced by the signaling.
4.3.2. A structural estimate. In our structural exercise, we make the parametric assumptions
that


1
ϕ (P(a = H | d)) = λP (a = H | d) and ψ (P(a = H | d)) = γ P (a = H | d) −
.
2
Therefore we parameterize utility by
1
U (d) = αd + βP (kd ) + λP (a = H | d) + γd P (a = H | d) −
− u,
2
where u is Type I extreme value, so the marginal utility is given by




1
−
2
with  drawn from a logistic distribution. This expresses the marginal utility of seeking for an individual of ability a in terms of the changes in (i) the instrumental payoff
(β∆
P (kd )), (ii) the reputational
payoff (λ∆d P (a = H | d)), and (iii) the interaction payoff
i
hd
1
(γ P (a = H | d = 1) − 2 ).
Appendix C describes identification and estimation of the parameters α, β, γ, and λ and
Panel A of Table 4 presents the results. Our parameters of interest are λ (signaling) and
b
b = 0.643 and γ
b = 0.0846, so that λ ≈ 7.6. Thus, the signaling
γ (shame). We estimate λ
b
γ
effect is about eight times as large as the shame effect in our sample. The fact that the
signaling parameter is much larger than the shame parameter is consistent with our reduced
form effects.
We repeat this exercise below with separate estimates for socially proximate pairs (friends
and same caste) and those that are socially distant.


∆Ua (d) = α + β∆d P (kd ) + λ∆d P (a = H | d) + γ P (a = H | d = 1) −



4.4. Further reduced-form results.
4.4.1. High skill and high clue counts. So far we have presented results for the low-skill
population with low clue count to keep the sample constant across treatment and identify
the signaling effect of interest. In Table 5, we give the analog of Table 3 for those with high
ability and a high number of clues.
The results are largely consistent with our story. The level of seeking is considerably
lower—5.8% in (Random, Private)—as compared to 20.9% for the low ability and low clue
count sample. This is unsurprising: the need for signals is smaller if one has a higher clue

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

25

count. Moreover, we see neither signaling nor shame effects. A Seeker is just as likely to
seek in (Skill, Private) as (Random, Private). He is also just as likely to seek in (Random,
Private) as (Random, Revealed).
Taken together, the results from the high skill and high clue count sample suggest that
because these individuals receive more clues, they have less of a need for information and do
not seek very often. If they do, it is likely for idiosyncratic reasons.
4.4.2. The interaction of the skill treatment and ability revelation. There is one cell we have
not yet discussed: (Skill, Revealed). By design, our main effects are identified off other
comparisons. We now discuss the comparisons associated with this cell.
Consider the effect of going from (Skill, Private) to (Skill, Revealed), given by β2 + β3 in
equation (4.1). By revealing ability, the signaling effect faced in (Skill, Private) is removed,
which should encourage seeking: we expect β3 > 0. Consistent with this, in Table 3 we find
that the total effect of going to (Skill, Revealed) from (Skill, Private) corresponds to an 8.8pp
increase (column 3). However, this effect is “too large”: the resulting seeking rate is nearly
the same as (Random, Private), meaning that the seeking rate more than compensates for
the shame effect faced in (Random, Revealed).
In interpreting this effect, note that there is an important contrast between the (Skill,
Revealed) cell and all of the others. For the population we focus on (low-skill, low-cluecount Seekers) the need for information is evident to the Advisor. This is because the
Advisor in this case is told that her paired Seeker has a low score, and also knows the rules
of the game. This eliminates some plausible explanations for not seeking, such as having
no need to (which is a possibility, as far as the Advisor knows, in (Random, Revealed)).
Indeed, when we condition instead on high-skill Seekers in this treatment, the extra seeking
due to the interaction of the Skill and Revealed arms is not significantly different from zero.
Though a full analysis of the motives that become relevant in this case is beyond the scope
of our study, we offer some hypotheses in a discussion in Section 6.3.1 below.
5. The role of social structure
We have seen that introducing an ability-signaling motivation in a social learning induces
a stigma effect, inhibiting seeking. We have also studied how this effect can be decomposed
into signaling and shame effects. In this section we explore how heterogeneity in these effects
makes seeking outcomes dependent on the social context. Specifically, in what relationships
is each effect strong?
5.1. Beliefs and social distance. Our theoretical analysis makes clear that, holding the
signaling parameter λ constant, the strength of the signaling effect depends on the strength
of the prior: when the Advisor has a stronger prior that ability is low, beliefs will move

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

26

less following seeking, creating less room for a signaling effect. This motivates a look at
individuals’ confidence about others’ abilities.
We begin by looking at how confidence in the assessments of others’ ability (intelligence)
varies with social distance. Panel A of Figure 4 shows that there is a steady decline in
confidence as a function of network distance (i.e., graph distance in the friendship graph).
Panel C repeats the exercise with caste. When a high caste respondent rates a fellow highcaste individual’s ability, she is more confident in her assessment than when she rates a lowcaste individual. There is no detectable difference however among low-caste respondents.
Overall these findings are consistent with individuals having, on average, stronger priors
about those that are socially close.
Next we ask whether respondents update less when they have stronger priors. Panels B
and D present the results conditioned on network distance and relative caste, respectively.
We define the “upward revision probability” to be the empirical frequency of respondents
increasing their assessment of the assessed individual’s skill. We compute the upward revision
probability conditional on learning that an individual has a test score that is at least one
standard deviation above the mean. We see that the upward revision probability when
network distance is 1 is about 0.35. That is, the majority do not update their assessment
when they are socially close. But at distance 3, the upward revision probability is 0.55. A
similar pattern holds looking within caste versus across caste group.
Taken together, the evidence suggests that individuals feel more confident about their assessments of those who are socially proximate to them. Accordingly, they are less responsive
to a signal about the individual’s ability. This suggests that we should expect signaling to
be a greater concern when the Advisor is socially distant rather than socially proximate to
the Seeker.

5.2. Stigma, signaling, and shame by social distance. We now study the heterogeneous
effects of our experiment by social proximity between Seeker and Advisor. We run the
regression
(5.1)

Seekijv = α + β1 SkillTreatmentv + β2 RevealTreatmentv
+ β3 SkillTreatmentv × RevealTreatmentv
+ δ0 SocialProxijv + δ1 SkillTreatmentv × SocialProxijv
+ δ2 RevealTreatmentv × SocialProxijv
+ δ3 SkillTreatmentv × RevealTreatmentv × SocialProxijv + ijv

for Seeker i with Advisor j in village v. SocialProx indicates the social proximity between
the Seeker and Advisor, here measured either by whether they are friends or by whether they

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

27

are of the same subcaste. Again we include Seeker score fixed effects and Seeker-by-Advisor
clue count fixed effects.
5.2.1. Signaling with the socially distant. We find that among the socially distant, signaling
likely drives more of the stigma effect than shame. Figures 5, Panels A and B present our
results graphically, simply plotting the raw data. We see that the seeking rate declines when
going to (Skill, Private) from (Random, Private) for both non-friends and different-caste
pairs, consistent with a stigma effect. However, in the raw data there is no evidence of a
shame effect, indicating that most of the stigma effect must be driven by signaling.
Tables 6 and 7 present regression results, which show large stigma effects (β1 in equation
(5.1)) but shame effects (β2 ) that are noisy and not statistically different from zero. When
we look at subject pairs that are not friends and compare (Skill, Private) to (Random,
Private), we identify a 13.9pp decrease in the probability of seeking, on a base of 18.2%,
(p = 0.018). Similarly, when we look at pairs that differ in caste, we see a 15.4pp decline in
the probability of seeking, on a base of 18.2% in (Random, Private). We cannot statistically
reject zero shame, though the point estimates are 11.4pp and 8.36pp for non-friends and
different-caste pairs, respectively.
Our structural exercise gives us a different lens for assessing the relative magnitudes of
the contributing effects. Panels D and E of Table 4 repeat our structural exercise looking
only at socially distant pairs. When we estimate the model on strangers or those of different
b = 1.1 or 1.57, respectively, while γ
b = 0.009 or −0.045, respectively.
castes, we find that λ
That is, signaling is the primary concern, and the parameter is much larger than the value
of the shame parameter.
5.2.2. Shame with the socially proximate. Panels C and D of Figures 5 present raw data for
the socially proximate. We see small declines in seeking probability when we compare (Skill,
Private) to (Random, Private). This indicates that the stigma effect is small among the
socially proximate. However, we see sizable shame effects in the comparison of (Random,
Revealed) to (Random, Private). Therefore, the raw data suggests that stigma is driven
entirely by shame, but the equilibrium shifts in the conditional probability of seeking by
type in (Skill, Private) are insufficient for shame to have a meaningful impact on the seeking
rate. On the other hand, when ability is revealed, low ability is revealed with certainty, and
therefore the shame effect is substantial.
Turning to the regression results, we see that the point estimate for the stigma effect is
quite small—a decline of 2.9pp on a base of 25.9% and not statistically different from zero
(p = 0.824). However, moving from (Random, Private) to (Random, Revealed) results in a
large decline in the seeking rate—by about 17.4pp. This indicates a potentially large, but
noisily estimated, shame effect amongst friends (p = 0.263). Similarly, among same-caste
pairs under (Skill, Private), we see no detectable stigma effect (6pp decline on a base of

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

28

20.1%, p = 0.385). But we do see a significant shame effect among same-caste pairs, with a
16.3pp decline in seeking relative to (Random,Private) (p = 0.057).
This is consistent with the idea that the socially proximate may know more about their
friends and co-caste members, so with tighter priors there is less scope for updating and
therefore signaling. At the same time, people tends to interact more with socially proximate
individuals, and the emotional stakes in these interactions can be higher, so shame may be
a greater issue, compared to interactions with strangers.
Panels B and C of Table 4 repeat our structural exercise with the socially proximate. We
b = −0.061
see that when we estimate the model on friend or same-caste pairs, we obtain λ
or 0.285, respectively (neither statistically different from zero), while γb = 0.355 or 0.163,
respectively. That is, signaling is essentially of no concern, though the caste estimates are
noisy, whereas the shame parameters are both large and more precisely estimated with
confidence intervals excluding zero.

6. Discussion
This section discusses some implications, both for social network theory and policy; supporting evidence from qualitative work; and further hypotheses suggested by our results.
6.1. Implications. This section moves beyond the two-agent model that has been our main
focus throughout. We informally discuss how the stigma of signaling low skill can depend
on and feed back into patterns of homophily (the tendency of similar types to connect) and
how this can contribute to inequality.
6.1.1. Homophily. For simplicity, suppose that there are two types of agents in the network,
in group46 g ∈ {r, b}, and that an agent’s category and skill are independent. Consider
the following two line networks depicted in Figure 6: (A) shows a homophilous network,
where people of the same group tend to be neighbors within the network, and (B) shows a
heterophilous network, where group membership alternates across nodes on the line. The
former pattern is more commonly observed in a residential setting, but the latter may be
induced, for example, in a workplace.
Assume that each node has a prior belief about the skill level of each her neighbors: πL and
πR for the neighbor to the left and right, respectively, drawn from a full-support distribution.
We further assume that a node has a more accurate prior (i.e., one closer to 0 or 1) about a
neighbor of the same demographic type.47
46A

group can be interpreted as caste or other demographic type.
can capture a number of effects: for instance, those of the same type may interact more frequently
(be friends socially) or perhaps be members of the same caste. What is key is that those of the same identity
may carry more information about each other, for instance simply because they have opportunity to draw
more inferences from a wider range of interactions.
47This

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

29

Assume for simplicity that there is no shame effect, in order to focus on signaling. In the
homophilous network, there will be chains of agents who all have strong priors about each
other’s type. Thus, they are more likely to opt into seeking information from each other.
On the other hand, in the heterophilious network, neighbors do not have strong priors about
each other’s skill, and there is greater scope for signaling across every link in the network.
As a result, individuals in a heterophilous network are less likely to engage in social learning.
This phenomenon, driven by the forces we have elucidated, feeds on itself: less talking means
less familiarity, which in turn means less talking.
Bringing the shame effect back in, assume (again motivated by the data) that the shame
effect is stronger among homophilous pairs. In this case, the shame effect would deter
learning in the homophilous network and encourage it in the heterophilous network.
Which effect dominates is an empirical question. Both our reduced-form and structural
analyses suggest that while the shame effect is stronger among the socially proximate than
the socially distant, the signaling effect among the socially distant is so large that it serves
as the dominant deterrent. Therefore, we expect that in real-world settings, homophilous
networks should allow for greater social learning since they ought to have a lower overall
stigma effect.
6.1.2. Inequality. Suppose there are some agents who are known to be of high ability, with
π ≈ 1 when they are Seekers. This may happen, for instance, because of prior interactions
in which they have convincingly signaled high ability. Suppose also that there are other,
“ordinary” agents whose abilities are not known with high confidence to be either high or
low—that is, for whom the prior π is closer to 1/2.
In this case, “ordinary” individuals are deterred from seeking by stigma, whereas our
results in case of a precise prior show that known-high-ability individuals are not. This can
create a multiplier effect and exacerbate inequalities in information. Those considered very
intelligent are permitted to ask questions and are immune to the stigma, while those who
need information more protect their reputations.
On the other hand, consider prior beliefs that have a different structure that might be
called “bad news”: some people are known to be of low ability (π ≈ 0) but, as before, the
abilities of “ordinary” individuals are less confidently known. Then those known to be of
low ability face no signaling inhibition, whereas those whose abilities are uncertain are more
reluctant. On the other hand, in this case the shame inhibition may still deter those of
low-ability, depending on whom they are interacting with.
This sketch gives a sense of how the forces we have described may be relevant in exacerbating inequality, paralleling our discussion of homophily above.
6.1.3. Information delivery strategies. In Banerjee et al. (2018), the present model is adapted
to explore how stigma concerns affect some information dissemination strategies that are

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

30

often used by policymakers: broadcasting information to all in a community (e.g., radio or
television) versus seeding information with a sparse set of individuals.
Broadcasting information to all in a community typically makes the broadcast public. In
particular, community members know that information has been broadcast in the newspaper
or on the radio, so it is likely that others have heard the information as well. In turn,
people generally understand that these are the beliefs about broadcasts. On the other hand,
seeding information with a small set of individuals need not have this effect. For instance,
the introduction of new agricultural technology via an extension program to a village often
makes it known to the entire community the identity of the initially informed, and that
others did not receive any instruction.
Our model implies that these differences will matter not only for who is initially informed,
but also for signaling concerns and seeking incentives. In particular, if it is public that
everyone had a chance to learn, and the information is reasonably “straightforward,” then
those who need further clarification may signal low ability or laziness if they need to seek
clarification. On the other hand, if it is common knowledge that information is delivered only
to a few seeds, all others have a license to seek information without a signaling deterrent:
it is known they have none to begin with. If social learning is important enough for enough
individuals, then the license to seek could be as important for learning outcomes as the initial
scale of information delivery.
The 2016 Indian demonetization provided an opportunity to explore these effects. During
the demonetization, there was widespread confusion about the rules (due, in part, to 54
rule changes over a six-week period), and wide heterogeneity in levels of knowledge about
the policy. Some individuals diligently followed the news and knew the rules, while others became increasingly confused. Banerjee et al. (2018) conducted an experiment in 225
villages where information delivery strategies were randomly varied along two dimensions:
(1) whether information was broadcast to 100% of households or only five seed households;
and (2)whether there was or was not common knowledge about how information was disseminated. The experimental results show that individuals’ asking and learning behaviors
follow the patterns suggested by our model: when there is common knowledge about how
information is delivered, providing more people with information deters communication and
can actually reduce knowledge.

6.2. Subjective perceptions of signaling and shame. Surveys conducted as part of the
demonetization study also offered the opportunity to elicit narratives about people’s own
experience of deciding whether to ask others for information in a setting where confusion

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

31

was salient. We document some representative reactions below.48 First, respondents reported
worrying that needing to ask more about the rules could be seen as compromising:
“There was confusion about where to deposit money, how much to deposit,
where to withdraw from, where all money could be deposited and [the] last
date [to deposit]. People hesitate to ask because they may think, ‘Even after
showing so much on TV, if I ask, what will they think of me? They will think
I don’t understand.’ ” – Respondent 1
Second, such judgments were also reported from the other side: individuals indicated that
they would update negatively about those who did not understand the policy without help.
“Not everyone knew the deadline and application process. In December, if
someone comes and asks even after showing on TV, I will think they are
dumb. They can’t understand.” – Respondent 2
Moving to shame, in a separate survey, we collected quotes from villagers about the willingness to engage in social learning about farming. In describing a situation where a fellow
member of the village already thinks that the respondent has low ability, the respondent
explains:
“If someone from my village [. . .] thinks that I am dumb, I will hesitate to
ask or even talk to them because I will feel bad that he is thinking this way
about me.” – Respondent 3
These reports provide a further look into the inhibitions in Section 3.1. Along with the
literature we discussed in Section 2.2, they suggest that reputation and interaction payoffs
play a role in subjective experiences of seeking and giving information, which is consistent
with our quantitative evidence on signaling and shame effects.
6.3. Further hypotheses. This section offers hypotheses suggested by our study. One
comes from an experimental finding, and the other is an implication of the theory.
6.3.1. Revealing need and pridefulness. Recall from Section 4.4.2 that when the Advisor is
aware of the Seeker’s need for information, the seeking rate increases. As we noted there, in
this treatment, for the low-ability types we focus on, the Advisor learns that the Seeker has
low ability. Therefore, she learns with certainty that the Seeker needs advice, and further,
the need for advice is generated by his low skill. Finally, these facts are all commonly known
(at least in an approximate sense) between the Seeker and the Advisor. This feature of
the treatment within this subgroup is somewhat peculiar. But the surprising outcome we
48Banerjee

et al. (2018) contains more details on the survey and documents quantitatively that signaling
was a major reported deterrent to seeking information.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

32

observe there—a strong positive effect on seeking, especially among friends—does suggest
some hypotheses for future study.
In particular, given the common knowledge we have described, if the Seeker chooses not
to seek advice, he may be signaling an unwillingness to ask for help, which might be called
pridefulness. Our model can be readily extended to posit that agents care about how others
assess attributes of theirs beyond the main one—ability—that we have been concentrating
on. In view of such concerns, agents could be reluctant to signal such an attribute. Another
way of looking at the relevant attribute is that it can be considered good to seek the help
of a friend, and refusing to do so when it’s clearly needed is a negative signal about the
relationship. Note that in all other treatments, there are benign reasons not to be seeking
advice, even for the low-skill group—the simplest one being not having a need for it.
This hypothesis is formulated after making our observations, and is necessarily tentative.
But the relevance of perceived need on seeking behavior is potentially important, and could
even be leveraged to encourage learning.
6.3.2. Welfare and removing stigma. In our model, there may be a unique equilibrium or
multiple equilibira. This occurs for fundamental reasons rather than due to peculiar offpath beliefs, which are often driving multiple-equilibrium effects in signaling models. Recall
equation 2.3 in Section 2. A stable equilibrium is a v at which the left-hand side and righthand side intersect, with R(v) having a slope of less than 1 in absolute value at the point of
intersection. Whether there is just one such intersection or several depends on the shapes of
the functions ϕ, ψ, GL , and GH .
When there are several stable equilibria, shifting between equilibria can have substantial
welfare consequences. Considering only the preferences in the model (i.e., those of Seekers),
the equilibria will have different levels of welfare in utilitarian terms, though in general a
shift may be better for some ability types and worse for others. In a richer model, the gains
to the Seekers would have to be traded off against the value to Advisor of learning more
about the Seeker’s type.
A shift between equilibria gives a meaning to the intuitive notion of “removing the stigma”
of asking questions. For example, an intervention may involve inducing people to ask questions by providing idiosyncratic, one-time rewards for doing so, essentially adjusting the
shocks—ideally in a way that is not known to everyone (to avoid an adjustment in the equilibrium). This can change the interpretation of the act of seeking. Once these interpretations
change, the new equilibrium can persist under the old fundamentals. Note that our approach
need not entail changing the shape of ϕ or ψ, which are fundamental parameters describing
how agents value reputation and interactions. On the other hand, some interventions could
have their effect by changing fundamentals temporarily. Analyzing these in detail would
require a fuller theory of learning and equilibrium adjustment.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

33

The economic fundamentals of the model involved in (2.3) determine whether temporary
policies of this sort can improve welfare. Consider an example illustrated in Figure 1 (B),
where points A and B represent two stable equilibria. Suppose a society starts at point
B, which represents a higher cutoff v for seeking information. It is possible that a one-shot
incentive to seeking, which induces more people to seek information, can “remove the stigma”
and lead to the other stable equilibrium represented by point A. In this case, the cutoff v is
lower, and there is a greater degree of information flow within the society.49
Finally, note that some of the interventions that reduce signaling deterrents also mitigate
shame. In particular, if seeking can somehow be made less informative about one’s type,
whether by shifting among equilibria or by changing the fundamentals of the model, then
individuals who were deterred exclusively by shame will seek more. On the other hand, some
other interventions that eliminate signaling severely worsen shame concerns and dramatically
deter seeking by low types—our (Revealed, Random) treatment being the most prominent
example.
7. Conclusion
This paper offers theory and evidence on how information-seeking can be dampened by an
endogenous stigma of asking questions. In particular, the act of seeking advice may signal
that one is of low ability. Further, there may be an aversion of interacting with someone in
view of an unfavorable assessment, aside from signaling concerns—a phenomenon we have
called shame. We develop a simple model to think about how stigma, through signaling and
shame, can affect social learning and then conduct an experiment to explore this mechanism,
identifying which effects are operating and how strongly. We find evidence in favor of the
view that individuals do worry about both signaling and shame in information-seeking, and
this can deter social learning. The signaling and shame effects are different in terms of when
and how they operate: signaling matters more when agents need to exchange information
with strangers or acquaintances, whereas shame matters more with friends.
In closing it is useful to benchmark the frictions we have identified against other, familiar
sorts of social boundaries. The decline in seeking rate due to stigma when we move from
(Random, Private) to (Skill, Private) is 1.5 (respectively, 5) times as large as the decline in
seeking rate due to the Advisor not being a friend (respectively, not being of the same caste)
as the Seeker. Similarly, the decline in seeking rate due to shame in going from (Random,
Private) to (Skill, Revealed) is 1.75 (respectively, 6) times as large as the decline in seeking
rate due to the Advisor not being a friend (respectively, not being of the same caste). To
49Even

though our illustrations so far have involved both signaling and shame, multiple equilibria can, of
course, occur with only signaling—i.e., in a model where ψ(·) = 0. Panel C illustrates this, holding the
parameters used in Panel B fixed but turning off the shame effect. Note, however, that in this case the worse
equilibrium, B, actually has a lower cutoff than when shame was present, and therefore a lower reputational
cost.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

34

the extent that social and caste connections are significant in communication frictions, this
suggests that seeking frictions due to stigma can have comparable effects.
We have emphasized the policy implications for anonymous query protocols, such as Avaaj
Otalo in Gujurat (Cole and Fernando, 2014), and for seeding schemes that pay attention to
the seeking incentives they provide, as in Banerjee et al. (2018). More broadly, the evidence
we have uncovered points to the idea that perception concerns play an important role in
mediating the activation of information networks. These concerns can distort network formation outcomes even relative to what is efficient for the people involved (Niehaus, 2011).
The nature of the distortion will vary across settings. But broadly, this observation suggests
a practical connection between the behavioral literature on signaling and related phenomena (Bénabou and Tirole, 2006; Bursztyn and Jensen, 2017) and the network literature on
endogenous network formation (Galeotti and Goyal, 2010; Acemoglu et al., 2014).
These implications interact in interesting ways with access to technology. Widespread use
of the Internet provides an outside option for access to information (Cole and Fernando,
2014) and different modes of communicating and interacting that may, for instance, mitigate
shame. In the spirit of Gagnon and Goyal (2017), it is important to investigate when this
amplifies the frictions we have been emphasizing, and when it alleviates them.

References
Acemoglu, D., K. Bimpikis, and A. Ozdaglar (2014): “Dynamics of Information
Exchange in Endogenous Social Networks,” Theoretical Economics.
Ali, S. N. and C. Lin (2013): “Why people vote: Ethical motives and social incentives,”
American economic Journal: microeconomics, 5, 73–98.
Andreoni, J., J. M. Rao, and H. Trachtman (2017): “Avoiding the ask: A field
experiment on altruism, empathy, and charitable giving,” Journal of Political Economy,
125, 625–653.
Ashraf, N., O. Bandiera, and S. S. Lee (2014): “Awards unbundled: Evidence from
a natural field experiment,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 100, 44–63.
Banerjee, A., E. Breza, A. G. Chandrasekhar, and B. Golub (2018): “When Less
is More: Experimental Evidence on Information Delivery during India’s Demonetization,”
NBER Working Paper No. 24679.
Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson (2013): “The
Diffusion of Microfinance,” Science, 341.
——— (2016): “Gossip: Identifying Central Individuals in a Social Network,” .
Beaman, L., A. BenYishay, J. Magruder, and A. M. Mobarak (2018): “Can
Network Theory-based Targeting Increase Technology Adoption?” Tech. rep., National
Bureau of Economic Research.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

35

Bénabou, R. and J. Tirole (2006): “Incentives and prosocial behavior,” American economic review, 96, 1652–1678.
Bernheim, B. D. (1994): “A theory of conformity,” Journal of political Economy, 102,
841–877.
Besley, T. and M. Ghatak (2008): “Status incentives,” American Economic Review, 98,
206–11.
Bursztyn, L., G. Egorov, and R. Jensen (2016): “Cool to Be Smart or Smart to Be
Cool? Understanding Peer Pressure in Education,” .
Bursztyn, L., T. Fujiwara, and A. Pallais (2017): “’Acting Wife’: Marriage Market
Incentives and Labor Market Investments,” American Economic Review, 107, 3288–3319.
Bursztyn, L. and R. Jensen (2015): “How Does Peer Pressure Affect Educational Investments?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 1329–1367.
——— (2017): “Social Image and Economic Behavior in the Field: Identifying, Understanding, and Shaping Social Pressure,” Annual Review of Economics, 9, 131–153.
Calvo-Armengol, A., J. de Marti, and A. Prat (2015): “Communication and Influence,” Theoretical Economics, 10, 649–690.
Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and N. Roussanov (2009): “Conspicuous consumption and
race,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 425–467.
Cole, S. A. and A. N. Fernando (2014): “The value of advice: Evidence from the
adoption of agricultural practices,” HBS Working Group Paper.
Conley, T. G. and C. R. Udry (2010): “Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple
in Ghana,” The American Economic Review, 35–69.
DellaVigna, S., J. A. List, U. Malmendier, and G. Rao (2016): “Voting to tell
others,” The Review of Economic Studies, 84, 143–181.
Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2003): “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118, 815–842.
Ellingsen, T. and M. Johannesson (2008): “Pride and prejudice: The human side of
incentive theory,” American economic review, 98, 990–1008.
Fang, H. (2006): “Disentangling the College Wage Premium: Estimating a Model with
Endogenous Education Choices,” International Economic Review, 47, 1151–1185.
Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig (1995): “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture,” Journal of Political Economy., 103,
1176–1209.
Fryer, R. and D. Austen-Smith (2005): “An Economic Analysis of ’Acting White’,” .
Gagnon, J. and S. Goyal (2017): “Networks, markets, and inequality,” American Economic Review, 107, 1–30.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

36

Galeotti, A., C. Ghiglino, and F. Squintani (2013): “Strategic information transmission networks,” Journal of Economic Theory, 148, 1751–1769.
Galeotti, A. and S. Goyal (2010): “The Law of the Few,” American Economic Review,
100, 1468–1492.
Goffman, E. (1959): “The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life,” Garden City, NY.
——— (1963): Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity, Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
——— (1967): Interaction ritual: Essays in face-to-face behavior, Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.
Goldfarb, A., R. C. McDevitt, S. Samila, and B. S. Silverman (2015): “The
effect of social interaction on economic transactions: Evidence from changes in two retail
formats,” Management Science, 61, 2963–2981.
Heffetz, O. (2011): “A test of conspicuous consumption: Visibility and income elasticities,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 1101–1117.
Jensen, R. (2010): “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 515–548.
Kremer, M. and E. Miguel (2007): “The Illusion of Sustainability,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics., 122, 1007–1065.
Lewis, H. B. (1971): “Shame and guilt in neurosis,” Psychoanalytic review, 58, 419.
Lindsay-Hartz, J. (1984): “Contrasting experiences of shame and guilt,” American behavioral scientist, 27, 689–704.
Niehaus, P. (2011): “Filtered Social Learning,” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 686–
720.
Page, R. (2015): Stigma, London: Psychology Press.
Scambler, G. (1998): “Stigma and disease: changing paradigms,” The Lancet, 352, 1054–
1055.
Spence, M. (1973): “Job market signaling,” The quarterly journal of Economics, 355–374.
Tracy, J. L. and R. W. Robins (2007): “The self in self-conscious emotions: A cognitive
appraisal approach,” in The self-conscious emotions: Theory and research, ed. by J. L.
Tracy, R. W. Robbins, and J. P. Tangney, New York: Guilford Press, 3–20.
Wong, Y. and J. Tsai (2007): “Cultural models of shame and guilt,” in The self-conscious
emotions: Theory and research, ed. by J. L. Tracy, R. W. Robbins, and J. P. Tangney,
New York: Guilford Press, 209–223.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

37

Figures

(a) Unique Equilibrium

(b) Multiple Equilibria

(c) Multiple Equilibria without Shame

Figure 1. A graphical depiction of finding equilibria by intersecting v/λ and R(v) := ϕb (Pv (a = H | d = 0)) − ϕb (Pv (a = H | d = 1)) −
γ b
ψ (Pv (a = H | d = 1)). In Panel A we plot two different configurations where
λ
the equilibrium is unique. Panels A and B set γ = 1 (shame) and Panel C sets
γ = 0.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

Private

Random

Skill

Revealed

value of info
− seeking cost

value of info
− seeking cost
− signaling

value of info
− seeking cost
− shame

value of info
− seeking cost
− signaling
+ Skill-Revealed interaction

.35
.3
.25
.2
.15
0

.05

.1

Probability of seeking

.4

.45

.5

Figure 2. Experimental design schematic.

Low Skilled

High Skilled
Random, Private

Skill, Private

Figure 3. Probability of seeking by low skilled (below median score) or high
skilled (above median score), by treatment. This does not condition on the
clue count in any way.

38

Pr(perceived increase)

0
Dij = 1

Dij = 2

Dij = 3

Dij >= 4

Dij = 1

Dij = 3

Dij >= 4

Pr(perceived increase)

0

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6

4
3
2
1

Dij = 2

(b) Beliefs updating by distance

5

(a) Confidence in beliefs by distance

Confidence rating (1-5)

39

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6

3
1

2

Confidence rating (1-5)

4

5

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

Same Caste (lower)

Same Caste (upper)

Respondent is of lower caste

(c) Confidence in beliefs by caste

Respondent is of higher caste

Same Caste (lower)

Same Caste (upper)

Respondent is of lower caste

(d) Beliefs updating by caste

Figure 4. A respondent’s stated level of confidence in her belief about a
given subject’s intelligence at baseline. In (A) and (C) these are averaged
conditioning on distance in the friendship network (Dij ) and relative caste
relationship. In (B) and (D), we plot the probability that the respondent
increases her evaluation of a given subject’s intelligence after learning that
this person got a Raven Matrix score at least one standard deviation above
the mean. Again we plot conditioning on distance in the network (Dij ) and
relative caste relationship. Distance in the friendship network is defined as the
length of the shortest path connecting the two individuals in the graph where
links reflect friendship (recall footnote 32). We categorize caste relationship
into three categories: same, higher, or lower caste (relative to the subject).

Respondent is of higher caste

1

40

.6
.5
0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Probability of seeking

.7

.8

.9

1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5

Skill, Private

Random, Revealed

Low Skilled, Low Clue Count

Skill, Revealed

Random, Private

High Skilled, High Clue Count

Skill, Private

Random, Revealed

Low Skilled, Low Clue Count

Skill, Revealed

High Skilled, High Clue Count

.6
.5
.4
.2

.2

.3

.3

.4

.5

.6

Probability of seeking

.7

.7

.8

.8

.9

.9

1

(b) Different caste

1

(a) Non-friends

.1

.1

0

Probability of seeking

.4
.3
.2
.1
0
Random, Private

0

Probability of seeking

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

Random, Private

Skill, Private

Random, Revealed

Low Skilled, Low Clue Count

(c) Friends

Skill, Revealed

High Skilled, High Clue Count

Random, Private

Skill, Private

Random, Revealed

Low Skilled, Low Clue Count

Skill, Revealed

High Skilled, High Clue Count

(d) Same caste

Figure 5. Probability of seeking plotted by treatment, with standard errors.
Two samples are plotted: low-skill with low clue count and high-skill with
high clue count, in order to hold ability and incentive to seek fixed across
treatments.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

(a) Homophilous Network

(b) Heterophilous Network

Figure 6

41

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

42

Tables
Table 1. Summary statistics
Panel A: Experimental sample
mean
sd
probability of seeking 0.14 (0.35)
test score of advisor
9.17 (3.29)
test score of seeker
9.46 (3.20)
female advisors
0.53 (0.50)
female seekers
0.54 (0.50)
upper caste advisors
0.56 (0.50)
upper caste seekers
0.61 (0.49)
Panel B: Links
within/across caste

of

all links
within-caste all links
across-caste all links
social links
within-caste social links
across-caste social links
information links
within-caste info links
across-caste info links

various
mean
8.62
6.57
2.13
6.66
5.13
1.60
5.65
4.30
1.42

types
sd
(5.28)
(4.60)
(2.73)
(3.64)
(3.33)
(2.13)
(3.99)
(3.41)
(2.02)

Table 2. Belief updating
VARIABLES
Std. Score

Observations
Depvar Mean
Village FE
Respondent FE

(1)
(2)
(3)
Upward revision prob. Upward revision prob. Upward revision prob.
0.0416
(0.0142)

0.0447
(0.0146)

0.0341
(0.0181)

1,306
0.388

1,306
0.388
X

1,306
0.388
X
X

Notes: Standard errors (clustered at the village level) are reported in parentheses. All
columns control for caste and surveyor fixed effects.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

43

Table 3. Main Results: Low IQ, low clue count
VARIABLES

(1)
Seeking

(2)
Seeking

(3)
Seeking

Skill

-0.145
-0.142
-0.115
(0.0559) (0.0559) (0.0551)
Reveal score to Advisor
-0.129
-0.123
-0.136
(0.0696) (0.0688) (0.0765)
Skill × Reveal score to Advisor 0.219
0.203
0.224
(0.0940) (0.0886) (0.0899)
Observations
Random, Private Mean
Seeker Score FE
Advisor-Seeker clue count FE

452
0.209

452
0.209
X

452
0.209
X
X

Notes: Standard errors (clustered at the village level) are reported in parentheses. All columns control for surveyor fixed
effects and phase of experiment.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

44

Table 4. Structural estimates of signaling and shame
Panel A: Full Sample

(1)
λ

(2)
γ

0.6431
0.0846
[0.0209, 1.5854 ] [-0.0119, 0.1810]
Panel B: Friends

λ

γ

-0.0606
0.3553
[-1.0459, 1.6908] [0.2364, 0.4542]
Panel C: Same Caste

λ

γ

0.2854
0.1632
[-0.8420, 1.9681] [0.0551, 0.2668]
Panel D: Strangers

λ

γ

1.1002
0.0092
[0.0717, 3.0203] [-0.0398, 0.1639]
Panel E: Different Caste

λ

γ

1.5711
-0.0453
[0.5801, 3.4712] [-0.1276, 0.1233]
Notes: Confidence intervals computed from block bootstrap by
resampling with replacement at the village level are reported in
brackets.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

45

Table 5. High IQ, high clue count
(1)
Seeking

(2)
Seeking

(3)
Seeking

0.0181
(0.0248)
Reveal score to Advisor
-0.00975
(0.0503)
Skill × Reveal score to Advisor -0.0398
(0.0778)

0.0184
(0.0252)
-0.00640
(0.0501)
-0.0433
(0.0785)

0.00505
(0.0289)
-0.0212
(0.0556)
-0.0276
(0.0787)

484
0.0581
X

484
0.0581
X
X

VARIABLES
Skill

Observations
Random, Private Mean
Seeker Score FE
Advisor-Seeker clue count FE

484
0.0581

Notes: Standard errors (clustered at the village level) are reported in parentheses. All columns control for surveyor fixed
effects and phase of experiment.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

46

Table 6. By social relationship
VARIABLES

(1)
Seeking

(2)
Seeking

(3)
Seeking

Skill

-0.149
-0.155
-0.139
(0.0561) (0.0559) (0.0574)
Reveal score to Advisor
-0.112
-0.106
-0.114
(0.0694) (0.0704) (0.0752)
Skill × Reveal score to Advisor
0.217
0.203
0.217
(0.100) (0.0973) (0.0991)
Friend
0.124
0.113
0.0775
(0.138) (0.134) (0.139)
Skill × Friend
0.0387
0.0688
0.110
(0.148) (0.146) (0.150)
Reveal score to Advisor × Friend
-0.131
-0.119
-0.0610
(0.170) (0.171) (0.178)
Skill × Reveal score to Advisor × Friend 0.397
0.336
0.275
(0.251) (0.251) (0.260)
Observations
Random, Private, Non-Friend Mean
Seeker Score FE
Advisor-Seeker clue count FE

452
0.182

452
0.182
X

452
0.182
X
X

Notes: Standard errors (clustered at the village level) are reported in
parentheses. All columns control for surveyor fixed effects and phase of
experiment.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

47

Table 7. By caste
(1)
Seeking

(2)
Seeking

(3)
Seeking

-0.155
(0.0629)
Reveal score to Advisor
-0.0841
(0.0881)
Skill × Reveal score to Advisor
0.341
(0.190)
Seeker Caste same as Advisor Caste
0.0451
(0.0765)
Skill × Seeker Caste same as Advisor Caste
0.0402
(0.0927)
Reveal × Seeker Caste same as Advisor Caste
-0.108
(0.118)
Skill × Reveal × Seeker Caste same as Advisor Caste -0.0690
(0.215)

-0.164
(0.0595)
-0.0709
(0.0922)
0.349
(0.185)
0.0499
(0.0722)
0.0583
(0.0863)
-0.117
(0.118)
-0.122
(0.211)

-0.154
(0.0618)
-0.0836
(0.0982)
0.355
(0.176)
0.0192
(0.0719)
0.0935
(0.0829)
-0.0802
(0.119)
-0.141
(0.207)

452
0.182
X

452
0.182
X
X

VARIABLES
Skill

Observations
Random, Private, Diff Caste Mean
Seeker Score FE
Advisor-Seeker clue count FE

452
0.182

Notes: Standard errors (clustered at the village level) are reported in parentheses.
All columns control for surveyor fixed effects and phase of experiment.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

48

Appendix A. Theoretical details and proofs
A.1. Definition of equilibrium. A (mixed) strategy for the Seeker is a map σ : {H, L} ×
R → [0, 1] where σ(a, w) is the probability of d = 1 given ability a and a realization of V
equal to w. A belief function for the Advisor is a map b : {0, 1} → [0, 1] giving the posterior
belief that a = H conditional on observing d. The Seeker’s payoff is
(A.1)

U (d) = V (d) + ϕ (b(d)) + d · ψ (b(d)) .

A Bayes-Nash equilibrium is defined to be a pair (σ, b) where b is consistent with Bayesian
updating assuming the Seeker plays according to σ, and σ maximizes the Seeker’s payoff
(among all σ) taking b as given.
A.2. Proof of Proposition 1. Equation (A.1) above implies
(A.2)

U (1) − U (0) = V (1) − V (0) − [ϕ(b(0)) − ϕ(b(1)) − ψ(b(1))] .

Given V = V (1) − V (0), this difference does not depend on a. Thus (up to probability-zero
events) by the no-atoms assumption, in any best-response profile the Seeker will choose d = 1
if the difference is nonnegative, i.e. if
(A.3)

V ≥ ϕ(b(0)) − ϕ(b(1)) − ψ(b(1)).

A.2.1. Inferences. Consider any strategy profile in which d = 1 is chosen if and only if
V ≥ v. First we will use Bayes’ rule to compute the Advisor’s inferences based on the
seeking behavior for any v. As a preliminary calculation, note that in such a strategy profile,
Pv (d = 1 | a) = P(C = 1)Ga (v)
= qGa (v)
Pv (d = 0 | a) = 1 − Pv (d = 1 | a)
= 1 − qGa (v).
Letting bv (d) denote the beliefs induced by this cutoff rule, we compute by Bayes’ rule that
(A.4)

bv (0)
Pv (a = H | d = 0)
π 1 − qGH (v)
=
=
1 − bv (0)
Pv (a = L | d = 0)
1 − π 1 − qGL (v)

and
(A.5)

bv (1)
Pv (a = H | d = 1)
π GH (v)
=
=
.
1 − bv (1)
Pv (a = L | d = 1)
1 − π GL (v)

A.2.2. Equilibrium condition. In any equilibrium the Seeker with V = v has to be indifferent
between seeking and not seeking. This means (A.3) holds with equality, where bv (0) and
bv (1) are determined by (A.4) and (A.5), respectively. Thus for the cutoff type we have
(A.6)

v = ϕ(bv (0)) − ϕ(bv (1)) − ψ(bv (1)),

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

49

with the b determined as we have said.
A.2.3. Existence of cutoff. A v solving (A.6) exists because the right-hand side of (A.3) is a
continuous function of v (by Assumption 2) bounded in absolute value (by boundedness of
the functions ϕ and ψ), and thus taking values in some bounded interval I. The function
v 7→ v is a continuous function crossing the interval I, so there must be a solution of (A.6)
by the Intermediate Value Theorem.
A.2.4. Positivity of cutoff. Now we argue that any v solving (A.6) is positive. At v ≤ 0,
the left-hand side is nonpositive. By Lemma 1 in Section A.6 below, bv (1) < bv (0). By the
Law of Iterated Expectations, since bv (1) and bv (0) must average to the prior π, it must in
fact be the case that bv (1) < π < bv (0). Putting this together with our assumptions that ϕ
is increasing and that ψ in increasing with ψ(π) ≤ 0, it follows that the right-hand side of
(A.6) is positive for any v. Thus there are no solutions with negative v.
A.3. Proof of Proposition 2. Proposition 1 in Section A.6 establishes that the cutoff is
the same for both types. Lemma 1 establishes that bv (1) < bv (0).
A.4. Proof of Proposition 3. If it is hypothesis (1) that holds, and the prior becomes
precise, then using (A.4) and (A.5) we can verify that bv (d), for any v and any d, tends to
π. Thus, the right-hand side of (A.6) tends pointwise to 0, and so the v solving (A.6) must
be very close to 0. Using the formulas in Section A.2.1 above, it follows that
Pv (a = H | d = 1) Pv (a = H | d = 0)
−
→ 0.
Pv (a = L | d = 1)
Pv (a = L | d = 0)
In other words,
P(a = H | d = 1)
P(a = H | d = 0)
−
→ 0.
1 − P(a = H | d = 1) 1 − P(a = H | d = 0)
x
Since the function x 7→ 1−x
is increasing and continuous, this shows that
P(a = H | d = 1) − P(a = H | d = 0) → 0.
The argument assuming that (2) holds is very similar.
A.5. Proof of Proposition 4. Write condition (A.6) defining the right-hand side as R(v),
so that
v
b v (0)) − ϕ(b
b v (1)).
= R(v) := ϕ(b
(A.7)
λ
If 1/λ is larger than the maximum slope of the right-hand side, it is clear (from the Mean
Value Theorem) that there cannot be two values of v satisfying the equation.
Now for the “large λ” result: first note that R(v) 6= 0 for any v by the “strict” aspect
of Assumption 1 on first-order stochastic dominance. Choose an arbitrarily large v0 . Let
R0 be the minimum of R over [0, v0 ], which is strictly positive. Choose λ so large that v/λ

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

50

remands less than R0 over the same interval. Then any intersection must satisfy v0 > 0. For
v0 chosen large enough, the probability of seeking will be arbitrarily small.
A.6. Auxiliary results.
Lemma 1. For any v ∈ R,
(A.8)

π GH (v)
π 1 − qGH (v)
<
.
1 − π GL (v)
1 − π 1 − qGL (v)

and consequently the bv (0) and bv (1) defined by (A.4) and (A.5) satisfy bv (1) < bv (0).
Proof. The ratios are well-defined by Assumption 2. By Assumption 1 on first-order stoH (v)
L (v)
chastic dominance, we have G
<G
, and therefore
FH (v)
FL (v)
π GH (v)
π FH (v)
<
.
1 − π GL (v)
1 − π FL (v)
Also by Assumption 1 on first-order stochastic dominance,
π GH (v)
1
< .
1 − π GL (v)
1
Now, for any positive reals x, y, z, y 0 , z 0 , if we have x < y/z and x < y 0 /z 0 then it follows that
0
x < qy+(1−q)y
. Thus,
qz+(1−q)z 0
π qFH (v) + (1 − q)
π GH (v)
<
.
1 − π GL (v)
1 − π qFL (v) + (1 − q)
To deduce the desired equation, use the identity Ga (v) = 1 − Fa (v) to show
(A.9)

π qFH (v) + (1 − q)
π 1 − qGH (v)
=
.
1 − π qFL (v) + (1 − q)
1 − π 1 − qGL (v)

This completes the proof of the first statement. The ordering of bv (1) and bv (0) follows from
x
the fact that the function x 7→ 1−x
is strictly increasing for x ∈ (0, 1).

Online Appendix
Not for Publication
Appendix B. Experimental materials
B.1. Skill test. ??
We present sample questions from the skill test.

Figure B.1. Examples from Skill Test.

B.2. Score to clues. We present the mapping from the skill test score to the number of
clues drawn in the Skill treatment.

Test Score

Clues

0
1
2

1

3
4
5

2

6
7
8

3

9
10
11

4

12
13
14

5

15

Figure B.2. Score to Clues Schedule.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

53

Appendix C. Structural estimation
We take a simple stand on preferences where the reputational and interaction payoffs are
linear functions of posterior beliefs:
1
Ua (d) = αd + βP (kd ) + λP (a = H | d) + γd P (a = H | d) −
− u,
2
where u is Type I extreme value. In that case the marginal utility of seeking is




1
∆d Ua (d) = α + β∆d P (kd ) + λ∆d P (a = H | d) + γ P (a = H | d = 1) −
−
2
where  independent across individuals and its distribution is logistic, with a c.d.f. given by
Λ(·).
The role of priors can be thought as follows. Though the presentation is for the case of
π = 1/2, when priors deviate from this, they are, in a first-order sense, absorbed into λ.
Suppose, for instance, that the Advisor thinks the paired Seeker has an ability less than 1/2.
Then a first-order approximation yields that the estimated λ decomposes into the underlying
utility parameter multiplied by an attenuation factor reflecting that beliefs are updated less
when the prior is stronger. It is in this sense that priors that vary by whether the pair are
friends versus strangers can greatly change the effect of signaling on decision making through
a smaller λ. The shame term, on the other hand, depends only on the posterior.50
Thus the probability that the individual chooses to seek is simply




1
.
2
The experimental variation allows us to identify parameters of the model in a rather
straightforward way. Because we observe the share of a-type individuals who choose to seek
as well as the change in information, ∆d P (kd ), and the type share conditional on a seeking
decision, P (a = H | d), we can estimate all pieces of the model.
Specifically, we can obtain estimates of α and β directly from a logistic regression with
the (Random, Private) data:
di = Λ (α + βP (kd )i )




P(d = 1) = Λ α + β∆d P (kd ) + λ∆d P (a = H | d) + γ P (a = H | d = 1) −



Note that under (Random, Private), we have ∆d P (a = H | d) = 0 (since ability is unrelated
to the need
to seek) and, averaging across the population, P (a = H | d = 1) = 21 .51

b βb , we then estimate for θ = (λ, γ),
With α,
c (θ)0 m
c (θ)
θb = argminθ∈R2 m

50We

could change the reference point from 1/2 to another value, even one that is relationship-dependent,
but for this simple exercise we aim to keep the number of parameters small.
51This uses less information than jointly estimating all moments together, but is sufficient for our purposes.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

54

where the moments are given by simply matching the empirical share of those who seek in
each treatment with the probabilities when evaluated at the appropriate parameters. The
first is simply the share of low types who seek in the (Random, Revealed) treatment minus
the quantity that, in equilibrium, it is equal to: the c.d.f. at the estimated parameters. The
second moment is the share of low types who seek in the (Skill, Private) minus the prediction
of this at the estimated parameters.
We use the following moments by treatment, where the sums and normalizations are over
the respective samples:
(1) (Random, Revealed, Low type):
1X
b (k ) + γ 0 − 1
c1 (θ) :=
b + βP
m
di − Λ α
d i
n i
2






.

(2) (Skill, Private, Low type):
1X
b (k ) + λ∆ P (a = H | d) + γ P (a = H | d = 1) − 1
b + βP
di − Λ α
d i
d
n i
2


c2 (θ) =
m





.

Recall that all of P (kd )i , ∆d P (a = H | d), and P (a = H | d = 1) are observed quantities
in the data.
We conduct inference by block-bootstrap.
Specifically, we sample with replacement 70


b
b
b b , βb , λb , γ
bb for b = 1, . . . , B, here B = 500, to compute
villages and then recompute α
standard errors. We also bootstrap bias correct our parameter estimates.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

55

Appendix D. Foundations for the reputational payoff
For example, suppose that the the Advisor receives utility Wa from collaborating with
the Seeker on some later project if the true skill is a. If the Advisor chooses to collaborate,
the Seeker receives a deterministic payoff of λ > 0 which enters his utility additively. The
Advisor wants to collaborate if and only if
(D.1)

P(a = H | y)
−WL
≥
.
P(a = L | y)
WH

L
The ratio −W
corresponds to the relative value of working with a high-skill Seeker compared
WH
to the loss of working with a low-skill Seeker, and corresponds to the odds—in the likelihoodratio sense—required to make working with this person worthwhile. Let H be the c.d.f. of
−WL
and assume it has a positive density supported on the positive reals. The utility of a
WH
Seeker of skill a is then

!

Ua (d) = V (d) + λH

P(a = H | d)
.
P(a = L | d)

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

56

Appendix E. High stakes

.15
.1
0

.05

Probability of seeking

.2

.25

We reran our experiment in a new sample of subjects all of low score in two treatments
(Random, Private) and (Skill, Private). The goal was to make the expected payoffs considerably larger conditional on guessing correctly, now Rs. 330 along with the same chance ti
win the Rs. 1350 phone, but now changing the odds to make the value of seeking almost
miniscule for a high type and enormous for someone with low clue count.
In this case, k ∈ {2, 6}, so the number of clues is binary. Further, while the probability
of a clue being correct in the low case is 0.6, it is 0.8 in the high case. This corresponds to
an individual with 2 clues of quality 0.6 being about 60% likely to make the right decision
whereas the number is 94% for someone with 6 clues of quality 0.8. Finally, Advisors always
receive 8 clues of quality 0.8. This implies that getting the clues from the Advisor leads to
getting the right choice 96% of the time. Therefore, the expected gains in monetary terms
for someone who received a high number of clues here is Rs. 7, whereas it is Rs. 110 (just
under a day’s wage) for someone who received a low number of clues.

Random, Private

Skill, Private

Figure E.1. Seeking rates by treatment across 134 subjects who have low
IQ and low clue count.
Figure E.1 presents the results graphically.52 As in our main experiment, (Random, Private) has a mean seeking rate of 0.2. This drops by 9.31pp when we move to (Skill, Private).
This suggest that the sizeable reduction in seeking due to the signaling effect persists even
when we raise the stakes considerably.

52A

regression with heteroskedastic-robust standard errors yields significant differences between the two
treatments.

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE

Table E.1. High Stakes Results
VARIABLES
Skill

Observations
Random, Private Mean

(1)
Seek
-0.0931
(0.0624)
134
0.200

Notes: Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses.

57

