NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASSORTATIVE MATCHING OR EXCLUSIONARY HIRING? THE IMPACT OF
FIRM POLICIES ON RACIAL WAGE DIFFERENCES IN BRAZIL
François Gerard
Lorenzo Lagos
Edson Severnini
David Card
Working Paper 25176
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25176

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018

We are grateful to Dario Fonseca and Samira Noronha for excellent research assistance, including
reviewing case law on labor market discrimination in Brazil, and to seminar participants at
Bocconi University, Carnegie Mellon University, Central European University, Columbia
University, Cornell University, New York University, Stockholm University, UC Berkeley,
University of Zurich, and Yale University for helpful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by François Gerard, Lorenzo Lagos, Edson Severnini, and David Card. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Assortative Matching or Exclusionary Hiring? The Impact of Firm Policies on Racial Wage
Differences in Brazil
François Gerard, Lorenzo Lagos, Edson Severnini, and David Card
NBER Working Paper No. 25176
October 2018
JEL No. E24,J15,J31
ABSTRACT
A growing body of research shows that firms' employment and wage-setting policies contribute
to wage inequality and pay disparities between groups. We measure the effects of these policies
on racial pay differences in Brazil. We find that nonwhites are less likely to work at
establishments that pay more to all race groups, a pattern that explains about 20% of the whitenonwhite wage gap for both genders. The pay premiums offered by different employers are also
compressed for nonwhites relative to whites, contributing another 5% of the overall gap. We then
ask how much of the under-representation of nonwhites at higher-paying workplaces is due to the
selective skill mix at these establishments. Using a counterfactual based on the observed skill
distribution at each establishment and the nonwhite shares in different skill groups in the local
labor market, we conclude that assortative matching accounts for about two- thirds of the underrepresentation gap for both men and women. The remainder reflects an unexplained preference
for white workers at higher-paying establishments. The wage losses associated with unexplained
sorting and differential wage setting are largest for nonwhites with the highest levels of general
skills, suggesting that the allocative costs of race-based preferences may be relatively large in
Brazil.
François Gerard
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 IAB
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fgerard@columbia.edu
Lorenzo Lagos
Department of Economics
Columbia University
IAB 503.02
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
lorenzo.lagos@columbia.edu

Edson Severnini
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Ave #2114B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ersevernini@gmail.com
David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25176

Race exerts a powerful influence on wage outcomes in many countries.1 Though
part of the earnings gap between different racial groups can sometimes be explained
by differences in education or other observed factors, unexplained pay disparities
are a major policy concern in the U.S., Brazil, and other nations. Most economic
research on race-related wage differentials builds on the approach of Becker (1957),
who assumed that each worker faces a market-determined wage.2 A growing body of
work on frictional labor markets, however, suggest that wages also incorporate firmspecific pay differences that can contribute to pay disparities.3 When employers have
wage-setting power, the racial pay gap will depend in part on the extent to which
higher-paying firms differentially employ whites versus nonwhites – a between-firm
sorting effect – and in part on the relative size of the pay premiums offered by a
given firm to different race groups – a relative wage-setting effect.
Findings from three complementary strands of research suggest that these effects
may be important. Randomized audit studies in many countries show that employer
call-back rates for minority job applicants are lower than those for whites, implying
that some employers set a higher bar for nonwhite candidates, or avoid hiring minorities altogether.4 Observational studies show that minority managers are more likely
to hire and retain minority applicants than their non-minority counterparts (e.g.,
Giuliano, Leonard, and Levine, 2009, 2011; Giuliano and Ransom, 2013; Aslund,
Hensvik, and Skans, 2014), pointing to potential discrimination by some managers.
And workplace-level studies of employee segregation show substantial segmentation
by race (Hellerstein and Neumark, 2008; Hellerstein, Neumark, and McInerney, 2008)
and ethnicity (e.g., Aslund and Skans, 2010; Glitz, 2014).
Nevertheless, it is unclear how much these patterns matter for white-nonwhite
1

For overviews focusing on the U.S., see Altonji and Blank (1999), Fryer (2010), and Bayer and
Charles (2018). For a summary of race-based differences in Latin America, see Nopo (2012) and
Cano-Urbina and Maso (2016). For evidence on race differentials in the U.K. and Canada, see
Blackaby, Leslie, and Murphy (2002) and Pendakur and Pendakur (1998, 2002), respectively.
2
See Charles and Guryan (2008, 2011) for recent analyses that build directly on Becker’s model,
and Hirata and Soares (2016) for an application in Brazil.
3
See Manning (2011) for a review of frictional and imperfect competition models of the labor
market. Black (1995) presented an early search-based model of discriminatory hiring. Lang and
Lehmann (2012) present a review of the discrimination literature emphasizing frictional labor market models. Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016) study the effects of firm-specific wage setting on
gender wage gaps in Portugal.
4
Zschirnt and Ruedin (2016) summarize 36 studies in OECD countries: they find a median
call-back rate for minorities relative to whites of 0.67, which is very close to the rate estimated
in the seminal study by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004). A recent audit study focusing on job
openings for recent college graduates in Mexico City (Arceo-Gomez and Campos-Vasquez, 2014)
finds a similar pattern for indigenous-looking female applicants.

1

earnings differences (see Lang and Lehmann, 2012, for a careful discussion). To
quantify the impacts, we use rich administrative data on the formal sector in Brazil
to estimate a series of two-way fixed effects (or “job ladder”) models for wages,
separately by race and gender, that include worker and establishment fixed effects.
We then use the estimated wage premiums for white and non-white workers at each
establishment, together with data on the distributions of workers across workplaces,
to conduct a series of decompositions that identify the contributions of between-firm
sorting and within-firm relative wage setting on racial pay gaps for each gender.
Racial differences in firm’s employment and wage-setting policies are particularly
relevant in our context. A steady stream of research since Silva (1978, 1980, 1985)
and Oliveira, Porcaro, and Araújo (1981) has shown that the unexplained wage gaps
between whites and nonwhites in Brazil are similar to those in the U.S., despite differences in the historical background and legal setting.5 Several studies have shown
that the gaps are especially large at the top of the distribution, pointing to the
scarcity of nonwhites in high-paying industries and occupations (Soares, 2000; Henriques, 2001; Campante, Crespo, and Leite, 2004; Chadarevian, 2011; Mariano et al.,
2018). Similar patterns have been documented in other Latin American countries
(e.g., Nopo, 2012). Yet, employers often argue that this pattern is due to the relative
shortage of qualified nonwhite workers, rather than to biases in their policies.
Our main analysis relies on the Relação Anual de Informações Sociais (RAIS), a
longitudinal matched worker-firm database with information on workers’ race, features that are key for our approach. RAIS covers essentially all formal employment
in Brazil, but misses the informal sector. To address concerns over selectivity into the
formal sector, we thus begin by using household survey data from the Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicı́lios (PNAD) to study wages and participation rates
in formal and informal employment. We show that the raw shares of whites and
nonwhites employed in the formal sector are comparable within each gender, and
that there is no formality gap once we condition on age, location, and education. In
contrast, the unexplained racial pay gaps are large (and similar) in the two sectors.
Two other important considerations in our context are the classification of race
and the impacts of the minimum wage. Traditionally, nonwhites in Brazil are categorized into two groups: blacks and mixed race individuals, who comprise about 10%
and 40% of the population, respectively. Consistent with previous studies, we find
5

Andrews (1992) presents an historical comparison of racial differences in the U.S. and Brazil
and concludes that differences were greater in the U.S. until the 1960s, but are now similar or even
larger in Brazil. See also Cavalieri and Fernandes (1998), Arcard and d’Hombres (2004), Reis and
Crespo (2015), Matos and Machado (2006), Garcia, Nopo, and Salardi (2009) and Bailey, Loveman,
and Muniz (2013) for more recent studies of racial wage differences in Brazil.

2

that the wage and educational differences between these groups are small, though
both have lower levels of education and earn substantially less than whites of the
same gender. We therefore combine them into a single nonwhite category.6 Regarding the minimum wage, simple histograms suggest that the federally legislated wage
floor exerts strong upward pressure on wages in many regions of Brazil, reducing
the effects of firm-specific wage setting and narrowing the wage gap between whites
and nonwhites.7 For our main analysis, we therefore focus on the Southeast region
– the highest-income region of Brazil – though we also present results for the entire
country. Additionally, we present separate results for workers with a high school
education or more, whose pay is less impacted by the mininum wage.
With this background, we turn to our results. Consistent with findings from the
U.S., Germany, and other countries, and with previous work by Lavetti and Schmutte
(2016) and Alvarez et al. (2018) on Brazil, we find that differences in the wage
premiums paid by different establishments explain an important share (≈ 20%) of
the variation in hourly wages for all four race-gender groups.8 The average workplace
premiums earned by whites are higher than those earned by nonwhites, accounting
for about one-quarter of the racial pay gap for both men and women.9 We also
find a strong pattern of positive assortative matching within each race-gender group.
Specifically, we estimate that establishments that pay 10% higher wage premiums
have workers who would earn 5-8% more at any workplace. Given the education gaps,
we would therefore expect to see some differential sorting of whites to higher-paying
6

Cornwall, Rivera, and Schmutte (2017) present an interesting analysis of “endogeneity” in the
measurement of race in RAIS. We thus conduct a number of checks to assess the impacts of potential
measurement errors in employer-reported race in RAIS.
7
Several recent papers, including Komastsu and Menezes-Filho (2016) and Alvarez et al. (2018),
argue that the rise in the minimum wage after the mid-1990s contributed to lowering overall wage
inequality in Brazil. Derenoncourt and Montialoux (2018) show that extensions in coverage of the
minimum wage in the mid-1960s contributed to a narrowing of black-white wage gaps in the U.S.
8
Abowd, Lengermann, and McKinney (2003) find that between-firm variation represents about
17% of the variance of U.S. wages. Card, Heining, and Kline (2013), Card, Cardoso, and Kline
(2016), and Macis and Schivardi (2016) estimate a 15%-20% share for establishment effects in the
case of German workers, Portuguese male workers, and Italian manufacturing workers, respectively.
9
A key issue underlying this comparison is how to benchmark the estimated establishment effects
for whites versus nonwhites. We use a normalization based on pay in the restaurant industry that
allows us to standardize the establishment (and person) effects for the two race groups (by gender).
We also evaluate the robustness of our conclusions to a range of assumptions on how much of
the racial pay gap in that industry is attributable to wage premiums paid only to whites, and to
normalizations based on other industries where wage-setting power is likely limited. To address the
issue that whites are concentrated in geographic areas with a higher fraction of larger and more
profitable firms, we also implement a simple reweighting procedure for all our decomposition results,
which adjusts the geographic distribution of nonwhites to match the distribution of whites.

3

establishments even in the absence of any discriminatory employment policies.
To assess how much, we construct estimates of the distributions of white and
non-white workers in different skill groups in each local labor market, based on
age and the percentiles of their estimated person effects.10 We then compare the
actual employment shares of nonwhites at each workplace to the expected shares if
establishments maintained the skill-age composition of their labor force but selected
workers without regard to race from the available pool in their local labor market.
This counterfactual suggests that about two-thirds of the overall sorting effect –
accounting for about 12% of the overall racial wage gap – is explained by race-neutral
assortative matching. The remainder, which incorporates discriminatory hiring and
retention policies, accounts for another 6-8% of the overall racial wage gap.
Next, we use the estimated establishment-specific wage premiums to evaluate
the within-firm relative wage-setting effect. We find that the wage premiums for
nonwhites are compressed relative to those for whites – a pattern that is consistent
with monopsonistic wage setting and lower elasticities of firm-specific supply (“price
discrimination;” Barth and Dale-Olsen, 2009; Card et al., 2018) or lower bargaining
power (Babcock and Laschever, 2003; Manning, 2011) for nonwhites than whites.
These lower average premiums explain another 5-6% of the overall racial wage gap.
Finally, we show that the wage losses associated with unexplained sorting and
differential wage-setting are largest for nonwhites with the highest levels of general
skills (as captured by their person effects), suggesting that the allocative costs of
race-based preferences may be relatively large in our setting.
Our work makes three main contributions. First, we advance the literature on
discriminatory employment policies and workplace segregation, offering comprehensive estimates of the impacts of these practices on overall wage gaps for both males
and females in Brazil, and showing how the effects vary across the skill distribution.11
Second, we show how estimates from a two-way fixed effects model can be used to
benchmark the employment patterns at a given workplace relative to its local labor
market, while accounting in a flexible way for the skill composition at the workplace.
This is particularly important in settings like Brazil where there is a large racial gap
10

Our approach generalizes the method proposed by Aslund and Skans (2010), which accounts
for observed skill characteristics of employees at a given workplace and in the surrounding labor
market, by accounting for any unobserved but time-invariant skill characteristics.
11
Previous work by Hellerstein and Neumark (2008) used U.S. data from a single cross-section
and found that black workers were more likely than whites to work at higher-wage establishments the opposite of the pattern in our data. An early study by Ashenfelter (1972) similarly found that
black workers were more likely than whites to work at unionized jobs in the late 1960s. We are
unaware of any work for the U.S. that has longitudinal data covering all (or most) establishments
and includes racial status information.

4

in education levels. Third, we contribute to the literature on racial wage differences
in Latin America, showing that firm-specific employment and pay-setting policies
contribute a substantial share of these gaps, that assortative matching would exacerbate racial inequalities even in the absence of any discrimination, but that race-based
preferences appear to play an important role at the top of the skill distribution.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 begins with a descriptive analysis of
racial differences in the Brazilian labor market, based on the PNAD data. Section
2 presents our econometric setup and decomposition methods. We then provide a
brief descriptive analysis of our main RAIS samples in Section 3, focusing on the
plausibility of the conditions for OLS to yield interpretable estimates of employer
wage premiums. Sections 4 and 5 present our main estimation and decomposition
results, using data from the Southeast region of Brazil. The latter section ends with a
detailed analysis of how unexplained sorting and relative wage setting affect workers
at different points in the skill distribution. We evaluate the robustness of our findings
in Section 6, by replicating our analysis using other regions of the country, different measures of race, different sub-periods of our sample, industries with different
degrees of interaction between employees and customers, and alternative normalizing assumptions regarding the wage premiums paid to whites and nonwhites in the
lowest-wage sectors of the economy. Section 7 concludes.

1

Background and Data

We begin by providing some background information on our empirical setting and
the data used in our analysis.
Legal Setting
Although African slave labor played a major role in colonial Brazil, a relatively fluid
notion of racial identity emerged in the post-slavery era, manifested by the absence
of de jure segregation and the acknowledgement of three main race groups: whites;
mixed race individuals (“pardos,” literally, brown people); and black/African race
individuals.12 Perhaps in part because of this fluidity, legal concerns over racial
discrimination emerged relatively late (Skidmore, 1992). Indeed, it was only with
the adoption of the 1988 Constitution and the passage of subsequent laws in 1989
and 1995 that racial discrimination in employment and pay setting became illegal
12

See Skidmore (1974), Marx (1998), Telles (2004), and Andrews (1992) for detailed discussions.

5

in Brazil.13 Nevertheless, a review of case law suggests that even in the early 2000’s
most claims of discrimination were dismissed (Equal Rights Trust, 2009).
Recently, however, the adoption of affirmative action policies in university admissions (Francis and Tannuri-Painto, 2013, 2015) has led to heightened awareness
of racial issues in Brazil and a new law promoting racial parity (the Racial Equality
Law) was passed in 2010. Therefore, it is possible that employer policies regarding
employment and wage setting have evolved during the 13 years (2002-2014) included
in our sample. We explore this possibility as part of our robustness analysis.
Initial Descriptive Analysis
We begin by studying data from the Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicı́lios
(PNAD), a nationally-representative household survey. The PNAD covers both the
formal and informal sectors, allowing us to assess the potential role of formality in
mediating the size of the wage gap between different race groups. For consistency
with our RAIS data set (see below), we pool the 2002-2014 PNAD surveys.14 We
also limit attention (here and throughout the paper) to men and women age 25 to
54 with at least one year of potential experience (using age and years of schooling).
Table 1 provides an overview of the characteristics of the working-age population
in Brazil by gender (panels A and B) and race (columns 1-4), with a parallel analysis
for the Southeast region in columns 5-8.15 The Southeast region contains the states
of Espı́rito Santo, Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro, and São Paulo, 42% of Brazil’s
population, and its most developed areas, including its three largest cities.16
The first row in each panel shows the fraction of the population in each race group.
In Brazil as a whole, about 50% of the working-age population are white (“branco”),
42% are mixed race (“pardo”), and 8% are black (“preto”). Together, these three
groups account for about 99% of the population, with Asians and indigenous groups
making up the remainder. In the Southeast, the share of whites is higher (56% of
men and 59% of women), while the share of mixed race individuals is lower (32-34%).
The second row shows the fractions of each group who were working as private13

The Afonso Arinos Law, passed in 1951, was intended to deter racial discrimination, but is
widely believed to have had at most a symbolic effect (Campos, 2015).
14
Ferreira, Firpo, and Messina (2014) present an analysis of PNAD data from 1995 to 2012.
They document trends over this period in returns to education, racial wage gaps, and overall wage
inequality, with particularly large changes from the mid-1990s to the early 2000s. To assess the
impacts of these underlying trends, we split our sample into earlier and later periods in Section 6.
15
Similar descriptive statistics for the other regions are reported in Table D1 in the Appendix.
16
A map showing Brazil’s regions and micro-regions (our definition of local labor market; see
below), as well as their racial composition, is presented in Figure C1 in the Appendix.

6

sector nonfarm employees at the PNAD survey date (in September). About 43%
of men and 25% of women are in this class in Brazil; the remainder includes selfemployed workers, farm laborers, domestic workers, public sector employees, and
nonworkers. The private employment rate of men differs by only a few percentage
points (ppts.) across the three main race groups, but is more variable for women. In
the Southeast region, private employment rates of both genders are higher and less
variable across race groups. Specifically, the rate ranges from 47% (for whites) to 51%
(for blacks) for men and from 23% (for mixed race individuals) to 27% (for whites)
for women. This similarity implies that there is relatively little room for differential
selection biases among the subset of private-sector employees in each race group.
In the remaining rows, we show selected characteristics for nonfarm private-sector
employees.17 Among male private-sector employees, mean schooling is 8.4 years and
45% have completed high school. Both rates are higher among female employees,
reflecting the fact that women tend to be better educated than men in Brazil. White
men have about 1.6 years more schooling than mixed race or black men, and are 40%
more likely to have finished high school. The corresponding gaps between white and
mixed race or black women are smaller, but still notable. In the Southeast region,
mean levels of schooling and the high school completion rate are both higher, but
the gaps between the race groups are comparable to those in the country as a whole.
While the differences in education between whites and nonwhites in Brazil are
larger than those that currently prevail in the U.S. (see, e.g., Bayer and Charles,
2018), they are broadly consistent with gaps in other Latin American countries. Esteve and López-Ruiz (2010), for example, document that the proportion of adults
in Brazil who have not completed primary education is about 20 ppts. higher for
nonwhites than whites. In Chile, the comparable gap between mapuches (the main
indigenous group) and non-indigenous people is about 15 ppts.; in Ecuador the gap
between blacks and whites is about 25 ppts.; and in Mexico the gap between indigenous Spanish speakers and non-indigenous people is about 23 ppts.
Looking next at the mean log hourly wage statistics presented in Table 1, two key
patterns stand out. First, mixed race and black workers earn 30-35% less than whites.
These gaps are similar for men and women, and in the Southeast region. Second,
mean log wages of all groups are roughly 10% higher in the Southeast region.
The level of Brazil’s minimum wage was relatively high during our sample period.18 Indeed, 54% of male and 71% of female private-sector employees earned less
17

All monetary values in the paper are deflated using the Consumer Price Index to a 2010 base.
The ratio of the minimum wage to the median wage rose from 58% in 2002 to 70% in 2006, and
was relatively constant afterwards (see Melo, 2014). By way of comparison, the ratio of the Federal
minimum wage to the median wage was about 38% in the U.S. and 62% in France in 2012.
18

7

than 200% of the minimum wage. Consistent with the patterns for mean log wages,
these fractions were higher for mixed race and black workers than for whites of either
gender, and lower in the Southeast region for all groups.
The impact of the minimum wage is illustrated visually in Figure 1, where we
show the distributions of log wages normalized relative to the minimum wage – i.e.,
log(w/min) – for white and non-white male workers in the Northeast region (the
poorest region of the country, with the highest fraction of black workers) and the
Southeast region (the richest region of the country).19 We show the distributions for
all male workers, for males with less than a high school education, and for males with
a high school education or more in the top, middle, and bottom panels, respectively.
For all three education groups in the Northeast region, we see a large spike in
the distribution at a relative wage of 1 (or a log relative wage of 0), coupled with a
stark asymmetry between the upper and lower tails of the distribution. These graphs
suggest that the minimum wage substantially attenuates any firm-specific component
of pay in the Northeast region and equalizes pay across race groups. The graphs for
workers in the Southeast region also show a notable spike at a relative wage of 1 and
some asymmetry between the upper and lower tails. Nevertheless, there is a clear
leftward shift in the distribution of wages for nonwhites relative to whites, suggesting
that the impact of firm-specific wage setting may be detectable, though it might be
attenuated for workers with less than a high school education.
To address concerns about the potential effects of the minimum wage we follow
two strategies. First, we focus on the Southeast region of the country for our main
analysis. Second, throughout our analysis, we present results for all education groups
and for higher-educated (high school or more) workers separately. The impacts of
the minimum wage appear to be relatively small for workers with at least a high
school education in the Southeast region, so the findings for this group may give a
clearer picture of what could be expected in the absence of a binding minimum wage.
Returning to Table 1, the last row of each panel shows the fraction of privatesector employees who have a valid working card (“carteira de trabalho”) for their job
and are thus in the formal sector. This rate is about 80% in Brazil and 83% in the
Southeast region. Importantly, the formality rate is quite similar across race groups,
suggesting that differences in formality between the groups are not a major concern
for interpreting measured wage gaps in the formal sector (more on this below).
19

Similar graphs for females are shown in Figure C2 in the Appendix.

8

An Overview of Racial Wage Gaps
Table 2 presents estimates from a series of simple regression models that use data
from the PNAD to measure the size of the racial wage gaps for male and female
private-sector employees in Brazil (including formal and informal employees). Again,
we present parallel results for Brazil as a whole and for the Southeast region.20
We also present separate results for all workers and the subset with a high school
education or more. For each group we present two specifications: one that includes
only state and year effects, and another that adds controls for education (a set of five
dummies for incomplete elementary school, and complete elementary school, middle
school, high school, or college) and a quadratic function of potential experience.
The estimated wage gaps between whites and the two main groups of nonwhites
range from 27% to 33% when we control only for state and year effects. As has
been found in numerous previous studies, including the seminal studies by Oliveira,
Porcaro, and Araújo (1981) and Silva (1978, 1980, 1985), mixed race and black
workers receive similar average wages that are both far below the average wages
of whites. The racial wage gaps are quite similar for males and females, but are
about 3 ppts. larger in the Southeast than in Brazil as a whole, perhaps reflecting
the reduced impact of the minimum wage. Finally, the gaps are 3-5 ppts. larger for
better educated men, but only slightly larger for better educated women.
The racial wage gaps are substantially reduced when we add controls for education
and experience. For the country as a whole (column 2), the unexplained gaps fall to
11-13 ppts. for males and to 11 ppts. for females. The drop in magnitude compared
to the gaps without controls (column 1) reflects the relatively large racial differences
in educational achievement documented in Table 1, and the relatively high return to
education in the Brazilian labor market (e.g., Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, 2002).
Interestingly, the unexplained gaps are very similar in the Southeast region (column
6). The wage gaps among workers with a high school education or more also fall
by nearly 50% when we add controls for education (in this case, a single dummy for
having completed a bachelor’s degree or more), though the gaps tend to be a little
larger for this group (13%-21%, versus 11%-14% for all workers).
These simple models lead us to two main conclusions. First, we confirm the
finding from other recent studies that mixed race and black workers face similar
wage penalties relative to whites. In the remainder of the paper, we thus combine
these two groups into a single non-white group. This has the advantage of creating
a relatively large non-white group, which is useful when we turn to two-way fixed
effects models. Second, we find that the unexplained wage gaps between whites
20

Similar estimates for the other Brazilian regions are reported in Table D2 in the Appendix.

9

and nonwhites are fairly similar in the Southeast and in the overall Brazilian labor
market. In the main analysis, we then focus on the Southeast region, but we present
results for the whole country in the robustness checks.
Wage Gaps in RAIS
Our main analysis uses the Relação Anual de Informações Sociais (RAIS), a longitudinal data set that provides nearly universal coverage of formal jobs in Brazil.21
Firms submit annual information to the Ministry of Labor on all employees who were
on the payroll in the previous year, including their hiring and separation dates, average monthly earnings during the year, monthly earnings in December, contracted
hours, age, gender, education, and race. Worker information is reported at the establishment level along with the industry and municipality of the workplace. Race is
classified into the same categories used in PNAD, but is only available after 2002.22
Hence, we use the RAIS files from 2002 to 2014, the last year available for this study.
To construct an hourly wage, we use information on contracted monthly hours
and monthly earnings in December of each year, the month for which we measure
earnings precisely, restricting attention to individuals who worked for their employer
for the full month.23 Conceptually, this wage is similar to that in PNAD, which
also measures earnings and hours for a cross-section of jobs at one point in time in
each year. Finally, we exclude farm workers and those outside the 25-54 age range
from our RAIS samples (as in the PNAD samples), as well as workers on temporary
contracts, those who are not paid on a monthly basis (the usual pay period in Brazil),
and those with very low or very high wages (see details in Appendix A).
21

Established in 1975, RAIS provides crucial information about the formal labor force in Brazil,
including labor market indicators made available to public and private organizations. The data
collected by RAIS are also used to administer a federal wage supplement to low-income formal
employees (“Abono Salarial”) and to monitor eligibility for various government programs, such as
the Brazilian conditional cash transfer program (“Bolsa Familia”). Compliance with the mandatory
reporting requirements is high because of large penalties when the data are late or incomplete.
22
Cornwall, Rivera, and Schmutte (2017) describe in details the process by which employers record
race. The requirement for employers to record workers’ race was added as part of an effort to comply
with the ILO Convention 111, which deals with discrimination in the workplace. Newspaper articles
show that firms fought the new requirement at the time, but did not prevail.
23
For the small fraction of workers who have more than one job in December, we first select the
job with the highest contracted hours, breaking any ties by selecting the job with the highest hourly
wage. In the few cases where hours and wages are identical on both jobs, we select one at random.
RAIS does not report actual hours worked, but we find no racial gap in actual hours worked for
formal-sector employees in PNAD (see Appendix Table D3). The PNAD data, which pertain to
September, may not perfectly capture differences in hours worked in December.

10

A concern in RAIS is that race is sometimes recorded differently by different
employers: among workers in the Southeast region whose modal race is white, their
race is coded as mixed race or black about 10% of the time, while for those whose
modal race is nonwhite, their race is coded as white about 15% of the time.24 Similar
anomalies occur, albeit less frequently, for the recording of education, gender, and
birth year. To address these inconsistencies, we assign individuals their modal race,
education, gender, and birth year across all their observations in the RAIS sample.
A second concern is that, although RAIS includes detailed longitudinal information for the formal sector, it excludes the entire informal sector. To assess how the
exclusion of the informal sector affects the measured racial wage gaps, we present
results from a series of models fit to the PNAD and RAIS samples in Table 3. The
models have the same full set of controls as the models in Table 2, but combine black
and mixed race individuals into a single non-white category.
The specifications in column 1 (for Brazil as a whole) and 5 (for the Southeast
region) model the probability of being in a formal job, conditional on being a privatesector employee in PNAD. The coefficients fall in a narrow range from -0.01 to 0.01,
suggesting that formality rates of whites and nonwhites of both genders are nearly
identical when we control for education, experience, state of residence, and year.25
The remaining specifications in Table 3 model log hourly wages. The models
in columns 2 and 6 are fit to samples that include all private-sector employees in
PNAD, while those in columns 3 and 7 are fit to subsamples of formal-sector workers in PNAD. Importantly, the estimated wage gaps between white and non-white
workers are very similar for both men and women regardless of whether informal
sector workers are excluded or not. Together with the relatively high overall rates
of formality among private-sector employees, this suggests that an analysis of racial
wage gaps in the formal sector can provide useful insights for the entire labor market.
Finally, columns 4 and 8 present results for our main RAIS samples. In particular,
we limit attention to employees at the largest connected sets of workplaces for both
white and non-white workers (of a given gender), which we call the “dual connected”
set of establishments (see the discussion in Section 3). Hourly wages are somewhat
higher than in the corresponding PNAD samples,26 while the racial wage gaps are a
little smaller, particularly for men. One partial explanation for the smaller wage gaps
24

As discussed by Cornwall, Rivera, and Schmutte (2017), the inconsistent reporting of race is
not entirely due to random misclassification errors, since workers who move to a better paying job
tend to be more likely to switch from nonwhite to white (and vice-versa).
25
Similar estimates for the other Brazilian regions are presented in Table D4 in the Appendix.
26
This might be due to the use of actual earnings (which can include overtime payments) but
contracted hours. If overtime is more prevalent in December (when RAIS data are measured) than
September (the data collection month for PNAD), hourly wages will be higher in RAIS.

11

in RAIS is that the mis-measurement of non-white racial status in the administrative
data (even after assigning individuals their modal race) leads to an attenuation bias.27
To assess this explanation, we re-estimated the models using only the subsample of
“consistent race” individuals whose (binary) race classification is the same in every
year they are observed in RAIS. This increases the magnitudes of the racial wage
gaps, leading to gaps for females that are very similar to those in PNAD, and gaps
for males that are only 2-3 ppts. smaller than in PNAD. In light of this finding, we
present results for workers with consistent race histories in our robustness analysis,
as well as for our full sample but classifying individuals by their first reported race
in RAIS rather than their modal race.

2

Econometric Framework

In this section, we present our econometric framework for measuring the effects of
firm-specific employment and pay-setting policies. We measure these effects by their
net impact on the racial wage gap. Specifically, we estimate models that capture
the wage premiums offered at each workplace, then perform simple counterfactual
exercises to evaluate the effects of assuming that (1) each workplace offered the same
wage premium (relative to other employers) to nonwhites and whites and (2) nonwhites and whites had the same probabilites of employment at different workplaces.
Our counterfactuals take the wages offered at each workplace as given and ignore the
equilibrium effects emphasized by Becker (1957) that can arise from discriminatory
preferences in the marketplace. Therefore, our procedure likely under-estimates the
overall impact of discriminatory preferences on the racial wage gaps.
Job Ladder Model of Wages
Building on Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) – henceforth AKM – we assume
that the log of the hourly wage paid to worker i in race-gender group g in period t
(ygit ) is generated by a model of the form:
g
′
+ Xgit
βg + εgit
ln ygit = αgi + ψJ(g,i,t)

(1)

where αgi is a person effect that captures any time-invariant but fully portable components of earnings capacity, ψjg represents a wage premium paid at establishment
j to workers in group g, J (g, i, t) is an index function indicating the workplace for
27

In particular, the share of non-white workers among formal private-sector employees remains
smaller in RAIS than in PNAD, even after assigning individuals their modal race.

12

worker i in group g in year t, Xgit is a vector of time varying controls (e.g., year
effects and controls for individual experience), and εgit is a time-varying error capturing all other factors, including any person-specific job match effects.28 The ψjg
terms capture workplace-specific pay premiums, but impose the assumption that the
proportional premiums are the same for all workers in a given race-gender group.
One simple explanation for the presence of firm- or establishment-based premiums
is monopsonist wage setting (see Card et al., 2018, for a review). Assuming that
firms have some market power, they will set wages that are marked down relative
to marginal revenue products, with a factor that depends on the elasticity of supply
to the firm (Robinson, 1933; Boal and Ransom, 1997; Manning, 2003). Firms with
a higher demand for labor (arising, e.g., from entrepreneurial skill) will set higher
wages to attract a larger labor force. As discussed in Appendix B, under a set of
simplifying assumptions about the choice model causing different workers to choose
different employers and the substitutability between subgroups of workers, an optimal
wage-setting policy will be characterized by a set of group-specific premiums:
ψjg = δg Rj

(2)

where Rj is a measure of latent productivity at establishment j and δg is a markdown
factor that varies across subgroups of workers and is related to their elasticities of
firm-specific supply (as in models of price discrimination; more on this below). An
observationally equivalent model is that workers’ wages incorporate a share of the
surplus associated with their employment match, that the average match surplus
is higher at more productive firms, and that different groups have different average
bargaining power (Babcock and Laschever, 2003; Card, Cardoso, and Kline, 2016).
The empirical predictions of equation (1) depend on what is assumed about the
error component εgit . If the conditional expectation of εgit is assumed to be independent of the job history of the worker – the “exogenous mobility” assumption required
for OLS estimation of (1) to yield unbiased estimates of the establishment effects –
then (1) implies that a worker in group g who moves from establishment k to establishment j will experience an average wage change of ψjg − ψkg , regardless of past or
future mobility patterns. A worker who moves in the opposite direction (from j to k)
will experience an equal and opposite expected wage change of ψkg − ψjg . This simple
symmetry prediction contrasts with the predictions from models of mobility driven
28

The contributions of the person effect and the time-varying covariates are not separately identified without a normalizing assumption, as discussed in Card et al. (2018). Following their work,
′
we assume that in the baseline year Xgit
βg = 0 for 40-year old males and 35-year-old females, such
that the person effects are measured as of age 40 for men and 35 for women, which correspond
approximately to the peak of their experience profiles (see Figure C3 in the Appendix).

13

by job match effects, which imply that movers in both directions will experience
positive average wage gains (see Eeckhout and Kircher, 2011, 2018, for a discussion
of alternative theoretical models of mobility and sorting). A series of specification
checks presented by Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) suggest that although the exogeous mobility assumption can be rejected by formal testing, the predictions of an
AKM-type model with exogenous mobility are not too far off. In the next section
we review these checks using RAIS data and confirm that this is also true in Brazil.
Estimates of AKM-style models for various countries, including the U.S., Germany, and Brazil, have found that workplace (or firm) effects in these models typically explain 15-25 percent of the overall variance of wages (see the review in Card
et al., 2018). Workers with higher person effects also tend to work at firms that pay
higher wage premiums. Such assortativeness has implications for wage inequality
because the variance of log wages for workers in group g can be decomposed as:


! ′

g
βg + V ar (εgit )
(3)
V ar (ln y git ) = V ar (αgi ) + V ar ψJ(g,i,t) + V ar Xgit





!
g
g
′
′
+ 2Cov αgi , Xgit
, Xgit
βg + 2Cov ψJ(g,i,t)
βg .
+2Cov αgi , ψJ(g,i,t)
A positive covariance between worker and establishment effects will magnify the
impacts of the person and firm components, contributing to higher overall inequality. As we discuss next, it also has important implications for the interpretation of
differential employment patterns in higher- and lower-premium workplaces.
Impacts of Sorting and Relative Wage-Setting on Racial Wage Gaps
We now ask how the presence of establishment-specific wage premiums contributes
to mean wage differences between groups. Suppose there are two groups, whites
(W ) and nonwhites (N ), and let πW j and πN j represent the fractions of the groups
employed at workplace j. Then the mean wages of the two groups can be written as:
X
′
ψjW πW j
E[ln yW it ] = E[αW i + XW
it βW ] +
j

E[ln yN it ] = E[αN i + XN′ it βN ] +

X

ψjN πN j

j

Subtracting these equations leads to a simple expression for the mean log wage gap
between whites and blacks:
X
X
′
′
ψjW πW j −
ψjN πN j (4)
E[ln yW it ] − E[ln yN it ] = αW − αN + X W βW − X N βN +
j

14

j

′

′

where αg = E[αgi ] and X g = E[Xgit ]. For simplicity, assume that X W βW = X N βN ,
so we can ignore the time-varying person components.29 Further rearrangement then
leads to two alternative decompositions:
X
X
ψjW (πW j − πN j ) +
(ψjW − ψjN )πN j(5)
E[ln yW it ] − E[ln yN it ] = αW − αN +
j

= αW − αN +

X
j

j

ψjN (πW j

− πN j ) +

X

(ψjW − ψjN )πW j(6)
.

j

Following Oaxaca (1973), the mean wage gap can be decomposed into a difference in mean characteristics between the two groups, weighted by the coefficients
for one of the two groups, and a difference in coefficients, weighted by the mean
characteristics of the other group. In a job ladder model, the “characteristics” are
simply person indicators and dummies for working at a given establishment, while
the “coefficients” are the worker effects and the establishment pay premiums. The
first term in equations (5) and (6) is just the difference in the mean person effects
for the two groups - what might be called the “average skill gap” between the two
groups. The other two terms measure the contribution of establishment pay and employment policies to the wage gap, with alternative choices for which group’s wage
premiums are used to weight the difference in employment shares, and which group’s
employment shares are used to weight the difference in establishment pay premiums.
In the analysis below we focus on the version of the decomposition specified by
equation (5). In this variant, the difference in pay premiums received by whites versus
nonwhites is weighted by the employment share of nonwhites, yielding an estimate of
the effect of differential pay-setting given the actual distribution of nonwhites across
establishments – a counterfactual that we believe is most natural. Likewise, the
difference in employment shares of whites and nonwhites is weighted by the wage
premium for white workers, yielding an estimate of the effect of differential sorting of
the two race groups across workplaces assuming that nonwhites were paid the same
premiums as whites – again, a counterfactual that we believe is natural.
Sorting Effect and Assortative Matching
P
The between workplace sorting term j ψjW (πW j − πN j ) in equation (5) will be zero
if the two groups have the same distributions of employment across establishments
(i.e., πW j = πN j for all j) or if there are no establishment-specific pay premiums
29

As discussed below, this assumption is roughly correct for males in our data. For females,
however, there are some modest differences between whites and nonwhites.

15

(as in traditional discrimination models), but it will be positive if white workers are
more likely to be employed at high-premium workplaces.
There are several reasons to suspect that this is true. One is that whites are
concentrated in geographic areas with a higher fraction of larger and more profitable
firms in Brazil. To address this issue, we implement a simple reweighting procedure
that adjusts the geographic distribution of nonwhites to match the distribution of
whites. Specifically, we form a weight for each nonwhite based on the relative fractions of whites and nonwhites in his or her micro-region.30 We then construct a
weighted average wage for nonwhites, and weighted fractions of nonwhites at each
establishment. Since the decompositions in equations (4)-(6) remain valid using
weighted means, we can account for the differing geographic distributions of whites
and nonwhites in a simple non-parametric fashion.
A second explanation is suggested by the general finding of positive assortative
matching between higher-skilled workers and higher-paying establishments – a pattern that is also true in Brazil (see below). Assuming that whites tend to have higher
overall human capital than nonwhites, and that higher-paying establishments hire
relatively more skilled workers, we would therefore expect to see more whites at these
establishments, even in the absence of other factors.
To account for such skill-biased employment patterns, we classify individuals (by
gender) into skill groups based on their age and the value of their estimated person
effects. We then calculate the fractions of workers at each establishment in each skill
group, and the share of nonwhites among all workers in each skill group in each local
labor market. Next, we calculate counterfactual employment shares of whites and
∗
∗
nonwhites, πW
j and πN j , respectively, that would be expected if each establishment
maintained the skill distribution of its labor force in each year but selected workers
without regard to race from the available pool in its local labor market in that year.
Using these shares we form the counterfactual skill-based sorting effect:
X
∗
∗
(7)
ψjW (πW
j − πN j ).
j

This gives the net effect of skill-based (race-neutral) employment probabilities on the
racial wage gap, holding constant the skill distribution at each workplace, the wage
premium paid to white workers, and the racial composition of local labor markets.
A third explanation for an under-representation of nonwhites at higher-paying
establishments is discriminatory hiring and/or retention policies. We cannot directly
30

A micro-region (“microrregião”) is a legally defined geographic entity roughly equivalent to
a county. It closely parallels the notion of local economies by grouping economically integrated
contiguous municipalities with similar geographic and productive characteristics. The 557 microregions in Brazil (160 of them are in the Southeast region) are shown in Figure C1 in the Appendix.

16

test this explanation. We can, however, calculate the difference between the actual
sorting effect and the counterfactual skill-based sorting effect:
X
X
∗
∗
(8)
D=
ψjW (πW j − πN j ) −
ψjW (πW
j − πN j )
j

j

To the extent that higher-premium establishments employ fewer nonwhites than
would be expected given their skill distribution and the nonwhite shares in each skill
group in their local labor market, the residual sorting effect D will be positive.
Relative Wage-Setting Effect
P
The relative pay-setting term j (ψjW − ψjN )πN j in equation (5) will be zero if ψjW =
ψjN = 0 for all j (as in traditional discrimination models), or if the pay premiums for
whites and nonwhites at each establishment are equal. It will be positive, however,
if whites tend to receive higher pay premiums than nonwhites at a given workplace.
As noted above, the simple monopsonistic pay-setting model developed by Card
et al. (2018) predicts a set of group-specific pay premiums of the form ψjg = δg Rj
where Rj is a measure of relative productivity at establishment j and δg is a groupspecific preference factor. This implies that
ψjN = γψjW ,

(9)

where γ = δN /δW . Under these conditions, the relative wage-setting effect is:
X

(ψjW − ψjN )πN j =

j

1−γ X N
ψj πN j .
γ
j

(10)

If δN < δW – so nonwhites’ wage premiums at more productive employers are compressed relative to whites’ – then γ < 1 and the pay-setting effect will be positive.
In the monopsonistic pay-setting model in Appendix B, δg depends on the relative
value that individuals in a group place on the wage versus nonwage features of a job,
and on the variation in the individual-specific valuations for a given job by individuals
in the group. Groups with a higher value of δg have more elastic supplies to a given
establishment, and therefore receive lower monopsonistic markdowns relative to their
marginal revenue products. For example, if δN /δW = 0.9 (i.e., nonwhites receive pay
premiums that are about 90% as large as whites) and the average pay premium
earned by nonwhites is 10%, the pay-setting effect will be about 1.1 ppts.

17

Normalizing the Pay Premiums
An important feature of the sorting effect in equation (5) is that it depends on the
differences in establishment shares of whites and nonwhites. Since these establishment shares sum to 1, the numerical value of the estimated sorting effect is invariant
to any additive transformation of the estimated
pay premiums. To see this, consider
P
the transformation ψejW = ψjW + τ. Since j τ (πN j − πW j ) = 0 for any τ , the transformed pay premiums imply the same numerical value of the sorting effect. This is
important because the pay premiums estimated in two-way fixed effects models are
always normalized relative to the pay premium in some reference firm (τ ). Substantively, this means that the overall sorting effect can be estimated without taking a
stand on how one normalizes the estimated pay premiums for a given group.
In contrast, the relative pay-setting effect in equation (5) depends on the difference in the estimated pay premiums for whites and nonwhites, and therefore on
the normalization of these premiums. Consider the same transformation as above:
ψejW = ψjW + τ , which adds a positive constant τ to the premiums for whites (reflecting, for example, a premium paid by firms in the reference sector to whites). This
will shift up the estimated pay-setting effect by the amount τ . Mechanically, it will
also reduce all the person effects for whites by the same factor, potentially affecting
the decomposition of the overall sorting effect into its skill-based and residual components (as the person effects are used to classify individuals into skill groups). Note
that the key issue is how to normalize the establishment effects for whites relative
to nonwhites: a renormalization that adds the same factor to the premiums for both
race groups leaves these effects unchanged.
We address the normalization issue by assuming that in the restaurant sector,
a large employment sector for both men and women that is comprised of many
small firms that pay relatively low wages, the average pay premiums for whites and
nonwhites of both genders are zero. In essence, we assume that firms with little or no
rent to share pay zero premiums to all groups. It is possible to show that under the
assumptions posed by Card et al. (2018) about the shape of workers’ preferences for
jobs at different workplaces, firms that require only a small workforce set wages so
that their employees are close to indifferent between employment at the firm and a
non-work alternative (i.e., just above their reservation wage). In this case, assuming
that restaurants are “small” employers, our normalization assumption will be valid.
Interestingly, in both the PNAD and RAIS data, we find very small racial wage
gaps in the restaurant sector (see Table D5 in the Appendix). Specifically, models
like those in Table 3 that include state and year effects and controls for education
and experience show a racial wage gap in our RAIS samples of about 2ppts. to
3ppts. Under the assumption that workers receive wages that are proportional to
18

their productivity in this sector, the implication is that the average skill gap between
nonwhites and whites in the restaurant industry is about 2ppts. to 3ppts.
A concern with our normalizing assumption is that, even in the restaurant sector,
there may be positive pay premiums for white workers that contribute to their higher
wage (e.g., if guests prefer being served by whites). As a robustness check, we
therefore evaluate the implications of choosing alternative normalizations such that
differential establishment-specific wage premiums account for about 50% or 100%
(i.e., 1.5 ppts. or 3 ppts.) of the observed wage gap between whites and nonwhites in
the restaurant sector.31 This amounts to adjusting all the establishment premiums
for whites upward (and all the person effects for whites downward) by 1.5 ppts. or 3
ppts. We also replicate our results by using a normalization based on other sectors
in which firms have likely little or no rent to share (e.g., auto repair services).

3

RAIS Samples and Specification Tests

We now describe our main RAIS samples and present specification tests supporting
the plausibility of the “exogenous mobility” condition for OLS to yield interpretable
estimates of establishment wage premiums, before we move to the estimation results.
RAIS Samples
We use longitudinal wage observations for private-sector employees in the RAIS
data set to estimate our two-way fixed effects models. Columns 1-4 of Table 4 first
show the characteristics of the four samples of workers in the Southeast region (one
for each race-gender group) that meet the selection criteria laid out in Section 1
(without imposing any restriction related to connected sets). We have about 44
million person-year observations over our 13-year period for about 9 million white
men, with samples about 70%, 45%, and 25% as big for white women, non-white
men, and non-white women, respectively. The age distributions of the four groups
are similar, while education varies more, with the highest levels of schooling among
white women and the lowest among non-white men. Mean log wages are about 10%
higher than in the PNAD samples described in Table 1, but the differences between
groups are similar. Nearly all workers are employed full time, with about 185 hours
per month (≈ 43 hours per week) among women and just slightly more among men.32
The fourth subpanel shows the mean establishment size and the mean fractions of
female and white employees in their workplace for the four groups. Weighted by the
31
32

To be conservative, we use a gap of 3ppts. in the restaurant sector for both males and females.
The most common contracts in Brazil specify a 44-hour or 40-hour workweek.

19

number of worker-year observations, mean establishment sizes are relatively large,
and even larger for women than men and for nonwhites than whites.33 The extent of
segregation across establishments by race and gender is evident in the differences in
exposure rates of the four groups to white and female colleagues. The mean fraction
of white employees at a white worker’s establishment is about 30 ppts. higher than
at a non-white worker’s (of the same gender), while the mean fraction of females at
a female’s workplace is about 40 ppts. higher than at a male’s (of the same race).34
As was pointed out by AKM, the establishment effects in a two-way fixed effects
model are only identifiable within “connected sets” of workplaces that are linked
by worker mobility. Columns 5-8 in Table 4 present similar descriptive statistics
for the subsamples of workers in each race-gender group who work in the largest
connected set of establishments for that group. The largest connected set includes
97% of person-year observations for white men, 95% for non-white men, 95% for white
women, and 90% for non-white women. Mean wages are 1-2% higher for observations
in the largest connected sets, but other characteristics remain very similar.
The decomposition in equation (5) implicitly assumes that each establishment
has both white and non-white workers, so that one can calculate race-specific pay
premiums at each establishment. In reality there are many small establishments that
hire only white (or less often, only non-white) workers, even in the largest connected
set for each race-gender group. Columns 9-12 in Table 4 thus present the descriptive
statistics for those workers employed at establishments in the dual-connected sets
for their gender (i.e., in the connected sets for both white and non-white workers
of the same gender). These are the samples used for column 8 in Table 3. Among
males, the dual connected sets include about 91% of the person-year observations for
nonwhites, but only 81% of the observations for whites, reflecting the higher share of
all-white establishments.35 Among females, the corresponding rates are 86% of the
person-year observations for nonwhites and 71% of the observations for whites.
Narrowing the samples to workers at the dual-connected establishments has little
impact on the average age or education of the workers in the sample, but it leads
to an increase in average wages of about 5 ppts. for white men and women, and
about 2 ppts. for non-white men and women. This differential effect arises because
establishments that have only one race group tend to pay relatively low wages, and
33

The finding that women work in larger establishments than men is also true in the U.S. (Papps,
2012) and the U.K. (Mumford and Smith, 2008).
34
The difference in females’ versus males’ exposure to female coworkers in the RAIS data is
slightly smaller than in Portugal (Card, Cardoso, and Kline, 2016), but similar to that in the
U.K. (Mumford and Smith, 2008). Data for relatively large establishments in the U.S. show less
segregation by race or gender than in RAIS (Hellerstein, Neumark, and McInerney, 2008).
35
The shares of all-white establishments are higher because of the larger sample sizes for whites.

20

more of such establishments are present in the connected sets for white workers.
Some Specification Tests for Exogenous Mobility
A concern with any conclusion based on two-way fixed effects models is that OLS
estimates of the firm wage premiums will be biased unless worker mobility is uncorrelated with the time-varying residual components of wages. Card, Heining, and Kline
(2013) developed an event-study analysis of the wage changes experienced by workers
moving between different groups of firms to assess the plausibility of this “exogenous
mobility” assumption. Specifically, they proposed grouping establishments by the
average pay of coworkers, and tracking the changes in wages for workers who move
up and down the “job ladder” with rungs defined by quartiles of co-worker pay.
Figure 2 shows the results of this analysis using our four race-gender groups
in RAIS. The samples are restricted to individuals who switch workplaces and are
observed in two consecutive years at both the origin and destination establishments.
Workplaces are grouped into coworker pay quartiles using wages of all coworkers (i.e.,
both races and both genders) in the year of hiring (for destination establishments) or
separation (for origin establishments). For clarity, only the wage profiles of workers
who move from jobs in quartile 1 and quartile 4 are shown in the figures.
The figures exhibit clear step-like patterns for all four race-gender groups: when
workers move to higher-wage establishments, their wages tend to rise, but they tend
to fall when workers move to lower-wage establishments. There is little evidence of
differential trends before or after a move for workers who move up or down the job
ladder, but there are clearly permanent differences in wages prior to a move that
are correlated with the direction of the move. For example, workers who start at
a 4th quartile establishment and move to another 4th quartile establishment have
substantially higher wages in the two years prior to the move than those who start
at a 4th quartile establishment and move down. Such differential mobility on the
basis of the permanent component of wages is fully consistent with the exogenous
mobility assumption, since the AKM model conditions on a worker fixed effect.
As discussed above, a stark prediction of an AKM model with exogenous mobility
is that wage changes associated with movements up the job ladder should be equal
and opposite to wage changes for corresponding movements down the ladder. Figure
2 suggests that this is the case in our data, but Figure 3 presents more systematic
evidence in support of this symmetry prediction. We use the same sample of movers,
but we group origin and destination firms in 20 quantiles of co-worker wages. For
each of the 20 × 20 pairs of quantiles, we then plot the mean change in log wages
for the movers in the year after vs. before the move against the mean difference in

21

log wages of co-workers at the destination vs. origin establishment.36 For each of the
four race-gender groups, the symmetry prediction seems to hold such that a linear fit
captures the relationship between changes in own wages and co-worker wages closely.
Interestingly, one can also see that the slope is flatter for nonwhites than for whites,
indicating that nonwhites may benefit less from moving up the job ladder.
The results in Figures 2 and 3 suggest that a simple AKM model estimated by
OLS will provide interpretable estimates of the wage premiums offered at different
establishments for different race-gender groups. We discuss additional diagnostic
evidence based on the residuals from the estimated models in the next section.

4

Estimation Results

In this section, we present the results from estimating the two-way fixed effects model
in equation (1) by race-gender group, using the largest connected sets described in
columns 5-8 in Table 4.37 We also provide evidence of strong assortative matching
between workers and establishments for each group, which is robust to the well-known
bias in the covariance of person and establishment effects with AKM models.
Estimation Results and Model Fit
Table 5 summarizes the estimation results. We show the standard deviations of the
′ b
βg , as well
person effects, of the establishment effects, and of the covariate index Xgit
as the correlation of the worker and establishment effects, the adjusted R-squared
of the models, and the implied variance decomposition based on equation (3). For
reference, we also show the fit statistics for a more general “job match” model that
includes a separate dummy for each worker-establishment match.
In general, the two-way fixed effects models fit well, with adjusted R-squared
statistics of around 90%. Nevertheless, RMSE’s (root-mean-squared-errors) of the
models are around 15% higher than those of the corresponding job match model.
A comparison of residual variances between these models allow us to calculate the
variance of the job match effects, i.e., the common component of εgit across all
observations of a given worker at a given workplace. As shown in the table, the job
match component is relatively small, accounting for just 3-4% of the overall variance
36

Movers’ wage changes are adjusted for trends based on coefficients from a regression estimated
on the sample of stayers, workers who remain at the origin establishments. The model includes the
same education dummies as in Table 2 and a quadratic in age fully interacted with these dummies.
37
The covariates Xgit include year dummies interacted with the same five education dummies as
in Table 2, and quadratic and cubic terms in age interacted with the education dummies.

22

of wages. This small magnitude means there is only limited scope for job match
effects to drive mobility patterns and invalidate the exogenous mobility assumption.
The variance shares show that fixed worker characteristics account for 50-60%
of the variance of wages in the Southeast region, with a larger share among females
than males, while the establishment effects account for 21-25% of the variance.38 The
covariance between these two sets of effects is positive and accounts for another 718% of the variance of wages. These variance shares are similar to those reported by
Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) for Germany, and by Lavetti and Schmutte (2016)
and Alvarez et al. (2018) for Brazil, based on broadly similar RAIS samples.
We present additional evidence on the goodness of fit of the AKM model for our
four groups in Figure C5 in the Appendix. We show the mean residuals for each of
100 cells, formed by assigning workers and establishments into 10 equally-sized bins
based on their corresponding estimated effects. The mean residuals in each cell are
close to zero, with the exception of cells representing workers with low person effects
employed at workplaces with low establishment effects, where the mean residuals are
positive. This pattern is most pronounced for non-white females, and is consistent
with upward pressure from the minimum wage that is particularly important for
low-skilled workers at low-paying establishments. We evaluate the sensitivity of our
decomposition results to these observations in our robustness checks in Section 6.
Assortative Matching
The results in Table 5 reveal that workers with higher earnings capacity at any
establishment (as represented by their person effects) are more likely to work at establishments that pay higher wage premiums. This holds for all race-gender groups,
but the correlations between the worker and establishment effects are smaller for nonwhites than for whites, suggesting that there may be differences in the propensities
of high-premium establishments to hire whites versus nonwhites.
As is well known in the literature, these estimated correlations have to be interpreted carefully because the sampling errors in the estimated worker and establishment effects are negatively correlated, leading to a downward bias (Maré and Hyslop,
2006; Andrews et al., 2008). The magnitude of the expected bias is larger for “thin
networks” (Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten, 2018), a problem that is likely more severe
for nonwhites than whites in our samples. For example, there are 6.6 white males but
only 5.1 non-white males per establishment in our largest connected sets, suggesting
38

Table D6 in the Appendix presents the corresponding estimates using observations for the whole
country. The results are quite similar: the correlation between the establishment effects estimated
in each sample for Southeast establishments is close to 1 (see Figure C4 in the Appendix).

23

that there are likely to be fewer network links between establishments for nonwhites.
It is possible to derive a corrected correlation (Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten, 2018),
but it is more straightforward to use standard methods to correct the partial regression coefficient relating worker effects to establishment effects. Consider a descriptive
regression fit over person-year observations in a given race-gender group g:
g
+ ξgit .
α
bgi = λ0g + λ1g ψbJ(g,i,t)

(11)

The coefficient λ1g gives the expected change in the person effect per unit increase
in the estimated establishment effect, and provides a convenient metric for assessing
the degree of assortative matching. Since the sampling errors in the person and
establishment effects are negatively correlated, we expect OLS estimates of λ1g to be
negatively biased. The estimates of ψjg for other race-gender groups are estimated on
separate samples, however, and are therefore uncorrelated with the estimated person
effects for a particular group. Assuming that establishment effects for different groups
are correlated with each other, we can use the estimated establishment effects for
another group as instrumental variables, yielding corrected estimates of λ1g .
We implement this procedure in Table 6, restricting attention to person and
establishment effects in the dual-connected sets for each gender, and using the establishment effects for the same gender but opposite race group as instruments.39
For reference, the first row of the table shows the unadjusted correlations of the
worker and establishment effects. Next, we present OLS and IV estimates of the λ1g
coefficients. We show estimates from two models: one with no other controls and one
that controls for micro-region fixed effects (and therefore control for the availability
of different subgroups of workers in each local labor market). Finally, we present the
first stage coefficients, which are relatively large and show very strong correlations
between the estimated establishment effects for whites and nonwhites of each gender,
as would be expected if the wage-setting model given by equation (9) is correct.
Consistent with the patterns for the simple correlation coefficients, the OLS estimates of λ1g are only about half as big for non-white men as white men and one-third
as big for non-white women as white women. The IV estimates are uniformly larger
but still show less assortative matching for nonwhites. Specifically, the IV estimate
of λ1g is about 20% lower for non-white men than white men, and 15% lower for
non-white women than white women.
Figure 4 provides additional evidence on the degree of assortative matching. We
show the fractions of workers employed at establishments in each quartile of the
39

We do not re-estimate the AKM models, we simply estimate OLS and IV versions of equation
(11) using the subsets of person-year observations in the dual-connected sets.

24

distribution of estimated pay premiums, separately for workers in five education categories: incomplete elementary school, and complete elementary school (including
those with incomplete middle school), middle school (including those with incomplete high school), high school (including those with incomplete college), or college.
For all race-gender groups, the college-educated subgroup is most likely to work at
high-premium establishments: 47%-59% of college-educated workers are employed
at quartile 4 establishments, compared to only 10%-19% of workers with only elementary schooling. Moreover, for both genders, there appears to be more assortative
matching for whites than for nonwhites, consistent with the findings in Table 6.40
These results point to two main conclusions. First, there is strong positive assortative matching between workers and establishments for all four race-gender groups.
On average, establishments that pay higher wage premiums hire workers with higher
permanent components of wages and higher education. The IV estimates in Table 6
suggest that an establishment that pays a 10% higher wage premium has employees
whose average earnings capacity is 5-7% higher. Second, the strength of the assortative matching appears to be lower for nonwhites than whites of either gender. This
gap suggests that race matters in the determination of employment probabilities,
even controlling for workers’ skills.

5

Decomposition results

We now use the results from the estimated two-way fixed effects models summarized
in Table 5 to measure the effects of employment and wage-setting policies on the
racial wage gap. We begin by decomposing the racial wage gap into worker-specific
components and a component attributable to establishment pay premiums. We
also relate these components to results from a standard Mincerian model. We then
decompose the contribution of establishments into a relative wage-setting effect and
a sorting effect, and further decompose the latter into a skill-based sorting and a
residual sorting effect. Finally, we investigate how the wage losses associated with
residual sorting and differential wage setting vary across the skill distribution.
Decomposing the Racial Wage Gap into Person and Establishment Effects
As discussed in Section 2, an initial step is to normalize the establishment effects.
This allows us to decompose the wages of any individual – or group – into a com40

For instance, the difference in the share of workers with a college degree vs. with only elementary
schooling employed in quartile 4 establishments reaches 46 ppts. and 41 ppts. for white men and
women, respectively, but only 36 ppts. and 33 ppts. for non-white men and women, respectively.

25

ponent due to their person effect and time varying characteristics, and a component
attributable to the premiums paid by their employer. As a baseline, we assume that
establishments in the restaurant sector pay zero wage premiums to either race-gender
group, on average. Under this assumption, the normalized employer effects represent wage differences relative to jobs where each worker is paid according to his or
her productivity (i.e., with no monopsonistic markdown or rent premium). Figure 5
displays the distribution of implied average pay premiums by 3-digit sector for white
workers. The estimated sector premiums for white males range from near zero – thus
near the restaurant sector, which is the 9th in rank order – for sectors such as delivery
services (-0.07), auto repair services (-0.03), and footwear manufacturing (-0.01) to
around 0.9 for sectors such as auto manufacturing (0.85) and petroleum extraction
(0.90). The ranking is similar for females; the rank correlation with male estimates
is 0.93. Interestingly, the high- and low-premium sectors correspond fairly closely to
the high- and low-wage sectors identified by Krueger and Summers (1988).41
Table 7 presents results from implementing the decomposition of the average
racial pay gap based on equation (4) using individuals in the dual-connected set of
each gender in the Southeast region, with and without reweighting to correct for
differences in the geographic distribution of whites and nonwhites (see Section 2).
We also present results for subsets of workers with vs. without a high school degree.42
Without reweighting, differences in the mean person effects account for about
70% of the white-nonwhite wage gap for both males and females, while differences
in the establishment effects account for 30-35%. Differences in the covariate index
account for a negligible share of the male wage gap, but actually widen the female
gap slightly, particularly for the higher-educated subgroup. This arises because the
experience profiles for higher-educated non-white women are somewhat flatter than
the profiles for whites (this can be seen in Figure C3 in the Appendix). Adjusting
women’s wages to an age-35 basis, as we do, thus raises the white-nonwhite gap in
the estimated person effects, with an offsetting negative gap in the covariate indexes.
Reweighting for the different locations of whites and nonwhites reduces the racial
wage gaps in the first column of Table 7 by 3-4 ppts. A majority of the reduction
comes from a reduction in the size of the establishment component, which is consistent with the idea that area-based wage differentials will be incorporated in the
establishment premiums and that whites are more likely to live in high-wage areas.
Nevertheless, the reweighting also leads to some reduction in the person-effects component (with the exception of females with completed high school), implying that
41

Table D7 in the Appendix shows the rank correlation between our ranking of sectors and theirs.
We do not re-estimate the AKM models, we simply implement the decomposition in equation
(4) in subsets of the dual-connected sets restricted by education levels.
42

26

there are relatively more high-earning whites than nonwhites in local labor markets
with more high-premium firms (this is shown in Figure C6 in the Appendix).43 Overall, the wage gaps remain sizable, however, particularly for higher-educated workers
for whom the wage gaps are 5 to 6 times larger than for lower-educated workers.
Focusing on the location-adjusted results, our estimates imply that the 18.6 ppt.
average racial wage gap for males is attributable to a 14.4 ppt. gap in permanent
earnings capacity and a 4.4 ppt. gap in average pay premiums. Similar comparisons
for females show that the 26.1 ppt. overall racial wage gap arises from a 21.6 ppt.
gap in permanent earnings capacity, a 7.1 ppt. gap in average pay premiums, and a
-2.6 ppt. gap in experience-related factors. Thus, the white-nonwhite difference in
mean establishment premiums accounts for about one quarter of the overall wage
gap for both genders (the same holds true for the higher-educated subgroup).
This decomposition relies on the assumption that workers of both race groups are
paid their true productivity in the restaurant industry. If one assumes instead that
the 3 ppt. wage gap in that sector (see Section 2) is entirely due to wage premiums
for whites, then the component attributed to differences in earnings capacity falls
mechanically to 11.4 ppts. for men and 18.6 ppts. for women, and the component
attributed to differences in average employer pay premiums rises to 7.4 ppts. for men
and 10.1 ppts. for women, or about 40% of the overall racial wage gap.
Relating our Decomposition Results to a Standard Mincerian Model
A question that naturally arises with the decomposition in Table 7 is how it relates
to the usual Mincerian decomposition of the racial wage gap into an “explained”
component (due to education and experience) and an “unexplained” component.
We address this in Appendix Table D8, which presents the joint distribution of the
Mincerian components of the wage gap and the AKM-based components (due to
person effects, establishment effects, and covariates).
This exercise points to three main conclusions. First, a majority of the unexplained wage gap from a Mincer specification is attributable to differences in average
person effects between whites and nonwhites (about 80% for males and 65% for females). In other words, differences in person effects explain a fairly large share of
the unexplained residual from a simple cross-sectional wage model, though 20-35%
is attributed to differences in firm effects. Second, about 60% of the racial gap in
person effects from an AKM decomposition is due to differences in education and
experience. The remaining 40% may be attributed to factors like school quality or
43

The figure shows the correlation between the fractions of high-skilled white workers and highpaying jobs across micro-regions. Figure C7 displays the distributions of estimated person effects.

27

parental inputs that are unobserved in a conventional Mincer model.
Third, and most interestingly, differences in education and experience explain an
important share of the racial gap in the AKM establishments effects (around 60%
of the gap for workers of all education levels, and 45% for those with a high-school
degree). Such a pattern is expected given the degree of sorting of higher-educated
workers to higher-paying establishments shown in Figure 4. Indeed, if employers paid
similar premiums to whites and nonwhites, and education and age were the only
factors that affected the probability of being employed at a higher-wage premium
workplace, then education and experience would explain the entire difference in the
average establishment premiums between whites and nonwhites. The fact that there
is a residual component for the establishment effects motivates our next analyses.
Decomposing the Effect of Employment and Wage-Setting Policies
We decompose the gap in average establishment premiums into a between-firm sorting effect and a within-firm relative wage-setting effect in Table 8, using the framework of equation (5). We show the overall wage gap (column 1), the mean establishment effects for whites and nonwhites (columns 2 and 3, respectively), the mean
difference in establishment effects (column 4), and the two components of equation
(5): the sorting and relative pay-setting effects (columns 5 and 6, respectively).
As noted in the discussion of Table 7, the average gap in establishment effects
between whites and nonwhites accounts for about one quarter of the overall wage gap
for both men and women (see column 4). The entries in column 5 imply that most of
the establishment effect is attributable to the under-representation of nonwhites in
higher-premium workplaces. Evaluated using the wage premiums earned by whites at
different workplaces, the differential sorting of white and non-white workers accounts
for about 20% of the overall wage gap for all groups but lower-educated males, for
whom the average gap in establishment effects is small to begin with (1 ppt.).
Relative to the size of the sorting effects, the wage-setting effects in column 6 are
modest in size, on the order of 1 ppt. for men and 1.5 ppts. for women. Some insight
into this finding is provided by equation (10) and the pattern in Figure 6, which
shows simple bin-scatters of the relationship between the estimated pay premiums
for whites and nonwhites (separately by gender). For both gender groups, we find
that nonwhite pay premiums are strongly correlated with white pay premiums, and
that an empirical relationship of the form ψjN = γψjW is highly plausible. To estimate
the slope parameter γ while accounting for estimation errors in the white premiums,
we use the premiums for white women as instruments for the premiums for white men
(and vice versa), using the fact that establishment effects for different genders are

28

correlated with each other. This approach leads to estimates of γ = 0.94 for males
and γ = 0.9 for females. Given the magnitudes of the average premiums earned by
non-white men (0.175) and women (0.085), equation (10) predicts pay-setting effects
that are close to the estimates in Table 8 (particularly for men), providing some
empirical support for the monopsonistic pay-setting model in Card et al. (2018).
As noted earlier, the value of the pay-setting effects – but not of the sorting effects – depends on the normalization of the establishment effects. If, for example, we
assume that the 3 ppt. white-nonwhite gap in the restaurant sector is attributable to
a difference in pay premiums received by whites rather than a difference in productivity, we would then increase the relative pay-setting effect by 3 ppts., leading to an
effect of about the same size as the sorting effect (and implying that differences in
establishment premiums explain about 40% of the racial wage gap for both genders).
Decomposing the Sorting Effect into Skill-Based and Residual Sorting
Our final step is to decompose the sorting effect into a skill-based component – due
to assortative race-neutral matching – and a residual component, using equations
(7) and (8), respectively. As discussed in Section 3, we form a counterfactual racial
composition for each establishment by calculating the expected fraction of nonwhites
if the establishment selected randomly in the pool of suitable workers in their local
labor market. Specifically, we divide workers of each gender into 16 bins defined by
four age categories (25-27, 28-36, 37-45, and 46-54) and four quartiles of the overall
distribution of person effects (combining whites and nonwhites).44 Next, we calculate
the fraction of employees at each establishment in each skill bin, and the nonwhite
share of each skill bin in its local labor market (micro-region). We then combine these
to calculate the expected fractions of whites and nonwhites at the establishment,
∗
∗
which we then use to calculate the counterfactual establishment shares πW
j and πN j ,
and the counterfactual skill-based sorting effect given by equation (7).45
Figure 7 presents our results graphically (given the negligible contribution of
establishments for lower-educated workers shown in Tables 7 and 8, we simplify our
graphs – here and in subsequent figures – by showing results for all workers and
those with at least a high school education). In each panel, the black line displays
the actual share of nonwhites by decile of the establishment-effect distribution. The
red and blue lines in each panel represent counterfactual shares under two scenarios.
44

We obtain similar results using finer skill categories, e.g., using octiles rather than quartiles of
the distribution of estimated person effects (see Table D9 in the Appendix).
45
Define Nkj the number of workers at establishment j in skill bin k, and pW k the share of white
workers in skill bin k in the local labor market.
The counterfactual
numbers of white and non-white
P
P
workers at establishment j are simply:
k Nkj · pW k and
k Nkj · (1 − pW k ), respectively.

29

First, we assume that each establishment maintains its existing age structure but
selects workers at random within age categories (i.e., without regard for race or skill)
from its local labor market. This gives the “naive” counterfactual shown by the red
line. Second, we assume that each establishment maintains its joint distribution of
age and skill but selects workers at random within age-skill categories (thus, without
regard for race), yielding the “full” counterfactual shown by the blue line.
The top panels combine workers of all education levels. We see that the actual
shares of non-white workers are relatively constant across the lower deciles of the
establishment effect distribution, but then decrease sharply, falling from about 0.35
to 0.25 for men and a little more for women. In contrast, the share of nonwhites
predicted by our naive benchmark remains nearly constant, as we move across the
firm effect deciles, implying that age differences are unimportant in understanding the
differential sorting of whites and nonwhites to high- and low-premium establishments.
Unlike the pattern for the naive counterfactual, the predicted non-white shares
under our full counterfactual exhibit a downward-sloping pattern across the deciles,
reflecting the racial gap in person effects and the tendency for higher-premium workplaces to hire workers with higher person effects. The blue lines fall between the red
and black lines, suggesting that skill-based employment policies explain some, but
not all, of the under-representation of nonwhites at higher-premium workplaces.
The bottom panels of Figure 7 show results for men and women with at least a
high school education. For these workers, the share of nonwhites at establishments
in the top two deciles of the premium distribution is about 6 ppts. and 8 ppts.
lower than would be expected under the naive counterfactual for men and women,
respectively. Moreover, skill-based sorting explains only about half of that difference.
These results are summarized quantitatively in columns 7 and 8 of Table 8. Skillbased sorting accounts for about two-thirds of the sorting effect for men, and a similar
share for the subgroup with high school or more. These shares are slightly lower for
women (about 55%-60%). The residual sorting effect – which includes any effect
of discriminatory employment policies by higher-premium establishments – accounts
for about 6% of the overall racial wage gap for men and 8% for women.
Variation in the Residual Sorting and Wage-Setting Effects by Skill
The results in Table 8 suggest that the impacts of race-based preferences in firms’
pay-setting and employment policies are larger for higher-educated nonwhites. To
give a fuller picture, we show how the magnitudes of the residual sorting and relative
wage-setting effects vary across skill levels (as captured by the person effects).
Specifically, we first divide workers of both races into 10 decile groups based on

30

their estimated person effects (the deciles are defined pooling whites and nonwhites
together, separately by gender). For workers in each decile group, we then calculate
the mean value of the estimatedP
white establishment effects at workplaces of white
workers (which corresponds to j ψbjW πW j using employment shares for whites in
that decile group) and at workplaces of non-white workers (which corresponds to
P bW
j ψj πN j ). The gap between the mean white establishment effects of the two
groups represents the sorting effect for workers in that person-effects decile. Since
we are conditioning on the values of the person effect, however, the difference has
the interpretation of a residual sorting effect (it differs very slightly from the concept
used in Table 8 because we do not also condition on age). Figure 8 shows the means
for each decile group for all male and female workers (upper panels) and for those
with at least a high school education (lower panels).
A concern with this simple exercise is that the estimation errors in the white
establishment effects are negatively correlated with the errors in the estimated white
person effects. This correlation will be magnified in the bottom and top deciles:
whites classified as having the lowest person effects (resp. highest person effects)
will on average have negative estimation errors (resp. positive estimation errors) in
their person effects, implying that the associated average firm effects will be “too
high” (resp. “too low”). This is clearly visible in the “dip” in the value of the mean
white establishment effect for white workers between the first and second deciles.
As expected, there is no such pattern in the mean white establishment effects for
non-white workers, since there is no correlation between the estimation errors in the
establishment effects for whites and the person effects for nonwhites.
With that caveat in mind, these is a clear tendency for higher-skilled workers of
both race groups to work at establishments with higher pay premiums. There is also
a systematic divergence between the mean establishment effects for whites and nonwhites, implying that higher-skilled nonwhites are systematically under-represented
at the best-paying workplaces, even conditional on their ability. The difference in the
top decile reaches 4.3 ppts. for men and 4.9 ppts. for women, and given the sampling
error issue, these are likely under-estimates of the true residual sorting effect.
Figure 9 presents a parallel analysis for the relative pay-setting effect. Here we
plot the mean of the estimated white establishment effects and the mean of the
estimated nonwhite establishment effects at workplaces of non-white workers (i.e.,
P bW
P bN
j ψj πN j , respectively) in each decile. The gap between these two
j ψj πN j and
means represents the relative pay-setting effect for workers in that person-effects
decile. Apart from the dip from the first to second deciles in the non-white establishment effects, which is likely due to the sampling error issue discussed above
(accordingly, there is little or no dip in the means of the white establishment effects),
31

there is a strong tendency for establishment effects to rise across the skill distribution. Moreover, the difference between the mean white and nonwhite establishment
effects at workplaces of non-white workers widens across the deciles. For example,
the gap amounts to a 4.7 ppt. and 6.4 ppt. wage penalty for male workers in the
8th and 9th skill deciles, respectively. The gaps are even larger in the 10th decile,
but these are likely over-estimated by a negative correlation between the estimation
error in the nonwhite establishment effects and the error in the estimated nonwhite
person effects among nonwhites in the top decile.
To show that our main conclusions are robust to the estimation error issue, we
reproduce Figures 8 and 9 in the Appendix (see Figures C8 and C9, respectively) but
using the estimated establishment effects of the other gender. For instance, in the
top-left panel of Figure C8, we plot the mean value of the estimated establishment
effects for white females at workplaces of white males and at workplaces of non-white
males for each decile of the male person-effects distribution. The establishment
effects for different genders are correlated with each other (a fact that we used for
our IV strategy in Figure 6), but there is no correlation between the estimation error
in the female establishment effects and the error in the estimated male person effects
(and vice-versa). Accordingly, the differential “dips” from the first to the second
deciles in Figures 8 and 9 disappear. As in Figure 8 and 9, in contrast, the residual
sorting and relative pay-setting effects (now evaluated using establishment effects of
the other gender) still widen systematically across the person-effects deciles.46
In summary, we infer that the costs of unequal employment and pay setting policies is disproportionately born by highly-skilled nonwhites. These results corroborate
the work of scholars who highlight the “elitist” nature of racial discrimination in the
Brazilian labor market (e.g., Campante, Crespo, and Leite, 2004), and suggest that
the allocative costs of race-based preferences may be relatively large in Brazil.

6

Robustness

The results presented so far are based on a series of choices about sample and specification. We focus on workers in the Southeast region; use the modal race for people
with a changing racial classification over time; impose a specific normalization for
the establishment effects; and pool all the data for the available sample period. In
this section, we show how our decomposition results vary as we vary these choices.
For ease of comparison, we summarize our findings graphically in Figure 10,
46
The specific point estimates in Figures C8 and C9 have to be interpreted with caution because
the establishment effects for different genders are unlikely to be perfectly correlated with each other.

32

with separate panels for workers of all education levels and for the higher-educated
subgroups – for whom all the effects that we estimated are systematically larger.47
For each alternative sample or specification choice, the height of the stacked column
represents the mean white-nonwhite wage gap and its four components represent
the gaps attributed to skill-based sorting, residual sorting, relative wage-setting,
and differences in person effects and covariates, respectively. For reference, the first
column in each panel reproduces our baseline results from Table 8.
We begin by extending our analysis to the whole country. To do this, we reestimated our AKM models pooling RAIS data from all Brazilian regions, and then
repeated our decompositions with the new set of worker and establishment effects.48
As shown in the second column of each panel, the overall wage gap is about 3 ppts.
smaller for males and 4 ppts. smaller for females in the national sample. The relative
shares of the gap attributed to the various components, however, are typically within
1 ppt. of the corresponding shares in the Southeast sample.
We also fitted a separate set of AKM models, and repeated our decompositions,
using only observations from the Northeast region. In this case, the wage gaps are
smaller, and the sorting and relative pay-setting effects are scaled down accordingly.
We find that skill-based sorting is relatively less important in the Northeast than
in our baseline sample (or the national sample), while residual sorting is somewhat
more important. Overall, however, the relative share of the wage gap accounted for
by establishment-specific pay premiums is remarkably stable across regions.
As noted in Section 1, some individuals in RAIS are classified as white in some
years and as nonwhite (black or mixed race) in others. For our baseline results, we
resolved this issue by assigning each individual his or her modal race group. As a
simple alternative, we classified each individual using the first race group they were
ever assigned to in RAIS. We then re-estimated our AKM models and performed
a new set of decompositions. In so doing, the overall racial wage gap increases a
bit for men but remains very similar for women. The relative shares of the various
components are again comparable to those in our baseline results, although the paysetting effects are slightly smaller and the residual sorting effects slightly larger.
A more aggressive approach is to drop any worker classified in more than one
(binary) race group in RAIS, which reduces our sample sizes by about 37%, with
a relatively larger loss of nonwhites than whites.49 Importantly, it removes an even
47

All the values displayed in those figures are reported in Tables D10 and D11 in the Appendix.
As mentioned earlier, the estimated effects based on this sample for the establishments located
in the Southeast are very close to those obtained using observations for the Southeast region only.
49
The percentage of person-year observations lost when imposing this restriction is 31% for white
males, 48% for non-white males, 24% for white females, and 44% for non-white females.
48

33

larger share of between-establishment movers, since nearly all changes in race occur
with a change in employer. The average wage gaps in this “consistent race" sample
are about 10 ppts. larger than in our baseline sample, reflecting a slight increase in the
mean wage of nonwhites and a larger rise in the mean wage of whites. Nevertheless,
the decomposition shares are not too different from those in our baseline results.
Most notably, the share of the wage gap attributed to the pay-setting effect is larger
with this sample, rising to 9% and 7% of the overall wage gap – vs. 5% and 6% in
our baseline results – for men and women, respectively.
In discussing the fit of our two-way fixed effects models, we noted that the models
tend to underestimate wages of workers with low estimated person effects who are
employed at establishments with low wage premiums. To evaluate the sensitivity
of our results to these observations, we took our baseline samples and excluded
observations for workers with estimated person effects in the bottom decile of the
person effect distribution, as well as for workers at establishments in the bottom decile
of the estimated wage premium distribution. We then repeated our decompositions
finding that these exclusions have only negligible effects on our baseline results.
Next, we show the impact of attributing 50% or 100% of the racial wage gap in the
restaurant sector to higher premiums earned by whites, rather than to a difference in
productivity, as in our baseline normalization. As mentioned above, this raises the
wage premiums for whites mechanically by 1.5 ppts. or 3 ppts., and the relative wagesetting effects by the same amounts. In contrast, by construction, the sorting effect
remains identical. Its composition is affected, however, because these alternative
normalizations also lower the person effects of whites mechanically by 1.5 ppts. or 3
ppts. Yet, the impact on the skill distribution is limited, such that the reduction in
the share of the sorting effect attributed to skill-based sorting is minimal.
We also show the impact of using other sectors, in which firms have likely little or
no rent to share, for the normalization of the establishment effects. Specifically, we
assumed that wage premiums of both races were zero in two alternative sectors with
low average establishment pay premiums, namely the auto repair sector for males
and the clothing and apparel sector (i.e., firms that sew clothing) for females. These
choices have the advantage of sidestepping concerns that some restaurant customers
may prefer to be served by whites, possibly leading to differential wage premiums
in that sector. Importantly, the “unexplained” racial wage gap in those sectors is
nearly identical to the gap in the restaurant sector, so these choices lead to similar
normalizations and only neglibible changes relative to our baseline results.
Finally, we investigate how our results vary with possible variation in the incentive
of employers to engage in discriminatory employment or wage-setting policies. First,
as mentioned earlier, legal or social sanctions against discrimination in the Brazilian
34

labor market may have evolved over time. To evaluate this possibility, we divided
our sample into two (overlapping) 8-year periods, from 2002 to 2009 and from 2007
to 2014.50 We then re-estimated our AKM models separately by sub-period and repeated our decompositions. Interestingly, we see a small decline in the overall racial
wage gap between the periods, with a reduction in the magnitudes of the residual
sorting and relative pay-setting effects, the two components that are most likely
to reflect discriminatory practices. Second, employers may have less incentives to
discriminate against nonwhites in industries where interactions between employees
and customers are less frequent. Accordingly, we see that the residual sorting and
relative pay-setting effects are larger in high “face-time” sectors (commerce, hospitality, financial services and insurance, real estate) than in low “face-time” sectors
(extractive and transformation industries, utilities, construction).51

7

Conclusions

This paper measured the contribution of firms’ employment and wage-setting policies
to the white-nonwhite pay gap in Brazil. It showed that firms exacerbate racial
inequalities in general skills in three ways. First, the strong assortativeness in the
matching between workers and establishments means that nonwhites are less likely to
be employed in high-premium workplaces, even in the absence of any discriminatory
practices, an effect that accounts for about half of the contribution of firms to the
racial wage gap. Yet, non-white workers also tend to be sorted into lower-premium
establishments, and tend to receive lower pay premiums in the establishments that
they are sorted into, compared to white workers of similar skill levels. The associated
wage losses are particularly severe for nonwhites at the top of the skill distribution.
The results of this paper relate to active policy debates that are taking place
across Latin American countries, where racial differences in education levels are persistent and nonwhites remain under-represented in high-paying industries and occupations. Plaintiffs have used the disproportionately high share of white employees
in several industries as evidence of (potentially “unconscious”) discrimination, as in
the high profile case filed in 2009 by the Union of Bank Employees of Brasilia against
Itau Unibanco. In this case, Brazil’s highest labor court agreed that the disparities
were alarming, but ruled against the plaintiff as it found no direct evidence of irregularities in the hiring and promotion practices of the bank. Interestingly, we show
in Tables D14 and D15 in the Appendix that our estimates of the “unexplained”
50
51

Tables D12 and D13 in the Appendix present the statistics in Table 4 for the two sub-periods.
We simply implement our decompositions separately for the two groups of sectors.

35

under-representation of nonwhites is largest in the “banking and finance” sector.
The findings of this paper naturally raise the question of how policies and management practices could help narrow the racial pay gap. The large white-nonwhite
skill gap, combined with the strong assortative matching, highlights the importance
of investments towards narrowing the educational gap. Yet, it is important to underline that the skill gap that we estimate is not necessarily determined prior to workers
entering the labor force. Differential mentoring and on-the-job training opportunities could also lower the skills that workers bring to any job, or even undermine the
impact of educational investments. An interesting agenda for future research is to go
beyond the “static” decomposition in this paper and examine the dynamic process
through which workers end up with higher person and firm effects.
In that respect, it would be interesting to study the impact of affirmative action
policies that exist in several countries. Despite the recent adoption of racial quotas
for public-sector jobs, Brazil does not require private-sector employers to take race
into account in their recruitment process. For instance, in contrast to the US, Brazil
does not require government contractors to make efforts to employ disadvantaged
groups at rates proportional to their shares in the (qualified) local labor market.
Miller (2017) shows that such policies can have powerful and lasting impacts on
the racial composition of “treated” firms. Nevertheless, it is yet to be seen what
the effects of similar policies would imply for the overall quality of the matching
of nonwhites in the labor market, and whether these effects would generalize to a
Latin American context. There is also a “softer” but increasing social pressure in
many countries on large companies to improve their standing on racial equality. For
instance, the Ethos Institute in cooperation with the Inter-American Development
Bank releases periodically the so-called Social, Racial, and Gender Profile of the 500
Largest Brazilian Companies, which analyzes the workforce of these companies to
reveal possible ethno-racial inequalities (among others) and reports on best employment practices and affirmative action programs already in place in those corporations.
It remains unclear, however, to which extent this growing movement actually affects
firms’ employment and wage-setting policies towards non-white workers.

36

References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis. 1999. “High Wage
Workers and High Wage Firms.” Econometrica 67(2):251–333.
Abowd, John M., Paul Lengermann, and Kevin L. McKinney. 2003. “The Measurement of Human Capital in the U.S. Economy.” Tech. Rep. Technical Paper No.
TP-2002-09, Washington DC: US Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies.
Altonji, Joseph and Rebecca Blank. 1999. “Race and Gender in the Labor Market.”
In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. IIIc, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Alvarez, Jorge, Felipe Benguria, Niklas Engbom, and Christian Moser. 2018. “Firms
and the decline in earnings inequality in Brazil.” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 10 (1):149–89.
Andrews, George Reid. 1992. “Racial Inequality in Brazil and the United States: A
Statistical Comparison.” Journal of Social History 26(2):229–263.
Andrews, Martyn J., Leonard Gill, Thorsten Schank, and Richard Upward. 2008.
“High Wage Workers and Low Wage Firms: Negative Assortative Matching or Limited Mobility Bias?” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A 171(3):673–
697.
Arcard, Jean-Louis and Beatrice d’Hombres. 2004. “Racial Discrimination in the
Brazilian Labour Market: Wage, Employment and Segregation Effects.” Journal
of International Development 16:1053–1066.
Arceo-Gomez, Eva and Raymundo Campos-Vasquez. 2014. “Race and Marriage in
the Labor Market: A discrimination correspondence audit study in a developing
country.” American Economic Review 104(5):376–380.
Ashenfelter, Orley. 1972. “Racial Discrimination and Trade Unionism.” Journal of
Political Economy 8(3):435–64.
Aslund, Olof, Lena Hensvik, and Oskar Nordstrom Skans. 2014. “Seeking Similarity:
How Immigrants and Natives Manage in the Labor Market.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 32(3):405–441.

37

Aslund, Olof and Oskar Nordstrom Skans. 2010. “Will I See You at Work? Ethnic Workplace Segregation in Sweden.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review
63(3):471–493.
Babcock, Linda and Sarah Laschever. 2003. Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and the
Gender Divide. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bailey, Stanley R., Mara Loveman, and Jeronimo O. Muniz. 2013. “Measures of
“Race” and the Analysis of Racial Inequality in Brazil.” Social Science Research
42(1):106–119.
Barth, Erling and Harald Dale-Olsen. 2009. “Monopsonistic Discrimination, Worker
Turnover, and the Gender Wage Gap.” Labour Economics 16(5):589–597.
Bayer, Patrick and Kerwin Kofi Charles. 2018. “Divergent Paths: A New Perspective
on Earnings Differences Between Black and White Men Since 1940.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 133 (3):1459–1501.
Becker, Gary. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination (second edition 1971).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “Are Emily and Greg More
Employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination.” American Economic Review 94(4):991–1013.
Black, Dan A. 1995. “Discrimination in an Equilibrium Search Model.” Journal of
Labor Economics 13(2):309–334.
Blackaby, D.H., D.G. Leslie, and P.D. Murphy. 2002. “White-Ethnic Minority Earnings and Employment Differentials in Britain: Evidence from the LFS.” Oxford
Economic Papers 54(2):270–297.
Boal, William M. and Michael R. Ransom. 1997. “Monopsony in the the Labor
Market.” Journal of Economic Literature 35(1):86–112.
Campante, Filipe R., Anna R. V. Crespo, and Phillippe G. P. G. Leite. 2004. “Desigualdade Salarial entre Raças no Mercado de Trabalho Urbano Brasileiro: Aspectos Regionais.” Revista Brasileira de Economia 58(2):185–210.
Campos, Walter de Oliveira. 2015. “Expectativas em torno da Lei Afonso Arinos (1951): A ‘Nova Abolição’ ou ‘Lei Para Americano Ver’ ?” Revista LatinoAmericana de História 4(13):257–278.
38

Cano-Urbina, Javier and Patrick L. Maso. 2016. “Acculturation and the Labor
Market in Mexico.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy (2016):5–21.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Jorg Heining, and Patrick M. Kline. 2018. “Firms
and Labor Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory.” Journal of Labor
Economics 36(Supplement):S13–S70.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick M. Kline. 2016. “Bargaining, Sorting,
and the Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay
of Women.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2):633–686.
Card, David, Jorg Heining, and Patrick M. Kline. 2013. “Workplace Heterogeneity
and the Rise of West German Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
128(3):967–1015.
Cavalieri, Claudia and Reynaldo Fernandes. 1998. “Diferenciais de Salários por
Gênero e por Cor: Uma Comparação entre as Regiões Metropolitanas Brasileiras.”
Revista de Economia Polı́tica 18(1):158–175.
Chadarevian, Pedro C. 2011. “Para Medir as Desigualdades Raciais no Mercado de
Trabalho.” Revista de Economia Polı́tica 31(2):283–304.
Charles, Kerwin K. and Jonathan Guryan. 2008. “Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination.” Journal of Political
Economy 116(5):773–809.
———. 2011. “Studying Discrimination: Fundamental Challenges and Recent
Progress.” Annual Review of Economics 3(1):479–511.
Cornwall, Christopher, Jason Rivera, and Ian M. Schmutte. 2017. “Wage Discrimination When Identity is Subjective: Evidence from Changes in Employer-Reported
Race.” Journal of Human Resources 52(3):719–755.
Derenoncourt, Ellora and Claire Montialoux. 2018. “Minimum Wages and Racial
Inequality.” University of Michigan CREST Working Paper .
Eeckhout, Jan and Philipp Kircher. 2011. “Identifying Sorting - In Theory.” Review
of Economic Studies 78(3):872–906.
———. 2018. “Assortative Matching with Large Firms.” Econometrica 86(1):85–132.
Equal Rights Trust. 2009. Brazil: Step-by-Step Guide: Race Discrimination in the
Field of Employment. London: Equal Rights Trust.
39

Esteve, Albert and Luis Ángel López-Ruiz. 2010. “Union Formation Implications of
Race and Gender Gaps in Educational Attainment: The Case of Latin America.”
Population Research and Policy Review 29(5):609–637.
Ferreira, Francisco H.G., Sergio P. Firpo, and Julian Messina. 2014. “A More Level
Playing Field? Explaining the Decline in Earnings Inequality in Brazil, 19952012.” International Research Initiative on Brazil and Africa (IRIBA) Working
Paper .
Francis, Andrew and Maria Tannuri-Painto. 2013. “Endogenous Race in Brazil:
Affirmative Action and the Construction of Racial Identity Among Young Adults.”
Economic Development and Cultural Change 61(4):731–753.
———. 2015. “Inside the Black Box: Affirmative Action and the Social Construction
of Race in Brazil.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 38(15):2771–2790.
Fryer, Roland G. 2010. “Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Race.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. IV, edited by Orley
Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 885–971.
Garcia, Luana Marques, Hugo Nopo, and Paola Salardi. 2009. “Gender and Racial
Wage Gaps in Brazil 1996-2006: Evidence Using a Matching Comparisons Approach.” Inter-American Development Bank Research Department Working Paper
681.
Giuliano, Laura, Jonathan Leonard, and David I. Levine. 2009. “Manager Race and
the Race of New Hires.” Journal of Labor Economics 27(4):589–631.
———. 2011. “Racial Bias in the Manager-Employee Relationship: An Analysis of
Quits, Dismissals, and Promotions at a Large Retail Firm.” Journal of Human
Resources 46(1):26–52.
Giuliano, Laura and Michael R. Ransom. 2013. “Manager Ethnicity and Employment
Segregation.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 66(2):346–379.
Glitz, Albrecht. 2014.
29(4):28–40.

“Ethnic Segregation in Germany.”

Labour Economics

Hellerstein, Judith and David Neumark. 2008. “Workplace Segregation in the United
States: Race, Ethnicity, and Skill.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3):459–
477.
40

Hellerstein, Judith, David Neumark, and Melissa McInerney. 2008. “Changes in
Workplace Segregation in the United States Between 1990 and 2000: Evidence
from Matched Employer-Employee Data.” In The Analysis of Firms and Employees: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches, edited by Stefan Bender, Julia Lane,
Kathryn Shaw, Fredrik Andersson, and Till von Wachter. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Henriques, Ricardo. 2001. “Desigualdade Racial no Brasil: Evolução das Condições
de Vida na Década de 90.” Institute for Applied Economic Research (IPEA)
Discussion Paper 807.
Hirata, Guilherme and Rodrigo R. Soares. 2016. “Competition and the Racial Wage
Gap: Testing Becker’s Model of Employer Discrimination.” IZA Working Paper
9764.
Kline, Patrick M., Raffaele Saggio, and Mikkel Sølvsten. 2018. “Leave-Out Estimation of Variance Components.” UC Berkeley Working Paper .
Komastsu, Bruno Kawaoka and Naercio A. Menezes-Filho. 2016. “Does the Rise of
the Minimum Wage Explain the Fall in Wage Inequality in Brazil?” Instituto de
Ensino e Pesquisa (INSPER) Working Paper .
Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. “Efficiency Wages and the InterIndustry Wage Structure.” Econometrica 56(2):259–293.
Lang, Kevin and Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann. 2012. “Racial Discrimination in the Labor
Market: Theory and Empirics.” Journal of Economic Literature 50(4):959–1006.
Lavetti, Kurt and Ian M. Schmutte. 2016. “Estimating Compensating Wage Differentials with Endogenous Job Mobility.” Ohio State University Working Paper
.
Macis, Mario and Fabiano Schivardi. 2016. “Exports and Wages: Rent Sharing,
Workforce Composition, or Returns to Skills?” Journal of Labor Economics
34(4):945–978.
Manning, Alan. 2003. Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
———. 2011. “Imperfect Competition in the Labor Market.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Vol. IV, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 973–1041.
41

Maré, David C. and Dean R. Hyslop. 2006. “Worker-Firm Heterogeneity and Matching: An Analysis Using Worker and Firm Fixed Effects Estimated from LEED.”
Statistics New Zealand LEED Research Paper .
Mariano, Francisca Z., Edward M. Costa, Guimar aes Daniel B., and Daniel T.
de Sousa. 2018. “Diferenciais de Rendimentos entre Raa̧as e Gêneros, nas Regiões
Metropolitanas, por Nı́veis Ocupacionais: Uma Análise Através do Pareamento de
Nopo.” Estudos Econômicos 48(1):137–173.
Marx, Anthony W. 1998. Making Race and Nation: A Comparison of South Africa,
the United States, and Brazil. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Matos, Raquel S. and Ana F. Machado. 2006. “Diferencial de Rendimentos por Cor
e Sexo no Brasil (1987-2001).” Econômica 8(1):5–27.
Melo, Frederico L. B. 2014. “The Minimum Wage Campaign in Brazil and the Fight
Against Inequality.” Global Labor Journal 6(3):283–301.
Miller, Conrad. 2017. “The Persistent Effect of Temporary Affirmative Action.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9(3):152–190.
Mumford, Karen and Peter N. Smith. 2008. “What Determines the Part-Time and
Gender Earnings Gaps in Britain: Evidence from the Workplace.” Oxford Economic Papers 61(Supplement):i56–i75.
Nopo, Hugo. 2012. New Century, Old Disparities: Gender and Ethnic Earning
Gaps in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington DC: The Inter-American
Development Bank and The World Bank.
Oaxaca, Ronald L. 1973. “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets.”
International Economic Review 14(3):693–709.
Oliveira, Lucia Elena Garcia, Rosa Maria Porcaro, and Tereza Cristina N. Araújo.
1981. O Lugar do Negro na Força de Trabalho. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Brasileiro
de Geografia e Estatı́stica (IBGE).
Papps, Kerry L. 2012. “Spillovers and Wage Determination Within Firms.” University of Bath Working Paper .
Pendakur, Krishna and Ravi Pendakur. 1998. “The Colour of Money: Earnings
Differentials Among Ethnic Groups in Canada.” Canadian Journal of Economics
31(3):518–548.
42

———. 2002. “Colour my World: Have Earnings Gaps for Canadian-Born Ethnic
Minorities Changed Over Time?” Canadian Public Policy 28(4):489–512.
Psacharopoulos, George and Harry A. Patrinos. 2002. “Returns to Investment in
Education: A Further Update.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
2881.
Reis, Mauricio Cortez and Ana Risi Vianna Crespo. 2015. “Race Discrimination in
Brazil: An Analysis of the Age, Period and Cohort Effects.” Institute for Applied
Economic Research (IPEA) Discussion Paper 1114.
Robinson, Joan. 1933. The Economics of Imperfect Competition. London: Macmillan.
Silva, Nelson do V. 1978. Black-White Income Differentials in Brazil. University of
Michigan PhD Dissertation. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
———. 1980. “O Preço da Cor: Diferenciais Raciais na Distribuição da Renda no
Brasil.” Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico 10(1):21–44.
———. 1985. “Updating the Cost of Not Being White in Brazil.” In Races, Classes
and Power in Brazil, edited by P.M. Fontaine. Los Angeles: UCLA Press, 42–55.
Skidmore, Thomas E. 1974. Black into White: Race and Nationality in Brazilian
Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 1992. “Fact and Myth: Discovering a Racial Problem in Brazil.” Kellogg
Institute Working Paper 173.
Soares, Sergei S. 2000. “O Perfil da Discriminação no Mercado de Trabalho – Homens
Negros, Mulheres Brancas e Mulheres Negras.” Institute for Applied Economic
Research (IPEA) Discussion Paper 769.
Telles, Edward E. 2004. Race in Another America: The Significance of Skin Color
in Brazil. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Zschirnt, Eva and Didier Ruedin. 2016. “Ethnic Discrimination in Hiring Decisions:
A Meta-Analysis of Correspondence Tests 1990-2015.” Journal of Ethnic and
Migration Studies January:1–19.

43

Figure 1: Log Hourly Wage Distributions Among Private-Sector Employees (Males)
(a) All education levels (Southeast)

(b) All education levels (Northeast)

Whites
Nonwhites

-1

0

1
2
3
Log(wage/mininum wage)

4

Whites
Nonwhites

5

-1

(c) No high school (Southeast)

0

1
2
3
Log(wage/mininum wage)

0

1
2
3
Log(wage/mininum wage)

4

Whites
Nonwhites

5

(e) Completed high school (Southeast)

-1

0

1
2
3
Log(wage/mininum wage)

0

1
2
3
Log(wage/mininum wage)

4

4

5

(f) Completed high school (Northeast)

Whites
Nonwhites

-1

5

(d) No high school (Northeast)

Whites
Nonwhites

-1

4

Whites
Nonwhites

5

-1

0

1
2
3
Log(wage/mininum wage)

4

5

Notes: The figure displays kernel densities (Epanechnikov kernel with a 0.025 half-width) of the log wageto-minimum-wage ratio for whites and nonwhites, based on PNAD 2002-2014 and constructed using survey
weights (PNAD was not conducted in 2010). The samples include male non-farm private-sector employees
(either formal or informal), age 25 to 54, with potential labor market experience of at least 1 year, and
non-missing data on race, gender, education, wage, and hours worked. The left and right panels restrict the
samples to the Southeast and the Northeast regions, respectively. The top panel pools all education levels
together; the middle and bottom panels are restricted to workers with no high school degree and with at
least a high school degree, respectively.

&#$"

&"

@";."@"

("

!"

@";."!"

!";."@"

'!"

!";."&"

("

(c) White females

@";."%"

!";."%"

!"

!";."!"

@";."&"

@";."%"

@";."!"

!";."@"

!";."&"

!";."%"

!";."!"

567*"8'!9:+1;"<*+4"+;".46/6,="(92641;"<*+4"+;">*1;6,+;6.,?"

'%"

@";."&"

@";."@"

@";."@"

'!"

("

!"

@";."!"

!";."@"

!";."&"

'!"

("

(d) Non-white females

@";."%"

!"

!";."%"

!";."!"

@";."&"

@";."%"

@";."!"

!";."@"

!";."&"

!";."%"

!";."!"

567*"8'!9:+1;"<*+4"+;".46/6,="(92641;"<*+4"+;">*1;6,+;6.,?"

'%"

@";."&"

567*"8'!9:+1;"<*+4"+;".46/6,="(92641;"<*+4"+;">*1;6,+;6.,?"

'%"

(b) Non-white males

Notes: The figure displays the evolution of wages for workers in the Southeast region who moved from origin establishments in the top and bottom
quartile groups to destination establishments in any of the other quartile groups. We use the samples described in columns (1)-(4) in Table 4; the movers
are defined as workers at establishments employing at least one worker of each race-gender group, who separated from the origin establishment in 20032012, were reemployed in the destination establishment the next or the following year, and were employed at the origin and destination establishments
for 2+ consecutive years. Origin/destination groups are based on quartiles of co-worker wages during the calendar year of separation/hiring.

@";."@"

'!"

567*"8'!9:+1;"<*+4"+;"".46/6,="(92641;"<*+4"+;">*1;6,+;6.,?"

'%"

(a) White males

Figure 2: Event Studies Around Job Moves

&#$"
&"
%#$"
%"

%#$"

%"

!#$"

!"

)*+,"-./"0+/*1".2").3*41"

)*+,"-./"0+/*1".2").3*41"

&#$"

&"

%#$"

%"

!#$"

!"

)*+,"-./"0+/*1".2").3*41"

)*+,"-./"0+/*1".2").3*41"

!#$"
!"

&#$"
&"
%#$"
%"
!#$"
!"

*-%,"

-"

?"

&"

,"

*,%'"

+"

*'%,"

*'"

$%,"

'%,"

!"#"$%&'(&)"*"$%$+,,"

@"

("

'$"

''"

'-"

'?"

'&"

$"

*,%'"

*,"

*$%'"

*$%'"

$%'"

,"

,%'"

',"

'+"

'@"

$%'"

,%'"

!"#"$%&'&()"*"$%$'+,"

(c) White females

A"

+"

&"

>"

'"

?"

@"

("

A"

,$"

,,"

,+"

,&"

,>"

,'"

,?"

,@"

,A"

'("

+$"

+%'"

-$"

-%,"

+"

&"

>"

*"

,"

&"

*"

?"

?"

-"

+"

),%*"

),"

$%*"

,%*"

@"

A"

,$"

,,"

,+"

,&"

,>"

,*"

$"

),%-"

),"

)$%-"

)$%-"

$%-"

,"

,%-"

,?"

,'"

$%-"

,%-"

!"#"$%&'&(")"$%$*+*"

(d) Non-white females

'"

,@"

@"

A"

'"

,$"

,,"

,&"

,*"

,?"

,-"

,+"

,@"

,A"

./01"23014/"51"674"804/"79"27)=7;>/;<"

),%-"

B;5451"CD01E5F/"

)&%-"

,"

$"

)$%*"

)$%*"

!"#"$%&'$&(")"$%$*+,"

-./0"12/03."40"563"7/3."68"16)<6:=.:;"

),%*"

B:4340"CD/0E4F."

)+%*"

$%*"

,"

,%*"

(b) Non-white males

,'"

,A"

&$"

&%-"

+$"

+%*"

Notes: The figure plots the mean change in movers’ wages between the years prior to separation and after hiring against the mean change in co-worker
wages between origin and destination establishments. Origin and destination establishments are grouped by 20 quantiles of co-worker wages; each of
the 20x20 dots corresponds to movers from/to given origin/destination quantiles. Movers are defined as in Figure 2; their wage changes are adjusted
for trends based on coefficients from a regression estimated on the sample of stayers, workers who remain at the same origin establishments over the
years around a move. The model includes the same education dummies as in Table 2 and a quadratic in age fully interacted with these dummies.

,"

,("

'A"

B:4340"CD/0E4F." -./0"12/03."40"563"7/3."68"16*<6:=.:;"

*+%'"

'"

$"
*$%,"

*$%,"

$%,"

'"

'%,"

(a) White males

Figure 3: Wage Changes of Movers vs. Changes of Co-Worker Wages

./01"23014/"51"674"804/"79"27*=7;>/;<"

*'%,"

B;5451"CD01E5F/"

./01"23014/"51"674"804/"79".7:/;<"

-./0"12/03."40"563"7/3."68"-69.:;"

-./0"12/03."40"563"7/3."68"-69.:;"

./01"23014/"51"674"804/"79".7:/;<"

Figure 4: Evidence of Assortativeness in the Matching Between Workers and Establishments
(a) White males

(b) Non-white males

0.8

0.8
Estabablishment effect quartile
Q1

Q3

Estabablishment effect quartile

Q4

0.59

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.28

0.3
0.2

0.16

0.1

Q3

Q4

0.55

0.5
0.4
0.31
0.3
0.19

0.20

0.19

0.1

0

0
Inc Elem

Inc Mid

Inc High

Inc Coll

College

Inc Elem

Education Category

Inc Mid

Inc High

Inc Coll

College

Education Category

(c) White females

(d) Non-white females

0.8

0.8
Estabablishment effect quartile

Estabablishment effect quartile
Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

0.7

0.6
0.51
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.23
0.2

Share of Observations

Q1

0.7

Share of Observations

Q2

0.6

0.2

0.15

0.13

Q1

0.7

Share of Observations

Share of Observations

0.7

Q2

0.10

0.10

Q3

Q4

0.6
0.5

0.47

0.4
0.28

0.3
0.18

0.2

0.1

Q2

0.14

0.12

0.14

0.1

0

0
Inc Elem

Inc Mid

Inc High

Inc Coll

Education Category

College

Inc Elem

Inc Mid

Inc High

Inc Coll

College

Education Category

Notes: The figure displays the share of person-year observations across establishment effect quartiles by
education categories, which correspond to the same education dummies as in Table 2: incomplete elementary
school (IncElem), and complete elementary school (including those with incomplete middle school; IncM id),
middle school (including those with incomplete high school; IncHigh), high school (including those with
incomplete college; IncColl), or college (College). The samples are restricted to the largest connected set
for each race-gender group in the Southeast region, described in columns (5)-(8) in Table 4.

Figure 5: Cumulative Distribution of Normalized Establishment Effect by Sector

'!!"
&!"
%!"

K/3;"L2</H2G3/9698"
J6832/92<38"

$!"

J6832/92<38"
"

#!"

$!"

%!"

K/3;"L2</H2G3/9698"

!"

#!"

&!"

./0/123456"748394:/34;<"=>'!!?"

'!!"

(b) Females

!"

./0/123456"748394:/34;<"=>'!!?"

(a) Males

(!)'"

!"

!)'"

!)#"

!)*"

!)$"

!)+"

!)%"

!),"

!)&"

!)-"

'"

(!)'"

@;90214A6B"CD436(EF6G4H4G"I832:148D06<3"IHH6G3"

!"

!)'"

!)#"

!)*"

!)$"

!)+"

!)%"

!),"

!)&"

!)-"

'"

@;90214A6B"CD436(EF6G4H4G"I832:148D06<3"IHH6G3"

Notes: The figure displays the cumulative distribution of average white-specific establishment effects for
three-digit industry sectors (CNAE), after normalizing these with respect to the average in the restaurant
sector (all establishments effects are normalized in the same way in subsequent figures and tables). The
averages are computed over person-year observations in the dual-connected set of each gender in the Southeast
region, i.e., the set of establishments in the largest connected set for both whites and nonwhites of that gender,
which is described in columns (9)-(12) in Table 4. The rank correlation between these sector-level averages
for males and females is 0.93.

Figure 6: Correlation of Establishment Effects for Whites and Nonwhites
(b) Females
Nonwhite-Specific Establishment Effects
-1
-.5
0
.5
1

Nonwhite-Specific Establishment Effects
-1
-.5
0
.5
1

(a) Males

OLS: .611 (.001)
IV: .940 (.003)

-1

-.5
0
.5
White-Specific Establishment Effects

Correlation: .569

1

OLS: .581 (.001)
IV: .903 (.003)

-1

-.5
0
.5
White-Specific Establishment Effects

1

Correlation: .535

Notes: The figure displays binned scatterplots of white-specific and nonwhite-specific establishment effects
from the Southeast region’s dual connected set of each gender. Observations are unique establishments.
Scatterplots use 20 equal-sized bins and plot the within-bin means. The slope of the OLS fit line (with its
standard error in parentheses) is reported in the graph (the correlation coefficient of the variables are reported
under the graph), as well as an IV estimate that accounts for estimation errors in the white premiums by
using the premiums for white women as instruments for the premiums for white men (and vice versa; in
that case, we use establishments in the tetra-connected set, i.e., the intersection of the dual-connected sets
of both genders).

Figure 7: Skill-Based Assortative Matching by Establishment Effect Deciles
(b) Females (all education)
0.5

0.45

0.45

0.4

0.4

0.35

0.35

Share of Nonwhites

Share of Nonwhites

(a) Males (all education)
0.5

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

0.1
Observed distribution
Predicted distribution preserving establishment skill composition
Naive predicted distribution

0.05
0
-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0
-0.6

0.6

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

(d) Females (completed high school)
0.5

0.45

0.45

0.4

0.4

0.35

0.35

Share of Nonwhites

Share of Nonwhites

(c) Males (completed high school)
0.5

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

0
-0.6

-0.4

Average (Residualized) White-Specific Establishment Effect by Decile

Average (Residualized) White-Specific Establishment Effect by Decile

0.05

Observed distribution
Predicted distribution preserving establishment skill composition
Naive predicted distribution

0.05

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

Observed distribution
Predicted distribution preserving establishment skill composition
Naive predicted distribution
-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.05

0.6

Average (Residualized) White-Specific Establishment Effect by Decile

0
-0.6

Observed distribution
Predicted distribution preserving establishment skill composition
Naive predicted distribution
-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Average (Residualized) White-Specific Establishment Effect by Decile

Notes: The figure displays the share of non-white person-year observations by deciles of the white-specific
establishment effects (residualized of micro-region fixed effects). The naive and predicted distributions
reshuffle person-year observations – regardless of race – across establishments within a micro-region. The
naive distribution maintains the age distribution of establishments for each year. The predicted distribution
maintains the age and skill distribution of establishments for each year. Samples are restricted to the dualconnected set of each gender (and education) group in the Southeast region. Nonwhites are reweighted so
as to have the same distribution across micro-regions as whites (of the same gender).

Figure 8: Residual Sorting Effect by Person Effect Deciles
(b) Females (all education)

(a) Males (all education)
0.5

Average White-Specific Establishment Effects

Average White-Specific Establishment Effects

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

White workers
Non-white workers

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

3.5

1

Average Person Effect by Decile

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

Average Person Effect by Decile

(c) Males (completed high school)

(d) Females (completed high school)

0.5

0.5

Average White-Specific Establishment Effects

Average White-Specific Establishment Effects

White workers
Non-white workers

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

White workers
Non-white workers

1

1.5

2

2.5

Average Person Effect by Decile

3

3.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

White workers
Non-white workers

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

Average Person Effect by Decile

Notes: The figure displays the means of the estimated white-specific establishment effects at workplaces of
whites and non-white workers in each decile of the person effect distribution. The gap between the mean
white-specific establishment effects of the two groups represents the residual sorting effect for workers in that
decile of person effects. We use person-year observations in the dual-connected set of each gender in the
Southeast region (the person effect deciles are defined pooling whites and nonwhites together). Nonwhites
are reweighted so as to have the same distribution across micro-regions as whites (of the same gender).

Figure 9: Relative Wage-Setting Effect by Person Effect Deciles
(b) Females (all education)

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

Average Establishment Effects

Average Establishment Effects

(a) Males (all education)

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1.5

2

2.5

3

0.2

0.1

0

White-specific establishment effects
Nonwhite-specific establishment effects

1

0.3

White-specific establishment effects
Nonwhite-specific establishment effects

1

3.5

1.5

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

1.5

2

2.5

Average Person Effect by Decile

3

3.5

3

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

White-specific establishment effects
Nonwhite-specific establishment effects

1

2.5

(d) Females (completed high school)

Average Establishment Effects

Average Establishment Effects

(c) Males (completed high school)

0

2

Average Person Effect by Decile

Average Person Effect by Decile

3.5

White-specific establishment effects
Nonwhite-specific establishment effects

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

Average Person Effect by Decile

Notes: The figure displays the means of the estimated white-specific and nonwhite-specific establishment
effects at workplaces of non-white workers in each decile of the person effect distribution. The gap between
the mean white-specific and nonwhite-specific establishment effects represents the relative wage-setting effect
for workers in that decile of person effects. We use person-year observations in the dual-connected set of each
gender in the Southeast region (the person effect deciles are defined pooling whites and nonwhites together).
Nonwhites are reweighted so as to have the same distribution across micro-regions as whites (of the same
gender).

Residual sorting

Relative wage-setting

Person effect and covariates

0.10
0.05
0.00

0.10

0.05

0.00

0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

Relative wage-setting

Person effect and covariates

Residual sorting

Relative wage-setting

Person effect and covariates

Notes: The figure displays similar decomposition results as in Table 9 for a series of robustness checks and heterogeneity analyses (see text for details).
In each case, the height of the stacked column represents the mean white-nonwhite wage gap and its four components represent the gap attributed
to skill-based sorting, to residual sorting, to relative wage-setting, and to differences in person effects and covariates, respectively. For reference, the
first column in each panel reproduces our baseline results from Table 9. All samples are restricted to the dual-connected set of each gender (and
education) group. Nonwhites are reweighted so as to have the same distribution across micro-regions as whites (of the same gender).

0.40

0.40

Skill-based sorting

0.15

0.15

Person effect and covariates

0.20

0.20

Relative wage-setting

0.25

0.25

Residual sorting

0.30

Skill-based sorting

0.35

0.30

Residual sorting

(b) Females (all education)

(d) Females (completed high school)

Skill-based sorting

0.40

0.35

(c) Males (completed high school)

Skill-based sorting

0.40

(a) Males (all education)

Figure 10: Robustness and Heterogeneity

FD62
ED7:
2D4:
ED:4
ED98

#I%-,-.'(,&>'&.>#<=#@,&G-'(J>(.'<,#(?@"<H((>#&A#.<"B?A#,-.(#C,<B@K
##)(-A#H(-,>#<=#(+B.-'&<A
2ED27
2ED88
##L,-.'&<A#M&'%#%&C%#>.%<<"#<,#?<,(
ED87
ED8F
##)(-A#"<C#%<B,"H#M-C(#1NO3
2D6:
2D84
##;%-,(#M&'%#M-C(#≤ 4#?&A&?B?#M-C(>
ED92
ED85
##;%-,(#&A#=<,?-"#>(.'<,#(?@"<H?(A'
ED:E
ED:4

FD5F
ED7F
2D52
ED:4
ED:E

ED4E

EDE:

9D98
ED5:
2D68
ED88
ED9:

ED67

EDE:

163

/"-.0

2ED58
ED89
2D7:
ED88
ED:4

ED47

2DEE

:DFE
ED6F
2D97
ED68
ED:5

ED6:

2DEE

173

!""#

2EDF6
ED94
2D9E
ED7:
ED:5

ED49

ED7F

FD8E
ED78
2D:F
ED5:
ED:6

ED69

ED78

183

$%&'(

FD5F
ED79
2D5:
ED9:
ED:2

ED45

ED54

9DFF
ED6E
2D79
ED78
ED:2

ED6:

ED56

193

)&*(+#
,-.(

;<B'%(->'#,(C&<A

FD4:
ED79
2D59
ED:E
ED:5

ED46

EDE:

:DEE
ED5F
2D77
ED7F
ED:4

ED72

EDEF

1:3

/"-.0

V<'(>K Q%( '-R"( +&>@"-H> >'-'&>'&.> R->(+ <A SV!W 4EE4J4E26 -A+ .<A>',B.'(+ B>&AC >B,G(H M(&C%'> 1SV!W M-> A<' .<A+B.'(+ &A 4E2E3D
Q%( >-?@"(> &A."B+( ?-"(> 1@-A(" !3 -A+ =(?-"(> 1@-A(" /3X -C( 47 '< 76X M&'% @<'(A'&-" "-R<, ?-,0(' (*@(,&(A.( <= -' "(->' 2 H(-,X -A+
A<AJ?&>>&AC +-'- <A ,-.(X C(A+(,X -A+ (+B.-'&<AD S,&G-'( (?@"<H?(A' >'-'B> &A."B+(> A<A=-,? =<,?-" -A+ &A=<,?-" @,&G-'(J>(.'<,
(?@"<H((>X (*."B+&AC '%<>( M&'% ?&>>&AC M-C(> <, %<B,>D I<"B?A> 123J163 @,(>(A' >'-'&>'&.> =<, '%( M%<"( .<BA',HY .<"B?A> 173J1:3
,(>',&.' '%( >-?@"( '< '%( ;<B'%(->' ,(C&<A <A"HD !"" ?<A('-,H G-"B(> &A '%( @-@(, -,( +(="-'(+ B>&AC '%( ISZ '< - 4E2E R->(D ZA (-.%
.->(X '%( =&,>' .<"B?A @<<"> -"" ,-.( C,<B@> '<C('%(,Y '%( <'%(, .<"B?A> ,(@<,' >'-'&>'&.> =<, (-.% <= '%( '%,(( ?-&A ,-.( C,<B@>X
>(@-,-'("H#1'%(#,-.(#C,<B@>#&A#SV!W#-,(#M%&'(X#?&*(+#,-.(X#R"-.0X#->&-AX#-A+#&A+&C(A<B>3D###########

ED29

ED42

ED47

#;%-,(#<=#.<"B?A#,-.(#C,<B@
##&A#@,&G-'(#(?@"<H?(A'

ED62

ED72

)"#*'+%&'(
#;%-,(#<=#>-?@"(#&A#.<"B?A#,-.(#C,<B@
2DEE

9D7F
ED59
2D64
ED88
ED97

ED64

#I%-,-.'(,&>'&.>#<=#@,&G-'(J>(.'<,#(?@"<H((>#&A#.<"B?A#,-.(#C,<B@K
##)(-A#H(-,>#<=#(+B.-'&<A
:D66
FD46
##L,-.'&<A#M&'%#%&C%#>.%<<"#<,#?<,(
ED67
ED75
##)(-A#"<C#%<B,"H#M-C(#1NO3
2D82
2D9:
##;%-,(#M&'%#M-C(#≤ 4#?&A&?B?#M-C(>
ED76
ED66
##;%-,(#&A#=<,?-"#>(.'<,#(?@"<H?(A'
ED9F
ED:4

ED6:

153

ED5F

ED62

2DEE

143

123

ED65

#;%-,(#<=#.<"B?A#,-.(#C,<B@
##&A#@,&G-'(#(?@"<H?(A'

!"#$%&'(
#;%-,(#<=#>-?@"(#&A#.<"B?A#,-.(#C,<B@

$%&'(

!""#

)&*(+#
,-.(

/,-P&"

Q-R"(#2K#I%-,-.'(,&>'&.>#<=#S,&G-'(J;(.'<,#T?@"<H((>#RH#N-.(#U,<B@

89:$*
!9:99#
89:%9
!9:99#

/3;
BD

89:$)
!9:99#
89:$@
!9:99#

89:""
!9:99#
89:""
!9:99#

/3;
/3;

89:""
!9:99#
89:"%
!9:99#

!$#

89:$*
!9:99#
89:%$
!9:99#

/3;
BD

89:%9
!9:99#
89:%&
!9:99#

!%#

89:"%
!9:99#
89:"(
!9:99#

/3;
/3;

89:"(
!9:99#
89:"@
!9:99#

!&#

ZD.E>3<34+Q0JQ+
;7QDD>

89:%"
!9:99#
89:%%
!9:99#

/3;
BD

89:%9
!9:99#
89:%%
!9:99#

!'#

N>>

89:""
!9:99#
89:""
!9:99#

/3;
/3;

89:""
!9:99#
89:"&
!9:99#

!(#

89:%"
!9:99#
89:%'
!9:99#

/3;
BD

89:%%
!9:99#
89:%)
!9:99#

!)#

89:"%
!9:99#
89:"(
!9:99#

/3;
/3;

89:"(
!9:99#
89:$"
!9:99#

!*#

ZD.E>3<34+Q0JQ+
;7QDD>

PD-<Q36;<+53J0DB

/3;
/3;
/3;
/3;
/3;
/3;
/3;
/3;
+A365+6B4+;<6<3+10234+31137<;
+C4-76<0DB+6B4+32E3503B73
BD
/3;
BD
/3;
BD
/3;
BD
/3;
MD<3;G FQ3 <6=>3 40;E>6/; <Q3 53;-><; D1 53J53;;0BJ >DJ QD-5>/ T6J3; DB 6 ;3503; D1 5673 J5D-E 4-..03;U -;0BJ 46<6 15D. LMN, $99$8
$9"& !LMN, T6; BD< 7DB4-7<34 0B $9"9#: FQ3 ;6.E>3; 0B7>-43 .6>3 !E6B3> N# 6B4 13.6>3 !E6B3> R# E50O6<38;37<D5 BDB165.
3.E>D/33; !30<Q35 1D5.6> D5 0B1D5.6>#U 6J3 $' <D '&U T0<Q ED<3B<06> >6=D5 .65?3< 32E3503B73 D1 6< >36;< " /365U 6B4 BDB8.0;;0BJ
46<6 DB 5673U J3B435U 34-76<0DBU T6J3U 6B4 QD-5; TD5?34: N>> ;E3701076<0DB; 0B7>-43 /365 6B4 ;<6<3 10234 31137<; 6B4 -;3 ;-5O3/
T30JQ<;: C4-76<0DB 6B4 32E3503B73 7DB<5D>; 0B7>-43 10O3 34-76<0DB 4-..03; !0B7D.E>3<3 3>3.3B<65/ ;7QDD>U 6B4 7D.E>3<3
3>3.3B<65/ ;7QDD>U .044>3 ;7QDD>U Q0JQ ;7QDD>U D5 7D>>3J3# 6B4 6 V-6456<07 0B ED<3B<06> 32E3503B73: FQ3 D.0<<34 5673 J5D-E 0;
TQ0<3: W<Q35 5673 4-..03; BD< 53ED5<34 653 0B40J3BD-; 6B4 N;06B: FQ3 ;6.E>3; 0B 7D>-.B; !"#8!&# -;3 46<6 1D5 <Q3 TQD>3 7D-B<5/X
7D>-.B; !'#8!*# 53;<507< <Q3 ;6.E>3; <D <Q3 PD-<Q36;< 53J0DB DB>/: YB 367Q 76;3U <Q3 105;< <TD 7D>-.B; EDD> TD5?35; D1 6>> 34-76<0DB
>3O3>;X+<Q3+D<Q35+7D>-.B;+53;<507<+<Q3+;6.E>3+<D+TD5?35;+T0<Q+7D.E>3<34+Q0JQ+;7QDD>:++++++

)"#*'+%&'(
+,-../+01+.0234+5673
++!;<4+355:#
+,-../+01+=>67?
++!;<4+355:#

+A365+6B4+;<6<3+10234+31137<;
+C4-76<0DB+6B4+32E3503B73

!"#$%&'(
+,-../+01+.0234+5673
++!;<4+355:#
+,-../+01+=>67?
++!;<4+355:#

!"#

N>>

R56S0>

F6=>3+$G+H6706>+,011353B73;+0B+IDJ+K6J3;+0B+LMN,+!L50O6<38P37<D5+C.E>D/33;#

.CD5;
4CDCC6
7D5C
.CD55
4CDCC6
5D;7
.CD59
4CDCC6
5D=7

1"#$%&'(#)#2/34&'-'*#5.65#(,5//&
/->$$)/'0/?"?@A'(B
CDC5
//4E(F/B##D6
4CDCC6
/GB%?/0"#/@A'(BE
CD=;
.CDC5
4CDCC6
CD=7

2"#7'3%&'(#)#!&&#'*+,%-./0
/->$$)/'0/?"?@A'(B
//4E(F/B##D6

/GB%?/0"#/@A'(BE

8"#7'3%&'(#)#2/34&'-'*#5.65#(,5//&
/->$$)/'0/?"?@A'(B
.CDC5
//4E(F/B##D6
4CDCC6

/GB%?/0"#/@A'(BE

5D=:

.CD58
4CDCC6

5D;<

.CD5C
4CDCC6

.CD5;
4CDCC6
7D58

.CD55
4CDCC6
5D=:

5DHH

.CD55
4CDCC6

5D=C

.CDCH
4CDCC6

.CD55
4CDCC6
7D5H

.CDC;
4CDCC6
5DH9

CD=;

CDCC
4CDCC6

CD=8

CDCC
4CDCC6

CDC5
4CDCC6
CD=<

CDCC
4CDCC6
CD=9

4:6

5D=H

.CD59
4CDCC6

5D<C

.CD55
4CDCC6

.CD5<
4CDCC6
7D5H

.CD57
4CDCC6
5D=H

4;6

*+,-

5DH7

.CD58
4CDCC6

5D<:

.CD55
4CDCC6

.CD5;
4CDCC6
7D75

.CD55
4CDCC6
5DH9

4<6

*+,-./
0"#$%&

I"J/A">#&)/@%JB

3">(AB%E(/#BJ'"?

7DCH

.CD58
4CDCC6

5D==

.CD5C
4CDCC6

.CD57
4CDCC6
7D8C

.CDC<
4CDCC6
7DC8

4=6

1,23

+"(BEM KAB (%L&B F'ER&%)E (AB #BE>&(E "0 #BJ#BEE'?J (AB ">(N"$B "? ("R "0 B%NA N"&>$? "? % EB#'BE "0 #%NB J#">R F>$$'BEU >E'?J F%(% 0#"$
*+,- 7CC7.7C59 4*+,- @%E ?"( N"?F>N(BF '? 7C5C6 "# 1,23 7CC7.7C59D KAB E%$R&BE '?N&>FB $%&B 4R%?B&E , %?F S6 %?F 0B$%&B 4R%?B&E V
%?F -6 R#'P%(B.EBN("# B$R&")BBEU %JB 7: (" :9U @'(A R"(B?('%& &%L"# $%#WB( BXRB#'B?NB "0 %( &B%E( 5 )B%#U (B?>#B "0 %( &B%E( 5 $"?(AU %?F ?"?.
$'EE'?J F%(% "? #%NBU JB?FB#U BF>N%('"?U @%JBU %?F A">#E @"#WBFD ,&& ERBN'0'N%('"?E '?N&>FB )B%# %?F E(%(B B00BN(EU (AB E%$B BF>N%('"?
F>$$'BE %E '? K%L&B 7U %?F Y>%F#%('N '? R"(B?('%& BXRB#'B?NB 4@B >EB E>#PB) @B'JA(E @'(A (AB *+,- F%(%6D KAB "$'((BF #%NB N%(BJ"#) 'E
@A'(BZ ?"?@A'(B '?N&>FBE L"(A L&%NW %?F $'XBF #%NBD [(AB# #%NB F>$$'BE ?"( #BR"#(BF %#B '?F'JB?">E %?F ,E'%?D KAB E%$R&BE '? N"&>$?E
456.496 >EB F%(% 0"# (AB @A"&B N">?(#)Z N"&>$?E 4:6.4=6 #BE(#'N( (AB E%$R&BE (" (AB 3">(AB%E( #BJ'"? "?&)D 2? B%NA N%EBU (AB 0'#E( (A#BB N"&>$?E
>EB (AB *+,- E%$R&BED KAB ">(N"$B '? (AB 0'#E( N"&>$? 'E % F>$$) 0"# LB'?J 0"#$%&&) B$R&")BFD KAB ERBN'0'N%('"? '? (AB EBN"?F N"&>$? 'E
(AB E%$B %E '? N"&>$?E 476U 496U 4;6U %?F 4=6 '? K%L&B 7D KAB (A'#F N"&>$? #BE(#'N(E (AB *+,- E%$R&B (" 0"#$%& B$R&")BBED KAB ERBN'0'N%('"? '?
(AB 0">#(A N"&>$? 'E 'FB?('N%& L>( >EBE (AB 1,23 E%$R&BE (A%( @B >EB 0"# "># FBN"$R"E'('"? #BE>&(E '? (AB #BE( "0 (AB R%RB#U ?%$B&) (AB F>%&.
N"??BN(BF/EB(/"0/B%NA/JB?FB#U/(A%(/'E/FBEN#'LBF/'?/N"&>$?E/4H6.4576/'?/K%L&B/9D

CD=:

.CD55
4CDCC6
5D<=

CDCC
4CDCC6
CD=7

!"#$%&'(#)#!&&#'*+,%-./0
/->$$)/'0/?"?@A'(B
//4E(F/B##D6
/GB%?/0"#/@A'(BE

496

476

456

486

*+,-

*+,-./
0"#$%&

*+,-

*+,-

1,23

!"#$%&'()

I"J/A">#&)/@%JB

!"#$%&'()

S#%T'&

K%L&B/8M/1%N'%&/-'00B#B?NBE/'?/!"#$%&'()/%?F/I"J/O%JBE/'?/*+,-/%?F/1,23/4*#'P%(B.3BN("#/Q$R&")BBE6

1>:7
0;>8;2
199>1
;>::
589
;>35
;>9;

-("#./(,%/0+&1.
<%(,&)+=&"+H@)B&.(=%&0IJ2
0C$(,D(@D&D%K>2

<%(,&'+,$")B&"+H@C
?"(@%&/H))-$#'%

$.)(23*.45#,)/64(1(')#1*.)*'.
<%(,&%C$(L)#C"'%,$&C#M%
?"(@%&/%'()%C&($&%C$(L)#C"'%,$
?"(@%&."#$%C&($&%C$(L)#C"'%,$
19N553N655
5N;75N477
:81N66;

7;1
;>33
;>6;

199>5
;>::

1>88
0;>7;2

9>6
;>53
;>;5

47>3
;>4;
;>;9

41N;83N148
7N:54N4:6
1N686N149

5:9
;>76
;>93

195>3
;>:7

1>9;
0;>812

1;>8
;>8;
;>1:

46>6
;>45
;>;7

042

!"#$%
/%'()%

1;N315N3:3
3N658N745
899N;46

8;9
;>75
;>6;

196>3
;>:8

1>67
0;>672

:>8
;>7;
;>;9

46>7
;>44
;>;7

052

*+,-."#$%
/%'()%

53N6;5N5::
9N754N851
1N415N33;

5:5
;>35
;>9;

199>;
;>::

1>:9
0;>8;2

:>6
;>64
;>11

47>5
;>4;
;>;9

062

!"#$%&
'()%

18N575N558
4N894N535
847N18:

745
;>33
;>61

199>4
;>::

1>8:
0;>7;2

9>6
;>53
;>;5

47>3
;>4;
;>;9

072

*+,-."#$%
'()%

3:N578N:66
7N554N61:
1N197N7;8

635
;>75
;>93

194>:
;>:7

1>93
0;>832

1;>8
;>8;
;>3;

46>5
;>45
;>;7

082

!"#$%
/%'()%

:N314N965
3N335N493
63;N:5;

894
;>75
;>63

195>9
;>:8

1>68
0;>682

:>8
;>71
;>;:

46>6
;>44
;>;7

092

*+,-."#$%
/%'()%

T(@=%C$&F+,,%F$%D&C%$C&0LB&@(F%-=%,D%@&=@+HG2

46N8;;N983
8N788N554
6:8N189

697
;>35
;>88

198>9
;>::

3>;4
0;>812

:>6
;>64
;>11

47>5
;>4;
;>;9

0:2

!"#$%&
'()%

17N969N616
4N818N15;
6:8N189

768
;>33
;>63

199>4
;>::

1>9;
0;>7;2

9>6
;>53
;>;5

47>3
;>4;
;>;9

01;2

*+,-."#$%
'()%

33N191N:93
6N369N69;
514N764

799
;>74
;>89

193>8
;>:7

1>99
0;>852

1;>9
;>81
;>31

46>6
;>45
;>;7

0112

!"#$%
/%'()%

9N8:6N839
3N17:N:11
514N764

93;
;>74
;>64

195>7
;>:8

1>6:
0;>682

:>8
;>71
;>;:

46>6
;>44
;>;7

0132

*+,-."#$%
/%'()%

QH()-F+,,%F$%D&C%$C&0LB&=%,D%@2

*+$%CP O"% $(L)% D#CG)(BC D%CF@#G$#K% C$($#C$#FC LB @(F%-=%,D%@ =@+HG #, $"@%% C('G)%C L(C%D +, ISU? 3;;3-3;15> O"% (,()BC#C C('G)%C #, F+)H',C 012-052 #,F)HD% ,+,/(@' G@#K($%-C%F$+@ /+@'() %'G)+B%%C #,
$"% ?+H$"%(C$ @%=#+,N (=% 36 $+ 65N .#$" G+$%,$#() )(L+@ '(@V%$ %WG%@#%,F% +/ ($ )%(C$ 1 B%(@N $%,H@% +/ ($ )%(C$ 1 '+,$"N (,D ,+,-'#CC#,= D($( +, @(F%N =%,D%@N %DHF($#+,N .(=%N (,D "+H@C .+@V%DN ."+ (@%
%'G)+B%D +, Q%F%'L%@ 41C$ +/ %(F" B%(@ .#$" (, +G%,-%,D%D F+,$@(F$ #, ."#F" $"%B (@% G(#D +, ( '+,$")B L(C#C> O"% %,$#@% "#C$+@B +/ (, #,D#K#DH() #C D@+GG%D #/ $"($ #,D#K#DH() @%G+@$C %(@,#,= ( .(=% L%)+.
$"% '#,#'H' .(=% +@ (L+K% $"% ::$" G%@F%,$#)% #, ( =#K%, B%(@N (C .%)) (C #, $"% F(C% +/ %W$@%'% .(=% F"(,=%C L%$.%%, F+,C%FH$#K% B%(@C> O"% (,()BC#C C('G)% #C @%C$@#F$%D $+ $"% )(@=%C$ F+,,%F$%D C%$ /+@
%(F" @(F%-=%,D%@ =@+HG #, F+)H',C 062-092N #>%>N $"% )(@=%C$ C%$ X+/ %C$(L)#C"'%,$C $"($ (@% )#,V%D LB .+@V%@ '+L#)#$B> O"% (,()BC#C C('G)% #C /H@$"%@ @%C$@#F$%D $+ $"% DH()-F+,,%F$%D C%$ +/ %(F" =%,D%@ #,
F+)H',C&0:2-0132N&#>%>N&$"%&C%$&+/&%C$(L)#C"'%,$C&#,&$"%&)(@=%C$&F+,,%F$%D&C%$&/+@&L+$"&."#$%C&(,D&,+,."#$%C&+/&$"($&=%,D%@>&S))&C$($#C$#FC&(@%&F()FH)($%D&(F@+CC&G%@C+,-B%(@&+LC%@K($#+,C>

54N:7;N787
:N;77N;34
1N75;N8;3

:>5
;>63
;>11

$%&'()*+,
<%(,&B%(@C&+/&CF"++)#,=
?"(@%&F+'G)%$%D&"#="&CF"++)&
?"(@%&F+'G)%$%D&F+))%=%

7(583#/7*9#.
*+>&G%@C+,-B%(@&+LC>
*+>&G%@C+,C
*+>&%C$(L)#C"'%,$C

47>5
;>4;
;>;9

032

012

!"#
<%(,&(=%
?"(@%&A&4;&B%(@C&+)D&
?"(@%&E&6;&B%(@C&+)D

*+,-."#$%
'()%

!"#$%&
'()%

S,()BC#C&C('G)%C&0())&K()#D&+LC%@K($#+,C2

O(L)%&5P&Q%CF@#G$#K%&?$($#C$#FC&R+'G(@#,=&$"%&S,()BC#C&?('G)%CN&$"%&T(@=%C$&R+,,%F$%D&?%$CN&(,D&$"%&QH()-R+,,%F$%D&?%$C

T(F)%&?S&6O''(8E&+/&L;$#'($%7&T.+-!(E&Z#V%7&L//%D$;&K+7%);&FE&J(D%-[%,7%8&[8+OC
!"#$%&
'()%

*+,-."#$%
'()%

!"#$%
/%'()%

*+,-."#$%
/%'()%

012

032

042

052

6$(,7(87&7%9#($#+,&+/&)+:&.(:%;

<=><?

<=?@A

<=>1B

<=?>1

!"##$%&'()'*$%$#+,+%'-.,/#$,+.0
&6$7=&7%9=&+/&C%8;+,&%//%D$;&0(D8+;;&C%8;+,-E8&+F;=2
&6$7=&7%9=&+/&%;$(F=&%//%D$;&0(D8+;;&C%8;+,-E8&+F;=2
&6$7=&7%9=&+/&GF&0(D8+;;&C%8;+,-E8&+F;=2
&H+88%)($#+,&+/&C%8;+,I%;$(F=&%//%D$;
&JK6L&+/&'+7%)
&M7NO;$%7&J-;PO(8%7&+/&'+7%)

<=5@@
<=441
<=1>A
<=3>4
<=341
<=A@4

<=51@
<=3@>
<=1A3
<=1?4
<=333
<=AB3

<=?51
<=441
<=1A?
<=3??
<=31A
<=@<>

<=55B
<=3A4
<=1A>
<=<AB
<=1@5
<=AA?

1(#2$%/.(3'4(56#$,78'+))+7,.'#(9+:0
&JK6L&+/&'($D"-%//%D$;&'+7%)
&M7NO;$%7&J-;PO(8%7&+/&'($D"-%//%D$;&'+7%)
&Q(8#(,D%&+/&N+F&'($D"&%//%D$
&R%8D%,$&+/&9(8#(,D%&+/&.(:%;&7O%&$+&N+F&'($D"&

<=1@>
<=@33
<=<1>
4=5

<=1@5
<=A@?
<=<15
5=<

<=1A>
<=@43
<=<15
3=>

<=1>4
<=@<@
<=<<@
3=>

;$%/$37+'9+7(#2(./,/(30
&R%8D%,$&+/&9(8#(,D%&+/&)+:&.(:%;&7O%&$+S
&&C%8;+,&%//%D$;
&&%;$(F)#;"'%,$&%//%D$;
&&D+9(8#(,D%&+/&C%8;+,&(,7&%;$(F=&%//%D$;
&&GF&(,7&(;;+D#($%7&D+9(8#(,D%;
&&8%;#7O()&0#,D)O7#,:&N+F&'($D"&(,7&$#'%-9(8E#,:2

?<=1
33=1
1A=3
1=?
A=3

5@=1
35=A
1<=>
?=3
1<=3

?>=<
31=4
1>=>
-3=@
B=@

B1=<
35=B
B=>
-<=4
A=1

*+$%;S T"% $(F)% ;O''(8#U%; $"% 8%;O)$; /8+' %;$#'($#,: $.+-.(E /#V%7 %//%D$; '+7%); /+8 $"% )+: "+O8)E
.(:% O;#,: C%8;+,-E%(8 +F;%89($#+,; #, $"% )(8:%;$ D+,,%D$%7 ;%$ /+8 %(D" 8(D%-:%,7%8 :8+OC #, $"%
6+O$"%(;$ 8%:#+,= T"% ;('C)%; (8% 7%;D8#F%7 #, D+)O',; 0?2-0A2 #, T(F)% 5= T"% '+7%); #,D)O7% 7O''#%; /+8
#,7#9#7O() .+8W%8; (,7 #,7#9#7O() %;$(F)#;"'%,$;X E%(8 7O''#%; #,$%8(D$%7 .#$" $"% ;('% /#9% %7OD($#+,
7O''#%; (; #, T(F)% 3X (,7 PO(78($#D (,7 DOF#D $%8'; #, (:% #,$%8(D$%7 .#$" $"% %7OD($#+, 7O''#%;= T"%
YD+'C(8#;+,Y N+F-'($D" %//%D$; '+7%); #,D)O7% 7O''#%; /+8 %(D" N+F '($D" (; .%)) (; $"% +$"%8 D+9(8#($%;
#,&$"%&F(;#D&'+7%);=

R(;)%&BE&YT#K%,<%&+/&O$$%,$J($#+,&Z#(9&#,&6+77%)($#+,&Z%$.%%,&!+7U%7&(,K&Y9$(;)#9"'%,$&Y//%<$9
!"#$%&
'()%

*+,-."#$%
'()%

!"#$%
/%'()%

*+,-."#$%
/%'()%

012

032

042

052

6+77%)($#+,&+/&8%79+,:%9$(;)#9"'%,$&%//%<$9

=>3?4

=>1@4

=>3@@

=>=AB

C%D7%99#+,&<+%//#<#%,$&+/&8%79+,&%//%<$&+,&%9$(;)#9"'%,$&%//%<$E
&FGH&%9$#'($%
&FGH&%9$#'($%&#,<)JK#,D&'#<7+-7%D#+,&/#L%K&%//%<$9

=>@5I
=>@31

=>35I
=>315

=>B3=
=>@IA

=>1A1
=>1@5

&MN&%9$#'($%
&MN&%9$#'($%&#,<)JK#,D&'#<7+-7%D#+,&/#L%K&%//%<$9

=>B?3
=>BB=

=>@34
=>@3=

=>?5B
=>?@B

=>B4A
=>B?A

OKK%,KJ'E&/#79$&9$(D%&<+%//#<#%,$9P&J9#,D&%9$(;)#9"'%,$&%//%<$&/+7&+88+9#$%&7(<%&09('%&D%,K%72&(9&#,9$7J'%,$
&Q#79$&9$(D%&<+%//#<#%,$
=>?B4
=>A13
=>?=B
&Q#79$&9$(D%&<+%//#<#%,$&#,<)JK#,D&'#<7+-7%D#+,&/#L%K&%//%<$9
=>?41
=>?IB
=>B@B

=>?4?
=>?11

*+$%9E R"% $(;)% K#98)(S9 7%D7%99#+, 7%9J)$9 87+T#K#,D %T#K%,<% +/ ($$%,J($#+, ;#(9 #, $"% <+77%)($#+, ;%$.%%, $"% %9$#'($%K
.+7U%7 (,K %9$(;)#9"'%,$ %//%<$9 #, +J7 $.+-.(S /#L%K %//%<$9 '+K%)9> R"% 9('8)%9 (7% 7%9$7#<$%K $+ 8%79+,-S%(7
+;9%7T($#+,9 #, $"% KJ()-<+,,%<$%K 9%$ +/ %(<" D%,K%7 #, $"% H+J$"%(9$ 7%D#+,P K%9<7#;%K #, <+)J',9 0I2-0132 #, R(;)% 5>V R"%
/#79$ 7+. 9"+.9 $"% J,(KWJ9$%K <+77%)($#+,9 +/ $"% .+7U%7 (,K %9$(;)#9"'%,$ %//%<$9P (9 #, R(;)% @P ;J$ /+7 $"% KJ()<+,,%<$%K 9%$9> V*%L$P .% 87%9%,$ FGH %9$#'($%9 /7+' 7%D7%99#,D $"% 8%79+, %//%<$ +, $"% %9$(;)#9"'%,$ %//%<$P (,K MN
%9$#'($%9 #, ."#<" .% J9% $"% %9$(;)#9"'%,$ %//%<$ /+7 $"% +88+9#$% 7(<% 0;J$ 9('% D%,K%72 (9 #,9$7J'%,$> R"% ;+$$+' 7+.9
87%9%,$ $"% /#79$ 9$(D% 7%D7%99#+, <+%//#<#%,$9> M, %(<" <(9%P .% 9"+. 7%9J)$9 /7+' $.+ '+K%)9E +,% .#$" ,+ +$"%7 <+,$7+)9
(,K +,% $"($ <+,$7+)9 /+7 '#<7+-7%D#+, /#L%K %//%<$9 0(,K $"%7%/+7% <+,$7+) /+7 $"% (T(#)(;#)#$S +/ K#//%7%,$ 9J;D7+J89 +/
.+7U%79&#,&%(<"&%9$(;)#9"'%,$X9&)+<()&)(;+7&'(7U%$2>&

L%1&#'DK'M#(,36,+)/),-',7'/2#'N%()%&'O%5#'P%6
!"#$%&&'$%()%&
4%5#'5%6

.,36,-#-/'%//$)1B/%1&#'/,K
*#$+,.,"%$)%/#
0+/%1&)+23#-/
#77#(/+

)-8#9

#77#(/+

:;<

:=<

:><

:?<
0+/@'077+

C@==D

C@;EC
:C@DC<

FC@CC;
:C@CC<

C@CEG
:C@>C<

H,'2)52'+(2,,&

C@CGI

.,36&#/#8'2)52'+(2,,&

C@=IC

C@CJ?
:C@E;<
C@=;C
:C@D=<

C@CCE
:C@CD<
FC@CCE
F:C@C=<

C@C=I
:C@>><
C@CGE
:C@>C<

!"#$%&'(
!"#$%&'()*%!+,-!.,/$)0,#$.!%0++*-*#/*(1
A&&'#8B(%/),-

!2%&'()*%!+,-!.,/$)0,#$.!%0++*-*#/*(!3#,#450)*(!-*4*065)*%!),!450)*!%0()-07')0,#81
A&&'#8B(%/),-

C@;GE

H,'2)52'+(2,,&

C@CJ=

.,36&#/#8'2)52'+(2,,&

C@=E=

C@;??
:C@DG<
C@C>G
:C@D><
C@=C>
:C@DG<

FC@CC>
F:C@C;<
C@CC?
:C@CG<
FC@CCD
F:C@C><

C@C??
:C@=?<
C@C;C
:C@;I<
C@CEJ
:C@=J<

C@=;D
:C@D><
C@CJ;
:C@E><
C@=>I
:C@D?<

FC@C==
F:C@CD<
FC@CCI
F:C@;;<
FC@C=D
F:C@CG<

C@;CC
:C@>?<
C@C>I
:C@?G<
C@;;C
:C@>?<

)"#*'+%&'(
!"#$%&'()*%!+,-!.,/$)0,#$.!%0++*-*#/*(1
"#$%&'()*%!+,-!.,/$)0,#$.!%0++*-*#/*(1
A&&'#8B(%/),-

C@=IJ

H,'2)52'+(2,,&

C@CG;

.,36&#/#8'2)52'+(2,,&

C@>==

!2%&'()*%!+,-!.,/$)0,#$.!%0++*-*#/*(!3#,#450)*(!-*4*065)*%!),!450)*!%0()-07')0,#81
A&&'#8B(%/),-

C@=E;

H,'2)52'+(2,,&

C@C?E

.,36&#/#8'2)52'+(2,,&

C@=I;

C@=;E
:C@G><
C@C?;
:C@IC<
C@=?>
:C@G?<

FC@C=E
F:C@;C<
FC@C;>
F:C@=I<
FC@C>=
F:C@;;<

C@CD;
:C@=D<
C@C;G
:C@?C<
C@CDI
:C@=D<

H,/#+K L2# /%1&# 8)+6&%Q+ /2# $#+B&/+ 7$,3 )36&#3#-/)-5 /2# 8#(,36,+)/),- ,7 /2# %"#$%5# 42)/#F
-,-42)/# 6%Q 5%6 1%+#8 ,- #RB%/),- :?< B+)-5 6#$+,-FQ#%$ ,1+#$"%/),-+ )- /2# 8B%&F(,--#(/#8 +#/ ,7 #%(2
5#-8#$ )- /2# S,B/2#%+/ $#5),-T 4)/2,B/ %-8 4)/2 $#4#)52/)-5 +, /2%/ -,-42)/#+ 2%"# /2# +%3#
8)+/$)1B/),- %($,++ 3)($,F$#5),-+ %+ 42)/#+ :,7 /2# +%3# 5#-8#$<@ S## /#9/ 7,$ % 8#/%)&#8 #96&%-%/),- ,7 /2#
8#(,36,+)/),-@ 0-/$)#+ )- 6%$#-/2#+#+ $#6$#+#-/ /2# 6#$(#-/%5# ,7 /2# ,"#$%&& $%()%& 4%5# 5%6 )- /2# 7)$+/
(,&B3-'/2%/')+'#96&%)-#8'1Q'/2#'7%(/,$'$#6$#+#-/#8')-'/2#'(,&B3-@

IJIDA

IJAEA

;<':)8:'4(:<<&

L<-+&#/#5':)8:'4(:<<&
'

IJICE

IJAK?

;<':)8:'4(:<<&

L<-+&#/#5':)8:'4(:<<&

IJ?K?

IJICB

IJ?DE

IJAEF

IJ?DI

IJAAI

>A@

IJ??A

IJIAD

IJIGD

IJAIA

IJ?CI

IJ?FD

>B@

N#%,4'<='#4/%3&)4:-#,/'#==#(/
9:)/#4
;<,7:)/#4

IJIFK
>IJAF@

IJI?G
>IJCI@

IJIF?
>IJAF@

IJIED
>IJAD@

IJI?I
>IJ?K@

IJICC
>IJAC@

>C@

*%+'),'-#%,
#4/%3&)4:-#,/'#==#(/

IJIEA
>IJA?@

IJI?I
>IJAA@

IJIDE
>IJA?@

IJIDC
>IJA?@

IJIIC
>IJIF@

IJIBD
>IJ?K@

>D@

IJI?F
>IJIE@

IJIIG
>IJ?F@

IJI?D
>IJIE@

IJI??
>IJIC@

IJIIE
>IJ?A@

IJIIK
>IJID@

>E@

IJIBD
>IJ?A@

IJIIB
>IJIE@

IJIBC
>IJ?B@

IJIBD
>IJ?B@

IJIIB
>IJIE@

IJIAB
>IJ?B@

>F@

IJIAF
>IJIK@

IJIIF
>IJ?E@

IJIAA
>IJIK@

IJI?K
>IJIF@

IJIII
>IJI?@

IJI?A
>IJIE@

>G@

M#(<-+<4)/)<,'<='4<$/),8'#==#(/
01)&&23%4#5
.#4)56%&
4<$/),8
4<$/),8

;</#4P O:# /%3&# 5)4+&%R4 /:# $#46&/4 =$<- )-+&#-#,/),8 /:# 5#(<-+<4)/)<, <= /:# %"#$%8# 7:)/#2,<,7:)/# 8%+ ), #4/%3&)4:-#,/ #==#(/4 ),/< % $#&%/)"# 7%8# 4#//),8 #==#(/ %,5 %
4<$/),8 #==#(/ 3%4#5 <, #S6%/)<, >D@T %4 7# 7#&& %4 /:# 5#(<-+<4)/)<, <= /:# 4<$/),8 #==#(/ ),/< % 41)&&23%4#5 4<$/),8 %,5 % $#4)56%& 4<$/),8 #==#(/ 3%4#5 <, #S6%/)<,4 >F@ %,5 >G@J
O:# 4%-+&#4 ),(&65# %&& +#$4<,2R#%$ <34#$"%/)<,4 ), /:# 56%&2(<,,#(/#5 4#/ <= #%(: 8#,5#$ ), /:# 0<6/:#%4/ $#8)<,J ;<,7:)/# <34#$"%/)<,4 %$# $#7#)8:/#5 4< /:%/ /:#R :%"# /:#
4%-# 5)4/$)36/)<, %($<44 -)($<2$#8)<,4 %4 7:)/#4 ><= /:# 4%-# 8#,5#$@J L<&6-, >?@ $#+$<56(#4 /:# <"#$%&& $%()%& 7%8# 8%+ =$<- (<&6-, >?@ <= O%3&# FU (<&6-, >A@ %,5 >B@ $#+<$/
/:# %"#$%8# #4/%3&)4:-#,/ #==#(/ =<$ 7:)/# %,5 ,<,7:)/#4T $#4+#(/)"#&RT %,5 (<&6-, >C@ (%&(6&%/#4 /:# 5)==#$#,(#T 7:)(: (<$$#4+<,54 /< /:# $%()%& 8%+ ), -#%, #4/%3&)4:-#,/
#==#(/4 ), (<&6-, >C@ <= O%3&#4 FJ L<&6-, >D@ %,5 >E@ 5#(<-+<4# /:# 8%+ ), (<&6-, >C@ ),/< % 4<$/),8 %,5 $#&%/)"# 7%8#24#//),8 #==#(/T $#4+#(/)"#&RJ L<&6-,4 >F@ %,5 >G@ 5#(<-+<4#
/:# 4<$/),8 #==#(/ ),/< % 41)&&23%4#5 %,5 % $#4)56%& 4<$/),8 #==#(/J Q,/$)#4 ), +%$#,/:#4#4 $#+$#4#,/ /:# 4:%$# <= /:# <"#$%&& $%()%& 7%8# 8%+ >), (<&6-, ?@ /:%/ )4 #V+&%),#5 3R /:#
4<6$(#'),'/:#'(<&6-,':#%5),8J'

IJAE?

H&&'#56(%/)<,

)"#*'+%&'(

IJ?GE

H&&'#56(%/)<,

!"#$%&'(

>?@

!"#$%&&'$%()%&
7%8#'8%+

M#(<-+<4)/)<,'<='8%+
'),'#4/%3&)4:-#,/'#==#(/4
.#&%/)"#
0<$/),8
7%8#24#//),8

O%3&#'GP'M#(<-+<4)/)<,'<='/:#'.%()%&'*%+'),'Q4/%3&)4:-#,/'Q==#(/4

