                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         UNEMPLOYMENT AND DEVELOPMENT

                                           Ying Feng
                                         David Lagakos
                                         James E. Rauch

                                      Working Paper 25171
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25171


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2018




For helpful comments we thank Gary Fields, Chris Huckfeldt, Ben Moll, Andi Mueller,
Tommaso Porzio, Guillaume Rocheteau, Venky Venkateswaran, Mike Waugh, Erin Wolcott,
Randy Wright and seminar/conference audiences at Cornell, Harvard/MIT, NYU, Rochester,
Midwest Macro (Pittsburgh), SED (Mexico City), China Conference on Development and
Growth (Wuhan), the MacCaLM Workshop (Edinburgh), Trinity College Dublin, UCSD and the
West Coast Search Conference (Irvine). All potential errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ying Feng, David Lagakos, and James E. Rauch. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unemployment and Development
Ying Feng, David Lagakos, and James E. Rauch
NBER Working Paper No. 25171
October 2018
JEL No. E24,E26,O11,O41

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper draws on household survey data from countries of all income levels to measure how
average unemployment rates vary with income per capita. We document that unemployment is
increasing with GDP per capita. Furthermore, we show that this fact is accounted for almost
entirely by low-educated workers, whose unemployment rates are strongly increasing in GDP per
capita, rather than by high-educated workers, whose unemployment rates are not correlated with
income. To interpret these facts, we build a model with workers of heterogeneous ability and two
sectors: a traditional sector, in which self-employed workers produce output without reward
for ability; and a modern sector, in which firms hire in frictional labor markets, and output
increases with ability. Countries differ exogenously in the productivity level of the modern
sector. The model predicts that as productivity rises, the traditional sector shrinks, as
progressively less-able workers enter the modern sector, leading to a rise in overall
unemployment and in the ratio of low-educated to high-educated unemployment rates.
Quantitatively, the model accounts for around one third of the cross-country patterns we
document.

Ying Feng                                      James E. Rauch
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego            University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                        La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
yif014@ucsd.edu                                and NBER
                                               jrauch@ucsd.edu
David Lagakos
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
lagakos@ucsd.edu
1     Introduction
No single measure of labor-market performance receives more attention among academics
and policy makers than the unemployment rate. It is well known, for example, that average
unemployment rates are higher in Western Europe than in the United States and Japan.
But there is little systematic evidence about how average unemployment rates vary across
the entire world income distribution. Internationally comparable data from the poorest
countries of the world are particularly lacking. This lack of data hampers research on the
determinants of national average unemployment levels, and on the link between unemployment
and development, to name two important topics.
This paper attempts to fill this gap by building a database of national unemployment rates
covering countries of all income levels. To do so, we draw on evidence from 199 household
surveys from 84 countries spanning 1960 to 2015. The database covers numerous rich countries
and around two dozen nations from the bottom quartile of the world income distribution.
Since measures of employment and job search vary across surveys, we divide the data into
several tiers based on scope for international comparability. We then construct unemployment
rates at the aggregate level and for several broad demographic groups, and compare how they
vary with average income.
We find, perhaps surprisingly, that unemployment rates are increasing in GDP per capita.
This finding is present for men and for women, for all broad age groups, within urban and
rural areas, and across all comparability tiers of our data. For prime-aged adults, a regression
of the country average unemployment rate on log GDP per capita yields a statistically
significant positive coefficient of 1.8 percent. Our findings contrast with the (scarce) existing
evidence in the literature, and in particular, the work of Caselli (2005), who finds in an earlier
database that unemployment rates do not systematically vary with income per capita.
In addition, we document that unemployment patterns across countries differ markedly by
education level. Among high-educated workers (secondary school or more), unemployment
rates do not vary systemically with GDP per capita. Among low-educated workers, in contrast,
unemployment rates are substantially higher in rich countries. Regressing the country average
high-educated unemployment on log GDP per capita yields an insignificant slope coefficient of
0.5 percent, whereas the slope coefficient for the low-educated is a significant 3.2 percent. Our
data imply that in rich countries, low-educated workers are more likely than high-educated
workers to be unemployed. In poor countries, the opposite is true, and unemployment is
concentrated among the high-educated.
To understand these facts, we build a simple two-sector model with frictional labor markets,
based on Diamond (1982) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), and heterogeneous workers


                                                1
that sort by ability as in Roy (1951). In the modern sector, labor markets are governed by
search frictions, and worker productivity is determined by a worker’s ability level. In the
traditional sector, workers are self-employed and do not need to search for jobs; however,
productivity is independent of ability. Outputs of the modern and traditional sectors are
perfect substitutes, and firms operate competitively in the modern sector, with unrestricted
entry. Countries differ exogenously in modern-sector productivity, with a single traditional-
sector technology available to all countries. This assumption builds on the mounting evidence
that cross-country productivity differences are skill-biased, as opposed to skill neutral (see,
e.g., Caselli and Coleman, 2006; Hjort and Poulsen, forthcoming; Jerzmanowski and Tamura,
2017; Malmberg, 2016).
Our simple model has several main theoretical predictions that are qualitatively consistent
with the facts we document. First, as modern-sector productivity increases, the traditional
sector shrinks, as progressively less able workers sort into the modern sector. Second, as
modern-sector productivity increases, the aggregate unemployment rate increases. This is
because as the modern sector expands, a greater fraction of workers now search for jobs in
frictional labor markets rather than working in self-employment. Moreover, the job-finding
rate falls in equilibrium, since average ability is lower in the modern sector. Third, as
productivity increases, unemployment rates rise faster for less able than for more able workers,
since a greater share of less able workers are drawn into job search. This third prediction
is consistent with the rising ratio of unemployment for low- to high-educated workers with
GDP per capita that we document.
To assess the model’s quantitative predictions, we extend the simple model in several ways so
as to be consistent with salient features of the cross-country data. In particular, we allow
modern and traditional sector outputs to be imperfect substitutes, and we allow countries to
differ exogenously in both traditional- and modern-sector productivity. We also allow for two
education groups, with the distribution of ability for the high-educated group stochastically
dominating that of the low-educated. We calibrate the distribution of ability using moments
of the U.S. wage distribution, and parameterize other aspects of the model to match key
moments of the U.S. labor market—in particular the average unemployment rate and the
ratio of the unemployment rate for low- to high-educated workers.
Our main quantitative experiment lowers productivity in the modern and traditional sectors, as
well as the fraction of high-educated workers, and then computes how the model’s predictions
for unemployment – in the aggregate and by education level –vary with GDP per capita. We
discipline the cross-country values of modern-sector productivity to match GDP per capita
levels across the world income distribution, and we discipline traditional-sector productivity
to match the relative prices of traditional goods. We proxy traditional sector employment in
the data by the set of workers who are self-employed without paid employees, and who work

                                               2
in low-skilled occupations. Not surprisingly, this share is strongly decreasing in GDP per
capita, ranging from around three quarters of the workforce in poor countries to less than
three percent in the richest countries.1
The calibrated model predicts that unemployment rates are increasing in GDP per capita, as
in the data, though the model underpredicts the magnitude of the relationship. Compared to
the observed 1.8 percentage-point increase in unemployment for an increase in one log point
of GDP per capita, the model predicts an increase of 0.5 percent. For unemployment by
education, the model correctly predicts that the ratio of low- to high-educated unemployment
is increasing in GDP per capita. Yet it again underpredicts the magnitude of the relationship,
with a semi-elasticity of 0.47 in the data compared to 0.25 in the model. We conclude that
our mechanism explains 30 percent of the relation between aggregate unemployment and
average income, and 53 percent of the relation between the unemployment ratio and average
income. Furthermore, the model’s predicted share of employment in the traditional sector
by GDP per capita corresponds closely with the data. We also show that our results are
sensitive to one parameter value in particular: the elasticity of substitution between modern
and traditional sector outputs, which governs the strength of our mechanism, the decline of
the traditional sector.
As an alternative and complementary theory, we incorporate the less generous unemployment
benefits of poor countries relative to richer countries. In the model, lower unemployment
benefits in poorer countries discourage search, thus lowering unemployment rates in equilib-
rium. We find that adding this alternative mechanism increases the explanatory power of our
quantitative model from 30 percent to 41 percent of the slope of the aggregate unemployment
rate in GDP per capita. On the other hand, it offers little additional explanatory power
for the relation between the ratio of low- to high-educated unemployment and income. We
conclude that our quantitative model explains a substantial fraction of the cross-country
unemployment patterns that we document, but that even including the less generous social
security nets of poorer countries, there is a lot left unexplained by the model.
We close the paper by presenting historical data on unemployment from the United States
and four other advanced countries for which long time series on unemployment are available:
Australia, France, Germany and the United Kingdom. We ask whether unemployment rates
are higher now than they were before World War I, which is the earliest period for which
unemployment data are available, to our knowledge. We find that for all countries, average
unemployment rates are indeed higher now than they were before World War I, and for
   1
     Note that this decrease in the traditional sector after excluding agriculture is of similar magnitude,
ranging from around half of the workforce to less than two percent. Thus, the traditional sector is not simply
agriculture, but represents the unskilled self-employment that is widespread throughout developing economies
(see e.g. Feng and Rickey, 2016; Gollin, 2008; Schoar, 2010).



                                                      3
four of the five countries, the difference is statistically significant. Using the U.S. data,
which we have at a more disaggregated level, we ask in addition whether unemployment is
particularly higher now for the less-educated. We find that average unemployment has indeed
risen faster for the less-educated than for the more-educated, at least since 1940. In 1940,
the less-educated were about 1.5 times as likely to be unemployed as the more-educated.
Today, the ratio is close to 2.5. We conclude that historical unemployment data are broadly
consistent with our cross-country findings, suggesting that unemployment is largely a feature
of advanced economies, rather than a by-product of under-development.
Related Literature. Most of the literature on average unemployment differences across
countries has focused on Europe and the United States (see, e.g., Blanchard and Summers,
1986; Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2008; Nickell, Nunziata, and Ochel, 2004). The few studies that
have addressed unemployment across a wider range of income levels have come to contradictory
conclusions, most likely due to a lack of comparable cross-country data. Banerjee, Basu, and
Keller (2016) compile World Bank unemployment data that suggest a decreasing pattern of
unemployment in income per capita, though their data are largely from middle-income and
richer countries. Perhaps the most systematic look at aggregate unemployment rates across
countries is by Caselli (2005), who draws on a 1996 World Bank dataset covering 60 countries.
These data show no correlation between GDP per capita and average unemployment, though
they cover just three countries in the bottom half of the world income distribution. Older
studies did not have sufficient data points to draw firm conclusions about cross-country
patterns, but tended to find that unemployment rates in developing economies studies were
not that different from those of richer economies (see, e.g., Fields, 1980, 2004; Squire, 1981;
Turnham, 1993). More recently, Poschke (2018) draws on surveys from 68 countries to study
the relationship between self-employment and the ratio of unemployment to wage employment.
His explanation emphasizes differences in labor market frictions across countries, whereas our
theory emphasizes different forces altogether.
Our paper is closely related to the growing literature on structural change, though our two
sectors do not fit neatly into the standard agriculture-manufacturing-services division (used
by e.g. Duarte and Restuccia, 2010; Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi, 2014; Mestieri,
Comin, and Lashkari, 2018).2 In our modern and traditional sectors, we emphasize skilled
wage employment versus unskilled self-employment, both of which can be present within the
agriculture, manufacturing, and service sectors. In this way, our sectors are closer to the split
between high-educated services and low-educated services taken by Buera and Kaboski (2012)
   2
     Other multi-sector models in macro split the economy into the consumption vs investment sectors (Hsieh
and Klenow, 2007; Restuccia and Urrutia, 2001), goods vs service sectors (e.g. Boppart, 2014), urban vs rural
areas (Cavalcanti, Monge-Naranjo, and Torres de Mello, 2016; Young, 2013), or agriculture vs non-agriculture
sectors (e.g. Adamopoulos and Restuccia, 2014; Lagakos and Waugh, 2013; Porzio and Santangelo, 2017).
Our modern-traditional division does not correspond cleanly to these splits either.


                                                     4
and Buera, Kaboski, and Rogerson (2015), though their models focus on non-homothetic
preferences, which play no role in our theory.
By emphasizing the transition from self-employment to wage employment in frictional labor
markets, our paper builds on the macroeconomic literature on home production and its role
in the development process. This transition to market production with development is a
key theme in the model of Ngai and Pissarides (2008), for example. Gollin, Parente, and
Rogerson (2004) argue that measured output differences across countries may be overstated
due to missing home production in poorer countries. Similarly, Parente, Rogerson, and
Wright (2000) show that policies that distort capital accumulation can lead to bigger output
losses once a home production sector is introduced into a standard neoclassical growth model,
since capital distortions encourage producers to move into self-employment. Empirically,
Bridgman, Duernecker, and Herrendorf (2018) show that the share of household production
in total hours decreases with GDP per capita. None of these studies focuses on the link
between unemployment and development, however.
Finally, our paper builds on the old literature on two-sector models in development, par-
ticularly Lewis (1954) and Harris and Todaro (1970). However, our model is focused on
the determinants of actual measured unemployment (often called “open unemployment”),
as opposed to “underemployment” or “disguised unemployment,” which corresponds to
some extent to our traditional sector. Negative selection into our traditional sector is also
quite related to the negative selection into the “informal sector” as characterized by Rauch
(1991), La Porta and Shleifer (2008, 2014) and others. Unlike Harris and Todaro (1970), the
urban-rural divide plays no role in our theory; we find similar unemployment patterns in
both rural and urban areas and, hence, abstract from them.



2     Data
This section describes the household survey data that we use to measure unemployment in
the aggregate and by demographic group across our set of countries.


2.1    Data Sources

Our data come from household surveys or censuses that are nationally representative. Many,
but not all, are available from the International Integrated Public Use Microdata Surveys
(IPUMS) (Minnesota Population Center, 2017) or the World Bank’s Living Standards Mea-
surement Surveys (LSMS). Tables A.1, A.2 and A.3 in the Appendix list the full set of
surveys employed, plus their sources. The key benefit of nationally representative surveys, as


                                              5
opposed to (say) administrative records on unemployment, is that they cover all individuals,
including the self-employed. In total, our analysis includes 199 country-year surveys, covering
84 countries, and spanning 1960 to 2015. Most of our data come from the 1990s and 2000s.3
To measure GDP per capita, we divide output-side real GDP at chained PPPs (in 2011 US$)
by population, both taken from the Penn World Tables 9.0. Unlike in previous studies, our
data have a high representation of the world’s poorest countries, with 23 countries from the
bottom quartile of the world income distribution, and 27 from the second quartile.
In our main analysis, we restrict attention to prime-aged adults (aged 25-54) of both sexes.
We also report our results for males and females separately, for broader age groups, and for
urban and rural regions. Throughout, we exclude those with missing values of key variables
and those living in group quarters. We use sample weights whenever they are available.


2.2     Unemployment Definition and Data Tiers

We define an unemployed person as one who (1) is not employed, and (2) has searched
 recently for a job. We define employment following the U.N. System of National Accounts as
“all persons, both employees and self-employed persons, engaged in some productive activity
 that falls within the production boundary of the SNA” (United Nations, 2008). Thus, we
 count those working in self-employment as employed. We define the unemployment rate as
 the ratio of unemployed workers to employed plus unemployed workers.4
The key measurement challenge we face is that not all surveys allow us to define unemployment
in exactly the same way. To ensure that our cross-country comparisons are as informative as
possible, we divide the surveys into tiers, based on their international comparability. Tier 1
has the highest scope for comparability, followed by Tier 2 and then Tier 3. We describe
these further below.
In Tier 1 and Tier 2 countries, employment specifically covers all economic activities that
produce output counted in the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). In other
words, employment specifically comprises wage employment, self-employment or work at a
family business or farm, whether or not the output is sold or consumed directly.5 With regard
   3
     Donovan, Lu, and Schoellman (2018) use surveys from 13 countries to document high-frequency labor
market patterns in the urban areas of middle and high income countries. Our paper covers many more low
income countries, whereas their study brings in repeated observations from the same individuals.
   4
     The BLS Handbook of Methods defines an unemployed individual as one who (1) is not employed, (2) has
searched recently for a job, and (3) is “available to work” (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2016). However,
only 49 of our 199 country-year surveys asked whether the interviewee is “available for work” in some way.
   5
     See e.g. Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014) for a more detailed treatment of which outputs are covered
in NIPA. Not counted is work on home-produced services such as cooking, cleaning or care of one’s own
children. Home-produced services are not counted in NIPA, and previous studies of time use, such as Aguiar
and Hurst (2007b), Ramey and Francis (2009) and Bick, Fuchs-Schuendeln, and Lagakos (2018), treat these


                                                     6
 to recent job search, Tier 1 includes surveys in which workers who searched did so either in
 the last week or the last four weeks. Tier 2 includes surveys in which workers are searching
“currently” (without specifying a time frame) or in some time period other than the last week
 or last four weeks, such as the last two months.
In Tier 3 countries, the employment question has lower scope for comparability. It may,
for example, consider those working for their own consumption or those not working for a
monetary wage as non-employed. It may include a minimum number of hours worked, or
cover only a specific period of time, such as the last seven days. Appendix Table A.3 lists the
way in which each country in Tier 3 has a non-standard employment question. In terms of
job search, Tier 3 countries cover any time.
All in all, our dataset consists of 129 Tier 1 surveys, 40 Tier 2 surveys and 30 Tier 3 surveys.
In our empirical findings below, we begin with data from all tiers, which maximizes the
number of observations available. We then restrict attention to Tier 1 first, followed by Tiers
1 and 2, to explore how our results change when we take into consideration a smaller but
more comparable set of countries.


2.3     Comparison to ILO and World Bank Data

Two readily downloadable sources of data on unemployment rates at the country level are the
“ILO modeled estimates” from the International Labor Office (ILO), and the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators (which are in fact derived directly from the ILO). However,
many of the ILO’s modeled estimates are, by definition, modeled or imputed rather than
computed directly from an underlying survey. Even by the ILO’s own admission, the modeled
estimates are fraught with serious non-comparabilities. For example, some estimates cover
only main cities or metropolitan areas, while others use non-standard employment definitions
that exclude self-employed workers or first-time job seekers.
Acknowledging the lack of international comparability in its full database, the ILO also
publishes “ILO-comparable” unemployment rates from 30 countries, which are always based
on a household labor force survey (Lepper, 2004). Unfortunately, the ILO-comparable
unemployment rates have very limited coverage of the bottom half of the world income
distribution, covering just one such country. Therefore, the ILO-comparable unemployment
dataset is ill-suited to answer the question of how average unemployment rates vary between
poor and rich countries. In addition, it does not provide disaggregated unemployment rates,
such as by education level, which we show are crucial to understanding the aggregate patterns.
If one nonetheless uses these ILO data to estimate how average unemployment rates vary
categories as “home production” rather than as work.


                                                   7
with income per capita, one will find a statistically insignificant or negative relationship.
Using the ILO modeled unemployment estimates, a regression of the 2014 unemployment
rate on log GDP per capita yields a slope coefficient of 0.02 with a p-value of 0.96. This
lack of correlation between unemployment and income is comparable to what Caselli (2005)
found. With the much smaller ILO comparable database, available from 1994 to 2003, the
regression coefficient is -3.44 with a p-value of 0.01. Thus, either of the readily available ILO
unemployment databases paint a misleading picture of how unemployment rates vary with
income level.



3     Empirical Findings
In this section, we report how average unemployment rates vary with GDP per capita. We first
compare aggregate unemployment rates, and then look beneath the surface at unemployment
by sex, by age group and by rural-urban status.


3.1    Aggregate Unemployment Rate

Figure 1 plots the country average unemployment rate for prime-aged adults (on a log base 2
scale) against log GDP per capita. The figure includes countries from all three tiers with at
least two years of data. The dotted black line – the linear regression line – shows a substantial
positive slope. The slope coefficient for a regression of the unemployment rate in natural
units on log GDP per capita is 1.8 and is statistically significant at the one-percent level.
Taking simple averages by country income quartile, the bottom (poorest) quartile has an
average unemployment rate of 2.5 percent. By contrast, the top (richest) quartile has an
average unemployment rate of 8.7 percent.
Besides the positive slope, Figure 1 highlights the large variation in average unemployment
rates within each income group. To what extent does this variation simply reflect measurement
error? To what extent does the correlation of unemployment rates and GDP per capita
survive once we restrict attention to more comparable data?
To help answer these questions, we report the slope coefficient of average unemployment on
log GDP per capita using various alternative cuts of the data. The first data column of Table
1 reports these slopes. When considering all 199 country-year surveys separately, the slope
falls somewhat to 1.1, and is again statistically significant at the one-percent level. When
using only Tier 1 surveys, the slope coefficient becomes 1.4, and with Tier 1 and 2 surveys,
the slope becomes 1.3. We conclude that the pattern of increasing unemployment is not an
artifact of our choice of countries in the main analysis.


                                               8
                                           Figure 1: Unemployment Rates by GDP per capita

                      32
                                                                                ARM     ZAF
                                  16



                                                                                                       ESP
                                                                                                           IRL
      Unemployment Rate (Percent)




                                                                                       BWA             GRC
                                                                              MAR
                                                                            PSE IRQ             IRN
                                                                 KGZ                    DOM
                                                                                        CHL               FRA
                                                                               JAM   VEN TURARG HUN
                          8




                                                                                        ROU
                                                    MWI ZMB                        LCA BRA      TTO         CAN
                                                                                          BLR    PRT           USA
                                                                                 FJI                      AUT
                                                              SLV             PER COLPAN
                 4




                                                               GHA
                                                                  BOL                         URY
                                                                             PRY ECU      CRI
                                                                  VNM                     MEX
                                                                                                            CHE
          2




                                                         TZA
                                                         IND
                                                    BFA KHM                     IDN
                                                    UGA  BGD
                                                     MLI
                      1




                                               RWA
                                             MOZ
                      0.5




                                                                                         MYS

                                       6        7                 8            9                  10              11
                                                                ln(GDP per capita)

 Note: This figure plots the average unemployment rate for prime-aged adults in each country with at
 least two observations across all years of data from all tiers.


3.2                  Unemployment Rate by Education Level

In this subsection, we report our findings by education level, which are helpful in accounting
for the aggregate patterns we document above. Later we present results by other demographic
groups. We define two education groups, which can be measured consistently across nearly all
of our countries. The low education group are those that did not finish secondary school. This
could mean no school, some or all of primary school completed, some secondary education,
or some other specialty education that lasts less than 12 years. The high education group are
those that completed secondary school or more. This could mean exactly secondary school,
some college or university completed, or an advanced degree.
Figure 2 plots the unemployment rates for prime-aged adults by education group. As before,
we plot the unemployment rates in log base 2 and GDP per capita in natural logs. As one
can see, the patterns differ sharply by group. For the low-educated group, unemployment is
strongly increasing in GDP per capita. For the high-educated group, unemployment rates are


                                                                        9
            Figure 2: Unemployment Rates by GDP per capita and Education

                                                                         (a) Low-Education Group
                                                                                                                   ZAF


                                                             32
                 Unemployment Rate (Percent) for Low Education
                                                                                                      ARM
                                                                                                                                 ESP IRL
                                                                                                                            ARG
                                                     16
                                                                                                                             HUN GRCFRA
                                                                                                                  BWA
                                                                                               PSE MAR
                                                                                         KGZ             IRQ CHL                             USA
                                                                                                              DOM           IRN          AUT
                                                                                                                                         CAN
                                                                         MWI                         JAM    VEN BLR
                                                                                                              ROU
                                                                                                                TUR
                                              8




                                                                                                                             TTO
                                                                                                                             PRT
                                                                                                             LCA           URY             CHE
                                                                                                           FJI   BRA
                                                                                ZMB SLV
                                                                                                     PER        COLPAN
                                     4




                                                                                                                     CRI
                                                                                       GHA          PRY ECU
                                                                                         BOL
                                                                                                                     MEX
                             2




                                                                                KHM
                                                                                 TZA
                                                                                          VNM
                                                                          BFA
                                                                          UGA
                                                                                 IND
                                                                                BGD                       IDN
                      1




                                                                   MOZ    MLI


                                                                                                                    MYS
               0.5




                                                                     7                    8            9                      10                 11
                                                                                        ln(GDP per capita)



                                                                         (b) High-Education Group
                                                              32
                Unemployment Rate (Percent) for High Education




                                                                                                      ARM


                                                                                                    MAR            ZAF
                                                      16




                                                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                            IRN    GRC
                                                                                         KGZ PSE            IRQ       ARG
                                                                                                                                     FRA
                                              8




                                                                          BFAZMB
                                                                         MWI                                    DOM
                                                                                                               BWA
                                                                                                               CHL                    IRL
                                                                          MLI                        JAM     VEN
                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                                ROU
                                                                                       GHA              FJI   BRA      HUN               CAN
                                                                                                     PER         BLR                         USA
                                                                                                                PAN URYTTO
                                                                                 IND   BOL          IDN     COL        PRT               AUT
                                     4




                                                                                BGD                       LCA
                                                                          UGA       SLV                 ECU
                                                                                 TZA
                                                                                KHM       VNM                                              CHE
                                                                                                    PRY
                             2




                                                                   MOZ                                               CRI
                                                                                                                     MEX
               0.5    1




                                                                                                                    MYS

                                                                     7                    8            9                      10                 11
                                                                                        ln(GDP per capita)


Note: This figure plots the average unemployment rate for prime-aged adults by education level in each
country with at least two observations across all years of data from all tiers. Low education means less
than secondary school completed; high-education means secondary school completed or more.




                                                                                               10
            Table 1: Slope Coefficients of Unemployment Rate on GDP per capita



                              All Workers        N     Low Education          High Education         Ratio
All surveys                       1.1∗∗∗        199           2.9∗∗∗                 -.2            .50∗∗∗
                                    (.3)                       (.4)                  (.3)             (.03)

Country average                   1.8∗∗∗        55            3.2∗∗∗                 .5             .48∗∗∗
                                    (.5)                       (.6)                  (.4)             (.05)

Only Tier 1 surveys               1.4∗∗∗        127           3.2∗∗∗                 .4             .48∗∗∗
                                    (.3)                       (.4)                  (.3)             (.03)

Only Tier 1 + 2 surveys           1.3∗∗∗        167           2.9∗∗∗                 -.1            .50∗∗∗
                                    (.3)                       (.4)                  (.3)             (.03)


Note: The table reports the slope coefficient from a regression of the prime-age unemployment rate
on log GDP per capita and a constant. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent,
5-percent and 10-percent levels. The first row includes all surveys in our data. The second row includes
one observation per country: the average unemployment rate for those with at least two observations
across all years from all tiers. The third row includes only Tier 1 surveys. The fourth row includes
only Tier 1 and Tier 2 surveys. Surveys with missing education level data are dropped in the last three columns.



roughly constant across income levels. Again, there is quite a lot of variation in unemployment
rates for each income level, though somewhat less than for the aggregate unemployment
rates. Taking simple averages by income quartile, for the low-educated workers in the bottom
quartile, the average unemployment rate is 2.7 percent. This rises to 8.1 percent in the second
quartile, 9.5 in the third and 14.3 in the richest quartile. For the high-educated, the average
unemployment rate is not monotonically increasing in income per capita. It rises from 4.9
percent in the bottom quartile to 7.7 in the second, and then falls to 6.2 and 7.3 in the third
and fourth quartiles.
The third and fourth data columns of Table 1 report the regression coefficients for the
low-educated and the high-educated separately. For the low-educated, the coefficient is 2.9
across all surveys, and statistically significant at the one-percent level. When restricted
to country averages (i.e., the average across all surveys available for each country), we get
a significant slope of 3.2. Across our Tier 1 surveys only, the slope is also 3.2, and when
including both Tier 1 and Tier 2 surveys, the slope is 2.9, with statistical significance at the
one-percent level in both cases. For the high-educated, in contrast, the slope is statistically
insignificantly different from zero in all cases. Across all surveys, the slope coefficient is -0.2
but with a standard error of 0.34. The estimated slopes are noisy and statistically insignificant
for country averages, for Tier 1 and for both Tiers 1 and 2, as well.
Figure 3 plots the ratio of unemployment for the low-educated to that for the high-educated

                                                      11
                                                        Figure 3: Ratio of Unemployment Rates for Low- to High-Educated

                                                3
                                                                                                                                   IRL
   Ratio of Low− to High−Education Unemployment




                                                                                                                      HUN          AUT

                                                                                                                                      USA
                                                                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                                                CRI
                                                                                                              ZAF
                                                                                                             BWA               FRA
                                 2




                                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                               BLR
                                                                                                       LCA            ARG
                                                                                                                       PRT
                                                                                                                       TTO
                                                                                 SLV                                         ESP
                                                                                                               URY
                                                                                                PRY       CHL
                                                                                             PSE JAM        MEX
                                                                                                           ROU
                                                                                                     IRQVENDOM               GRC
                                                                                       KGZ
                                                                                                              TUR
                                                                                                             MYS
                                                                        MWI                           FJI
                                                                                                      ECUCOL
                  1




                                                                                                    ARM    BRA
                                                                               TZA
                                                                              ZMB                           PAN       IRN
                                                                                                   PER
                                                                              KHM      BOL        MAR
                                                                                        VNM
                                                                                     GHA
                                                                 MOZ
                                                                         UGA BGD
                                                                              IND                   IDN
                                                                         BFA
                                                                         MLI
                           0




                                                    6               7                   8            9                  10               11
                                                                                      ln(GDP per capita)

Note: This figure plots the average unemployment ratio of the low-educated workers over the high-educated
workers for prime-aged adults across all years of data for each country with at least two years’ observations,
for Tiers 1, 2 and 3 of surveys. See the Data Appendix for more details.


group. As the figure shows, this ratio is strongly increasing in GDP per capita. It is also
less variable across countries within each broad income level than in Figure 1, for example.
Virtually all of the poorest countries have ratios less than one, meaning that the low-educated
workers are less likely to be unemployed than the high-educated. All of the richest countries
have a ratio above one, meaning that the less-educated are more likely than the high-educated
to be unemployed. For the poorest quartile of the world income distribution, the average
ratio is 0.52. It rises to 1.1 in the second quartile, 1.5 in the third and 2.1 in the richest
quartile. Table 1 reports that a regression of this ratio on log GDP per capita yields an
estimated slope coefficient always in the ballpark of 0.5 across all surveys, with little variation
by data comparability tier.




                                                                                             12
3.3     Robustness

In this section, we report how unemployment patterns vary by sex, age, and within rural
and urban areas. Table 2 presents the slope coefficients from a regression of unemployment
rates on log GDP per capita for various disaggregated categories of individuals. We do this
separately for the low-education and high-education groups, first over all of our surveys (left
panel), and then using only country averages over all available years (right panel).
 Table 2: Robustness of Slope Coefficients of Unemployment Rate on log GDP per capita



                                 All Surveys                               All Country Averages
                   Low Edu.         High Edu.          N        Low Edu.          High Edu.         N
  Prime males         2.5∗∗∗            -.3           195          2.9∗∗∗             .4           54
                       (.4)             (.3)                        (.6)             (.3)


  Full sample         3.3∗∗∗            -.5           197          3.4∗∗∗             .5           54
                       (.4)             (.4)                        (.7)             (.6)


  Males               2.9∗∗∗            -.4           197          3.1∗∗∗             .4           54
                       (.4)             (.3)                        (.6)             (.5)


  Females             3.8∗∗∗            -.8∗          197          3.9∗∗∗             .3           54
                       (.4)             (.5)                        (.8)             (.8)


  Age 16-24           6.2∗∗∗            -1.2          183          6.6∗∗∗             .5           52
                       (.7)             (.8)                        (1.2)            (1.3)


  Age 25-54           2.9∗∗∗            -.2           195          3.2∗∗∗             .5           54
                       (.4)             (.3)                        (.6)             (.4)


  Age 55+             2.0∗∗∗            .5∗           173          2.4∗∗∗            .8∗           49
                       (.4)             (.2)                        (.6)             (.4)


  Rural               2.7∗∗∗            -.02          107          3.4∗∗∗            1.8∗          29
                       (.6)             (.7)                        (1.0)            (1.0)


  Urban               2.5∗∗∗            -.9           107          3.4∗∗∗             .6           29
                       (.9)             (.6)                        (1.2)            (.8)


Note: The table reports the slope coefficients from regressions of the unemployment rate on log GDP per
capita and a constant. Observations include aggregate unemployment rates across all Tier 1, 2, and 3 surveys.
Country averages are restricted to countries with at least two years’ observations. ***, ** and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent levels.

The first row of Table 2 reports the slope for prime-aged males only. Across all surveys and
country averages, low-educated prime-aged males have a statistically significant positive slope
with GDP per capita, while high-educated ones have an insignificant slope. This pattern is

                                                    13
replicated and even stronger in the full sample of households (second row), which includes
household members aged 16 to 25, those above age 55, and both sexes. The patterns hold
separately for males of all ages (third row) as well, while for females (fourth row), there is
even a significant negative trend with GDP per capita among the high-educated. We conclude
that our patterns hold for both sexes.
When looking by age group, the low-educated always have a significant and positive rela-
tionship with GDP per capita, with the strongest relationship for those aged 16 to 24. The
young high-educated have a significant negative slope with GDP per capita, at least across
all surveys; the prime-aged have an insignificant negative trend; and the old have a small but
significant positive slope. Thus, our patterns are robust across age groups. Finally, we look
separately at rural and urban individuals. For both groups, we see the same patterns: strong
positive increases in low-educated unemployment with GDP per capita and insignificant
slopes for the high-educated. Thus, our findings are present in both rural and urban areas.6


3.4     Employment, Unemployment, and Not in the Labor Force

Other data sets show that average employment rates are lower in rich countries than in poor
countries, at least for males (see e.g. Bick, Fuchs-Schuendeln, and Lagakos, 2018). Does this
imply that unemployment rates are higher in rich countries? Basic accounting identities show
that the answer is no. Those not employed can be either unemployed or not in the labor
force. The lower employment rates of rich countries could in principle correspond to lower
labor force participation rates, or higher unemployment rates, or both. In practice, we show
that the relationship between employment rates, unemployment rates, the percent not in the
labor force (NLF), and income per capita varies considerably by gender and education, and
cannot be inferred directly from evidence on employment rates alone.
Table 3 reports the percent of prime aged adults – by sex and education level – that are
employed, unemployed, and not in the labor force, for countries in the bottom and top income
quartiles. For low-educated males, employment rates are substantially lower in the richest
quartile than in the poorest. This reflects a substantially higher percent of low-educated
males not in the labor force in the richest quartile, as well as their higher unemployment
rates in the richest quartile. A similar pattern also holds for women, though with lower
employment levels in both quartiles.
Among high-educated males, employment rates are modestly higher in the richest quartile
   6
    One may worry that surveyors in poor countries may systematically avoid times when workers are unlikely
to be unemployed, such as harvest times, so as to ensure adequate survey participation. If so, our surveys
would overestimate the unemployment rates in the poor countries, thus, underestimating the slope of the
relationship between average unemployment and income per capita.



                                                    14
              Table 3: Employment, Unemployment and Not in the Labor Force
                                               Low Education                       High Education
              Income Quartile          Bottom      Top Difference          Bottom       Top    Difference
                  Employed              87.5       72.8      -14.7∗∗∗       83.1       86.3         3.2
    Male        Unemployed               2.3       11.2       8.9∗∗∗         4.0        6.1       2.1∗∗∗
             Not in labor force         10.2       16.0        5.8∗         12.9        7.6       -5.3∗∗
                  Employed              60.4       46.0       -14.4∗        63.1       69.7         6.6
  Female        Unemployed               1.9        9.1       7.2∗∗∗         4.2        6.7        2.4∗
             Not in labor force         37.7       44.9        7.2          32.7       23.7        -9.0∗

Note: This table reports summary statistics of prime age employment, unemployment and percent not in the
labor force for the bottom and top quartile countries, by gender and education. The rows present the average
of poor countries, the average of the rich countries, and the difference between the poor and rich means, plus
the results of a permutation test of the differences in means.


than in the poorest quartile (though the difference is statistically insignificant). Yet the
percent of high-educated males that are unemployed is also modestly higher in the richest
quartile. The reason that both are higher in the richest quartile is that, as Table 3 shows,
the percent not in the labor force is substantially lower for high-educated males in the
richest quartile. A similar pattern again holds for females, though with larger increases in
employment rates and labor force participation rates than for the males. We conclude that
there is no simple way one can infer cross-country unemployment patterns by looking solely
at data on employment rates, which reflect a margin of labor force participation as well.



4     A Simple Model of Unemployment and Development
In this section, we build a simple model to qualitatively match the increasing unemployment
rate with development, and the patterns of unemployment by education level. Since the main
focus of the paper is on unemployment rates, we abstract from the decision of whether to join
the labor force. Since our empirical patterns are present for both sexes, all age groups and
within both rural and urban areas, we abstract from demographics and regional considerations.
In order to match the large decrease in the traditional (low-skilled self-employment) sector
that coincides with development, we allow for two sectors in our model.




                                                     15
4.1    Environment

There is a unit measure of risk-neutral, infinitely-lived workers, each of whom is endowed
with efficiency units drawn from a fixed distribution G(x) on [x, x̄]. We assume that G(x)
is differentiable and let g(x) ≡ G0 (x) be its probability density function. There is also a
continuum of risk-neutral, infinitely-lived firms, each of which can employ one worker. In this
simple model, we assume undirected search in the aggregate distribution of ability. Later, in
the quantitative version of our model, we relax these assumptions and allow firms to direct
their search efforts toward high and low education groups of workers.
Workers can choose to work in one of two sectors: a traditional sector, in which workers are
self-employed without returns to ability, and a modern sector, in which firms hire workers
subject to matching friction. and production displays constant returns to ability. The
technologies in the traditional and modern sectors, respectively, are given by:

                                     Y T = AT N T ,   and                                   (1)
                                     Y M = AM X M ,                                         (2)

where YT , AT and NT are output, productivity and the number of workers in the traditional
sector, and YM , AM and XM are output, productivity and the total number of efficiency
units in the modern sector. Countries vary in their level of productivity AM but not AT , so
technological change in our model is skill-biased. Here we assume the outputs of the modern
and traditional sectors to be perfect substitutes for simplicity. We relax this assumption and
the invariance of AT in the quantitative model that follows. Our assumption of exogenous
modern-sector productivity is abstract, though it may capture more concrete channels that
affect firm size and hence the extent of wage employment, such as firm financial frictions (e.g.
Banerjee and Newman, 1993; Buera, Kaboski, and Shin, 2011; Greenwood, Sanchez, and
Wang, 2010), or monitoring frictions (e.g. Akcigit, Alp, and Peters, 2018; Cole, Greenwood,
and Sanchez, 2016).
We now combine a Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides model of steady-state unemployment with
a Roy model of selection into the modern versus the traditional sector.
Steady State. In the steady state, workers will not move between sectors in the absence of
shocks. Denote by x∗ the efficiency units of the marginal worker who is indifferent between
self-employment and entering the modern sector unemployed. We will show below that the
value of being unemployed is increasing in x; hence, in steady state, workers with x < x∗
prefer self-employment in the traditional sector, and workers with x ≥ x∗ prefer to enter the
modern sector as unemployed.



                                              16
Modern Sector. In order to hire a worker, a firm must post a vacancy at flow cost AM c.7
Let the flow of matches be given by the constant returns to scale function

                                           m(u, v) = ηuα v 1−α ,                                          (3)

where u is the endogenous measure of unemployed workers and v is the endogenous measure
of vacancies in the economy. Define θ ≡ uv as “market tightness.” The job-finding rate is
then f (u, v) ≡ m
                u
                  = ηθ1−α , and the vacancy hiring rate is q(u, v) ≡ mv = ηθ−α .
We assume that workers and firms separate at an exogenous rate s. Let AM bx denote
the unemployment flow payoff,8 where 0 < b < 1. One rationale for this choice is that
unemployment benefits are typically indexed to wages, which we will show scale with AM x
in equilibrium. A second rationale is that job finding rates are approximately constant across
skill groups, which is consistent with a model where unemployment benefits scale with the
expected wage (Hall and Mueller, Forthcoming; Mincer, 1991; Mueller, 2017). Denoting by δ
the rate of time discount for all agents, the values of unemployment and employment for an
individual with efficiency units x are given, respectively, by
                                                                      
                              U (x) = AM bx + δ f E(x) + (1 − f )U (x)                                    (4)
                                                                   
                              E(x) = w(x) + δ sU (x) + (1 − s)E(x) ,                                      (5)

where w(x) is the endogenous flow wage.
Because firms will be matched only with agents in the modern sector, who have efficiency
units x ≥ x∗ , we can specify the value of a job to a firm if matched with a worker with
efficiency units x and the value of maintaining a vacancy as:
                                                                  
                           J(x) = AM x − w(x) + δ sV + (1 − s)J(x)                                        (6)
                             V = −AM c + δ qE J|x > x∗ + (1 − q)V ,
                                                                   
                                                                                                          (7)

                  R x̄ J(x)g(x)dx
where E J|x > x∗ = x∗1−G(x∗ ) is the expected value to the firm of a job match conditional
on the workers having entered the modern sector.
Because of the free-entry condition for firms, we have V = 0. Let S(x) ≡ E(x) − U (x) + J(x)
denote the total surplus of a match, and β ∈ (0, 1) be the Nash bargaining power of the
worker. The firm then receives (1 − β)S(x) when a vacancy is filled. Combining this division
of the surplus with equations (4) to (7) allows us to solve for U (x) and w(x), with the former
   7
     We shall see later that, in equilibrium, wages scale with AM . If the productivity of the vacancy posting
process is not affected by AM , the cost of posting a vacancy should also scale with AM .
   8
     Our results are qualitatively unchanged if we let AM b denote the unemployment flow payoff.



                                                     17
given by:
                         1              1−α β     AM x(1 − b)(1 − β) 
                U (x) =      AM bx + δηθ                                .                   (8)
                        1−δ                 1 − β βδηθ1−α + 1 − δ + δs
Equation (8) shows that U (x) is increasing, as we asserted previously. We also show in
Appendix B.1 that steady state in the modern sector is characterized by the following
relationship between θ and x∗ :

                                (1 − β)δηθ−α
                        c=        1−α
                                                   (1 − b)E(x|x > x∗ ).                     (9)
                             βδηθ     + 1 − δ + δs
Note that market tightness θ is unaffected by AM for a given x∗ . By equation (11) below,
this implies that unemployment is unaffected by AM for a given x∗ . Thus, in the absence of
a traditional sector, our model predicts that unemployment remains constant as per capita
income increases. If b or c did not scale with AM , θ would instead decrease with AM for a given
x∗ , and in the absence of a traditional sector, our model would predict that unemployment
decreases as per capita income increases.
                                                                          AT
Indifference Condition. The value of staying in the traditional sector is 1−δ , since any
traditional worker produces AT in every period. The worker with efficiency units x∗ is
indifferent between staying in the traditional sector and entering the modern sector as
unemployed:

                                                     AM x∗ (1 − b)(1 − β)
                                                                         
             AT       ∗     1        ∗      1−α β
                = U (x ) =      AM bx + δηθ                                .               (10)
            1−δ            1−δ                 1 − β βδηθ1−α + 1 − δ + δs

Unemployment Rate. Letting uM denote the measure of the modern-sector unemployed
and its steady-state value, we can write the change in modern-sector unemployment as
u̇M = (LM − uM )s − uM f (θ), where f (θ) = ηθ1−α is the steady state job finding rate and
LM = 1 − G(x∗ ) is the labor that participates in the modern sector. We can then set u̇M = 0
to obtain the measure of steady-state modern sector unemployment, which is the same as
the overall unemployment rate, since the overall measure of workers is one and there is no
unemployment in the traditional sector:

                                         s 1 − G(x∗ )
                                                     
                                      u=               .                                   (11)
                                           s + ηθ1−α

Note that the unemployment rate depends on the separation rate, s, the (endogenous) market
tightness, θ, and the (endogenous) cutoff x∗ for working in the modern sector. The fraction
1 − G(x∗ ) represents the measure of workers in the modern sector. The higher is this fraction,
all else equal, the higher is the unemployment rate. Similarly, the lower is θ, all else equal,
the higher is unemployment.


                                              18
4.2     Model Solution and Predictions

We now establish the uniqueness of our model solution, and characterize how the endogenous
variables θ and x∗ vary with modern-sector productivity, AM .
Proposition 1 If an interior solution x∗ ∈ (x, x̄) exists, the model solution (x∗ , θ) is unique,
and the cutoff ability x∗ decreases as modern-sector productivity AM increases.
Proof. See Appendix B.2.
Proposition 1 shows that an increase in modern sector productivity reduces x∗ , drawing
workers out of the traditional sector into the modern sector. This result plays an important
role in determining how unemployment rates vary with modern-sector productivity. In
particular, we can use it to help establish:
Proposition 2 The aggregate unemployment rate u increases as modern-sector productivity
AM increases.
Proof. See Appendix B.3.
The intuition for this result is as follows. First, as AM increases, workers are drawn out of
the traditional sector and into search for wage employment in the modern sector, as shown
in Proposition 1. Because modern-sector jobs involve regular separations, a larger modern
sector means larger steady-state unemployment, all else equal. Second, as AM increases,
market tightness, θ, falls in equilibrium. Because the workers drawn into the modern sector
are of lower ability than existing modern-sector workers, the expected value of a match to
the firm falls. For the free-entry condition to hold, the job filling rate for a vacancy must rise.
This means fewer vacancies per unemployed person, i.e., a smaller θ.
Proposition 3 Let x∗ be an interior solution and x0 < x∗ denote a fixed ability level. Then
the ratio of the unemployment rate for workers with ability lower than x0 to that of workers
with ability higher than x0 increases as modern-sector productivity AM increases.
Proof. See Appendix B.4.
 In short, this result states that the relative unemployment of less-able to more-able workers
 increases with development. Intuitively, this occurs because a larger share of less-able workers
 are drawn into the modern sector as AM rises. Figure 4 illustrates how Proposition 3 works.
 Denote the “high-ability workers” as those with ability above x0 , and those below x0 as the
“low-ability workers.” The initial cutoff is depicted as x∗1 , and hence regions A and B represent
 the traditional sector, whereas C and D are the modern sector. Once AM rises, the cutoff
 falls, by Proposition 1, to a lower cutoff which we denote by x∗2 . Region B switches from the
 traditional to the modern sector. Since these are low-ability workers, and no high-ability
workers switch sectors, the ratio of low- to high-ability unemployment increases.


                                                19
                     Figure 4: Comparative Statics in AM in Simple Model




 Note: This figure illustrates comparative statics in AM , characterized formally in Propositions 2 and 3.


5     Quantitative Analysis
Though the simple model above is useful for establishing the qualitative properties of our
theory, the model is a bit too stylized to use in our quantitative analysis. Thus, in this section
we build a richer quantitative version of the model. We then calibrate the model to match
features of the U.S. labor market, and compute the model’s predictions over the full range of
the world income distribution.


5.1    Quantitative Version of the Model

In our simple model the outputs of the modern and traditional sectors are perfect substitutes,
so their relative price cannot change as AM rises. This is at odds with the well-known tendency
for the relative price of non-traded services, in which the traditional sector is intensive, to rise
with per capita GDP. With this in mind, we now allow traditional and modern sector outputs
to be imperfect substitutes. We specify the following constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES)
aggregate production function:
                                                                  σ1
                                      Y = γYTσ + (1 − γ)YMσ             ,                              (12)

                                                    20
where YT and YM are the aggregate outputs of the traditional and modern sectors, respectively,
                                                         1
and the elasticity of substitution between them equals 1−σ . Denote the price of traditional-
sector output relative to modern-sector output by PT . In a competitive market, the ratio of
prices equals the ratio of marginal productivities:
                                                          1−σ
                                       ∂Y /∂YT     γ    YM
                                  PT =         =                .                                         (13)
                                       ∂Y /∂YM   1 − γ YT

Technological change that is skill-biased across countries is a core assumption of our model.
The assumption that technological change in the traditional sector is zero, however, is an
oversimplification. In our quantitative exercise we allow for an elasticity of technological
change in the traditional sector with respect to technological change in the modern sector
that is less than one. Specifically, in our calibration procedure we will assume that log(AT ) =
θ0 + θ1 log(AM ), where we expect to find that θ1 < 1.9
Increases in PT or AT with AM cause workers who remain in the traditional sector in rich
countries to earn more than traditional sector workers in poor countries. This is more realistic
than the prediction of the simple model that earnings of traditional sector workers in rich
and poor countries will be the same.
Key predictions of our model concern traditional employment and unemployment by worker
ability. Unfortunately, direct measures of ability across many countries are not available.
Wage is a linear function of ability in our model, but we cannot observe wages for the
self-employed in the traditional sector or the unemployed. Instead, for the purpose of
quantifying our predictions regarding traditional self-employment and unemployment by
ability, we use education as our proxy for ability. Specifically, we divide the labor force into
the two education groups used above, in particular the low education group, which did not
finish secondary school, and the high education group, which completed secondary school or
more. We incorporate education into our model as a proxy for ability by assuming that the
distribution of ability for the high-education group first-order stochastically dominates the
distribution of ability for the low-education group: Gh (x) < Gl (x) for all x ∈ (x, x̄).10
Countries differ exogenously in the fraction λ of their workers that are in the low-education
group. The remaining 1 − λ are in the high-education group. We assume employers can
   9
     In our theory, the higher relative output of goods produced by skilled workers that occurs with development
results only from increased productivity in the modern sector relative to the traditional sector. In reality,
however, development leads to an increase in the relative demand for skill-intensive goods, as richer households
demand more skill-intensive products and services (Buera and Kaboski, 2012; Buera, Kaboski, and Rogerson,
2015) Our results would still apply, at least qualitatively, if we were to extend our model to include non-
homothetic preferences in which higher income causes higher relative demand for skill-intensive goods.
  10
     This condition is sufficient, but not necessary, for the results of this subsection. We verified that the
distributions calibrated in the next subsection satisfy this condition.



                                                      21
observe this education credential ex ante and divide the modern sector labor market into two
search markets, one for each education level. Finally, we treat the outputs of modern-sector
firms that search in the high-education and low-education labor markets as perfect substitutes,
and add them to obtain YM in equation (13).
We also allow for the possibility that the separation rate for high-educated workers is less
than for low-educated workers, though this is not necessary to obtain any of our qualitative
results: sh ≤ sl . All other parameters are assumed to be the same across the two labor
markets.
We can now prove:
Lemma 1 For any interior solution to the model with two labor markets, x∗h < x∗l .
Proof. See Appendix B.5.
It follows from Lemma 1 and Gh (x) < Gl (x) that the share of high-educated agents who are
self-employed in the traditional sector is lower than the corresponding share of low-educated
agents:
Proposition 4 For any interior solution to the model with two labor markets, Gh (x∗h ) <
Gl (x∗l ).
As modern sector productivity AM increases in our simple model, Proposition 1 states that
the share of workers who are self-employed in the traditional sector falls (x∗ decreases).
Similarly, if increasing AM dominates increasing traditional sector relative price PT and
traditional sector productivity AT in our quantitative model, the shares of both high- and
low-educated workers who are self-employed in the traditional sector will fall (x∗h and x∗l
both decrease). The unemployment rates of both high- and low-educated workers must then
increase, just as did the aggregate unemployment rate in the simple model (Proposition
2). Here, however, the aggregate unemployment rate does not necessarily increase, despite
increases in the unemployment rates for both education groups. The aggregate unemployment
rate in the quantitative version of our model is a weighted average of the unemployment
rates of high- and low-educated workers, with weights 1 − λ and λ. In the data, as modern
sector productivity and thus GDP per capita increases, the share of low-educated workers λ
tends to decrease. If the high-educated unemployment rate is smaller than the low-educated
unemployment rate, it is possible for the aggregate unemployment rate predicted by the
quantitative version of our model to decrease with AM and GDP per capita.
Whether the ratio of low-educated to high-educated unemployment rates increases with AM
in the quantitative model, which would be the equivalent of Proposition 3 in the simple
model, depends on the calibration. However, we can establish a strong presumption that
our quantitative model will display this property. The basis for Proposition 3 is that, as


                                              22
AM increases, participation in the modern sector by workers with low ability increases
relative to participation by workers with high ability. We can expect, similarly, that as
AM increases, participation in the modern sector of low-educated workers will increase
proportionately faster than participation of high-educated workers. The reason is that low-
educated workers’ participation in the modern sector must be lower according to Proposition 4,
but both participation rates must approach 100 percent as AM increases. In our quantitative
predictions in Subsection 5.3 below, participation of low-educated relative to high-educated
workers in the modern sector does indeed increase as AM , and thus per capita GDP, increases.


5.2     Parameterizing the Model

We begin by directly setting some parameter values following the literature. We set the
quarterly discount factor to δ = 0.99, consistent with an annual interest rate of around four
percent. We set the worker’s bargaining weight to β = 0.7 and the elasticity parameter of
the matching function to α = 0.7, which are the values used in Fujita and Ramey (2012) and
are in line with the standard parameter choices used in macro search models. We set the
quarterly separation rate for the high-educated workers to sh = 0.045, which is the value
estimated in Wolcott (2018). We use the unemployment benefits replacement rate of 45
percent. This is in line with the 40 percent used by Shimer (2005) , the 42 percent in Braxton,
Herkenhoff, and Phillips (2018), and the 50 - 60 percent range in Krueger and Mueller (2010).
We also normalize the mean of the ability for low-educated workers to be one.
We set the elasticity of substitution between traditional and modern goods to be 3 in our
benchmark calibration, though we explore sensitivity to this parameter, as we describe
below. Our elasticity of substitution relates to some extent to the elasticity of substitution
between home and market goods that is emphasized by the large literature emphasizing home
production in the macroeconomy.11 Though our model’s elasticity is related to these, it is
not exactly comparable, and one may imagine that there are greater substitution possibilities
between modern and traditional goods than between home and market production, since
modern and traditional goods are both purchased in the market. For example, one type of
substitution between the modern and traditional sector may be getting older shoes shined
  11
     See eg. Baxter and Jermann (1999); Benhabib, Rogerson, and Wright (1991); Greenwood and Hercowitz
(1991); Karabarbounis (2014); Ngai and Pissarides (2008, 2011); Rogerson (2008). Aruoba, Davis, and Wright
(2016) choose a value of 1.8, and argue that this is close to the midpoint of the range suggested by previous
estimates in this literature. For example, Rupert, Rogerson, and Wright (1995) use panel data from the PSID
with evidence on time spent in home production and market work, and estimate an elasticity of substitution
between 1.8 and 2.0. McGrattan, Rogerson, and Wright (1997) and Chang and Schorfheide (2003) use U.S.
time series data and come up with estimates of 1.5 to 1.8 and 2.3 respectively. Aguiar and Hurst (2007a)
draw on detailed household-level data on market goods consumption and time spent on home production,
such as cleaning, cooking and home repair. They estimate an elasticity of substitution of 2.1 when considering
all home production categories in their data.


                                                     23
and repaired (from a self-employed shoe repairer) rather than purchasing newer shoes (from a
modern shoe factory). Another example is buying produce from an informal road-side vendor
versus buying produce at a modern supermarket. It is therefore worth looking at alternative
evidence on substitution between different categories of purchased goods and services. In a
widely cited study, Broda and Weinstein (2006) estimate elasticities of substitution across a
diverse set of goods varieties, finding a median estimate of around 2.2 to 3.7 across goods
categories.12 Our benchmark value of 3 is right in the middle of their estimates, though since
there is not a more precise value suggested by the literature, we explore a lower value of 2.5,
closer to the home-production literature, and a higher value of 3.5, close to the upper end of
the values estimated by Broda and Weinstein (2006).
We calibrate the remaining eight parameters to jointly match eight moments in the data.
These parameters are: (i) the mean of the ability distribution for the high-educated workers,
mh ; (ii) and (iii): the variances of the ability distributions for the low- and high-educated
workers, vl and vh ; (iv) the vacancy cost c as a share of the modern-sector productivity for a
worker with one unit of ability; (v) the efficiency term, η, of the matching function; (vi) the
traditional-sector share in the aggregate production function, γ; (vii) the quarterly separation
rate for the low-educated workers, sl ; and, finally, (viii): the maximum value of AM , which
corresponds to the U.S. level.13
The eight moments are: (i) the ratio of the average modern-sector wages for the high- over
low-educated that we calculated using the 2000 Census 5% sample (1.60); (ii) and (iii) the
variances of log wages for the high- and low-educated (0.34 and 0.28), using the same 2000
census; (iv) the vacancy cost of 17 percent of average output in the modern sector as used in
Fujita and Ramey (2012); (v) the average U.S. unemployment rate of 5.71 percent in the
United States among the 18 samples in our data from 1960 to 2014; (vi) the U.S. expenditure
share in the traditional sector, which we conjecture to be smaller than two percent; (vii)
the ratio of unemployment for the the low-educated to high-educated (2.31); and (viii) an
average employment share of two percent in the traditional sector (as we explain below).
We define the traditional sector as the intersection of own-account (self-employed without
employees) workers and occupations with low skill content – in particular, shop and market
sales, agricultural and fishery workers, crafts and related trades workers, plant and machine
  12
     We are not aware of any estimates of substitution elasticities between goods with low and high levels of
skill inputs. On the production side, the closest estimate would be for the substitution elasticity between high-
and low-skilled labor in the aggregate production function; Autor (2002, pg. 11) argues that the “consensus
across estimates for the U.S.” is that this elasticity is approximately two. McKiernan (2018) estimates
an elasticity of substitution of around 6.5 between informal and formal labor, though this is again about
production and not final consumption goods.
  13
     Note that although the absolute value of AM is smaller than AT , the modern sector is more productive
than the traditional sector in value terms. The traditional and modern sectors produce different goods, and
the relative price of the traditional good, PT , is around 0.01 in the United States in our calibrated model.


                                                      24
                                 Table 4: Calibrated Parameters

         Parameter                                                                     Value
                               Panel A: Pre-Assigned Parameters
         δ - Discount factor (quarterly)                                                0.99
         β - Workers’ bargaining power                                                   0.7
         α - Matching parameter                                                          0.7
         sh - Separation rate (quarterly) for high-educated workers                     0.045
         b - Unemployed benefits                                                        0.45
          1
         1−σ
               - Elasticity of substitution                                               3
         AT (U S) - U.S. traditional-sector productivity                                  1
         ml - Mean of ability dfor low-educated workers                                   1
                                 Panel B: Calibrated Parameters
         mh - Mean of ability for high-educated workers                                 1.66
         vl - Variance of ability for low-educated workers                              0.45
         vh - Variance of ability for high-educated workers                             1.15
         c - Vacancy cost                                                               0.15
         η - Matching efficiency                                                        0.85
         γ - Traditional-sector share in aggregate production function                  0.01
         sl - Separation rate (quarterly) for low-educated workers                      0.112
         max(AM ) - Modern-sector productivity for the richest country                  0.04

   Note: The table reports the values and interpretations of the parameters of the quantitative model
   under the benchmark calibration.


operators and assemblers, and “elementary occupations.” Unfortunately, the U.S. data
after 1960 distinguish only between incorporated and unincorporated businesses among the
self-employed, rather than between own-account workers and employers as in the countries in
Figures 5 and 6 below. Considering that the Canada samples have an average of 2.8 percent
prime-aged employment in the traditional sector, which is defined consistently with the other
countries, we conjecture that the United States has a smaller share of two percent. As with
our benchmark unemployment measures, all traditional sector employment shares reported
in this section are calculated for prime-aged workers.
Table 4 reports the value of each parameter used in the calibration. Our calibrated quarterly
separation rate for the low-educated is 0.112, similar to the direct estimate of 0.06 - 0.12


                                                  25
                     Table 5: Moments Targeted in the Model vs Data


       Moment                                                             Target     Model
       Ratio of average wage for the high- vs low-educated                  1.60      1.61
       High-edu log(wage) variance                                          0.34      0.33
       Low-edu log(wage) variance                                           0.28      0.28
       U.S. vacancy cost as % of average output in modern sector             17       16.9
       U.S. unemployment rate                                               5.71      5.69
       U.S. % expenditure share of traditional sector                      <2.0       0.67
       U.S. ratio of unemployment rates ul /uh                              2.31      2.32
       U.S. traditional sector employment share                              2        1.84

   Note: The table reports the moments targeted in the benchmark calibration of the quantitative
   model and the model’s predictions for each moment.


during 1980 to 2010 computed by Wolcott (2018) for low-educated workers. Our estimate is
also broadly consistent with the separation rate in low-skilled services in the United States.
For example, according to the 2017 Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, the monthly
separation rate in wholesale and retail trade, transportation and utilities is around 3.5 percent.
This corresponds to a quarterly separation rate of around 10 percent.
We report each moment and its model counterpart in Table 5. Overall, the model matches
the desired moments quite well. Although all of the eight parameters reported above jointly
discipline all the parameters, it is useful to provide some intuition about which moments are
most informative about each parameter. In particular, the mean of the ability distribution
for high-educated workers, mh , largely governs the ratio of average wage of the high- to
low-educated workers. The variances of the two ability distributions govern the variances
of log wages for the low- and high-educated workers. The model vacancy cost and model
unemployment benefit are most informative about the relative size of vacancy cost and
unemployment benefits to the average output per worker in the modern sector. The matching
efficiency parameter η mostly informs the average unemployment rate, and the sector share
parameter in the aggregate production function mostly informs the expenditure share of
traditional-sector output. The quarterly separation rate for low-educated workers is most
informative about the unemployment ratio of low- to high-educated workers. Finally, the
maximum AM value governs the traditional sector employment share in the richest country
(the United States).



                                                26
                  Table 6: Slope of Log Relative Prices on log(GDP) in Data

       Shoe repair - women’s street shoes .39∗∗∗ Men’s basic haircut                        .61∗∗∗
                                                   (.002)                                    (.001)


       Shoe repair - men’s classic shoes           .53∗∗∗ Ladies haircut - curlers          .63∗∗∗
                                                   (.004)                                    (.002)


       Shoeshine                                   .56∗∗∗ Manicure                          .44∗∗∗
                                                   (.002)                                    (.003)


       Local taxi ride                             .42∗∗∗ Ladies haircut - long hair .68∗∗∗
                                                   (.006)                                    (.002)


   Note: Data come from the unpublished ICP 2011 disaggregated price data for the Global Core list
   of goods and services. See Appendix Table C1 for the exact definition of each good and service.
   The table reports the slope coefficient from a regression of the log of the item price relative to the
   investment goods price on log GDP per capita and a constant. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
   significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent levels.



It remains to calibrate the elasticity of traditional sector productivity with respect to modern
sector productivity. To do so, we use the fact that greater increases in AT will result in
smaller increases in PT as GDP per capita increases, all else equal. Specifically, we target the
elasticity of the relative price of traditional goods with respect to GDP per capita.
We draw on disaggregated evidence on average national prices for specific products from
the 2011 International Comparison Program (ICP). The ICP data are the best available
data on the prices of identical (or nearly identical) goods and services around the world,
and are available for almost every country in the world. How do we define traditional goods
in these data? Consistent with our definition of the traditional sector, we pick goods or
services that are have low skill content and are likely to be provided by self-employed workers.
We identified eight specific services that plausibly meet these criteria: (i) a shoe repair for
women’s street shoes; (ii) a shoe repair for men’s classic shoes; (iii) a shoeshine; (iv) a 7km
taxi ride from the town center; (v) a men’s basic haircut; (vi) a ladies haircut with curlers;
(vii) a manicure; (viii) a ladies haircut, long hair. Appendix Table C1 provides the exact
definitions of these eight traditional sector services. Since investment goods largely fit our
definition of a modern output, we take the aggregate price level of investment from the Penn
World Table as a proxy for our modern sector price. For each traditional-sector service, we
then compute the relative price of the service compared to investment goods in each country.
Table 6 reports the slope coefficient from a regression of the log of the item relative price on
log GDP per capita and a constant. As shown in the table, the elasticity of the relative price
ranges between 0.39 to 0.68. We target the median of these relative price elasticities, which


                                                    27
is around 0.60. Our calibration uses the parameter θ1 , the elasticity of AT with respect to
AM , to target this relative price elasticity. This yields θ1 = 0.26, with the intercept θ0 in the
equation log(AT ) = θ0 + θ1 log(AM ) determined implicitly by our normalization of AT to be
one in the United States.14


5.3     Quantitative Predictions

With the model calibrated to the U.S. data, we then lower AM , AT , and λ, the fraction of
workers that are low-educated. We discipline λ directly using data on the fraction of workers
with less than high school education across our set of countries (see Appendix Figure C1).
After solving each economy, we use the equilibrium prices PT from all economies to compute
a single international price, the average of PT weighted by traditional-sector output in each
economy. We use this international price to compute the values of model outputs for all
economies, including the U.S., and then scale all output values such that the richest economy
matches the U.S. GDP per capita of exp(10.7) or $44,355.
Figure 5 plots the traditional-sector size in the model and data. As GDP per capita decreases
from the U.S. level, our model predicts an increase in the traditional-sector size from two
percent to almost 60 percent. This is largely in line with our data. Furthermore, our model
gets the curvature largely correct – in particular, the convex relationship between traditional-
sector share and GDP per capita. This occurs partly because in richer economies almost all
high-educated workers in the model are in the modern sector, so when those workers start to
switch to the traditional sector, its size increases faster.
To emphasize the mechanisms further, Figure 6 plots the traditional-sector shares by education
level. As in the data, the model predicts decreasing relationships between the traditional
sector shares and per capita GDP for both groups. Crucially, it predicts much higher shares
of traditional sector employment for the low-educated in poor countries. As AM rises, there
are more low- than high-educated workers to sort out of the traditional sector, and as a
result unemployment rises more for the low-educated (as in the data). This differential rate
of exodus from the traditional sector as AM rises is thus key to our theory, and Figure 6
shows that the magnitudes here are largely consistent with the data. Note that the aggregate
traditional-sector share in Figure 5 is nearly the same as the low-educated traditional sector
share in Figure 6, because the labor force in poor countries is dominated by low-educated
workers.
Figure 7 plots the aggregate unemployment level in the model and data. As GDP per capita
  14
    Specifically, to match the elasticity of relative price to GDP per capita, we have to solve the full set of
countries in the model with potential values of θ1 . In contrast, we only need to solve one country in the
model to calibrate the eight U.S. moments.


                                                      28
                                              Figure 5: Traditional-Sector Share in Model and Data

                     80
                                                              TZA


                                                        MWI                        NGA
    Traditional Sector Size (Percent)




                                                                     GHA
                                60




                                                        MLI


                                                              KHM
                                                                    IDNBOL
                   40




                                                              ZMB                 ECU
                                            Model                              NIC
                                                                                   PER
                                                               IND            MAR
                                                                 SLV              DOM
                                                                                   FJIPAN           IRN
                                                                                      BRA     MEX
                                                                                             TUR
      20




                                                                                   JAM
                                                                                               MYS
                                                                                  ARG       CRI
                                                                                              URY     GRC
                                                                                         CHLVEN
                                                                                             BWA
                                                                                              ROU TTO
                                                                                                    PRT IRL
                                                                                                        AUT
                                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                                      HUNFRA CHE
                                                                                               ZAF          CAN
                     0




                                        6           7                   8            9                10           11
                                                                      ln(GDP per capita)

   Note: This figure plots the size of the traditional sector against log GDP per capita in the data and
   model. Each dot represents one country, and the solid line is the prediction of the quantitative model.


increases, our model predicts that the unemployment rate will increase from less than 4
percent to the calibrated value of 5.7 percent. This is similar to the magnitudes in the
data, though the model somewhat under-predicts the steepness of the relationship. Further,
consistent with the data, our model predicts a sharper increase when GDP per capita is lower.
This is a result of the faster decrease in the traditional-sector share when GDP per capita is
lower.
Figure 8 plots the ratio of unemployment for the low-educated to the high-educated in the
model and data. The model is calibrated to obtain the correct ratio for the United States.
For lower levels of GDP per capita, the model predicts a decline in this ratio, as in the data.
Again, the the model underpredicts the steepness of this relationship. The model predicts
that this ratio is just above one for the poorest countries, whereas in the data, the ratio is
closer to 0.5.
Table 8 reports the slope coefficients from regressions of the unemployment rate and other
key variables for prime age workers on log GDP per capita and a constant, in our model and

                                                                             29
                                                                      Figure 6: Traditional-Sector Share by Education



                                                            80
         Traditional Sector Size (Percent) for High Education
                                                60




                                                                                                            NGA
                                  40




                                                                                        TZA



                                                                                  MWI         GHA
                     20




                                                                                                             PER
                                                                                         KHM
                                                                                          IND
                                                                                        ZMB                                IRN
                                                                                  MLI           BOL        ECU
                                                                     Model                   IDN        NIC
                                                                                                          JAM          MEX
                                                                                            SLV                      TUR     HUN
                                                                                                       ARGDOMBRA    URY        AUT   CHE
                                                                                                               CHLCRI
                                                                                                       MAR FJIPAN   ROU  TTO GRCFRA
                                                                                                                                 IRL
                                                                                                                  VENZAF
                                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                                                                   BWA      PRTESP CAN
         0




                                                                 6            7                  8            9                  10            11
                                                                                               ln(GDP per capita)


                                                                                        TZA
         Traditional Sector Size (Percent) for Low Education
                                                         80




                                                                                                            NGA
                                                                                  MWI
                                                                                              GHA
                                              60




                                                                                  MLI

                                                                                        KHM BOL
                                                                                           IDN               PER
                                 40




                                                                                                              ECU
                                                                                        ZMB
                                                                                                           NIC
                                                                                                                               IRN
                                                                      Model              IND
                                                                                           SLV         MAR    PAN
                                                                                                           FJI BRA
                                                                                                          DOM               MEX
                                                                                                         JAM              TUR    GRC
                                                                                                                         ROU
                     20




                                                                                                                       CRIMYS
                                                                                                           ARG           URY
                                                                                                                    CHLVEN
                                                                                                                        BWA TTO      IRL
                                                                                                                                PRTAUT
                                                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                                    FRA
                                                                                                                                 HUN    CAN
                                                                                                                          ZAF            CHE
         0




                                                                 6            7                  8            9                  10            11
                                                                                               ln(GDP per capita)


Note: This figure plots the size of the traditional sector against log GDP per capita in the data and
model. The top panel is for high-educated workers, and the bottom is for low-educated workers.




                                                                                                      30
                                          Figure 7: Unemployment Rates in the Model and Data

                   32
                                                                                  ARM     ZAF
                               16



                                                                                                         ESP
   Unemployment Rate (Percent)




                                                                                         BWA             GRC IRL
                                                                             MAR
                                                                           PSE IRQ
                                        Model                                                     IRN
                                                                   KGZ                    DOM
                                                                                          CHL               FRA
                                                                                 JAM   VEN TURARG HUN
                       8




                                                                                          ROU
                                                      MWI ZMB                        LCA BRA      TTO
                                                                                                   PRT        CAN
                                                                                            BLR                  USA
                                                                                   FJI                      AUT
                                                                SLV             PER COLPAN
              4




                                                                 GHA
                                                                    BOL                         URY
                                                                               PRY ECU      CRI
                                                                    VNM                     MEX
                                                                                                              CHE
                                                           TZA
       2




                                                           IND
                                                      BFA KHM                     IDN
                                                      UGA BGD
                                                        MLI
                   1




                                                  RWA
                                                MOZ
                   0.5




                                                                                           MYS

                                    6             7                 8            9                  10              11
                                                                  ln(GDP per capita)

   Note: This figure plots the aggregate unemployment rate against log GDP per capita. Each dot
   represents one country in our data, and the solid line is the prediction of the quantitative model.


in the data. For the aggregate unemployment rate, the model yields a semi-elasticity of 0.5
compared to 1.8 in the data. Thus, the model accounts for around 30 percent (0.5/1.8) of
the empirical relationship between unemployment and log GDP per capita. Unemployment
rates for the low-educated have a semi-elasticity of 1.7 in the model, compared to 3.2 in the
data. The high-educated semi-elasticities are fairly similar, at 0.4 in the model and 0.5 in
the data. The ratio of low- to high-educated unemployment rates is 0.5 in the data and 0.3
in the model. Largely consistent with the above discussions, the model yields magnitudes
similar to the data but underpredicts the empirical elasticities. Traditional-sector slopes are
similar in the model and data, at -15.9 in the model and -13.4 in the data.
We also calibrated our model using an alternative strategy to discipline the elasticity of
technological change in the traditional sector with respect to technological change in the
modern sector. We targeted the slope of the aggregate traditional sector share on log GDP
per capita instead of the elasticity of the relative price of traditional sector output with
respect to GDP per capita. This yields θ1 = 0.19 when we match the traditional sector

                                                                          31
                                                        Figure 8: Unemployment Ratio in the Model and Data

                                                3
                                                                                                                             IRL
   Ratio of Low− to High−Education Unemployment




                                                                                                                HUN          AUT

                                                                                                                                USA
                                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                          CRI
                                                          Model                                         ZAF
                                                                                                       BWA               FRA
                                 2




                                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                         BLR
                                                                                                 LCA            ARG
                                                                                                                 PRT
                                                                                                                 TTO
                                                                           SLV                                         ESP
                                                                                                         URY
                                                                                          PRY       CHL
                                                                                       PSE JAM        MEX
                                                                                                     ROU
                                                                                               IRQVENDOM               GRC
                                                                                 KGZ
                                                                                                        TUR
                                                                                                       MYS
                                                                  MWI                           FJI
                                                                                                ECUCOL
                  1




                                                                                              ARM    BRA
                                                                         TZA
                                                                        ZMB                           PAN       IRN
                                                                                             PER
                                                                        KHM      BOL        MAR
                                                                                  VNM
                                                                               GHA
                                                           MOZ
                                                                   UGA BGD
                                                                        IND                   IDN
                                                                   BFA
                                                                   MLI
                           0




                                                    6         7                   8            9                  10               11
                                                                                ln(GDP per capita)

   Note: This figure plots the ratio of unemployment for the low-educated to unemployment for the
   high-educated. Each dot represents one country in our database. The solid line is the prediction of
   the quantitative model.


share slope of -15.9 precisely. When calibrated this way, the model yields a slightly higher
relative price elasticity of 0.67, which is still in the range of the empirical estimates 0.4 to 0.7.
Using this strategy, the model accounts for more than 40 percent (0.75/1.8) of the empirical
relationship between unemployment and log GDP per capita. It yields the same slope of 0.3
for the ratio of low- to high-educated unemployment as in the benchmark. Appendix Table
C2 reports all the model slopes when using the alternative calibration strategy.
In our benchmark model, the unemployment benefits replacement rate b is set to 0.45 in all
economies. But in reality, the benefits replacement rate is higher in richer countries. To study
the quantitative impact of varying b values, we now calibrate the model using increasing b
values from 0 in the poorest country to 45 percent in the United States.
Panel A of Table 8 reports the slope coefficients from regressions of the unemployment rate
and unemployment ratio on log GDP per capita and a constant, in our benchmark model and


                                                                                       32
                 Table 7: Slope Coefficients in Data and Quantitative Model

                                                                        Data        Model
                Aggregate traditional sector share                      -15.9        -13.4
                Traditional-sector share for low educated               -16.7        -12.7
                Traditional-sector share for high educated               -4.9        -5.0
                Aggregate unemployment rate                              1.8          0.5
                Unemployment rate for low-educated                       3.2          1.7
                Unemployment rate for high-educated                      0.5          0.4
                Ratio of unemployment rates ul /uh                       0.5          0.3
                Relative price PT                                        0.6         0.60

   Note: The table reports estimated slope coefficients from regressions of the statistics in each row on
   log GDP per capita. The first data column reports the slopes from our cross-country database, and
   the second data column reports the slopes from the quantitative model.


in the model with varying b values. The model with varying b values predicts an aggregate
unemployment rate elasticity of 0.72, compared to 0.52 in the benchmark model. This
accounts for 41 percent of the empirical relationship in the data, which is 11 percentage points
higher than in our benchmark model. For the unemployment ratio, the model with varying b
values has an elasticity of 0.26, very similar to 0.25 in the benchmark model. In addition,
Panel B of Table 8 reports the difference of average unemployment rates and ratios for the
top and bottom income countries, both in the data and in two versions of the model. The top
income quartile countries in our sample have an average unemployment rate of 8.0 percent
compared to 2.7 percent for the bottom quartile countries. The difference is 5.3 percentage
points. The model with varying b values can account for 52 percent of this unemployment
rate difference, compared to 42 percent for the benchmark model. For the unemployment
ratio difference, the two versions of model have similar explanatory power, 51 percent for the
benchmark model and 54 percent for the model with increasing b values.
In summary, an alternative model which includes increasing unemployment benefits with
development helps to explain the increase in the unemployment rate with GDP per capita,
but not the increase in the unemployment ratio. Thus, although the quantitive model explains
a substantial portion of the aggregate unemployment patterns in question, and the higher
unemployment benefits in richer countries increase the model’s explanatory power, much
of the data are left unexplained by the model. Additional forces that help to explain the
cross-country relationship between average unemployment and income per capita are a subject
for future research.

                                                    33
                     Table 8: Benchmark Model and Model with Varying b



                                     Panel A: Slope Coefficients
                           Data       Benchmark          Explained        Varying b        Explained
    Unemployment           1.76           0.52              30%              0.72             41%
    uL /uH                 0.47           0.25              53%              0.26            55 %


                          Panel B: Top Quartile Minus Bottom Quartile
    benchmark              Data       Benchmark          Explained        Varying b        Explained
    Unemployment            5.3            2.2              42 %             2.78             52%
    uL /uH                  1.3            0.7              51%              0.69            54 %

Note: Panel A reports the slope coefficients from regressions of the unemployment rate and unemployment
ratio on log GDP per capita and a constant. Panel B reports the difference between the top and bottom
quartiles of the world income distribution. The first data column reports the values from our cross-country
database. The second and third data columns report the values from the benchmark model and the percent of
the data explained. The fourth and fifth columns report the values from the alternative model, with varying
b, and the percent explained from that model.


5.4     Sensitivity Analysis

As noted above, the literature provides us with a range of plausible elasticities of substitution
rather than a single firm value. In this section, we explore the sensitivity of our model’s
predictions to the value for the elasticity of substitution. We compute the model’s predictions
for elasticities 2.5 and 3.5, in particular, in addition to the benchmark value of 3.
We present the results in Table 9. Each row reports the slope coefficient from a regression of
the variable on question on log GDP per capita. The first column is the data slope coefficients,
the second is that of the benchmark model, and the third and fourth columns are the slope
coefficients in the model with the lower and higher values of the substitution elasticities,
respectively. For the lower value of 2.5, the model underpredicts the slope of the traditional
sector shares on log GDP per capita. As a result, the aggregate unemployment rate varies
less with GDP per capita (0.1 versus 0.5 in the benchmark model), as do unemployment
rates for low-educated workers (1.2 versus 1.7 in the benchmark) and high-educated workers
(0.2 versus 0.4 in the benchmark). The ratio of low-to-high unemployment rates also varies
less with GDP per capita than in the benchmark (0.17 versus 0.25). The relative price varies
more than in the benchmark (0.64 versus 0.60).



                                                    34
                                                                                               1
             Table 9: Sensitivity Analysis of Model Elasticity of Substitution,               1−σ




                                                                                 1              1
                                                          Data Benchmark        1−σ
                                                                                      = 2.5    1−σ
                                                                                                     = 3.5

   Aggregate traditional sector share                     -15.9     -13.4          -9.2             -17.1
   Traditional-sector share for low educated              -16.7     -12.7          -8.4             -16.4
   Traditional-sector share for high educated             -4.9      -5.0           -2.6             -7.8
   Aggregate unemployment rate                            1.8        0.5              0.1            0.9
   Unemployment rate for low-educated                     3.2        1.7              1.2            2.1
   Unemployment rate for high-educated                    0.5        0.4              0.2            0.5
   Ratio of unemployment rates ul /uh                     0.5       0.25           0.17             0.32
   Relative price PT                                      0.6       0.60           0.64             0.56

Note: This table reports the slope coefficients from regressions of the statistics in each row on log GDP per
capita and a constant. The first column is for an elasticity of substitution between modern and traditional
output of 2.5, the second column is the benchmark model, and the third column is for an elasticity of
substitution of 3.5.


For the higher value of 3.5, the model over-predicts the slope of the traditional sector share on
log GDP per capita. The unemployment rate varies substantially more with GDP per capita
than in the benchmark, both in the aggregate and by education level. The unemployment
ratio has a slope of 0.32 compared to 0.25 in the benchmark, and is somewhat closer to the
slope of 0.5 in the data.
The intuition for these results is as follows. The change in the level of unemployment is driven
by the exodus from the traditional sector, which, in turn, is driven by the increase in the
ratio of marginal value products of labor: PAT MAT
                                                   . The smaller is the elasticity of substitution,
the less this ratio changes because the rise in PT offsets the rise in AM as we move from the
poorest to the richest country. In the benchmark model, the slope of this ratio on log GDP
per capita is 0.87, only 0.79 when the elasticity is 2.5, and 0.95 when the elasticity is 3.5.
That is why the model predicts so much more change in unemployment when the elasticity is
3.5 than when it is 2.5.
We conclude that the model is sensitive to values of the elasticity of substitution between
modern- and traditional-sector output. For our benchmark value of 3 the model explains the
traditional-sector employment share across countries quite well, suggesting that this may be
a sensible value ex-post. For all three of the values chosen, the model underpredicts the slope
of the relationship between unemployment and GDP per capita.

                                                     35
6     Historical Evidence
In this section, we report historical evidence from countries that have high income per capita
today to explore how their average unemployment rates have evolved over the long run
with income levels. We first look at aggregate unemployment rates from Australia, France,
Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States in the period before World War I
compared to the most recent evidence. We then look at more disaggregate evidence from the
United States.


6.1    Historical Unemployment Rates

The earliest evidence on unemployment that we can find comes from the late 19th century
or early 20th century. For simplicity, we consider two periods: an early period containing
all data pre-World War I, and a recent period comprised of the most recently available data
covering the same number of years. There are five countries for which we found aggregate
unemployment data for at least ten years before WWI started in 1914: Australia, France,
Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States. The recent period is then defined
as 2004 - 2016 for Australia, 1998 - 2016 for France, 1990 - 2016 for Germany, 1984 - 2016
for the UK, and 1972 - 2016 for the U.S. The recent aggregate unemployment rate data are
combined from the World Bank, the U.K. office for National Statistics, and the U.S. BLS.
Table 10 reports the average unemployment rates in the early and recent periods for these
five countries, the difference between the recent and early periods, and a permutation test
of the difference between the recent and early periods. The recent unemployment rate is
larger than the early period for all five countries. Among them, Australia’s unemployment
rate is very similar in the two periods, and the difference is statistically insignificant. For the
remaining four, average unemployment is economically and statistically significantly higher
in the recent period. France’s unemployment is the highest overall in both periods, and
rises from 7.4 to 8.9 percent. Germany’s unemployment rises from 2.4 to 7.6 percent. The
United Kingdom rises from 4.7 to 7.3 percent, and the United States rises from 5.1 to 6.4
percent. All of these countries had very large increases in GDP per capita over this period.
We conclude that the historical evidence is consistent with our cross sectional finding that
the aggregate unemployment rate increases when GDP per capita increases.


6.2    Disaggregated U.S. Time Series Evidence

We now turn to evidence from the U.S. time series micro data. These data allow us to go
beneath the aggregate unemployment rates and to study what happens to unemployment and

                                                36
                              Table 10: Historical Unemployment Rates

                  Country                Early Period                Unemployment Difference
                                           (source)                  Early Recent (p-value)

                 Australia                1901 - 1913                5.17    5.26         0.09
                                          (Mitchell 1992)                                  (.48)


                   France                 1895 - 1913                7.35    8.91       1.55∗∗∗
                                          (Mitchell 1992)                                  (.00)


                 Germany                  1887 - 1913                2.37    7.55       5.18∗∗∗
                                          (Mitchell 1992)                                  (.00)


            United Kingdom                1881 - 1913                4.71    7.29       2.57∗∗∗
                                   (UK Central Statistical Office)                         (.00)


              United States               1869 - 1913                5.11    6.38       1.27∗∗∗
                                    (Vernon 1994, Mitchell 1992)                           (.00)


Note: The table reports the average unemployment rates in the early and recent periods, and the results of a
one-sided permutation test of whether the recent period has a larger unemployment rate. The early period is
defined as the years before WWI; and the recent period is defined as a corresponding year to 2016 such that
we have the same number of years for the two periods in each country; see the text for exact dates.


traditional sector employment by education group. The data allow us to test our theory’s
prediction that unemployment rates rose, particularly for the low-educated.15
To do so, we draw on the U.S. census every decade from 1910 to 2010 from IPUMS International
(Minnesota Population Center, 2017). To maintain consistency across years, we restrict
attention to workers aged 16 and over in all states except Alaska and Hawaii. The first row
of Table 11 reports the slope coefficients from regressions of the unemployment rates on
log GDP per capita and a constant. As the table shows, unemployment rates rose with log
GDP per capita on average, particularly for the less-educated. The estimated slope of the
ratio of low-educated unemployment to high-educated unemployment is 0.7 using these data,
compared with 0.5 in the cross-country data. We conclude that disaggregated unemployment
rates from historical U.S. data are largely consistent with our theory and our cross-country
evidence.
Our theory also predicts that the size of the traditional sector has fallen over time in the
United States. To test this prediction, we use the census data from 1960 to 2010 to measure
the size of the traditional sector according to our proxy of self-employed workers in low-skilled
occupations. The second row of Table 11 reports the slope coefficient from a regression of
  15
    Strictly speaking, our theory applies to comparisons across steady states, so the predictions in this section
are suggested by our theory rather than directly derived from it.



                                                        37
                       Table 11: Slope Coefficients for U.S. Time Series



                                                             Worker Education Group
                                   All Workers             Low           High          Ratio
        Unemployment rate                 3.3∗∗          10.6∗∗∗         3.8∗∗          .7∗∗
                                           (1.6)           (2.3)          (1.6)          (.3)

        Traditional sector share         -2.6∗∗            -1.6            -.4
                                           (1.0)           (1.3)           (.7)


    Note: The table reports the slope coefficients from regressions of unemployment rates and the
    traditional sector share on log GDP per capita and a constant. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
    significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent levels.



the traditional sector share on log GDP per capita and a constant. As the theory predicts,
the traditional-sector share decreases significantly with log GDP per capita, mostly driven by
the decrease for the low-education group. We conclude that our theory performs adequately
here as well.



7     Conclusions
We draw on household survey evidence from around the world to document that unemployment
rates are higher, on average, in rich countries than in poor countries. The pattern is particularly
pronounced for the less-educated, whose unemployment rates are strongly increasing in GDP
per capita, whereas unemployment for the more-educated is roughly constant on average
across countries. Our findings imply that the low-educated are more likely to be unemployed
than the high-educated in rich countries, whereas the opposite is true in poor countries.
To explain these facts, we build a two-sector model that combines labor search, as in Diamond
(1982) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), with a traditional self-employment sector, as
in Parente, Rogerson, and Wright (2000). In our model, countries differ exogenously in the
productivity of the modern sector, in which worker productivity depends on ability, and
workers offer their services in a labor market with search frictions. All countries have access
to an identical traditional sector governed by self-employment and production in which ability
plays no role. As such, our model features skill-biased technology differences across countries,
as emphasized by, for example, Caselli and Coleman (2006). Workers are heterogeneous and
sort as in Roy (1951). As productivity of the modern sector rises, progressively more workers
sort into the modern sector. Unemployment levels rise, and particularly so for the less able,


                                                   38
as proxied by low education in our empirical findings. A quantitative analysis of the model
shows that the model explains a reasonable fraction – on the order of one third – of the
cross-country facts that we document.
Our model suggests that at least some rise in unemployment is a natural consequence of
the development process, as skilled workers search for jobs, rather than a sign of worsening
economic opportunities as countries grow. At the same time, by making unemployment
more predictable, we take the first steps toward providing a benchmark against which policy
makers can judge the efficiency of their labor markets.



References
Adamopoulos, T., and D. Restuccia (2014): “The Size Distribution of Farms and
 International Productivity Differences,” American Economic Review, 104(6), 1667–97.

Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst (2007a): “Lifecycle Prices and Production,” American Economic
 Review, 97(5), 1533–59.

        (2007b): “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time Over Five Decades,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 969–1006.

Akcigit, U., H. Alp, and M. Peters (2018): “Lack of Selection and Limits to Delegation:
 Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries,” Unpublished Working Paper, Yale University.

Aruoba, S. B., M. A. Davis, and R. Wright (2016): “Homework in Monetary Economics:
 Inflation, Home Production, and the Production of Homes,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
 21, 105–124.

Autor, D. (2002): “Skill Biased Technical Change and Rising Inequality: What is the
 Evidence? What are the Alternatives?,” Unpublished Working Paper, MIT.

Banerjee, A., P. Basu, and E. Keller (2016): “Cross-Country Disparities in Skill
 Premium and Skill Acquisition,” Unpublished Working Paper, Durham University.

Banerjee, A. V., and A. F. Newman (1993): “Occupational Choice and the Process of
 Development,” Journal of Political Economy, 101(2), 274–98.

Baxter, M., and U. J. Jermann (1999): “Household Production and the Excess Sensitivity
 of Consumption to Current Income,” American Economic Review, 84(4), 902–920.

Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1991): “Homework in Macroeconomics:
 Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Journal of Political Economy, 99(6),
 1166–1187.


                                            39
Bick, A., N. Fuchs-Schuendeln, and D. Lagakos (2018): “How Do Hours Worked Vary
  with Income? Cross-Country Evidence and Implications,” American Economic Review,
  108(8), 170–99.

Blanchard, O. J., and L. H. Summers (1986): “Hysteresis and the European Unemploy-
 ment Problem,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1.

Boppart, T. (2014): “Structural Change and the Kaldor Facts in a Growth Model With
 Relative Price Effects and Non?Gorman Preferences,” Econometrica, 82(6), 2167–2196.

Braxton, J. C., K. Herkenhoff, and G. Phillips (2018): “Can the Unemployed
 Borrow? Implications for Public Insurance,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of
 Minnesota.

Bridgman, B., G. Duernecker, and B. Herrendorf (2018): “Structural Transforma-
 tion, Marketization, and Household Production around the World,” Journal of Development
 Economics, 133, 102–126.

Broda, C., and D. E. Weinstein (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 541–585.

Buera, F. J., and J. P. Kaboski (2012): “The Rise of the Service Economy,” American
 Economic Review, 102, 2450–69.

Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and R. Rogerson (2015): “Skill-Biased Structural Change,”
 Unpublished Working Paper, University of Notre Dame.

Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011): “Finance and Development: A Tale
 of Two Sectors,” American Economic Review, 101(8), 1964–2002.

Caselli, F. (2005): “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Handbook of
 Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. N. Durlauf.

Caselli, F., and W. Coleman (2006): “The World Technology Frontier,” American
 Economic Review, 96(3), 499–522.

Cavalcanti, P. F., A. Monge-Naranjo, and L. Torres de Mello (2016): “Of Cities
 and Slums,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2016-022A.

Chang, Y., and F. Schorfheide (2003): “Labor-Supply Shifts and Economic Fluctuations,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 1751–1768.

Chodorow-Reich, G., and L. Karabarbounis (2016): “The Cyclicality of the Opportu-
 nity Cost of Employment,” Journal of Political Economy, 124(6), 1563–1618.



                                          40
Cole, H. L., J. Greenwood, and J. Sanchez (2016): “Why Doesn’t Technology Flow
 from Rich to Poor Countries?,” Journal of Political Economy, 84(4), 1477–1521.

Diamond, P. A. (1982): “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 90(8), 881–894.

Donovan, K., J. Lu, and T. Schoellman (2018): “Labor Market Flows and Development,”
 Unpublished Manuscript, University of Notre Dame.

Duarte, M., and D. Restuccia (2010): “The Role of the Structural Transformation in
 Aggregate Productivity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1), 129–173.

Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer (2015): “The Next Generation of the
  Penn World Table,” American Economic Review, 105(10), 3150–3182.

Feng, Y., and L. Rickey (2016): “Development and Selection into Necessity versus
 Opportunity Entrepreneurship,” Unpublished Working Paper, UCSD.

Fields, G. S. (1980): “Education and Income Distribution in Developing Countries: A
  Review of the Literature,” World Bank Staff Working Paper No. 402 (pp. 231 - 315).

         (2004): “A Guide to Multi-sector Labor Market Models,” Unpublished Working
  Paper, Cornell University.

Fujita, S., and G. Ramey (2012): “Exogenous Versus Endogenous Separation,” American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(4), 68–93.

Gollin, D. (2008): “Nobody’s Business But My Own: Self-Employment and Small Enterprise
 in Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(2), 219–233.

Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh (2014): “The Agricultural Productivity
 Gap,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 939–993.

Gollin, D., S. L. Parente, and R. Rogerson (2004): “Farm Work, Home Work and
 International Productivity Differences,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 7, 827–850.

Greenwood, J., and Z. Hercowitz (1991): “The Allocation of Capital and Time Over
 the Business Cycle,” Journal of Political Economy, 99(6), 1188–1214.

Greenwood, J., J. M. Sanchez, and C. Wang (2010): “Financing Development: The
 Role of Information Costs,” American Economic Review, 100(4), 1875?1891.

Hall, R. E., and A. I. Mueller (Forthcoming): “Wage Dispersion and Search Behavior:
 The Importance of Non-Wage Job Values,” Journal of Political Economy.




                                         41
Harris, J. R., and M. P. Todaro (1970): “Migration, Unemployment and Development:
 A Two-Sector Analysis,” American Economic Review, 60(1), 126–142.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi (2014): “Growth and Structural
 Transformation,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. N. Durlauf,
 vol. 2, chap. 6, pp. 855–941. Elsevier.

Hjort, J., and J. Poulsen (forthcoming): “The Arrival of Fast Internet and Employment
 in Africa,” American Economic Review.

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2007): “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,”
 American Economic Review, 97(3), 562–585.

Jerzmanowski, M., and R. Tamura (2017): “Directed Technological Change and Cross
  Country Income Differences: A Quantitative Analysis,” Unpublished Working Paper,
  Clemson University.

Karabarbounis, L. (2014): “Production, Labor Wedges, and International Business Cycles,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 64, 68–84.

Krueger, A. B., and A. Mueller (2010): “Job Search and Unemployment Insurance:
 New Evidence from Time Use Data,” Journal of Public Economics, 94(3), 298 – 307.

La Porta, R., and A. Shleifer (2008): “The Unofficial Economy and Economic Develop-
  ment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 275–363.

         (2014): “Informality and Development,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3),
  109–26.

Lagakos, D., and M. E. Waugh (2013): “Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country
 Productivity Differences,” The American Economic Review, 103(2), 948–980.

Lepper, F. (2004): “Comparable Annual Employment and Unemployment Estimates,”
 Discussion paper, Department of Statistics, International Labour Office, Geneva.

Lewis, W. A. (1954): “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor,” The
 Manchester School, 22(2), 139–91.

Ljungqvist, L., and T. J. Sargent (2008): “Two Questions about European Unemploy-
  ment,” Econometrica, 76(1), 1–29.

Malmberg, H. (2016): “Human Capital and Development Accounting Revisted,” Unpub-
 lished Working Paper, IIES Stockholm.

McGrattan, E. R., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1997): “An Equilibrium Model of



                                          42
  the Business Cycle with Household Production and Fiscal Policy,” International Economic
  Review, 38, 267–290.

McKiernan, K. (2018): “Welfare Impacts of Social Security Reform: The Case of Chile in
 1981,” Unpublished Working Paper, Vanderbilt University.

Mestieri, M., D. Comin, and D. Lashkari (2018): “Structural Change with Long-run
 Income and Price Effects,” Unpublished Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Mincer, J. (1991): “Education and Unemployment,” NBER Working Paper No. 3838.

Minnesota Population Center (2017): “Integrated Public Use Microdata Se-
 ries, International: Version 6.5 [dataset],” Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
 http://doi.org/10.18128/D020.V6.5.

Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
 Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61, 397–415.

Mueller, A. I. (2017): “Separations, Sorting, and Cyclical Unemployment,” American
 Economic Review, 107(7), 2081–2107.

Ngai, R. L., and C. A. Pissarides (2008): “Trends in Hours and Economic Growth,”
 Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(2), 239–56.

        (2011): “Taxes, Social Subsidies and the Allocation of Work Time,” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(4), 1–26.

Nickell, S., L. Nunziata, and W. Ochel (2004): “Unemployment in the OECD Since
  the 1960s. What Do We Know?,” Economic Journal, 115(500), 1–27.

Parente, S. L., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (2000): “Homework in Development
 Economics: Household Production and the Wealth of Nations,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 108(4), 680–687.

Porzio, T., and G. Santangelo (2017): “Structural Change and the Supply of Agricultural
 Workers,” Unpublished Working Paper, University of California San Diego.

Poschke, M. (2018): “Wage Employment, Unemployment and Self-Employment Across
 Countries,” Unpublished Manuscript, McGill University.

Ramey, V. A., and N. Francis (2009): “A Century of Work and Leisure,” American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2), 189–224.

Rauch, J. E. (1991): “Modelling the Informal Sector Informally,” Journal of Development
 Economics, 35(1), 33–47.



                                           43
Restuccia, D., and C. Urrutia (2001): “Relative Prices and Investment Rates,” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 47(1), 93–121.

Rogerson, R. (2008): “Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of European Labor
 Market Outcomes,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(2), 235–259.

Roy, A. (1951): “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic Papers,
 3, 135–46.

Rupert, P., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1995): “Estimating Substitution Elasticities
 in Household Production Models,” Economic Theory, 6, 179–93.

Schoar, A. (2010): “The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneur-
  ship,” in Innovation Policy and the Economy, ed. by J. Lerner, and S. Stern, chap. 3, pp.
  57–81. University of Chicago Press.

Shimer, R. (2005): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
 American Economic Review, 95(1).

Squire, L. (1981): Employment Policy in Developing Countries: A Survey of Issues and
 Evidence. New York: Published for the World Bank by Oxford University Press.

Turnham, D. (1993): Employment and Development: A New Review of Evidence. Paris,
 OECD.

United     Nations      (2008):      “System of   National            Accounts,     2008,”
 https://unstats.un.org/unsd/sna1993/WC-SNAvolume2.pdf.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016): Handbook of Methods. U.S. Government
 Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Wolcott, E. (2018): “Employment Inequality: Why Do the Low-Skilled Work Less Now?,”
 Unpublished Working Paper, Middlebury College.

Young, A. (2013): “Inequality, the Urban-Rural Gap and Migration,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 129(2), 939–993.




                                            44
Appendices
A      Data Appendix
Among the 199 surveys listed below, there are 11 from earlier than 1990, 59 from the 1990s,
88 from the 2000s, and 41 from 2010 and later. Among the 84 countries, there are 55 for
which we have at least two surveys.

                            Table A.1: Tier 1: Most Comparable Surveys

                                 Tier 1a: Searched for work last week
         Country                       Year                                Source
       Azerbaijan                      1995                      Survey of Living Conditions
       Bangladesh                2000, 2005, 2010         Household Income-Expenditure Survey (HIES)
         Bolivia                    1992, 2001                             IPUMS-I
        Botswana                    2001, 2011                             IPUMS-I
          Brazil                       2010                                IPUMS-I
      Burkina Faso                     2014                                 LSMS
      Burkina Faso                     2006                                IPUMS-I
         Canada                        2011                                IPUMS-I
          Chile                     1992, 2002                             IPUMS-I
        Colombia                    1993, 2005                             IPUMS-I
       Costa Rica                   2000, 2011                             IPUMS-I
          Cuba                         2002                                IPUMS-I
    Dominican Republic                 2002                                IPUMS-I
         Ecuador                 1990, 2001, 2010                          IPUMS-I
       El Salvador                     1992                                IPUMS-I
           Fiji                        2007                                IPUMS-I
          Ghana                     1984, 2000                             IPUMS-I
          Ghana                        1998                        Living Standards Survey
          Greece                 1996, 2001, 2011                          IPUMS-I
         Hungary                       2011                                IPUMS-I
          India            1983, 1987, 1993, 1999, 2004                    IPUMS-I
        Indonesia                1990, 1995, 2010                          IPUMS-I
        Indonesia                      2014                      Indonesia Family Life Survey
         Ireland                       2011                                IPUMS-I
         Jamaica                    1991, 2001                             IPUMS-I
          Kenya                        2009                                IPUMS-I

                                            45
      Malaysia                 1991, 2000                           IPUMS-I
        Mexico        1990, 1995, 2000, 2010, 2015                  IPUMS-I
      Mongolia                    2000                              IPUMS-I
    Mozambique                 1997, 2007                           IPUMS-I
       Nigeria                    2010                              IPUMS-I
      Pakistan                    1973                              IPUMS-I
       Panama               1990, 2000, 2010                        IPUMS-I
      Paraguay                    1992                              IPUMS-I
         Peru                     2007                              IPUMS-I
         Peru                     1994                      Living Standards Survey
     Philippines                  1990                              IPUMS-I
        Poland                    2002                              IPUMS-I
       Portugal                1991, 2001                           IPUMS-I
      Romania               1992, 2002, 2011                        IPUMS-I
       Rwanda                     2002                              IPUMS-I
     Saint Lucia               1980, 1991                           IPUMS-I
    South Africa                  1993                    Integrated Household Survey
    South Sudan                   2008                              IPUMS-I
        Spain                     2011                              IPUMS-I
        Sudan                     2008                              IPUMS-I
      Tajikistan                  1999                               LSMS
      Tanzania                 2002, 2012                           IPUMS-I
Trinidad and Tobago   1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2011                  IPUMS-I
       Uganda                  1991, 2002                           IPUMS-I
    United States                 1960                              IPUMS-I
      Venezuela                   2001                              IPUMS-I
       Zambia                  1990, 2010                           IPUMS-I

                      Tier 1b: Searched for work in the last 4 weeks
    Argentina                    1991                                IPUMS-I
    Armenia                      2011                                IPUMS-I
     Belarus                     2009                                IPUMS-I
      Brazil                     2000                                IPUMS-I
     Canada                   1991, 2001                             IPUMS-I
Dominican Republic               2010                                IPUMS-I
      Italy                      2001                                IPUMS- I
     Jordan                      2004                                IPUMS-I


                                      46
       Panama                        2010                               IPUMS-I
       Paraguay                      2002                               IPUMS-I
     South Africa                 2007, 2011                            IPUMS-I
    United States        1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2005                    IPUMS
    United States                 2001-2014               American Community Survey (ACS)
Bosnia and Herzegovina               2004               Living in Bosnia and Herzegovina Survey
         Brazil                      1997                      Survey of Living Conditions
       Bulgaria                      2007                     Multi-topic Household Survey
          Iran                       2011                               IPUMS-I
          Iraq                       2012                   Household Socio-economic Survey
        Malawi                       2013                  Integrated Household Panel Survey
        Serbia                       2007                                 LSMS
        Uganda                       2011                         National Panel Survey




                                         47
Table A.2: Tier 2: Comparable Search Questions, Less Comparable Duration Questions

    Country              Year           Source          Seeking window
    Armenia              2001          IPUMS-I              Current
  Bangladesh          1991, 2001       IPUMS-I       7 days, main activity
  Bangladesh             2011          IPUMS-I           Current status
     Brazil              1980          IPUMS-I              Current
 Burkina Faso            1996          IPUMS-I  At least 3 days in the last week
   Cambodia           1998, 2008       IPUMS-I             6 months
     Egypt               2006          IPUMS-I              current
  El Salvador            2007          IPUMS-I        Current/ last week
     France           2006, 2011       IPUMS-I              Current
      Haiti              2003          IPUMS-I            Last month
   Hungary               1990          IPUMS-I              Current
      Iran               2006          IPUMS-I            Past 30 days
      Iraq               1997          IPUMS-I              Current
    Ireland     1991, 1996, 2002, 2006 IPUMS-I              Current
Kyrgyz Republic       1999, 2009       IPUMS-I              Current
    Malawi               2008          IPUMS-I             Last year
      Mali            1998, 2009       IPUMS-I              4 weeks
    Morocco           1994, 2004       IPUMS-I              Current
   Nicaragua             2005          IPUMS-I              2 weeks
   Portugal              2011          IPUMS-I              Current
    Rwanda               1991          IPUMS-I         Most of the week
    Senegal              2002          IPUMS-I Continuously for at least 3 months
 Sierra Leone            2004          IPUMS-I              4 weeks
 South Africa            1996          IPUMS-I              Current
  Switzerland            2000          IPUMS-I              Current
    Turkey            1990, 2000       IPUMS-I              Current
    Uruguay           2006, 2011       IPUMS-I              4 weeks
   Venezuela             1990          IPUMS-I              Current
    Zambia               2000          IPUMS-I      Primary activity, 7 days




                                       48
                         Table A.3: Tier 3: Least Comparable Search or Activity Questions

     Country          Year       Source             Activity                             Search
     Argentina     2001, 2010   IPUMS-I   Exclude: for self-consumption                  4 weeks
                                           A minimum average of 12
       Austria       1991       IPUMS-I                                                  Current
                                                hours per week
       Austria       2001       IPUMS-I              7 days                     Only previously employed
       Austria       2011       IPUMS-I              No text                            No text
       Belarus       1999       IPUMS-I   Exclude: for self-consumption                   Yes
      Botswana       2011       IPUMS-I             4 Weeks
                                                                              Last 7 days for worked before;
     Cameroon        2005       IPUMS-I              7 Days
                                                                              now for looking for the first job
       China          1990    IPUMS-I               No text                               No text
      Ethiopia        2007    IPUMS-I              Standard                               No text
49




       France      1990, 1999 IPUMS-I               Current                         Enrollment ANPE
         Fiji         1996    IPUMS-I          Worked for money                       Not comparable
       Ghana          2010    IPUMS-I               No text                               No text
      Hungary         2001    IPUMS-I               Current                       Unemployment benefit
        India         2009    IPUMS-I              Standard               Only 12 months main activity available
       Liberia        2008    IPUMS-I             12 Months                             12 months
     Netherlands      2001    IPUMS-I              No Text                            Not comparable
                                                                                Included did not seek but
      Palestine    1997, 2007   IPUMS-I              7 Days
                                                                                       want to work
       Peru          1993       IPUMS-I         Not comparable                        Not comparable
      Portugal       1981       IPUMS-I             7 Days                           Text not available
                                                                             Registered as unemployed at the
      Slovenia       2002       IPUMS-I             Current
                                                                             employment service of Slovenia
        Spain       1991, 2001   IPUMS-I          7 Days             Unemployed, worked previously
     South Africa      2001      IPUMS-I         4 Weeks                  Could not find work
     Switzerland       1990      IPUMS-I   Principal occupation                Current
       Ukraine         2001      IPUMS-I          Status          Unemployment allowances, unemployed
       Vietnam      2009, 1991   IPUMS-I       Earn income                     4 Weeks
50
B     Model Derivation and Proofs

B.1     Model Derivations

In this subsection, we develop the expressions for U (x) and w(x), and show the intermediate
steps to develop Equation (9). We start by simplifying Equations (4) - (7) to

                           (1 − δ)U (x) = AM bx + δηθ1−α E(x) − U (x)
                                                                     
                                                                                       (B.1)
                                                              
                           (1 − δ)E(x) = w(x) + δs U (x) − E(x)                        (B.2)
                                       AM x − w(x)
                                  J(x) =                                               (B.3)
                                       1 − δ(1 − s)
                                              Z x̄
                             ∗             −α
                               
                      1 − G(x ) AM c = δηθ         J(x)g(x)dx.                         (B.4)
                                                   x∗


The firm receives (1 − β)S(x) = (1 − β)[E(x) − U (x) + J(x)] = J(x) when a vacancy is filled.
Combining this division of surplus with equation (B.3) gives

                                                β AM x − w(x)
                             E(x) − U (x) =                      .                     (B.5)
                                              1 − β 1 − δ(1 − s)

Substituting equation (B.5) into equation (B.1) yields

                             1              1−α β    AM x − w(x) 
                    U (x) =      AM bx + δηθ                        .                  (B.6)
                            1−δ                 1 − β 1 − δ(1 − s)

We can then solve for w(x) by combining equations (B.6) and (B.5) with equation (B.2):

                  AM bx     k(θ)                     β(δηθ1−α + 1 − δ + δs)
          w(x) =         +         AM x, with k(θ) =                        .
                 1 + k(θ) 1 + k(θ)                     (1 − β)(1 − δ + δs)

Substituting this solution into equations (B.3) and (B.6) gives us, respectively,

                                          AM x(1 − b)(1 − β)
                                J(x) =                                                 (B.7)
                                         βδηθ1−α + 1 − δ + δs

                           1                   β    AM x(1 − b)(1 − β) 
                U (x) =        AM bx + δηθ1−α                             .            (B.8)
                          1−δ                 1 − β βδηθ1−α + 1 − δ + δs
Equation (B.8) appears as equation (8) in the text. Finally, substituting equation (B.7) into
equation (B.4) and dividing both sides by 1 − G(x∗ ) yields equation (9) that determines θ




                                              51
for any given level of x∗ :

                                              (1 − β)δηθ−α
                                   c=                           (1 − b)E(x|x > x∗ ).
                                           βδηθ1−α + 1 − δ + δs

B.2     Proof of Proposition 1

Equations (9) and (10) allow us to solve for unique values of θ and x∗ . We first simplify
equation (10) to
                                  (AT − AM bx∗ )(1 − δ + δs)
                           θ1−α =                            .                       (B.9)
                                       βδη(AM x∗ − AT )

Substitute this expression into equation (9), yielding a single equation that determines x∗ :
                   α                                          1
 (AT − AM bx∗ ) 1−α AM x∗ (1 − b)c(1 − δ + δs) 1−α                                1    α
                                                1                 = (1 − β)(δη) 1−α β 1−α (1 − b)E(x|x > x∗ ).
                   (AM x∗ − AT )               1−α

                                                                                                           (B.10)
We assume that a solution x∗ ∈ (x, x̄) to equation (B.10) exists. Since the existence of
this solution implies that AM x∗ − AT > 0, it also implies the existence of a solution θ > 0.
Moreover, if the solution x∗ is unique, then the solution θ is also unique.
To demonstrate uniqueness of the solution x∗ , we first show that the left-hand side of equation
(B.10) is decreasing in x∗ . Inspection of equation (B.10) shows that a sufficient condition is
                             1
that AM x∗ /(AM x∗ − AT ) 1−α is decreasing in x∗ . We have
            "d         A M x∗              #
                                      1
                                                                             x∗
                                                                                                      
                 (AM   x∗ −A       ) 1−α                             1                         α
       sign                    T
                                               = sign (AM x∗ − AT ) 1−α −       (AM x∗ − AT ) 1−α AM
                       dx∗                                                  1−α
                                                             αAM x∗
                                                                   
                                               = sign − AT −          ,
                                                              1−α

which is negative. Since the right-hand side of equation (B.10) is increasing in x∗ , then the
x∗ that solves equation (B.10) must be unique.
Having demonstrated that the solution is unique, we turn to comparative statics of an increase
in AM . We want to show that the left-hand side of equation (B.10) is decreasing in AM . It is




                                                             52
sufficient to show:
          "d        AM x∗         #
                            1
                                                                                                       
               (AM x∗ −AT ) 1−α                             1            1                 α
      sign                            = sign (AM x∗ − AT ) 1−α − AM         (AM x∗ − AT ) 1−α x∗
                    dAM                                                 1−α
                                                                     ∗
                                                                      
                                                              AM x
                                      = sign (AM x∗ − AT ) −
                                                              1−α
                                                            ∗
                                                             
                                                       AM x
                                      = sign − AT − α
                                                       1−α

Thus, we know that the sign of this derivative must be negative. We already know that the
left- and right-hand sides of equation (B.10) are decreasing and increasing in x∗ , respectively,
so dx∗ /dAM < 0 follows.


B.3     Proof of Proposition 2

It follows from Proposition 1 that x∗ decreases with AM . As x∗ decreases, we see from
equation (9) that θ decreases. Inspection of equation (11) then shows that u must increase.


B.4     Proof of Proposition 3
                                                                                           s
The unemployment rate for workers with x < x0 is a weighted average of                  s+ηθ1−α
                                                                                                ,   for workers
with x∗ < x < x0 , and 0, for workers with x < x∗ . Therefore
                         s
                                  G(x0 ) − G(x∗ ) + 0 · G(x∗ )          s
                                                                               G(x0 ) − G(x∗ )
                                                                                             
                     s+ηθ1−α                                        s+ηθ1−α
   E u|x < x0 =                                                  =                                  .   (B.11)
                                          G(x0 )                               G(x0 )

The ratio of this unemployment rate to the unemployment rate for workers with ability higher
than x0 is
                                s                  ∗
                                                       
                                              −
                         
              E u|x < x0          1−α G(x 0 )   G(x  )         s           G(x∗ )
                          = s+ηθ                        /           = 1 −        .   (B.12)
              E u|x > x0              G(x0 )               s + ηθ1−α       G(x0 )

This ratio increases with AM since x∗ decreases with AM , as proved in Proposition 1.


B.5     Proof of Lemma 1

We can solve for market tightness θh and θl and cutoff ability levels x∗h and x∗l using the
equivalents of equations (9) and (B.9) for the high- and low-educated labor markets in the



                                                     53
quantitative model:

                               (1 − β)δηθh−α
                        c=     1−α             (1 − b)Eh (x|x > x∗h )                        (9h)
                           βδηθh + 1 − δ + δsh

                                        (AT − AM bx∗h )(1 − δ + δsh )
                              θh1−α =                                                     (B.9h)
                                            βδη(AM x∗h − AT )
                                 (1 − β)δηθl−α
                        c=                          (1 − b)El (x|x > x∗l )                   (9l )
                             βδηθl1−α + 1 − δ + δsl
                                        (AT − AM bx∗l )(1 − δ + δsl )
                              θl1−α =                                 ,                    (B.9l )
                                            βδη(AM x∗l − AT )

where Eh and El are computed using gh (x) and gl (x), respectively.
It follows that equation (B.10) that determines x∗ can, with appropriate subscripting, deter-
mine x∗h or x∗l . We showed in the proof of Proposition 1 that the left- (right-) hand side of
equation (B.10) is decreasing (increasing) in x∗ . Inspection of the left-hand side of equation
(B.10) shows that it is increasing in s, hence, any increase in s from sh to sl must increase x∗l
relative to x∗h . Inspection of the right-hand side of equation (B.10) shows that it is increasing
in E(x|x > x∗ ); thus, computing the expectation using gh (x) relative to gl (x) must decrease
x∗h relative to x∗l , because Gh (x) first-order stochastically dominates Gl (x).




                                                 54
C              Appendix Figures and Tables

                                         Figure C1: Low-Education Share, λ, in Model and Data
                    100



                                                     MLI   KHM
                                                     MWI                            MYS
                                                           HTI
                                                                 IDN
                                                                   GHA    MAR
                                                                           NICDOM
                                80




                                                           ZMB                           TUR
                                                                               BRA CRI URY
     Low Education Share (Percent)




                                                                                          MEX PRT
                                                                  BOL          FJI COL
                                                               SLV
                                                             IND              ECUARG
                                                                                   CHLVEN
                                                                           NGA PAN
                                                                                        ZAF      ESP
                                                                             JAM
                      60




                                                                                              GRC
                                                                         PSE
                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                                                   IRL
                                                                               PER
            40




                                                                                                       CAN
                                                                                     ROU
    20




                                                                                                             USA
                                                                                               Model
                    0




                                     6           7                 8            9               10             11
                                                                 ln(GDP per capita)


Note: This figure plots the values of λ used in the quantitative experiments of Section 5 (solid line), and
the percent of the labor force that is low-educated in each of our countries (dots with identifiers). The
data come from IPUMS. Low-educated individuals are defined to be those with less than a secondary
school education.




                                                                         55
                       Table C1: Definition of Traditional Sector Goods

 Item                                  Details
 Shoe Repair - Women Street Shoes Replacement of 2 heels (glued and nailed);
                                  While-you-wait in shop service;
                                  Heel: Synthetic polyurethane, small heel.
 Shoe Repair - Men Classic Shoes       Re-soling rubber soles (glued & nailed or stitched);
                                       Not “urgent” in shop service.
 Shoeshine                             Cleaning leather shoes with a brush and polishing;
                                       Manual work while keeping the shoes on;
                                       Exclude service in a shop.
 Taxi                                  7 km in the town center on working days at 3 p.m.;
                                       Includes: Possible fixed starting fee + price per km;
                                       Excludes: Taxi called by telephone.
 Men basic haircut                     Scissor cut of short hair for male adults;
                                       Type of establishment: Common men’s barber shop;
                                       No shampoo/washing nor styling/fixing products;
                                       Full price including tips if any.
 Ladies haircut - curlers              Hair with curlers cut to medium (basic) for female adult;
                                       Shampoo/washing, blow drying, and styling/fixing products;
                                       Establishment: Common hairdresser (exclude hair stylist).
 Manicure                              Standard manicure on natural nails by nail technician;
                                       Establishment: Professional beautician;
                                       Full price including tips if any;
                                       Bath, filing, cuticles treatment, one-color varnishing.
 Ladies haircut - long hair            Long hair cut to short for female adult;
                                       Shampoo/washing, blow drying, styling/fixing products;
                                       Establishment: Common hairdresser (exclude hair stylist).

Note: The table reports the definitions of each ICP traditional service used in Table 6, and described in
Section 5.2. The services come from the unpublished ICP 2011 Global Core list of goods and services.




                                                   56
                   Table C2: Slope Coefficients in the Alternative Calibration

                                                             Data        Model        Alternative Cali.
    Aggregate traditional sector share                       -15.9        -13.4               -15.9
    Traditional-sector share for low educated                -16.7        -12.7               -15.2
    Traditional-sector share for high educated                -4.9         -5.0               -6.7
    Aggregate unemployment rate                               1.8          0.5                 0.7
    Unemployment rate for low-educated                        3.2          1.7                 1.9
    Unemployment rate for high-educated                       0.5          0.4                 0.4
    Ratio of unemployment rates ul /uh                        0.5          0.3                 0.3
    Relative price PT                                         0.6         0.60                0.67

Note: The table reports slope coefficients from regressions of the statistics in each row on log GDP per capita.




                                                      57
