                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE IMPACT OF PERMANENT RESIDENCY DELAYS FOR STEM PHDS:
                          WHO LEAVES AND WHY

                                      Shulamit Kahn
                                     Megan MacGarvie

                                     Working Paper 25175
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25175


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2018




We thank Chelsea Carter and Zijie Zhu for excellent research assistance. We thank Gabriele
Cristelli, Sari Kerr, Bill Kerr, Jim Rebitzer, David Spitzer and Bruce Weinberg for helpful
suggestions. We also thank those at NSF NCSES and at NORC for enabling this research.
However, all analysis and conclusions are solely the work of the authors and not NSF or NORC.
This work was supported by NSF grant SES-1538716. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Shulamit Kahn and Megan MacGarvie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Permanent Residency Delays for STEM PhDs: Who leaves and Why
Shulamit Kahn and Megan MacGarvie
NBER Working Paper No. 25175
October 2018
JEL No. J61,O15,O3

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper assesses whether delays in obtaining permanent residency status can explain recent
declines in the share of Chinese and Indian PhD graduates from US STEM programs who remain
in the US after their studies. We find that newly-binding limits on permanent visas for those from
China and India with advanced degrees are significantly associated with declines in stay rates.
The stay rate of Chinese graduates declines by 2.4 percentage points for each year of delay, while
Indian graduates facing delays of at least 5 1/2 years have a stay rate that is 8.9 percentage points
lower. The per-country permanent visa cap affects a large share of STEM PhDs who are
disproportionately found in fields of study that have been crucial in stimulating US economic
growth yet enroll relatively few natives. Finally, results suggest that the growth of science in
countries of origin has an important influence on stay rates, while macroeconomic factors such as
GDP per capita affect stay rates only via their impact on science funding. We conclude that per-
country limits play a significant role in constraining the supply of highly skilled STEM workers
in the US economy.


Shulamit Kahn
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Ave.
Boston, MA 02215
skahn@bu.edu

Megan MacGarvie
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue, Room 522H
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
mmacgarv@bu.edu
        The US trains a large share of the world’s PhD scientists, and in some fields of science and

engineering, students of foreign origin represent the majority of doctoral degrees granted by US

programs. Students produced by these programs have made important contributions to innovation at US

universities and firms (Stuen et al. 2012, Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle 2010). Currently, the countries that

send the most STEM doctoral students to the US – China and India – are also among those with the

highest fraction of students who stay in the US after their studies (Finn 2014, NSF 2016). However, the

fraction of Chinese and Indian doctoral recipients reporting definite plans to stay in the US has fallen in

the last decade (NSF Science and Engineering Indicators 2018 Appendix Table 3-21).

        In this paper, we investigate possible reasons for the decline in stay rates (the probability of

remaining in the US) of Chinese and Indian STEM PhDs, with a particular focus on the impact of

limitations on the number of employment-based permanent residency visas available to these workers.

We analyze the EB-2 visa category, which applies to those holding advanced degrees and allows

temporary residents with these degrees to become permanent residents. We exploit changes over time in

the rate at which EB-2 permanent residency visas (also known as “green cards”) are granted to applicants

as a result of binding constraints on the number of visas available per country. These changes have

created long wait times for Chinese and Indian applicants only, while applicants from other countries

have not faced binding visa limitations. Our analyses allow us to measure how tighter visa policies for

those with advanced degrees affect the stay rates of foreigners who obtain US STEM PhDs.1

        Our main data come from the NSF’s Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR). Starting in 2010, this

database includes scientists with US PhDs who have left the US. This allows us to provide some of the

first evidence on the determinants of longer-term stay rates. The scientists we study were temporary


1
 Applicants employed by universities and other nonprofit institutions such as hospitals and government agencies are
not subject to any cap on employment-based visas (SEC. 103 of American Competitiveness in the Twenty-first
Century Act of 2000). However, we do not limit our analysis to those working in the private sector, since the choice
of sector is part of the location choice process. In robustness checks, we analyze whether the visa delays are
correlated with larger propensities to work in nonprofits.
                                                             2
residents when they obtained their PhDs between 2001 and 2013 and are observed in the 2010, 2013 and

2015 SDR waves, which allows us to provide evidence on the stay rates of these foreign-born scientists

over a longer time frame post-PhD than has previously been reported. The SDR is linked to the NSF’s

Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED), the source for intended post-PhD locations used by Grogger and

Hanson (2015) and others to proxy stay rates of people receiving US PhDs. We find that intention to stay

in the US measured upon graduation by NSF’s SED is an important predictor of longer term stay rates,

but that the longer term propensity to stay in the US exhibits some very different patterns.

        Country-based limits on EB-2 green cards are associated with reductions in the stay rates of

Chinese students of 2.4 percentage points (ppt.) per year of delay relative to students from the rest of the

world, while Indian students are only affected by very long delays in visa processing. Indian students

facing delays of 5½ years or more have a relative stay rate that is about 8.9 ppt. lower. This relative

reduction in the stay rates of Chinese and Indian students is estimated after controlling for

macroeconomic and scientific conditions in home countries, and is robust to controlling for country-

specific time trends. These results suggest that the decline in the relative stay rate is not explained by

improvements in living and working conditions in China and India, but rather the effects of immigration

policy on the attractiveness of working in the US.

        In addition to measuring the effects of visa availability, we estimate the relationship between stay

rates and home countries’ macroeconomics and scientific research base. Although prior research on stay

rates has typically not explicitly controlled for the strength of the science enterprise in the home country,

we find that this factor is an important predictor of return rates, with students from the lowest-ranked

countries in terms of publication output exhibiting stay rates that are 13% higher than those from the

highest-ranked countries. The quality of articles produced in the home country (as measured by citations

per article) is also a strong predictor of return to the home country.

        This paper also examines which fields of study are most affected by this combination of factors,

                                                           3
and shows that counter-productively, the fields with the greatest apparent excess demand for STEM PhDs

are also the fields with the greatest numbers of graduates affected by visa restrictions. Thus, the rapid

improvement in the level of scientific activity in home countries and limits on the number of immigrants

by country of origin combine to discourage international students from remaining in the country after

graduation, reducing the supply of workers available to be hired by innovative firms in the US.



                                              Prior Literature

        The current paper builds upon Grogger and Hanson (2015), which uses data from the NSF’s SED,

a census administered to all doctoral recipients in the US at the time of PhD completion, to measure stay

rates. The SED has the advantage of being very large and covering a long time span, but has the

disadvantage of only listing respondents’ plans to stay in the US at the time of PhD completion, not

whether they actually remained. Nonetheless, Grogger and Hanson establish that SED intentions to stay

are positively associated with the growth of GDP per capita in the US at the time of PhD, negatively

associated with prosperity in the home country, and negatively associated with the level of democracy in

the home country. Finn (2014) matches the SED to 2011 Social Security data to obtain the only

nationally representative estimates to date of stay rates over early careers prior to the international SDR

that we use. Most recently, NSF’s Science & Engineering Indicators 2018 has also used the SDR to

measure stay rates.

        Khosla (2018) has also addressed the impact of per-country permanent residency limits on the

stay rates of STEM doctorates, although using only the 2010 and 2013 surveys of the SDR and the SED.

We replicate some of Khosla’s results but obtain results that contradict one major finding, specifically

that there was no effect of visa restrictions on stay rates by six years after PhD. Instead, we find that there

are sustained effects. In addition, we provide a more comprehensive analysis of the impacts of EB-2

delays, including differences between the effect on Chinese and Indians, the importance of the home

                                                           4
country’s scientific environment, the fields that lose US scientists due to the policy, and how the visa

delays affect the kinds of jobs the scientists take.

        Earlier work on permanent residency includes Hunt’s (2017) study of job-changing among

temporary residents. She finds that when temporary residents become permanent residents, there is a 20%

increase in the rate of job changing. This suggests that job mobility of temporary residents is constrained.

However, using data from 6 large Indian IT firms operating in the US, Depew, Norlander and Sorensen

(2017) find a significant amount of inter-firm mobility among those with H-1B and L-1 temporary visas

that varies over the earnings distribution and over the business cycle.

        Another related paper is Brentschneider and Dai (2017), which analyzes the SDR and obtains

several findings consistent with those of this paper, including the importance of science infrastructure in

the home country and financial support for graduate study from foreign sources for predicting stay rates

of the. Breschi et al. (2018) compile a large dataset of Indian inventors from patent data matched to

LinkedIn profiles, and document an increase in recent decades in the propensity to return to India across

cohorts of Indians who came to the US to study. Soon (2008) analyzes survey data on international

students in New Zealand, and finds that 82.6% of those who initially intended to return to their home

country before beginning their studies in New Zealand ultimately did return, while 37.1% of those who

originally intended not to return did return.

        Some of the prior literature has focused on the extent to which foreign students might be selected

on ability, and how the return migration decision is affected by ability. Bratsberg (1995), Borjas and

Bratsberg (1996), and Grogger and Hanson (2015) focus on whether return migration accentuates the

selection effect of migration. Borjas and Bratsberg (1996) model the decision to migrate, whether

temporarily or permanently, as a function of expected earnings in the source and receiving countries, the

potential migrant’s skill/ability and returns to skill at home and abroad, and a random parameter. They

find that, as long as the returns to skill are higher in the receiving country, migrants come from the upper

                                                          5
part of the ability distribution and those who stay permanently in the receiving country will be those with

the highest ability. Breschi et al (2018) find evidence of positive selection of foreign students with US

degrees remaining in the US based on the fact that Indians who have obtained Master’s or PhD degrees in

the US are less likely to return than those who have merely obtained Bachelor’s degrees in the US.

However, Brentschneider and Dai (2017) find no relationship in the SDR between return rates and the

research quality of the US university from which foreign students obtain their PhDs.2 Kato and Sparber

(2013) find that H-1B visa restrictions have decreased applicants to the US from the top ability levels (as

measured by SATs). They offer two possible reasons for this. First, high-ability students may be

disproportionately discouraged from applying to US colleges if they are more aware of the effects of

tightened immigration policy on job opportunities. Second, those foreign students with high levels of

ability may be most affected by tightened immigration policy because low-ability students are unlikely to

be offered jobs in the US irrespective of the policy environment.

        Preferences have been studied as well. In a study focused specifically on the return intentions of

Chinese students abroad, Zeithammer and Kellogg (2013) perform a conjoint analysis of student

preferences to assess the tradeoffs associated with staying in the US vs. returning to China. The authors

find that approximately 70% of Chinese STEM PhDs would prefer to return to China if offered the same

salary as they expect to receive in the US, but that salary differentials between the US and China keep the

majority of them in the US. By contrast, in a survey of recent PhDs in Chemistry, Ganguli and Gaule

(2018) find that international students have stronger preferences for remaining in the US for post-doctoral

training than do domestic students, after controlling for test scores and career preferences. Roach,

Sauermann and Skrentny (2018) survey STEM PhD students before and after graduation, finding that

entrepreneurial preferences are often not acted on post-PhD. This may be due to the US visa systems


2
 Brentschneider and Dai measure research quality using data from the National Research Council’s 2006 ranking of
doctoral programs and a ranking of the top 200 programs in terms of research expenditure from the Center for
Measuring University Performance.
                                                           6
requiring employment-based immigrants to have stable employment.



                                                           Data

        Our main data come from the 2010, 2013 and 2015 waves of the National Science Foundation’s

International Survey of Doctoral Recipients (ISDR) and the Survey of Doctoral Recipients (SDR). These

are partially longitudinal surveys of a sample of individuals receiving doctorates in the US. The NSF has

matched these people to the NSF’s Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED), which contains a snapshot of

information on approximately 90% of doctoral recipients at the time of doctoral receipt. The NSF began

systematically following doctoral recipients even if they moved abroad only from 2001 and on, although

the first SDR to incorporate these PhDs was in 2010. We therefore include in our analysis only those who

earned their doctorates in 2001 or later and use only the SDR waves starting in 2010.

        In 2015, the SDR drew a whole new sample more than twice the size of the 2013 SDR, sampling

from past SEDs (and keeping only a small fraction of those who had been in the 2013 SDR3). This added

a large number of observations of people living abroad (5,431 of those employed compared to 3,439 in

2013). This also gives a much larger variety of country-of-origin/field combinations. The 2015 SDR

response rate was 66%, down from a 70% response rate in 2013. The NSF has worked hard to estimate

weights that they believe make the sample representative. However, given the differences in methods of

creating the 2015 sample, we warn readers that identifying trends between 2013 and 2015 may not be as

accurate as when using previous SDRs. Also, because the probability of finding a new sample of US

PhDs who left the US long ago was likely the most fraught with response bias, we continue to ignore

those who received PhDs prior to 2001.

        We restrict attention to people with doctorates in STEM fields who are currently employed and


3
 In total, of the 16,215 temporary residents at PhD with adequate data that we use in our analysis, 11,347 were
observed only once. Of the others, 1,385 were in all three surveys – 2010, 2013 and 2015. 3,483 respondents were in
two surveys only (2,836 were in 2010 and 2013 only; 485 in 2013 and 2015 only; and 162 in 2010 and 2015 only).
                                                             7
who were temporary residents at PhD.4 The sample contains 22,470 observations of temporary residents

at time of PhD completion who were working during the survey year,5 of whom 68.2%6 are in the US in

the survey year, with 13.7% of these reporting that they had become naturalized citizens, 52.5% reporting

permanent resident status, and 32.2% remaining temporary residents.

        We discuss the sources of data on visa delays and country-level variables in the Variables section.



                                                  The Empirical Model

        Our analysis first estimates how EB-2 visa delays affect the probability that a temporary resident

remains in the US after PhD completion, conditional on a wide variety of factors including fixed effects

for PhD year. It then examines the relationship using additional variables for visa delays and conducts

robustness checks.

        The control variables are factors that shift both foreign US PhD recipients’ preferred choices for

location and job characteristics (supply) and factors that affect the availability and characteristics of job

offers (demand) in the US, home country and third countries. These are in addition to the visa restrictions

that determine whether the scientists can be offered a job and what type of job they can be offered. Thus,

our empirical model should be thought of as a reduced form.

        The timing and other aspects of our data make it difficult to know for all respondents exactly

when the location decision was made. As a result, we cannot be certain of the visa policy, macroeconomic

and other conditions at the decision point. Thus, for most people we know their actual location at one

point of time – i.e. in 2010, 2013 or 2015 – which could be between 1 and 13 years post-PhD.7 However


4
  If citizenship status was missing at graduation and in a subsequent SDR survey year the individual was coded as a
temporary resident, we classify these as a temporary resident at time of PhD (this is true of 402 observations). We
exclude a handful of people who a birth state inside the US but say they were temporary residents. People born in
Puerto Rico or a US territory are classified as non-foreign.
5
  Only those working who would be affected by employment-based visas. Those not employed are 4.41% of the
total SDRs’ population, 3.52% of those who are temporary residents at PhD.
6
  The percentages given here and throughout the paper are all weighted.
7
  See footnote 3.
                                                              8
we do not know when the respondent actually moved to his or her current location. Moreover, even if we

know when they actually moved, we cannot know when they made the decision to move. However, it is

crucial for us to assign a time to the location decision, because we need to connect it with the visa policy

and country conditions around that point of time. That is, we don’t know if the choice was actually made

around the time of PhD receipt, or after additional training/working several years in the US (e.g. on a

postdoc or in Occupational Practical Training or OPT), or even whether it was remade every year. We

only know that a choice was made (even if it is a temporary one) by the time they appear in the survey.

        Consequently, we make a reasonable assumption, estimate our model, and then test it against

other possible timing assumptions. Specifically, we assume that they make their location choice given the

information around the time of their PhD, which seems reasonable since at that point, they are forced to

make a choice then. Moreover, we do not assume that they base that decision on the current visa delay

during the month of graduation. After all, visa delays both trend and vary idiosyncratically (as shown in

Figure 1). Instead, we use the moving average of the visa delay from 6 months before to 6 months after

the respondent’s graduation month as the typical delay they can expect to face if they remain in the US.8

        We also test how sensitive our results are to alternative assumptions about the timing of the

decision and assess which assumption seems to most accurately predict the stay rates. For instance, we

model what happens if the PhDs base their decisions on the visa policy 3 years post-PhD, and compare

this to the assumption that decisions are based on conditions in the survey year. We find that the variables

measured at PhD are most accurate predictors of location.9

        The implicit assumption in our model is that people tend to not change their country year-to-year

once they leave the US. We base this assumption partially on the evidence we have from the

approximately 5,000 graduates of foreign origin who were observed in more than one survey.10 94.6% of


8
  In contrast, Khosla’s (2018) EB-2 variable was the delay length in a single month one year post-PhD.
9
  Regressions available from authors upon request.
10
  See footnote 3.
                                                             9
those observed in the home country were still there the next survey. An even higher percentage, 96.7%, of

those who were observed out of the country in one survey were also out of the US in the next. This

corroborates findings from our previous work– albeit it on a much smaller sample – where more than

90% of US STEM PhDs who returned to their home countries did not move back to the US in their early

careers (Kahn and MacGarvie 2016a).

        Note that we do know from the SED responses whether the graduate intends to remain in the US

for the period immediately following the PhD. However, we do not use this information as evidence of

actual location, because many new graduates may respond about the intended location of their post-PhD

additional training – as postdocs or OPT – even if they intend to leave the US after that. Also, those who

intend to stay permanently may be unable to find a suitable job or to get a temporary work visa. Later in

this paper, we empirically analyze the relationship between intended location, actual location and visa

delay length.

        Except for a short period in the first academic year included in our survey (2001), EB-2 visa

delays occurred starting in the middle of 2005. Delay lengths generally trended upward over time after

that.11 We must therefore be careful to add variables that control for secular trends in stay rates. Rather

than including a single time trend, we capture time with dummies for each PhD year to impose the least

possible structure on the relationship between stay rates and time. We also include dummies for the

survey year. We note that with year of PhD and survey year dummies, adding dummies for years-since-

PhD would be perfectly collinear.12 In robustness checks, we instead use dummies for years-since-PhD.

        China and India have both experienced significant economic growth since the beginning of our

sample period, and improvements in living conditions may have encouraged some graduates of US

programs to return home. Consequently, stay rate time trends for India and China may be different from



 We discuss the early 2001 visa delays in more detail in the following section.
11
12
  They actually would not be completely collinear, but only because we happened to use the exact dates (month and
year) to calculated the time between PhD and the survey.
                                                           10
stay rate time trends for the rest of the world. We will address this in several ways.

         First, we include China and India fixed effects to pick up time-invariant features of the

attractiveness of the home country. We also include a rich set of time-varying controls for economic,

scientific and political conditions in the home country, including GDP per capita of the home country

(relative to the US), the R&D/GDP ratio, the country ranking in scientific articles, the number of citations

received by these articles, and the country’s level of democracy.

         In addition to these controls, we estimate additional specifications in which we include country-

specific time trends (that is, the China dummy interacted with the year of PhD, and a similar interaction

term for India). These interactions control for differential changes in the attractiveness of China and India

over time during our sample.13 The fact that we continue to estimate significant effects after including

these interaction terms implies that any improvement in the attractiveness of China and India would have

to coincide precisely with the timing of the introduction of the visa delays in the US.

         To control for changing Chinese policies aimed at increasing return rates of Chinese scientists

working in the west, we also perform analysis excluding observations most likely to be affected by

policies in China.

         Finally, we also perform placebo tests that show that the visa effects found are not relevant for

Chinese or Indian permanent residents or naturalized citizens, or for temporary residents from

neighboring and culturally similar countries (Pakistan and Taiwan) who are not constrained by visa

limitations. The absence of an effect for these groups provides reassurance that our results are indeed

related to US visa policy for temporary residents, rather than something affecting all Chinese/Indian

immigrants or temporary residents from similar countries.




13
  This makes the model essentially a standard differences-in-differences model. We do not use this as our base
model because of our concern about the interpretation of PhD year. Thus, we cannot disentangle time trends by
cohort (PhD year), time trends as individuals age, and calendar year differences so it is difficult understanding what
these “time trends” are measuring.
                                                              11
          All of these results are described in detail below.



                                                    Variables

        Appendix Tables 1a and 1b show summary statistics for the variables used in this analysis.

These variables are explained below.

                              Employment-Based Permanent Residency Visa Variables

        According to the Immigration Act of 1990, immigrants to the US can become permanent

residents via a family-based visa or an employment-based visa, and the act sets out the number and types

of employment-based visas made available each year. There are 140,00014 (or more) employment-based

permanent visas available each year, excluding those awarded to non-profit employers, particularly

universities and hospitals.15 Of these, 40,040 are allocated to persons of extraordinary ability or

multinational managers and executives (EB-1). Another 40,040 are allocated to members of the

professions holding advanced degrees (or with exceptional abilities) – the EB-2 category. It is in this

category that employers typically request permanent visas for STEM PhDs. The EB-2 category also gets

any leftovers if the EB-1 applicants do not use up their quota of 40,000.

        Within the EB-2 category, there is a per-country limitation of 7% of the maximum number of

family-based plus employment-based permanent visas, which means approximately 25,620. If the number

of applications from a country exceeds that, processing of the application is put in a queue. The USCIS

works through each country’s queue in order of application date. Each month, it publishes its “priority

dates” – the dates of application that the government is currently processing for each type of permanent




14
   This is a minimum. In some years, the actual number is slightly more. For instance, in FY2012 ending in Sept
2012, there were 144,951. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visa_Bulletin_Employment-based_Preferences_Cut-
off_Dates.
15
   The relevant law is the Immigration Act of 1990. Universities and non-profits are not subject to this cap.
                                                             12
visa from each country that reached its 7% limit – in the Department of State’s visa bulletins.16 We use

these to calculate the delay – the difference between the date of PhD receipt and the priority date at that

month (and from these calculate the moving averages.)

         The 7% maximum first delayed India’s EB-2 applications in November 1991 and China’s in

October 1993, and during the 1990s each of these countries faced delays some months but not others. The

American Competitiveness in the Twenty-First Century Act of 2000 enabled the per-country 7% ceiling

for all EB visa applications “to be surpassed for individual countries that are oversubscribed as long as

visas are available within the worldwide limit for employment-based preferences.” (Argueta 2016). This

Act was first passed in January of 2000 and signed into law in October, although it took until May of

2001 until the USCIS had no queue remaining even for India and China. Our data starts with the cohort

graduating in the academic year 2001, a cohort which either faced no queue at graduation or knew that the

queue would soon disappear. It should not, therefore, have affected location plans. We model stay rates

under this assumption, although in robustness checks re-estimate our main models as if the earliest

graduates (in fall of 2000) faced actual delays.

         There continued to be no EB-2 delay through September 2005. However, in the fiscal year ending

in September 2005, there was a total of almost 250,000 employment-based visas granted (Argueta 2016),

signaling that in the future the demand for employment-based visas would be entirely used up. Therefore,

starting in October of 2005, the 7% limit applied. The only two countries of origin whose permanent visa

EB-2 pending applications exceeded the 7% limit in October 2005 and practically every month since are

India and China.

         We show the delay length due to EB-2 visa backlog in Figure 1. The backlog of pending

applications are of different lengths each month and are larger for India than China. Thus, the waiting


16
  For instance, https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/legal/visa-law0/visa-bulletin/2014/visa-bulletin-for-
september-2014.html. When visa bulletins were not available on the State Department’s site directly, we found
them on the website immihelp, for instance https://www.immihelp.com/visa-bulletin/september-2002.html
                                                             13
periods for employment-based permanent visas have varied both across countries of origin and over time

and this allows us to identify the delays’ effects.

        Some of the month-to-month variability is due to USCIS mis-estimating the number of applicants

it had already processed until late in the fiscal year and therefore temporarily processed people with

earlier (or later) application dates than planned. As a result, we use 13 month moving averages rather than

single month’s delays, also shown in Figure 1.17

                                      Foreign Support during Graduate School

        Many students receive financial support for their PhD studies from the government of their

country of origin. Examples of this include the BECAS Chile Scholarship and Mexico’s CONACYT

fellowship program. Many of these students receive J-1 visas for study in the US, which require them to

return to their country for two years after they graduate before applying for a US employment-based

visa.18 Some specific programs in foreign countries also stipulate that students return to the home country

after completing their studies, irrespective of their US visa requirement.

        Although we do not directly observe whether respondents had a J-1 visa for their studies, our data

allow us to measure whether people had received money for at least partial funding from foreign

governments, which we have made into a dummy. In our sample of those with temporary visas at PhD,

4.1% had received foreign support (Appendix Table 1).

                         Control Variables: Demographics, family and education

        Variables capturing demographics and family at the point of PhD no doubt affect the decision of

where to locate and we include them in our stay-rate regressions. These include dummies for Female,



17
   We also needed to make some reasonable assumption about the end points. We assumed that no graduates
expected a visa delay until new delays were announced in October 2005. For the first few months that EB-2 delays
were imposed on India and China, we averaged the delay over those months from -6 to +6 months that did have a
delay.
18
   Kahn and MacGarvie (2015) document the high return rates of students funded by the Foreign Fulbright
Fellowship Program, funded by the US department of state. Students receiving funding from this program also
receive J-1 visas.
                                                            14
female and married at PhD, female and children at PhD, male and married at PhD, male and children at

PhD , age at PhD, Black, Asian, Hispanic, and whether the father completed college. 19

        A second group of control variables relate to the PhD education of the respondent. We control for

field of study of highest degree using 2-digit SED categories listed in Appendix Table 2 (for example,

computer science, mathematics and statistics, etc.). We also control for the prestige or quality of the

doctoral institution. This data comes from the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU), 2003-

2016, which is available at the institution level for the top 500 universities and at the broad field level for

the top 200 universities.20 We break this into 9 categories, (1-10, 11-25, 26-50, 51-100, 101-201, 201-300,

301-400, 401-500, and unranked). The ranking of the PhD institution is the main proxy we have for the

academic ability and/or the quality of education of the respondent. We include a dummy for whether the

PhD was granted by a medical school and another dummy for whether the person is currently in a

postdoc. As discussed above, regressions also include fixed effects for PhD year and for survey year.

                                 Control Variables: Country Characteristics

        In addition to these personal control variables, the regressions control for the characteristics of

home countries that we derive from other sources. Real GDP per capita (in PPP constant 2011

international $) and R&D expenditure as a percent of GDP come from the World Bank’s World

Development Indicators. From these variables we compute the ratio of real home country GDP per capita

to US GDP per capita in the year before PhD receipt,21 home country R&D expenditures as a percent of

GDP in the year before PhD receipt, and a variable for whether data on R&D is missing (which is




19
   Family characteristics during the survey year may very well be endogenous and are highly correlated with family
characteristics at PhD, so were left out of the regressions.
20
   These fields are: Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Engineering/Technology and Computer Sciences, Life and
Agriculture Sciences, and Clinical Medicine and Pharmacy. Available at http://www.shanghairanking.com/,
accessed July 2017.
21
   We also experimented using other GDP-based variables as we discuss in the results section. Note that the World
Bank data did not include Taiwan, which we added using IMF data.
                                                            15
typically true for countries with so little R&D that they do not track it.)22 Following Grogger and Hanson

(2015) we use the average Polity IV scores in the previous three years as a measure of the

democratization of the home country (Marshall and Jaggers 2002).23 We incorporate information on the

home country’s distance from the US from Mayer and Zignago (2011)24 and a dummy variable for

whether English was an official language of the country.

        To measure the strength of the home country’s science base, we use the Scimago country

rankings.25 For each country-year, Scimago creates a ranking based on the total number of published

scientific articles.26 From this, we create 4 categories (ranked 1-20, 21-50, 51-100,100-250). We also

separately control for the HC’s total number of citations per article (Scimago), which turns out to have

more statistical power in measuring the HC’s scientific base.



                                            Results: The Location Decision

        Appendix Table 1 shows the average stay rates for those who were temporary residents at time

of PhD and were working in the survey year (68.1%). We can also measure (approximately) five-year stay

rates in the survey of February 2010 (i.e. for those who received PhDs in March 2004 to January 2007) to

be 69.5% percent, identical to Finn (2014)’s most recent five year stay rate estimate, for those who

received PhDs in 2006.27 However, five-year stay rates in the October 2013 survey had risen to 71.5, yet


22
   We interpolate R&D values for countries who only periodically report this number.
23
   We use POLITY2, the modified version of POLITY variable, converting the polity scores during wartimes (i.e. -
66, -77 and -88) to the lowest conventional polity scores (from -10 to 10). We also include a dummy variable for
countries with no Polity score, mostly those from small island countries.
24
   The distance measure is calculated using the great circle formula, which uses the latitude and longitude of a
country’s most populous or capital city.
25
   Available at http://www.scimagojr.com/countryrank.php, accessed July 2017.
26
   Scimago also ranks fields within countries. We have also estimated our main equations using this ranking as well
with qualitatively similar results, matching the NSF fields of study to the Scimago subject areas. There were about
800 missing values for this ranking, so we do not use this in the reported regressions.
27
   Our longer term stay rates are slightly lower than Finn’s. In the sample used in this paper, 62.9% of those who
graduated in 2001 were in the US in 2010 and 58.1% of those who graduated in 2003 were in the US in 2013. In
contrast, Finn found that the 10 year stay rate for 2001-2011 was 65%. Both studies refer to those who were
temporary residents at time of doctorate receipt.
                                                             16
fallen back to 66.2 in the February 2015 survey.28 Finally, we note that the NSF also estimated 5-year stay

rates (NSF 2018) from the 2015 SDR, for temporary or permanent residents at PhD (and including those

not working) at 70%.29

         The overall impact of the employment-based permanent visa cap on staying in the US

         Our regression analyses of the location decision are estimated as linear probability models and

clustered by respondent (since 30% of people were surveyed more than once, see footnote 3).30 The unit

of observation is person i in survey year t (where t is 2010, 2013 or 2015). The dependent variable is an

indicator variable for whether the person is currently working in the US.

         The results begin in Table 1, which includes only the coefficients on the key variables.

(coefficients on other explanatory variables for one specification are in Appendix Table 3). The first

column of Table 1 does not include any visa policy variables, only control variables related to the

individual and country-year. This and all regressions also include dummy variables for birth countries

China and India, the two countries affected by the visa cap. We see that among STEM PhDs, ceteris

paribus Chinese PhDs are 17.7 ppt. (percentage points) more likely and Indian PhDs are 10.6 ppt. more

likely to remain in the US than those from all other countries combined (which we will abbreviate as

RoW for Rest of World).

         Were Chinese and Indian graduates discouraged from remaining in the US when the per-country

limits on EB-2 visas became binding? To test this, we include in Table 1 Column 2 a dummy variable

for whether the limits or caps on EB-2 visas were binding for that country during the month in which the

person received his or her PhD. This variable is highly significant (t = -4.86) and suggests that stay rates

for those who were affected by binding caps were 7.90 lower than those who were not, ceteris paribus.


28
   However, we cannot know whether this drop in 2015 is a real drop or is due to the difference in the 2015 SDR
sampling.
29
   Most of the difference between the NSF (2018) estimate and ours was due to the fact that they included permanent
residents at PhD, who clearly have higher stay rates. Also, those foreigners not working also had a higher stay rate.
30
   Results are robust to clustering by country (see Appendix Table 5, column 2).
                                                             17
This regression assumes that the Chinese and Indians have the same reaction to an EB-2 visa application

delay. Table 1 Column 3 includes separate dummies for the visa delay for India and China and indicates

that the 7.90 ppt. coefficient was combining two significantly different (t = 1.99) effects, a decrease of

9.48 ppt. (t = -5.48) for students from China and a much smaller 3.89 ppt. (t=-1.43) decrease for students

from India.

        In Table 1 Column 4, we replace the EB-2 delay dummy with the moving average delay length

(in years, see Figure 1), which is typically larger for India than for China and ranges from 1.6 years to 7.8

years and may be the cause of the disparate effects of the visa policy in these countries. Column 4

indicates that each additional year on average decreases the stay rate by 1.94 ppt. (t =5.3), so that a 2 year

delay decreases it by around 4 ppt. but a 5 year delay decreases it by more than 9½ ppt. Column 5 divides

the delay length variable into separate effects for China and India. These two coefficients on visa delay

length are significantly different (t = 2.22): each year of delay decreased China’s stay rates by 2.48 ppt.

(t=-5.90) but only decreased India’s stay rates by 1.21 ppt. (t = -2.39).

        There are extremely large changes in visa delay times between Oct 2005 through June 2013 (the

date of the last PhD conferred in our sample) – for India particularly and for China to a lesser extent

(Figure 1). We therefore also, in Table 1 Column 6, estimate a more semiparametric model that replaces

the linear visa delay variable with a set of dummies for each value for the number of years of delay

length, rounded to the nearest year. For China, this includes 4 dummies (2 through 5 years) and, for India,

5 dummies (4 through 8 years).

        For Chinese PhDs, all coefficients on the individual delay-length dummies are significantly

different from zero (i.e. from no delay) and generally become more negative as the delay increases. In

additional regressions, we added both the individual delay-year dummies and the two country-specific

delay length variables simultaneously and used an F (Chow) tests to establish that for China, adding these

additional delay dummies adds no explanatory power (p-value = 0.467). Thus for China, a linear delay

                                                          18
length variable is a sufficient statistic to capture the impact of EB-2 visa delays.

        The pattern for India is different. In the Table 1 Column 6 semi-parametric model, we see that

not all India delay dummies are significant. For the (relatively) shorter delays of 4 and 5 years, there is

little impact on the stay rates of Indian students. For the longer run delays of 6, 7 and 8 years, there are

large significant impacts on location, although the coefficients for 6, 7 and 8 years of delay year are

similar. An F (Chow) test rejects the hypothesis that adding the Indian annual delay dummies adds no

explanatory power beyond a linear variable for the Indian delay length variable (P= 0.044). However, the

coefficients in Column 6 suggest a more parsimonious specification with a single dummy for long Indian

visa delays (of more than 5½ years). We performed an additional test on a regression with the separate

dummies and this single dummy for long Indian visa delays and found that the separate dummies do not

add explanatory power (p-value = 0.84). Therefore, in Column 7 we report the more compact model that

is supported by these F tests – with a linear Chinese visa delay length variable and a dummy variable for

long Indian visa delays (>5½ years).

        We conclude that Chinese graduates respond consistently to each additional year of delay, but

Indian PhDs only respond to very long delays. As Table 1 Column 7 shows, each year of visa delay

decreases Chinese stay rates by 2.39 ppt., so that the longest delay they face during this period (of

approximately 5 years) decreases the stay rate by approximately 12 ppt. In contrast, delays of more than

around 5½ years decrease Indian stay rates by 8.89 ppt. (or on average 1.38 ppt. per delay year).

        We have seen that every year of visa delay deters more Chinese from remaining in the US, but

that only very long visa delays affect Indian PhDs. Why would there be a difference? We suggest some

possible reasons, but have no definitive evidence to conclusively explain the differences.

        One factor that may partially explain why Chinese PhDs appear more sensitive to visa delays is a

difference in the tendency to marry American citizens. Family-based applications for permanent

residency are not subject to quotas by nationality. According to the 2013 wave of the American

                                                          19
Community Survey (ACS), 10.8% of Indian-born PhDs (aged 25-50) in the US were married to an

American citizen but only 2.8% of Chinese-born PhDs were. A second factor is the prevalence of firms

with Indian headquarters among the largest employers of temporary H-1B positions (Mayda et al. 2018).

Since most scientists remaining in the US outside of the nonprofit sector are likely to have an H-1B visa

(especially given the 2004 American Competitiveness Act which set aside 20,000 additional H-1B visas

for those with advanced STEM degrees), Indians might have an advantage obtaining employment with

these Indian-based firms. Finally, there may be more Chinese PhD recipients near the margin because, in

some respects, China is a more attractive destination for recent PhDs than India. China has had faster

GDP growth (20.7% over the three years prior to PhD completion on average in contrast to 12.5% for

India) and a higher GDP per capita (14.3% of US GDP during our period vs. 7.5% for India), and China

ranks higher on the Scimago country ranking of scientific journal articles (averaging 2.9 vs. 10.2 for

India). This combined with a higher language barrier for Chinese students than for Indian students

remaining in the US may make the net benefit of returning to China positive, even when wait times for

permanent residency are shorter than wait times for Indian natives.

                   Impacts on more permanent stay rates and reported intentions to stay

        The location observed immediately after PhD completion is often not a person’s permanent

location, but rather just the location of additional training as a postdoc or on OPT. In the Appendix, we

assess the impact of the visa policy on more permanent location in several different models. Although the

sample size is reduced and the significance levels of some coefficients are lower, the estimates shown in

the Appendix demonstrate the robustness of the impact of visa restrictions on stay rates. For instance, in

Appendix Table 4 Column 1, we exclude those within 3 years from PhD receipt or in postdocs and find

that each year of EB-2 delay decreases longer-run Chinese stay rates by 2.14 ppt. See the Appendix for

more discussion.

        Prior research on stay rates has analyzed students’ stated intentions to remain in the US, which

                                                         20
may or may not be a good measure of actual stay rates.31 We find that the effect of visa restrictions on

reported intentions to stay in the US is weaker than the effect on actual stay rates (Appendix Table 4

Column 4.) For instance, we find a 0.93 ppt. per year decrease in intentions to stay for Chinese that falls

to an insignificant 0.71 (Column 5) when we exclude postdocs; for Indians, we find an insignificant

effect of long delays on intentions to stay in both columns. The small or insignificant effect of visas on

intentions may reflect overconfidence among doctoral students about their ability to remain in the US; it

may also reflect the fact that students remaining for postdocs do not need work visas (and can instead use

OPT). Importantly, Appendix Table 4 Column 6 shows that the qualitative results for stay rates that we

found in Table 1 are robust to controlling for stated intentions to remain in the US. These results and

other columns of Appendix Table 4 are described in greater detail in the Appendix.

                                              Threats to Validity

        Earlier, we described several alternative possible reasons for our main results and mentioned the

additional specifications we performed to test them. Here, we give more details about these tests.

        There were no visa delays in the early years of our sample; after the quotas were reached (in Oct.

2005), visa delays increased over time – particularly for India (Fig 1). Are the coefficients on delay

lengths simply picking up an increase in return rates over time for Indian and Chinese PhDs that is

unrelated to visa delays? To test this, Table 2 Column 1 shows the compact model after including linear

time trends for India and China (in addition to the standard non-country-specific PhD year fixed effects

included in all regressions). Adding in these two country-specific time trends decreases the coefficient on

the visa delay variables somewhat, but does not change the results substantially. For instance, comparing

Table 2 Column 1 and Table 1 Column 7 compact models, the impact of a visa delay year on China is a

bit lower (from -2.39 ppt. to -1.93 ppt., with a new t statistic of -2.58); similarly, the impact of a long visa




                                                           21
delay on India is somewhat lower (it was previously -8.89 ppt., and is now -6.22 ppt., t=-2.13).32

         The second possible reason that China has a different pattern for later PhDs could be that we are

picking up the effects of China’s 1000 Talents Program, which began attracting younger STEM experts to

return to China starting in 2011 (and older exceptional scientists since 2008). To test this, the regression

in Table 2 Column 2, drops all Chinese observations from 2013 and 2015 surveys and also Chinese who

were 40 or older in survey year 2010. Even with the few remaining Chinese in our analysis, we find no

difference in the impact of the visa delay.

         As an additional check of whether our results can be explained by trends in return rates seen in

countries with similar characteristics, rather than the specific effects of US visa policy, we conduct

placebo tests in which we assign students from Pakistan the EB-2 visa delay that applied to Indian

students, and assign students from Taiwan the Chinese EB-2 visa delay. The logic is that students from

these placebo countries will share many of the characteristics of students from China or India, but due to

the smaller populations of Pakistan and Taiwan, there are fewer applicants for US EB-2 green cards and

the per-country limits are never reached. Thus if we observe the same response to Indian and Chinese visa

delays among students from placebo countries, it will suggest that our results are explained by factors

other than US policy.

         Table 2 Column 3 adds to the “compact regression”33 a dummy for Pakistan, a dummy for

Taiwan, and a placebo version of the visa delay variables giving Taiwan China’s delay length and giving

Pakistan a dummy for long Indian delays. In contrast to students from China who experienced a




32
   The time trends are negative and only sometimes significant; however, we must remember that we have already
also controlled for GDP per capita and scientific advancement. Improvements in these two home-country factors are
likely to be the main factors that would increase return rates for reasons not related to visa delays. A less parametric
test would instead include a complete set of PhD-year fixed effects for India and for China respectively in addition
to the current fixed effects for PhD year. However, in this model the visa delay coefficients will only be capturing
the relatively small amount of month-to-month variation in moving averages of visa length within a year. Moreover,
our choice of moving average period is itself arbitrary, so this should not be used to identify visa delay effects.
33
   See Table 2 Column 7. Note that results are similar using a semiparametric model as in Table 2 Column 6.
                                                               22
significant decline in the stay rate of approximately 2.4 ppt. per year of additional visa delay, PhDs from

Taiwan see a significant increase of approximately 3.3 ppt.; in contrast to India where long delays

significantly decrease stay rates by 8.9 ppt., long delays significantly increase Pakistan’s stay rates by an

insignificant 9.1 ppt. Results are similar after dropping China and India from the sample (Table 2

Column 4). The fact that US visa policy with regard to China and India does not appear to have a

deterrent effect on the stay rates of students from placebo countries is consistent with our story.

        A final placebo test comes from the idea that, if our results are explained solely by the

coincidentally increasing attractiveness of China and India over the period in which visa delays

lengthened, we would expect all Chinese and Indian nationals to return at higher rates, and not just those

who are temporary residents at the time of PhD receipt. To investigate this, we run the compact model on

a sample of foreign-born STEM PhDs who were either permanent residents or naturalized citizens (Table

2 Column 5) at the time of PhD. Consistent with our expectations, neither Chinese visa delay length nor

the dummy for long Indian visa delays are significant. Results are similar in the semiparametric model

(available upon request): the coefficients on the dummies for years of visa delay show no clear pattern

and they are all statistically insignificant.

        Additional robustness checks show that the results are robust to replacing the PhD year fixed

effects with fixed effects for years from PhD (Appendix Table 5 Column 1). They are also robust to

clustering errors by country of origin instead of by person (Appendix Table 5, Column 2) or adding

country-specific fixed effects for the 18 additional countries of origin with at least 200 observations

(Appendix Table 5, Column 3). Results were similar when we allowed China and India to have different

coefficients in the different survey years to control for the possibility that the survey-year conditions in

these countries were confounding factors (Appendix Table 5, Column 4); when we excluded the

recession years 2007-2010 (Appendix Table 5, Column 5); and when we included the moving average



                                                          23
of delays for those who had faced academic year 2001 caps (Appendix Table 5, Column 6).34



                                Results: How the EB-2 Visa Caps affect US Science

                                        The STEM fields most affected

        The previous section shows that EB-2 caps directly affect US science by limiting the number of

PhDs working in the US. And it is not surprising that the two countries with the most US-trained PhDs –

China and India – are also the ones for which the cap is binding. However, the per-country caps affect the

US more – and we argue, more negatively – than an across-the-board EB-2 cap would. The number of

American citizens obtaining PhDs in STEM fields overall is much smaller than the total number of US-

trained STEM PhDs demanded by US employers. If every US citizen who received a US PhD in a STEM

field between 2001 and 2013 and was employed in the survey years (2010, 2013 and 2015) worked in the

US, they would only provide 67.8% of the demand for US-trained PhDs from those cohorts. 35 Non-

citizens are needed to fill this gap.

        Even within STEM, Americans tend to study in different PhD STEM fields than citizens or those

from other countries. This is obvious from Appendix Table 2. The third column shows that US citizens

specialize in biological sciences and psychology which together account for 43% of their STEM PhDs

(2001-2013 cohorts). Among US-educated biology PhDs in these cohorts working in the US, 71% are

American citizens; the similar figure for US-educated psychology PhDs is 93%.36 On the other hand,

Americans are much less likely to study electrical/computer engineering (only 3% of STEM PhD

recipients do) and American citizens fill only 30% of US employment (of US-granted PhDs in the 2001-



34
    This robustness check is included out of an abundance of caution, despite knowing that recent legislation made
the caps very temporary. See earlier discussion on Employment-Based Permanent Residency Visa Variables
35
   Not every one of these PhDs were in fact employed in the US, so that the proportion of US citizens-at-PhD among
all employed US-granted 2001-13 PhD cohorts was only 65.1. Moreover, since the NSF data do not include PhDs
trained in other countries working in the US, the actual cohort of all 2001-13-granted PhDs working in the US is
considerably larger, and American citizens a much smaller proportion of this larger group.
36
   Not shown in table.
                                                            24
2013 cohorts) in that field.

        In Table 3 and illustrated in Figure 2, we define fields with excess demand as those in which

American citizens could staff less than the 68.7% of current employment (of US-granted 2001-2013

PhDs).37 Excess demand fields include all engineering subfields, computer science, math/statistics,

chemistry, physics, economics, and agricultural/food sciences. Americans provide only 48% of

employment in these excess-demand fields, but 79% of employment in the remaining fields. International

students provide the majority of employees (on average 52%, with a maximum of 59% in

Electrical/Computer Engineering) in these high-excess-demand fields.

        Moreover, among international students, Indian and Chinese students exhibit patterns different

from those from the rest of international students (Appendix Table 2, Table 3). 72% of Chinese and 71%

of Indians received their PhDs in high-excess-demand fields, compared to 63% of non-citizens from the

rest of the world (RoW). Together, Chinese and Indian students provide 28% of employment in excess-

demand fields, with those from other countries providing the additional 24%. In contrast, PhDs from

India and China represent about 9% of employment in other fields (and the rest of the world represents

12%).

        The high-demand fields also tend to have higher average salaries, as seen in Table 3. Perhaps not

surprisingly, fields with high US salaries have higher average stay rates as well (Table 3). The countries

that send large numbers of students to be trained in fields with high excess demand in the US will thus

tend to have high stay rates in the US, and are therefore are at more risk of being capped by a per-country

visa limit. Consequently, a policy that caps Chinese and Indian permanent residency visas will limit the

supply of skills in the fields most needed by US employers of STEM PhDs.

         The effects of this policy on the US economy stand in stark contrast to the impact of a different


37
  As noted above, this is the average share of employment (of these cohorts) that could be staffed by Americans
across all fields. However, exactly the same fields are categorized as excess-demand whether we use this percentage
or the average percentage of American citizens among US STEM employment (of these cohorts), 65.1%.
                                                            25
policy that also reduces the stay rates of international students, that is, J-1 visas for educational exchange.

These visas require graduates to return to their home country for 2 years, and many of the STEM PhD

students who receive financial support from their home country governments either have J-1 visas, or

have funding from specific programs in foreign countries that also stipulate that students return to the

home country after completing their studies. Appendix Table 1 indicates that about 4% of US-trained

foreign PhDs received support from foreign governments during graduate school. Ceteris paribus,

receiving foreign support is associated with approximately a 33 ppt. decrease in the probability of staying

in the US (Appendix Table 3) and a 34 ppt. increase in the likelihood of returning to the home country

(Table 4 columns 1 and 2),. However, those with foreign government support are concentrated in fields

of study characterized by country-specific human capital. These fields include agricultural and food

sciences, environmental sciences, and social sciences such as psychology and political science. These are

all fields with relatively low excess demand, and also lower-than-median US salaries.38

        It is possible, however, that the visa delays may have different impacts on Indians/Chinese from

different fields. One possibility is that those least affected by the cap are those in high-excess-demand

fields because they obtain larger net benefits from staying, including higher salaries, and employers are

more willing to commit to an EB-2 process that can take many years. To test this, in Appendix Table 5

Column 7 we have re-estimated our compact regression adding in interactions between the visa delay

variables and a dummy for high excess-demand fields. We found that visa delays impact stay rates in both

excess-demand fields and others, and that for neither China nor India is there a significantly different

impact of visa delays between high excess-demand fields and other fields. Numerically, the visa delay’s

impact is slightly smaller for high-excess-demand fields: For China, impact of a year of delay is 2.25 in

high-demand fields v. 2.76. For India, the impact of a long delay is 8.55 v. 9.60. We conclude that the


38
  The exception is agricultural and food science, which is categorized as excess demand by my definition (i.e.
Americans could only fill 61% of US employment in this field. However, it does have a low stay rate (50%) and
salaries far below the median.
                                                            26
visa cap has effects on both high-excess-demand fields and other fields.

         Similarly, it may be that the visa delays only affect students of “lesser ability” (once again,

because the net benefits of staying are lower). Our best measure of inherent ability is the rank of the PhD

institution. Overall, staying in the US is not correlated with the PhD rank ceteris paribus.39 Thus, in the

control variable coefficients in Appendix Table 3, no institutional rank category coefficient is

significantly different from the top (excluded) rank, nor from each other.

         Nevertheless, it is possible that the impact of visa restrictions on Chinese and Indian students

depends on their ability as proxied by the rank of their PhD institutions. To test this, in Appendix Table 5

Column 8, we add controls for institution rank dummies (simplified into 3 equally-sized categories)

interacted with dummies for China and India and interactions between these dummies and a dummy for

having the visas capped, separately for India and China. For both China and India, none of the visa

interactions are significant. That is, the visa seems to have affected all ranks similarly.40

                                    Visa delays and type of job and salaries

         There are no limits on the number of EB-2 visas that can be granted to employees of universities

and other non-profits. Therefore, we might expect that once EB-2 caps became binding, Indians and

Chinese would have become more likely to move to academia or other nonprofit jobs. Prior research

(Amuedo-Dorantes and Furtado 2017) has shown that constraints on H-1B visas for certain countries may

lead those affected by the constraints to take jobs in the academic sector rather than industry, since

academic institutions are also exempt from the H-1B quotas. To test this for EB-2 visas, we ran

regressions in which the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent is employed in



39
  This is a similar finding to Brentschneider and Dai (2017). Interestingly, we find that intentions to stay are
correlated with institutional rank. In our regressions of these intentions, we find that people from top 10 schools are
about 6.9 ppt. more likely to intend to remain in the US than those from worse ranks, 8.5 ppt. more likely than those
from unranked schools.
40
   Note however, in coefficients not shown, that for China – but not India or the rest of the world – those from highly
ranked schools are less likely to remain in the US. Our results contrast with Kato and Sparber’s (2013) findings that
H-1B visa limitations keep the best undergraduates from even applying to US colleges.
                                                              27
academia, restricting the sample to people employed in the US but not employed in a post-doc41 (Column

5 of Table 4), with the same right-hand-side variables as in the compact model. The results showed no

impact of the visas on working in academia.42 Alternatively, in Column 6 of Table 4, we included those

employed in a postdoc. Again the coefficients on the visa variables again are not statistically significant at

standard levels. There is a hint that long Indian delays may increase choosing academia (including

academic postdocs), but the t-statistic of this coefficient is only 1.54 (p=0.123).43

         We also analyzed whether visa policy increases employment in the broader group of all

nonprofits (academia + nonprofits), without and with current postdocs included (Columns 7 and 8 of

Table 4). The visa delay coefficients were not statistically significant for either country or sample.

However, once again, there is a hint that the long caps on Indians increased their likelihood of working

for the broad not-for-profit sector including postdocs, since the coefficient on long Indian caps is 6.0 ppt.

with t=1.71 (p=.087). We conclude that in terms of long run jobs (post-postdoc), the visa is not pushing

people into academia besides postdocs; however, it may be encouraging Indians to enter postdocs. Note

that in more detailed analysis, Amuedo-Dorantes and Furtado also find that the H-1B visa changes they

study increase academic employment for holders of Masters degrees but not for holders of PhDs.

         Why didn’t the visas not encourage a shift towards academic employment? One potential

explanation is that PhD scientists have very strong preferences for either a job in academia or in industry

and these preferences dominate the effects of permanent residency delays. Another potential explanation

is that those hired into academia would be inframarginal with or without any visa delays.

         Visa delays also can affect how long the potential immigrant stays with a firm, since leaving




41
   Post-docs are covered by student visas or OPT.
42
   We tried various different definitions of academic jobs from the narrow “tenure track academic jobs” to the
broadest “any job in the education sector” (shown in Table 4), with similar results. Regression results available from
the authors.
43
   We also estimated this as a semiparametric model and no single delay coefficient was significant, with changing
signs.
                                                              28
means losing their place on the EB-2 queue. This precludes the scientists from starting their own

companies, and typically also precludes them from working in new small companies (Roach, Sauermann

and Skrentny 2018). To test these possibilities, we ran regression analyses of the probability of being

“self-employed,”, “self-employed incorporated,”, or “works for small new firms”44 (respectively) of those

working in the US. The visa delay variables were not even marginally significant in any of these

regressions. We note that, in general, few PhDs are in these firms, making it difficult to unearth any

significant effects in our limited samples (See Appendix Table 1b). Along the same lines, we test and do

not find that visa delays affect the size of the firm of those working in the US private sector. We also do

not estimate any significant impacts of visa delays on the length of time they had been with their current

firm (for those working in the US private sector).

         Table 5 first demonstrates that graduates affected by visa restrictions are significantly more likely

to be temporary residents ceteris paribus than unaffected students (7.5% for Indian graduates facing long

visa delays and 1.4% per year for Chinese graduates, Table 5 Column 1). This could in principle lead to

lower salaries all else equal, since workers waiting for permanent residency may be less prone to being

hired by competing employers. Indeed, if we run a regression of log salary (of those working in the US)

on control variables plus temporary resident status, we find that ceteris paribus temporary residents earn

5.0% less. (Table 5 Column 2). However, when we run log salary regressions with our visa delay

variables replacing the temporary resident indicator, neither visa delay coefficient is significant. (Table 5

Column 3). We can reconcile these two findings by speculating that the temporary residency

accompanying visa delays is associated with lower salaries, but that there must be some positive

selection, so that the Chinese and Indians who are not deterred from staying in the US by the visa delays

are the ones being offered higher salaries than the ones who are deterred.



44
  Firms with less than 25 employees that came into being within the past 5 years. All regression results available
from the authors.
                                                              29
                        Results: How the EB-2 Visa Caps affect Home Countries

                                           Are they going home?

         The first columns of Table 4 look at whether visa delays are associated with increased propensity

to locate in home countries or in third countries which are neither home nor the US. It shows that STEM

graduates who leave the US due to visa delays are almost all returning to the home country. Thus, long

visa delays for India are associated with an increase of 8.1 ppt. in the probability of returning home (t=

3.63; compare to a reduction of -8.9 ppt. for staying in the US), while each year of delay increases the

probability of returning to China by 2.08 ppt. (t=5.91, compare to a -2.39 effect on staying in the US).

Looking at the semiparametric model with separate dummies for each number of years of delay in

Column 2, we see that the significant visa effects for Indians returning home begin at visa lengths of 5

years with a coefficient of 5.06 ppt. (significant at the 5% level), whereas the impact on staying in the US

only began at 6 years (rounded).

         However, we observe no significant effects of visa delays on the probability of being located in a

third country (Table 4 Columns 3 and 4).

         How much do Stay and Return Rates depend on the Science Base in the Home Country?

         An additional dimension of EB-2 delays’ impacts on the US economy lies in the relationship

between the home country’s scientific advancement and macroeconomic conditions and stay and return

rates.

         Coming from a home country with a very weak science base – as measured using Scimago’s

country rankings of publications – increases stay rates. Similarly it decreases return rates. Specifically, in

our regression results (Appendix Table 3), while there are no significant differences in stay rates between

the top 20 countries (in terms of publications) and the next 30, home countries with worse (higher than

50) Scimago rankings are associated with an increase in the US stay rate (9.2 ppt. more than the top

                                                          30
ranks) and with a decrease in the home country return rates (approximately 10.6 ppt. lower45). Note that

fully 89% of the sample come from countries ranked 50 or better. Thus the strong effect on stay rates of

being from a particularly weak science countries applies to a relatively small number of graduates.

         The Scimago country rankings calculations are based on the total number of publications in the

country, which favors high population countries like China and India (ranked 2nd and 7th respectively in

2013). We therefore have computed an alternative measure using Scimago data, the log of citations per

article in the scientist’s field in the home country (in the year leading to the PhD). This variable has a

very significant coefficient: each 1% increase in citations per article decreases the likelihood of staying in

the US by approximately 0.16 ppt. (Appendix Table 3)46 and increases the likelihood of returning home

by almost 0.13 ppt.

         Holding these science variables constant, R&D spending as a percentage of GDP at the time of

PhD is not significantly associated with stay rates or with return rates holding. The coefficient on the

dummy for the 3.4% of observations missing home-country R&D percentage does not affect stay rates,

but those countries with missing R&D figures have more than 5 ppt. lower return rates ceteris paribus.

         Just as we asked whether the visa delay effects differ by field type and by PhD institution rank,

we also want to know whether responses to EB-2 visa delays depend on the strength of science in the

home country. To investigate this, we exploit the fact that the scientific changes in China and India did

not occur evenly across fields. We created interaction terms between field-specific publication rankings

from the Scimago data for India and China and the visa variables in the compact model. (Appendix

Table 5 Column 9). Adding these to the stay rate regressions, the effect of the visa does not depend on

the scientific level of the field in either country.

         How much do the Stay and Return Rates depend on Macroeconomic Conditions at Home?


45
  All home country coefficients are available from the authors.
46
  The impact is larger – 0.19 ppt. – when separate controls for the high science countries China and India are
excluded from the regression.
                                                              31
        How will stay rates change as economic conditions improve in home countries? To estimate this,

we first consider the impact of macroeconomic conditions around the time of PhD. While Grogger and

Hanson (2015) found larger and significant effects on intentions to stay, we find an insignificant

relationship between the GDP per capita in the home country at time of PhD relative to the US and stay

rates (e.g. in Appendix Table 3 the coefficient is -0.017, t= -0.58.)47 Similarly, there is no effect of

relative GDP per capita on location in the home country (t=1.10). We also experimented with alternative

GDP measures, including the growth rate of home country per capita GDP leading up to the PhD (relative

to the US growth and also a dummy variable for particularly high GDP per capita growth rates (above

10% per year). 48 None were significant.

        However, in our regressions of intentions to stay in the US from the SED – the measure used by

Grogger and Hanson – the relative GDP per capita was significant (with more home country relative GDP

growth decreasing intentions to stay by approximately 9.71 ppt. (t= -3.23 based on the “compact”

specification of Appendix Table 4 Column 6)49 even with all the science variable controls.

        The reason that GDP does not impact actual location – as we would have expected – is that we

are simultaneously controlling for the science base of the home country. In results which exclude our

measures of a country’s science base (country rank, citations per article discussed below), the coefficient

on (relative) GDP per capita in the PhD year becomes large – on the order of -9.8% – and highly

significant (t= -4.02, from the regression of Appendix Table 5, Column 10). The impact of GDP per

capita on return rates when the science variables are excluded is also large and highly significant (6.8 ppt.

t=3.33). We conclude that GDP per capita is highly correlated with the strength of science in the country,




47
   Note that the GDP measure is relative to the US GDP, both adjusted for PPP.
48
  Results from these alternative regressions are available on request from the authors. We add this dummy because
countries with extremely high growth rates (above the 90 th percentile in our sample) may behave differently from
others.
49
   Excluding postdocs as in Appendix Table 5, Column 10, the coefficient of relative GDP on intentions is still
large and significant: -7.9 t= -2.2
                                                            32
and it is these science measures that are the most important home country characteristics determining

location.50



                                                        Conclusion

         American firms and universities rely heavily on foreign-born doctoral recipients to fill research

positions in most STEM fields. In fields like computer science and electrical/computer engineering, a

large share of employees come from China and India. Despite the fact that degree-holders earn

particularly high salaries, relatively few American citizens enroll in these fields. At the same time, US

immigration policy limits the number of permanent residency visas that can be granted to nationals of a

particular country, a policy which affects China and India but not other countries.

         This paper demonstrates that US visa policy differentially constrains the supply of highly skilled

workers in precisely the fields of study that are in greatest demand by US firms, universities, and research

organizations, fields where Indians and Chinese are concentrated. Country-based limits on EB-2 green

cards are associated with reductions in the stay rates of Chinese students of 2.4 percentage points (ppt.)

per year of delay relative to students from the rest of the world, while Indian students are only affected by

very long delays in visa processing. Indian students facing delays of 5½ years or more have a relative stay

rate that is about 8.9 ppt. lower. At the same time, our results show that students from countries with

greater scientific output have lower stay rates. This suggests not only that the current approach to

allocating permanent residency visas reduces the supply of highly skilled STEM workers, but also that as

support for science continues to improve in sending countries such as China, the negative effects of visa

delays in the US will only intensify. These results suggest that a policy that factored in the demand for


50
  We also reran the base compact model (Table 2 column 7) controlling for the relative home country GDP per
capita measure in the year preceding the survey year instead of the PhD year and found qualitatively similar results –
an insignificant effect of relative GDP per capita when country’s science strength is controlled for, but a large,
significantly negative coefficient on relative GDP per capita in the PhD year when controls for science base are
excluded,
                                                              33
skilled workers when allocating permanent residency visas would generate better innovation outcomes for

the US than a policy with country quotas.

        .




                                                      34
                                               References

        The American Competitiveness in the 21st Century Act (AC21), Pub. L. 106-313 (October 17,
2000), 114 Stat. 1251.

        Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina and Delia Furtado (2017). “Settling for Academia? H-1B Visas and
the Career Choices of International Students in the United States,” Journal of Human Resources
December 5, 2017 0816-8167r1

        Arlington, VA (NSF 13-300) [September 2012] https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf13300/
(accessed 12/30/2017).

       Argueta, Carla (2016), “Numerical Limits on Permanent Employment-Based Immigration:
Analysis of the Per-country Ceilings” Congressional Research Service Report 7-5700, www.crs.gov

         Bratsberg, Bernt (1995). The Incidence of Non-Return Among Foreign Students in the United
States. Economics of Education Review 14(4) 373-384.

      Borjas, George and Bernt Bratsberg (1996) “The Outmigration of the Foreign-born.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 78(1). 165-175.

        Brentschneider, Stuart and Yiqun Dai (2017), “Why do foreign citizens with US Ph.D. Degrees
return home?,” Working Paper.

       Breschi, Stefano, Francesco Lissoni, Ernest Miguelez (2018), “Return migrants’ self-selection:
Evidence for Indian inventors,” NBER working paper No. 24809

        Depew, Briggs, Peter Norlander and Todd A. Sorensen (2017). “Interfirm-Mobility and return
migration patterns of skilled guest workers.” Journal of Population Economics 30, 681-721. DOI
10.1007/s00148-016-0607-y

      Feenstra, Robert C , Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer (2015), “The Next Generation of the
Penn World Table,” American Economic Review, 105(10): 3150–3182.

         Finn, Michael (2014) “Stay Rates of Foreign Doctorate Recipients from U.S. Universities, 2011,”
Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education working paper,
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/7a4c/49e7878730b587201548338aa6052e2401b7.pdf (accessed
12/30/2017)

        Ganguli, Ina and Patrick Gaule (2018), “Will the U.S. Keep the Best and the Brightest (as Post-
docs)? Career and Location Preferences of Foreign STEM PhDs,” NBER Working Paper No. 24838.

       Grogger, Jeffrey, and Gordon H. Hanson (2015), “Attracting Talent: Location Choices of
Foreign-Born PhDs in the United States” Journal of Labor Economics, 33(S1), pp. S5–S38.

        Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. 2010. "How Much Does Immigration Boost
Innovation?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2 (2): 31-56.

                                                       35
       Hunt, Jennifer (2017), “How Restricted is the Job Mobility of Skilled Temporary Work Visa
Holders?” NBER Working Paper No. 23529. June 2017.

        Kahn, Shulamit and Megan J. MacGarvie (2016a), “How Important Is U.S. Location for Research
in Science?” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 98:2, 397-414.

        Kahn, S. and MacGarvie, M. (2016b) “Do return requirements increase international knowledge
diffusion? Evidence from the Fulbright program.” Research Policy, 45(6) July 2016: pp.1304-1322.

        Kato, Takao and Chad Sparber (2013) “Quotas and Quality: The Effect of H-1B Visa Restrictions
on the Pool of Prospective Undergraduate Students from Abroad.” Review of Economics and Statistics
95(1) 109-126.

        Khosla, Pooja. (2018) Wait time for permanent residency and the retention of immigrant doctoral
recipients in the U.S. Economic Analysis and Policy, 57, 33-43.

        Marshall, Monty, and Keith Jaggers (2002), The Polity IV Project: Political regime characteristics
and transitions. University of Maryland.

       Mayer, Thierry and Soledad Zignago (2011), “Notes on CEPII’s distances measures: The
GeoDist database” CEPII Working Paper no. 2011-25, December.

        National Science Foundation (2018), National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics.
Science and Engineering Indicators 2018. https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2018/nsb20181/report

        Roach, Michael, Henry Sauermann and John Skrentny (forthcoming). Entrepreneurial
Characteristics, Preferences and Outcome of Native and Foreign Science & Engineering PhD Students.”
In Ina Ganguli, Shulamit Kahn and Megan MacGarvie eds. The Role of Immigrants and Foreign Students
in Science, Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Cambridge MA: NBER.

       Soon, Jan-Jan (2008) “The determinants of international students’ return intention,” University of
Otago Economics Discussion Paper No. 0806.

        Stuen, Erik T., Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, Keith E. Maskus (2012), “Skilled Immigration and
Innovation: Evidence from Enrolment Fluctuations in US Doctoral Programmes,” The Economic Journal,
Volume 122, Issue 565, Pages 1143-1176

        Zeithammer, Robert and Ryan P. Kellogg (2013), “The Hesitant Hai Gui: Return-Migration
Preferences of U.S.-Educated Chinese Scientists and Engineers,” Journal of Marketing Research: October
2013, Vol. 50, No. 5, pp. 644-663.




                                                       36
                              Figure 1
Expected wait time by PhD completion date, actual and moving average




                                37
                   Figure 2 Distribution of Employed US PhDs (cohorts 2001-13)



 100%

  90%

  80%

  70%

  60%

  50%

  40%

  30%

  20%

  10%

   0%
            Employed in high excess-demand fields                   Employed in other fields

                    From US**       From China***       From India***      From RoW***



* Excess-demand fields have % US citizens among US-trained PhDs <65% total employed
** US-born and naturalized citizens
*** Population includes temporary and permanent residents at PhD from these countries. RoW Rest of
World




                                                 38
                                            Table 1: OLS Regressions
                                      Dependent variable: Staying in the US
                          Population: International students (temporary residents at PhD)
                               (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
EB-2 cap binding                         -0.079***
                                           (0.016)
India X cap binding                                         -0.039
                                                           (0.027)
China X cap binding                                      -0.095***
                                                           (0.017)
EB-2 delay                                                              -0.019***
                                                                          (0.004)
India X delay                                                                           -0.012*
                                                                                         (0.005)
China X delay                                                                          -0.025***                     -0.024***
                                                                                         (0.004)                       (0.004)
India X 4 yr. delay                                                                                      -0.016
                                                                                                        (0.032)
India X 5 yr. delay                                                                                      -0.029
                                                                                                        (0.030)
India X 6 yr. delay                                                                                    -0.095*
                                                                                                        (0.039)
India X 7 yr. delay                                                                                    -0.127*
                                                                                                        (0.056)
India X 8 yr. delay                                                                                    -0.128*
                                                                                                        (0.057)
China X 2 yr. delay                                                                                    -0.064*
                                                                                                        (0.029)
China X 3 yr. delay                                                                                   -0.102***
                                                                                                        (0.029)
China X 4 yr. delay                                                                                   -0.085***
                                                                                                        (0.019)
China X 5 yr. delay                                                                                   -0.131***
                                                                                                        (0.023)
India X long delay                                                                                                   -0.089***
                                                                                                                       (0.027)
India                      0.106***       0.164***       0.136***       0.175***       0.152***       0.137***       0.123***
                            (0.031)        (0.033)        (0.037)        (0.034)        (0.036)        (0.037)         (0.031)
China                      0.177***       0.229***       0.238***       0.223***       0.236***       0.238***       0.232***
                            (0.030)        (0.032)        (0.032)        (0.032)        (0.032)        (0.033)         (0.032)
        R-squared            0.205          0.207          0.207          0.207          0.208          0.208           0.208

* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. The number of observations in all regressions is 22,470. Robust standard errors, clustered by
respondent, in parentheses. All regressions include fixed effects for survey year, year of PhD, and 2-digit field of study.
Additional controls include demographic variables, rank category of PhD institution, post-doc status, and home country
characteristics (language, distance, GDP per capita, R&D/GDP, democratization, country rank in number of scientific articles
produced and citations per article). Other coefficients for the specification in column (7) are in Appendix Table 3.



                                                              39
                                        Table 2: Robustness and placebo tests
                                         Dependent variable: Staying in the US
                                                    (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)
                                                Linear time     Thousand
                                                    trend        Talents                       Placebo
              India X long delay                  -0.062*       -0.091***         -0.083**                   -0.004
                                                  (0.029)         (0.027)          (0.027)                  (0.028)
              China X delay                       -0.019*       -0.025***        -0.022***                   -0.006
                                                  (0.008)         (0.007)          (0.004)                  (0.005)
              India X PhD year                    -0.008*
                                                  (0.004)
              China X PhD year                     -0.005
                                                  (0.005)
              India                              0.178***        0.116***        0.124***                    0.006
                                                  (0.043)         (0.031)         (0.033)                   (0.032)
              China                              0.254***        0.222***        0.225***                    -0.003
                                                  (0.038)         (0.035)         (0.033)                   (0.033)
              Pakistan                                                              0.018        0.012
                                                                                     (0.066)    (0.067)
              Taiwan                                                              -0.076*        -0.071
                                                                                     (0.037)    (0.037)
              Pakistan - delay                                                      0.091        0.084
                                                                                     (0.129)    (0.127)
              Taiwan - delay                                                      0.033**       0.030**
                                                                                     (0.011)    (0.011)
              R-squared                            0.207           0.189            0.209         0.13       0.045
              # observations                      22,470          18,211           22,470        14,858      5,746


* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Robust standard errors, clustered by respondent, in parentheses. All regressions include fixed
effects for survey year, year of PhD, and 2-digit field of study. See note on Table 2 for additional controls. Column 1 includes a
linear time trend interacted with the China and India dummies. To control for the effects of the Thousand Talents program,
column 2 excludes observations from survey years 2013 and 2015 for Chinese scientists who were 40 or older in 2010. Columns
3 and 4 contain results of a placebo test using students from Taiwan and Pakistan. Column 5 contains results of a placebo test
using students who were already permanent residents at time of PhD.




                                                                40
                           Table 3: Characteristics of High Excess Demand Fields*

                                    In excess-demand fields                In other fields          Total


                                  US Employment of US-granted PhDs (cohorts 2001-2013)
 Total                                      45.95%                             54.05%                  100.00%


 By country of origin
          From US**                         48.49%                             79.29%                  65.14%
         From China***                      19.28%                             6.30%                   12.27%
         From India***                       8.52%                             2.90%                    5.48%
         From RoW***                        23.71%                             11.51%                  17.11%
                         Total               100%                               100%                    100%


                                                         Average salary
                                           $104,260                           $81,169                  $91,799


                                                 US PhDs Granted 2001-2013
 Total                                      47.59%                             52.41%                   100%


 By country of origin
          From US**                         34.05%                             65.95%                   100%
         From China***                      72.18%                             27.82%                   100%
         From India***                      71.38%                             28.62%                   100%
         From RoW***                        62.77%                             37.23%                   100%


                                           Average stay rate of temp. resident PhDs
                                            69.83%                             64.42%                  68.16%


* We define fields with excess demand as those in which American citizens could staff less than the 68.7% of current
employment (of US-granted 2001-2013 PhDs). 68.7% is the average share of employment that could be staffed by Americans
across all fields.




                                                           41
                              Table 4: Geographic and Sectoral Destinations of Graduates


                            (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)                (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)
                           Population: all Temp. Residents at PhD              Population: Temp. Residents at PhD working in US
                                                                               academia      academia     non-profit   non-profit
                          home                         third
                                                                                  (excl.        (incl.        (excl       (incl
                         country                      country
                                                                               postdocs)     postdocs)    postdocs)    postdocs)
India X long delay      0.081***                       0.008                     0.031          0.055         0.038      0.060
                         (0.022)                      (0.016)                   (0.043)       (0.036)       (0.044)     (0.035)
China X delay           0.021***                       0.003                     -0.003        -0.003        -0.003      0.005
                         (0.004)                      (0.003)                   (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.007)     (0.006)
India X 4 yr. delay                       0.027                    -0.011
                                         (0.025)                  (0.022)
India X 5 yr. delay                      0.051*                    -0.022
                                         (0.023)                  (0.021)
India X 6 yr. delay                     0.107**                    -0.012
                                         (0.033)                  (0.023)
India X 7 yr. delay                     0.086**                    0.040
                                         (0.031)                  (0.048)
India X 8 yr. delay                     0.139**                    -0.011
                                         (0.048)                  (0.033)
China X 2 yr. delay                     0.071**                    -0.007
                                         (0.025)                  (0.019)
China X 3 yr. delay                    0.088***                    0.014
                                         (0.025)                  (0.019)
China X 4 yr. delay                    0.077***                    0.008
                                         (0.017)                  (0.012)
China X 5 yr. delay                    0.118***                    0.013
                                         (0.020)                  (0.015)
India                   -0.142***      -0.167***       0.019       0.030        -0.105*            -0.075       -0.106*         -0.091*
                          (0.026)        (0.031)     (0.0225)     (0.027)        (0.048)          (0.044)        (0.048)         (0.043)
China                   -0.194***      -0.202***       -0.039      -0.036      -0.174***        -0.168***      -0.186***       -0.173***
                          (0.027)        (0.027)      (0.023)     (0.024)        (0.049)          (0.045)        (0.048)         (0.044)
For support during
grad school             0.339***       0.337***       (0.009)     (0.009)         0.016          0.0132          0.046           0.019
                         (0.019)        (0.019)       (0.014)     (0.014)        (0.054)         (0.051)        (0.047)         (0.048)
R-squared                 0.189          0.189         0.052       0.052          0.136           0.189          0.178           0.241
# observations           22,470         22,470        22,470      22,470         11,168          13.202         11,168          13.202

     * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Robust standard errors, clustered by respondent, in parentheses. All regressions include fixed
     effects for survey year, year of PhD, and 2-digit field of study. See note on Table 2 for additional controls. The dependent
     variable in columns 1 and 2 is a dummy for whether the person has returned to their home country; in columns 3 and 4 it is a
     dummy for being in a third country. Columns 5-8 are restricted to people working in the US. In column 5, the dependent variable
     is a dummy for working in academia (excluding those in postdocs); column 6 includes postdocs. In column 7 the dependent
     variable is a dummy for working in the non-profit, non-governmental sector (excluding those in postdocs); column 8 includes
     postdocs.




                                                                   42
                                  Table 5: Visa Delays, Visa Status and Salaries

                                                        Temporary
                                                        Resident                  Salary
                                                        (1)             (2)            (3)
                              India X long delay        0.0751*                        -0.0132
                                                        (0.0344)                       (0.0327)
                              China X visa delay        0.0141**                       0.0082
                                                        (0.0046)                       (0.0072)
                              Temporary resident                        -0.0492***
                                                                        (0.0143)
                              India                     0.1382***       0.1083*        0.0994*
                                                        (0.0342)        (0.0461)       (0.0467)
                              China                     0.1505***       0.1216**       0.0923*
                                                        (0.0315)        (0.0396)       (0.0463)
                              R-squared                 0.3370          0.2530         0.2522
                              N                         13202           13193          13193

* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Robust standard errors, clustered by respondent, in parentheses. All regressions include fixed
effects for survey year, year of PhD, and 2-digit field of study. See note on Table 2 for additional controls. In column 1, the
dependent variable is a dummy indicating that the respondent is a temporary resident. In columns 2-3, the dependent variable is
ln(salary).




                                                               43
                                                 Appendix


                                         Stay rates in the long run


        We assess the impact of per-country limits on permanent residency visas on more permanent

location in a several different models. In the first model, we model stay rates of those who are more than

3 years post-PhD and assume that new PhDs make their joint plan for postdoc/OPT and more permanent

employment location simultaneously around the time of PhD receipt. This analysis automatically

excludes everyone who obtained PhDs after Jan. 2012, since 3 years had not yet elapsed by the time of

the most recently available (Feb. 2015) survey. Similarly, observations in the 2013 survey are truncated at

Sept. 2010, and observations in the 2010 survey are truncated at Jan. 2007. We also exclude everyone

who stated that they were working on a postdoc when they responded to the SDR, even if they were more

than 3 year post-PhD.


        Results are shown in Column 1 (compact model) of Appendix Table 4 (re-estimates of the

models of Table 2 Column 7.) Here, we find that the impact of each year of visa delay remains

substantial and significant for Chinese doctoral recipients (-2.14 ppt. per year, t = -4.39). However, for

Indians, the long run impact of long (5½ + years) visa delays is -5.74 ppt. but insignificant at typical

levels (t= -1.44 p=.149). Note that since this long-run location model excludes the very latest PhDs, there

are no Indians with 7 or 8 year delays at PhD (occurring in years 2012 and 2013) – the group with the

largest reduction in stay rates – and only 186 observations with a 6 year delay. As a result, the coefficient

and degree of significance on the Indian long-delay variable are smaller than in the full model of Indian

stay rates in Table 2 Column 7.


        In our second long run model, we consider the possibility that PhDs postpone their employment-

location decisions until they complete their postdocs or OPT, or have worked for a few years. In this case,

long run choices would still be modeled as the choices of those observed 3 or more years post-PhD

excluding those currently in postdocs, but they would react to visa delays at 3 years post-PhD. This model


                                                     44
is shown in Appendix Table 4 Column 2. This model fits the data less well. Finally, because limiting to

3 years post-PhD cut out the Indian respondents with the longest delays, we also estimate a regression

with no limit on years-from-PhD but simply excluding those currently in a postdoc (Appendix Table 4

Column 3). The impact of one more year of delay for Chinese virtually unchanged, but now the effect of

long Indian delays – which now include delays as long as 8 years, returns to their previous large

coefficient size and significance (-8.39 ppt., t= -2.66).


        Finally, we note that Khosla (2018) tried to estimate the long run impact (6-11 years post-PhD) of

the visa delay on scientists using years-since-PhD. Since year of PhD, survey year and years-since-PhD

are perfectly collinear – meaning that you cannot disentangle the three time effects -- she had to make

arbitrary assumptions to do this. Specifically, she grouped years from PhD into 4 ranges. However, this is

an arbitrary choice and it make no more sense to group years from PhD than to group PhD year. In other

words, it is impossible to differentiate between cohort (PhD year) effects and career-stage effects, given

the existence of survey-year effects, without making arbitrary assumptions. Also, it is not surprising that

she found no effect since she only had 2010 and 2013 SDRs (with only PhDs granted earlier), and given

the tiny sample of people 6 or more years from PhD (who had faced a visa constraint at PhD by the Feb.

2013 survey and had been subject to a visa cap by graduating post-2005).


                                         Intended v. actual stay rates


        We cannot apply similar analysis to model the impact of the imposition of EB-2 application

delays on immediate post-PhD locations, because our earliest SDR survey that followed doctorates who

moved abroad (2010) was more than 4 years since the visa delay became binding. The best we can do is

what others have done, i.e. use students’ intentions to stay in the US when surveyed at the time of PhD

receipt to proxy short run stay rates.




                                                      45
In Appendix Table 4 Columns 4 and 5, the dependent variable is “Intend to stay in the US”.1 In

Column 4, the coefficient on each year of delay for the Chinese is significant but smaller than in our stay

rate models (-0.93), while for India the effect of long delays (at PhD) is not significant (t= -0.26). In

Column 5, we repeat the analysis but excluding those intending postdocs from the analysis. In this case,

even the China visa coefficient is not significant (t= -1.25).


        We note that Khosla (2018) found a -1.4 ppt. significant average effect of EB-2 visa delays on

intentions (for PhDs 2001+, with a much larger sample including the entire SED STEM population but

without 2015.) Estimating a single average visa effect in our dataset, limiting ourselves to data from the

earlier surveys (2010 and 2013 surveys) and including post-docs, as in her analysis, we find an average

effect (-1.13 ppt. t=-2.32) quite similar to hers. However, when we add in the much larger 2015 sample

with longer Indian delays, we get a smaller and insignificant value (- 0.57 ppt., t= -1.54).


        To summarize, when we include the survey wave of 2015 (and therefore longer visa delays) but

exclude those who intend postdocs, the visa delays seem to have little impact on Chinese STEM PhDs’

intentions to remain in the US (for those who don’t enter a postdoc after PhD), and no effect on Indians’

location intentions at PhD. This may be for a variety of reasons: perhaps the PhDs are overly optimistic

about getting an H-1B or about the kind of job they could get in the US, or do not realize the

disadvantages of remaining temporary residents.


        However, intentions to remain in the US – even excluding those intending to enter postdocs, may

not match actual location, for instance because the person is unable to get a temporary work visa. The

correlation coefficient between SED intentions to remain in the US and actually being observed in the US

is 0.59 in our sample (excluding students from India and China who may have been affected by the EB-2




        1
          We include only a single observation for those observed in more than one SDR, since this is an SED-
derived variable only measured once (at PhD completion).

                                                       46
visas.)2 Thus intentions and stay rates – especially short-run stay rates -- are highly correlated, yet

intentions are an imperfect predictor of whether or not these PhDs actually do remain.


Do EB-2 visa delays affect US stay rates, even controlling for intentions to remain? Appendix Table 4

Column 6 displays a regression in which the dependent variable is a dummy for remaining in the US

(excluding those in postdocs, as in Appendix Table 4 Column 3) but adding a control for whether or not

the person intended to remain at PhD. Intending to stay in the US is associated with a (highly significant)

48.1 ppt. increase in actually being observed in the US ceteris paribus. Yet, conditioning on location

intentions, the visa delay length continues to have a highly significant effect on the probability of actually

remaining in the US for Chinese PhDs at all delay lengths averaging 1.52 ppt. per year ( t= -3.51 Column

6). For India, results are similar to what they were without intentions as a control: long delays deter stay

rates by 8.2 ppt. (t= -2.77).


        We conclude that for Chinese STEM PhDs, visa delays at PhD impact actual locations in the long

run. However, they do not seem to have a major impact on Chinese intentions to remain in the US (at

PhD) for those who don’t enter a postdoc after PhD. Shorter visa delays (<5½ years) at PhD have no

impact on Indian locations in the long run, but it is difficult to ascertain the long run impact of very long

delays on Indians given our limited years of data. No delays – short or long – affect Indians’ location

intentions at PhD, which only partially mirror later actual locations.




        2
            If we limit ourselves to those within 3 years of the survey, this correlation coefficient rises to 0.68.

                                                             47
Appendix Table 1a Descriptive statistics on Temporary Residents at PhD (PhD years 2001 - 2013)
                                       Employed in SDR 2010, 13, 15

                                            Full Sample   From India     From China   From RoW
       N                                      22,470        2,457           5,155      14,858
       Stay rate                              0.682         0.847           0.875      0.541
       Return rate                            0.215         0.088           0.081      0.316
       In third country                       0.103         0.065           0.044      0.143
                                                           Personal Characteristics
       Male single, no children                0.132        0.129          0.071       0.165
       Female                                  0.286        0.210          0.301       0.297
       Male Married at PhD                     0.400        0.311          0.512       0.364
       Female Married at PhD                   0.135        0.113          0.199       0.108
       Male child at PhD                       0.213        0.086          0.235       0.232
       Male child at PhD - missing             0.050        0.053          0.043       0.052
       Male single at PhD                      0.267        0.420          0.156       0.286
       Female Child at PhD                     0.058        0.027          0.080       0.055
       Female child at PhD - missing           0.020        0.008          0.019       0.023
       black                                   0.030        0.002          0.000       0.052
       asian                                   0.680        0.991          0.997       0.440
       hispanic                                0.063        0.002          0.001       0.110
       Age at PhD                              31.423       29.093         30.834      32.300
       Foreign support                         0.041        0.001          0.001       0.071
       medical                                 0.040        0.044          0.050       0.034
       In a postdoc                            0.121        0.135          0.112       0.122
       Father college grad                     0.545        0.816          0.414       0.546
       Sample year 2010                        0.270        0.241          0.271       0.277
       Sample year 2013                        0.336        0.338          0.325       0.341
       Sample year 2015                        0.394        0.421          0.404       0.382
       PhD Rank top 10%                        0.088        0.059          0.061       0.109
       Average PhD Rank                       101.818      110.888        111.968      94.326
       PhD inst unranked                       0.122        0.154          0.114       0.118
                                                           Country Characteristics
       Top 20 in publication rank             0.731           1               1         0.526
       Pub rank 21-50                         0.158           0               0         0.279
       Pub rank 51-100                        0.094           0               0         0.165
       Pub rank 101-200                       0.017           0               0         0.029
       English official language              0.228           1               0         0.157
       Distance from US                       10.015        11.762          10.994      9.078
       Polity                                 3.040           9               -7        6.801
       ln Citations per article               2.139         2.045           1.471       2.509
       GDP per capita rel. to US              0.315         0.072           0.133       0.470
       R&D/GDP (%)                            1.319         0.802           1.335       1.444



                                                    48
Appendix Table 1b Descriptive statistics on Temporary Residents at PhD (PhD years 2001 - 2013)
                             Employed in in the US (SDR 2010, 13, 15)

                                                        Including Postdocs
                                      Full Sample    From India     From China    From RoW
       N                                    13,202          1,961         4,347        6,894
       Temporary resident                 33.362%       46.826%        31.257%      29.948%
       Employed in Academia               41.602%       32.068%        33.637%      51.958%
       Employed by small firm              4.963%        4.438%         4.818%       5.287%
       Employed in not for profit         51.905%       40.463%        43.760%      63.147%
       Self employed                       4.133%        2.429%         6.194%       3.058%
       Self employed, incorporated         3.422%        2.112%         5.371%       2.291%
       Employed in Start-up                2.154%        2.157%         1.981%       2.298%

       Salary (2011$)                   100,085.70     99,977.87     112,053.90   90,080.04
       Years w current employer              3.827         3.422          3.982        3.852

                                                        Excluding post docs
                                      Full Sample    From India     From China    From RoW
       N                                    11,168          1,625         3,748        5,795
       Temporary resident                 27.525%       41.065%        26.531%      23.065%
       Employed in Academia               35.783%       24.763%        27.930%      47.049%
       Employed by small firm              5.379%        4.795%         5.178%       5.787%
       Employed in not for profit         44.692%       31.396%        36.887%      56.813%
       Self employed                       4.795%        2.827%         6.982%       3.644%
       Self employed, incorporated         3.986%        2.458%         6.095%       2.729%
       Employed in Start-up                2.489%        2.433%         2.248%       2.723%

       Salary (2011$)                   108,406.30    108,344.30     120,578.00   97,701.71
       Years w current employer              4.025         3.593          4.120        4.112




                                               49
                                                         Appendix Table 2: Distributions Across Fields

                                              Total Employed                                             STEM PhDs by field
                                                   in US             Total PhDs granted        From US*        From China**        From India**   From RoW**
      Computer sciences                            4.18%                    4.15%                2.85%             7.22%               8.50%        4.83%
      Math/Stats                                   4.32%                    4.57%                3.40%             7.55%               3.41%        6.17%
      Agr/Food Sciences                            1.78%                    2.04%                1.58%             1.73%               2.09%        3.27%
      Biological Sciences                          22.79%                  21.77%               25.10%            19.29%              18.74%        15.70%
      Eviron. Life Sciences                        1.31%                    1.35%                1.51%             0.74%               0.38%        1.49%
      Chemistry                                    7.14%                    6.95%                6.63%            10.01%               6.40%        6.34%
      Earth/Ocean/Atmosphere                       1.98%                    2.08%                2.14%             2.16%               1.26%        2.08%
      Physics/Astronomy                            4.88%                    5.13%                4.38%             5.84%               4.51%        6.71%
      Other Phys Sci                               0.36%                    0.35%                0.43%             0.19%               0.10%        0.31%
      Economics                                    2.83%                    3.61%                2.12%             2.88%               3.17%        7.61%
      Political Science                            2.78%                    2.92%                3.55%             0.57%               1.00%        2.95%
      Psychology                                   12.34%                  11.34%               17.43%             1.04%               0.97%        4.07%
      Sociology, anthropology                      3.73%                    3.72%                5.08%             0.56%               0.36%        2.76%
      Other Social Sciences                        2.59%                    2.89%                3.35%             0.82%               0.69%        3.27%
      Aerospace engineering                        0.77%                    0.75%                0.58%             0.54%               1.66%        1.04%
      Chemical engineering                         2.28%                    2.29%                1.75%             3.37%               6.08%        2.21%
      Civil/Architectural eng                      1.68%                    1.92%                0.97%             3.01%               1.85%        3.67%
      Electrical/Computer eng                      6.33%                    6.37%                2.86%            14.45%              14.02%        9.18%
      Industrial engineering                       0.73%                    0.80%                0.35%             1.24%               1.72%        1.48%
      Mechanical engineering                       3.15%                    3.10%                1.99%             5.55%               6.89%        3.72%
      Other engineering                            5.85%                    5.91%                4.59%             8.79%              11.07%        6.53%
      Health, Other                                6.22%                    5.99%                7.37%             2.46%               5.12%        4.61%
      Total                                         100%                    100%                 100%              100%                100%         100%


* US-born and naturalized citizens. ** Population includes temporary and permanent residents at PhD from these countries. RoW Rest of World.



                                                                                     50
                                        Appendix Table 3: Coefficients on Control Variables from Table 2 Column 7
Female                                             0.0232   PhD inst unranked                    -0.0043   PhD Year 2003                             -0.0748**
                                                  (0.014)                                       (0.0195)                                               (0.025)
Male married at PhD                             0.0722***   Math/Stats                         -0.0725**   PhD Year 2004                              -0.0480*
                                                  (0.012)                                        (0.024)                                               (0.023)
Female married at PhD                           0.0514***   Agr/Food Sciences                 -0.1369***   PhD Year 2005                               -0.0217
                                                 (0.0149)                                        (0.028)                                               (0.023)
Male w. child at PhD                            -0.0371**   Biological Sciences                  -0.0137   PhD Year 2006                              -0.0501*
                                                  (0.013)                                        (0.020)                                               (0.023)
Female w. child at PhD                            -0.0349   Eviron. Life Sciences             -0.1453***   PhD Year 2007                             -0.0585**
                                                  (0.022)                                        (0.034)                                               (0.022)
Female - missing data on child at PhD             -0.0181   Chemistry                            -0.0187   PhD Year 2008                               -0.0388
                                                  (0.018)                                        (0.021)                                               (0.023)
Male - missing data on child at PhD               -0.0531   Earth/Ocean/Atmosphere            -0.1070***   PhD Year 2009                               -0.0463
                                                  (0.028)                                        (0.030)                                               (0.024)
African American                                  -0.0056   Physics/Astronomy                   -0.0608*   PhD Year 2010                            -0.0874***
                                                  (0.027)                                        (0.024)                                               (0.026)
Asian                                           -0.0500**   Other Phys Sci                      -0.1454*   PhD Year 2011                            -0.1190***
                                                  (0.019)                                        (0.061)                                               (0.027)
Hispanic                                        -0.0531**   Economics                         -0.1715***   PhD Year 2012                            -0.1264***
                                                  (0.019)                                        (0.024)                                              (0.0309)
Age at PhD                                     -0.0077***   Political Science                 -0.2583***   PhD Year 2013                            -0.1244***
                                                  (0.001)                                        (0.035)                                               (0.033)
Foreign support during PhD                     -0.3292***   Psychology                         -0.1081**   Country ranked 21-50 in publications        -0.0268
                                                  (0.018)                                       (0.0350)                                               (0.019)
PhD from medical school                            0.0313   Sociology, anthropology           -0.1497***   Country ranked 51-100 in publications     0.0919***
                                                  (0.021)                                        (0.035)                                               (0.025)
In a postdoc                                    0.1059***   Other Social Sciences             -0.1479***   Country ranked 101-250 in publications    0.1260***
                                                 (0.0119)                                        (0.034)                                               (0.038)
Father had BA                                      0.0058   Aerospace engineering                 0.0324   English is official language of HC        0.1206***
                                                  (0.009)                                        (0.042)                                               (0.020)
Survey year 2013                                -0.0149**   Chemical engineering                  -0.031   Distance to HC                            -0.0083**
                                                  (0.005)                                        (0.027)                                               (0.003)
Survey year 2015                                  -0.0018   Civil/Architectural engineering      -0.0478   Polity                                       0.0016
                                                  (0.009)                                        (0.028)                                               (0.002)
PhD inst rank 11-25                               -0.0311   Electrical/Computer engineering       0.0176   Missing polity score                       -0.2081*
                                                  (0.020)                                        (0.019)                                               (0.082)
PhD inst rank 26-50                               -0.0135   Industrial engineering               -0.0423   Cites per article in HC bef. PhD year    -0.1592***
                                                  (0.019)                                        (0.035)                                               (0.019)
PhD inst rank 51-100                               -0.007   Mechanical engineering                0.0335   GPD per cap. HC /US (PPP) bef PhD year      -0.0173
                                                  (0.018)                                        (0.023)                                               (0.030)
PhD inst rank 101-200                              0.0013   Other engineering                    -0.0247   R&D %GDP in HC bef PhD year                  0.0194
                                                  (0.018)                                        (0.021)                                              (0.0101)
PhD inst rank 201-300                              0.0091   Health                              -0.0581*   R&D% GDP missing                              0.041
                                                  (0.021)                                        (0.026)                                               (0.027)
PhD inst rank 301-400                             -0.0162   Other                               0.3819**
                                                  (0.025)                                       (0.1402)
PhD inst rank 401-500                              -0.001   Phd Year 2002                         -0.042
                                                  (0.025)                                        (0.024)


                                                                                     51
                                                      Appendix Table 4: Timing of the Effect and Intentions
                                                                          (1)                  (2)               (3)              (4)            (5)               (6)
                                                                                                                                                              Stay in US,
                                                                                                                                              Intend to            with
                                                                                                              All yrs,                      stay but not       intentions
                                                                     Long run >3 yrs, excluding              excluding        Intend to          for a            (excl.
                                                                               postdocs                      postdocs            stay          postdoc         postdocs)
       India X long delay                                               -0.057                               -0.084**           -0.007          -0.010          -0.082**
                                                                       (0.040)                                (0.032)          (0.026)         (0.034)           (0.030)
       China X delay                                                 -0.021***                              -0.0218***         -0.009*          -0.007        -0.015***
                                                                       (0.005)                                (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.006)           (0.004)
       India X long delay at 3 yrs                                                        0.041
                                                                                         (0.025)
       China X delay at 3 yrs                                                            0.0009
                                                                                         (0.007)
       =1 if individual planned to stay in US after grad                                                                                                       0.481***
                                                                                                                                                                (0.011)
       India                                                          0.134***               0.127***         0.146***          0.058          0.095*          0.111***
                                                                       (0.036)                (0.036)          (0.033)         (0.030)         (0.038)          (0.029)
       China                                                          0.260***               0.220***         0.255***          0.052          0.094*          0.207***
                                                                       (0.037)                (0.035)          (0.034)         (0.031)         (0.040)          (0.031)
       R-squared                                                        0.220                  0.219            0.215           0.155           0.193            0.395
       N                                                               17,128                 17,128           19,716          15,875          10,516           19,283


* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Robust standard errors, clustered by respondent, in parentheses. All regressions include fixed effects for survey year, year of PhD, and 2-digit
field of study. See note on Table 2 for additional controls. The dependent variable in Columns 1-3 and 6 is a dummy for staying in the US. Columns 1 and 2 exclude respondents
within 3 years of PhD receipt. Columns 3, 5 and 6 exclude people currently employed in postdocs. The dependent variable in Column 4 and 5 is a dummy for stating intentions to
stay in the US at time of PhD receipt, and include only one observation per person.




                                                                                        52
                                           Appendix Table 5: Miscellaneous Regressions, dependent variable: Staying in the US

                                  (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)              (5)           (6)             (7)             (8)              (9)              (10)
                              with years                         with          dif China,                      Including      High/other                       Publication
                              from PhD        clustering by     country      India survey        excl.          caps for        excess         Inst rank      country-field     exc. Science
                                instead          country          FE          year effects     recession         2001          demand        interactions      rank X visa       variables
                              -0.090***        -0.089***       -0.081**        -0.084**        -0.104**       -0.088***        -0.098**        -0.084**          -0.136*          -0.080**
India X long delay
                                (0.026)          (0.011)        (0.027)         (0.027)           (0.038)       (0.027)         (0.049)         (0.027)          (0.057)           (0.027)
                              -0.022***        -0.024***       -0.023***      -0.024***        -0.022***      -0.024***       -0.031***       -0.020***        -0.019***         -0.022***
China X delay
                                (0.004)          (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)           (0.005)       (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.006)          (0.005)           (0.004)

India X long delay X                                                                                                             0.013
excess demand                                                                                                                   (0.057)

China X delay X excess                                                                                                           0.010
demand                                                                                                                          (0.007)

India X capped X                                                                                                                                 0.015
ranked 51-200                                                                                                                                   (0.044)

India X capped X                                                                                                                                -0.062
ranked 201+                                                                                                                                     (0.043)

China X capped X                                                                                                                                -0.010
ranked 51-200                                                                                                                                   (0.028)

China X capped X                                                                                                                                -(0.042
ranked 201+                                                                                                                                     (0.030)
India X capped X                                                                                                                                                  0.005
country-field rank                                                                                                                                               (0.005)

China X capped X                                                                                                                                                 (0.001)
country-field rank                                                                                                                                               (0.000)
R-squared                       0.2064           0.2078          0.2279         0.2077            0.2252        0.2103          0.2105          0.2112           0.2115            0.1999
N                               22470            22470           22470          22470             14134         22470           22470           22470             22470            22470

      * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Robust standard errors, clustered by respondent, in parentheses. All regressions include India and China dummies and fixed effects for survey
      year, year of PhD, and 2-digit field of study and additional controls listed in Table 2 note. Column (7) also includes India X excess demand and China X excess demand. Col (8)
      also includes India X rank51-200, India X rank201+ and similarly for India. Col (9) also includes India X country-field rank, China X country-field rank.


                                                                                             53
