                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE IMPACT OF CONSUMER CREDIT ACCESS ON UNEMPLOYMENT

                                       Kyle F. Herkenhoff

                                       Working Paper 25187
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25187


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2018




I would like to thank Gary Hansen, Lee Ohanian, and Pierre-Olivier Weill for their guidance and
support. I would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Manuel Amador, Yves Balasko, Hugo Hopenhayn,
Erik Hurst, Tim Kehoe, John Kennes, Ricardo Lagos, Ellen McGrattan, Seth Neumuller, Guido
Menzio, Casey Mulligan, Ana Luisa Pessoa Araujo, Fabrizio Perri, Ed Prescott, Andrea Raffo,
Guillaume Rocheteau, Jim Schmitz, Robert Shimer, and Nancy Stokey for useful comments. This
paper was funded This paper was partly written at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. I am especially grateful for their hospitality. This research
was supported by the National Science Foundation (Award No. SES-1824422) and the UCLA
Ziman Center for Real Estate. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Kyle F. Herkenhoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Consumer Credit Access on Unemployment
Kyle F. Herkenhoff
NBER Working Paper No. 25187
October 2018
JEL No. E2,E24,J01,J24,J6,J64

                                         ABSTRACT

Unemployed households' access to unsecured revolving credit more than tripled over the last
three decades. This paper analyzes how both cyclical fluctuations and trend increases in credit
access impact the business cycle. The main quantitative result is that credit expansions and
contractions have contributed to moderately deeper and more protracted recessions over the last
40 years. As more individuals obtained credit from 1977 to 2010, cyclical credit fluctuations
affected a larger share of the population and became more important determinants of employment
dynamics. Even though business cycles are more volatile, newborns strictly prefer to live in the
economy with growing, but fluctuating, access to credit markets.


Kyle F. Herkenhoff
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
kyle.herkenhoff@gmail.com
             The Impact of Consumer Credit Access on
                         Unemployment∗
                                        Kyle F. Herkenhoff†
                                     University of Minnesota

                                          August 18, 2018



                                                Abstract

          Unemployed households’ access to unsecured revolving credit more than tripled over
       the last three decades. This paper analyzes how both cyclical fluctuations and trend
       increases in credit access impact the business cycle. The main quantitative result is
       that credit expansions and contractions have contributed to moderately deeper and
       more protracted recessions over the last 40 years. As more individuals obtained credit
       from 1977 to 2010, cyclical credit fluctuations affected a larger share of the population
       and became more important determinants of employment dynamics. Even though
       business cycles are more volatile, newborns strictly prefer to live in the economy with
       growing, but fluctuating, access to credit markets.


    The fraction of unemployed households with access to unsecured revolving credit (e.g.
credit cards) increased from 13% in 1977 to 45% in 2010. Such access to credit is quanti-
tatively important for the unemployed. Low asset unemployed households replace approxi-
mately 15% of lost income through unsecured borrowing (Sullivan [2008]) while nearly 40%
   ∗
     I would like to thank Gary Hansen, Lee Ohanian, and Pierre-Olivier Weill for their guidance and support.
I would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Manuel Amador, Yves Balasko, Hugo Hopenhayn, Erik Hurst, Tim
Kehoe, John Kennes, Ricardo Lagos, Ellen McGrattan, Seth Neumuller, Guido Menzio, Casey Mulligan, Ana
Luisa Pessoa Araujo, Fabrizio Perri, Ed Prescott, Andrea Raffo, Guillaume Rocheteau, Jim Schmitz, Robert
Shimer, and Nancy Stokey for useful comments. This paper was funded This paper was partly written
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. I am especially
grateful for their hospitality. This research was supported by the National Science Foundation (Award No.
SES-1824422) and the UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate.
   †
     Correspondence: kfh@umn.edu
                                                     1
of households self-report defaulting on non-mortgage payments in response to job loss (Hurd
and Rohwedder [2010]). Moreover, recent work by Herkenhoff, Phillips, and Cohen-Cole
[2015] has shown that the ability to borrow significantly prolongs unemployment durations
and raises replacement wages. At the same time that self-insurance opportunities expanded
through credit markets, employment recoveries slowed (Bachmann [2009]). Although a large
literature including Ljungqvist and Sargent [1998] examines the impact of unemployment
benefit duration and replacement rates on employment incentives and economic recoveries,
the macroeconomic effects of credit access on households’ job finding behavior remains an
open question. In this paper, I theoretically and quantitatively examine how growth and
fluctuations in households’ access to credit markets since the 1970s have affected the way
employment evolves over the business cycle.

    To address this question, the paper develops a general equilibrium search and matching
model with defaultable debt. Relative to existing defaultable debt models such as Chat-
terjee, Corbae, Nakajima, and Rı́os-Rull [2007], Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt [2007], and
Nakajima and Rı́os-Rull [2014], the framework generates interactions between heterogeneous
employment outcomes and heterogeneous credit histories. The model allows me to measure
how consumer credit growth and fluctuations have affected employment recoveries and wel-
fare from 1977 to 2012 in the United States. There are three main results. First, credit
expansions and contractions have contributed to moderately deeper and more protracted re-
cessions over the last 40 years. As more individuals obtained credit access from 1977 to 2010,
credit fluctuations affected a larger share of the population and became more important de-
terminants of employment dynamics. Second, even though business cycles are more volatile,
newborn agents are willing to give up a positive amount of lifetime consumption in order to
live in the economy in which credit is stochastically expanding to 2010 levels of credit, as
opposed to the economy with fixed 1977 levels of credit. And finally, in the absence of pro-
cyclical credit fluctuations, slow-moving trend credit growth may actually dampen business
cycle dynamics.

    There are two opposing forces generating these results. When credit access expands in
the short run, before households adjust their saving behavior, this acts like a safety net and
households optimally search for better-paying but harder-to-find jobs knowing that if the
job search fails they can use credit to smooth consumption. If credit grows coming out of a
recession, this may lead to elevated unemployment in the short run and a slower recovery; this
is what I call the expansion effect of credit. On the other hand, if households have a larger
but constant level of credit access, they may actually respond less to productivity changes.
The reason is that with greater long-run levels of credit access, more individuals dissave and

                                              2
enter recessions indebted. With a tighter labor market in a recession, indebted agents avoid
default by disproportionately cutting their reservation wages in order to maintain a higher
job finding rate. This force tends to dampen employment volatility over the business cycle,
and it is what I call the level effect of credit. Which of these two forces dominates business
cycle dynamics depends on the path of credit access before, during, and after recessions. The
estimated path of credit access is highly procyclical along the benchmark transition path from
1977 to 2012. Strong credit growth tends to occur coming out of recessions and thus the
expansion effect of credit dominates the level effect of credit, and as a result, employment
recoveries slow. If credit expansions are weak, for example in an economy with a slow rate
of trend credit growth, the level effect of credit wins, and business cycles become dampened.
Regardless of which force wins, households have better self-insurance opportunities and are
unambiguously better off.

   Underlying these results is a general equilibrium business cycle model in which households
search for both jobs and borrowing opportunities.1 Business cycles are driven by aggregate
labor productivity and households choose which jobs to search for, knowing that higher
paying jobs take longer to find, especially when labor productivity is depressed (Menzio
and Shi [2010, 2011]). If a household applies for a loan and successfully meets a lender in
the credit market, it has access to defaultable debt contracts which are priced similar to
Eaton and Gersovitz [1981]. On the other side of the market, lenders direct credit offers
to households to maximize profits, and so the arrival rate of borrowing opportunities is an
equilibrium object that depends on the household’s employment status and fluctuates with
the aggregate state.

    To generate both the trend growth and cyclical fluctuations in credit observed since
the 1970s, the model incorporates stochastic, exogenous expansions and contractions to
the aggregate efficiency of matching lenders to households. The empirical counterpart of
trend growth of credit matching efficiency is credit scoring, the digitization of the banking
sector, and the availability of online loans, among other numerous innovations (see Livshits,
MacGee, and Tertilt [2016] for more discussion) while the cyclical fluctuations of credit
matching efficiency map closely to movements in lending standards. The cyclical component
plays the most important role in the quantitative analysis, and therefore I discuss various
sources of evidence on the procyclicality of match efficiency. In addition to this exogenous
growth in credit, as unemployment durations and default risks endogenously change over the
business cycle, lenders expand and restrict the number of credit offers they send, altering
  1
    Related and innovative work by Drozd and Nosal [2008] model search in consumer credit markets and
Wasmer and Weil [2004] and Petrosky-Nadeau [2014] consider search in the business loan market. New work
by Raveendranathan [2018] has integrated generalized Nash bargaining into the credit market.

                                                  3
household job finding behavior.

    The main experiment is then to feed band-pass filtered output per worker deviations
into two identical economies from 1977-2012, except one economy receives a stochastic path
of the credit matching efficiency calibrated to observed credit use among the unemployed
while the other economy has credit matching efficiency remain at 1970s levels, and to then
compare employment recoveries along the transition path. Following the 1990, 2001, and 2007
recessions, procyclical credit expansions generate up to an additional one percentage point
decline in employment that persists throughout the recovery. Compared to the economy
with 1970s levels of credit access, the economy with stochastically expanding credit access
brings employment deviations 23.5% closer to the data two years after the initial onset of
the 1990, 2001, and 2007 recessions, on average. What drives the slower recoveries are
procyclical expansions and contractions of credit along the transition path; I demonstrate
this by showing that linearly expanding credit access actually dampens business cycles since
the level effect of credit dominates. Despite the slower recoveries, newborn households would
be willing to sacrifice between .05% and .2% of lifetime consumption in order to be born in
the economy with stochastically expanding credit access as opposed to the economy with
1970s levels of credit access. Lastly, the timing of the revolving credit boom and its effect on
employment make it a potentially important component of the jobless recovery phenomenon,
although the mechanism in the present paper should largely be viewed as complementary, not
mutually exclusive, to other explanations (e.g. Bachmann [2009], Schaal [2017], Jaimovich
and Siu [2012], and Berger [2012], Mitman and Rabinovich [2012] among many others).
What makes credit fluctuations more important in recent years is that there are simply
more people using credit markets. In the 1980s, when the level of credit access is very low,
large declines and rebounds in match efficiency have little impact on employment dynamics
because there were just very few people who rely on credit markets (e.g. see Online Appendix
Q). This interaction between the level and cycle is absent from neoclassical growth models
which are scale invariant (i.e. the level of technology does not impact the response of the
economy to technology shocks).

   While much is known both theoretically and empirically about the way unemployment in-
surance and saving decisions impact employment incentives (inter alia Hansen and İmrohoroğlu
[1992], Ljungqvist and Sargent [1998], and Acemoglu and Shimer [1999], Chetty [2008]),
only recently has the profession considered the way labor markets are affected by other pri-
vate consumption smoothing mechanisms such as home equity loans (Hurst and Stafford
[2004]), default arrangements (Athreya and Simpson [2006], Han and Li [2007], Gordon
[2015], Herkenhoff and Ohanian [2015] among others), mortgage modifications (Mulligan

                                               4
[2008] and Herkenhoff and Ohanian [2011]), and various combinations of spousal labor sup-
ply and assets (see Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten [2016] and citations therein).

    Several other studies including Athreya and Simpson [2006], Rendon [2006], Crossley and
Low [2011] and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni [2011] have looked at the role borrowing constraints
play in models with partial equilibrium labor markets and found significant interactions be-
tween borrowing constraints and labor supply, while general equilibrium work by Krusell,
Mukoyama, and Şahin [2010] and Nakajima [2012] find moderate effects of saving on labor
markets. In an important extension, Nakajima [2012] modifies his model to allow for bor-
rowing and finds little impact on aggregates. There are several reasons the present paper
yields different conclusions. The main reason is that the present paper targets gross debt po-
sitions and the fraction of agents borrowing, implying much more credit use than Nakajima
[2012]. Nakajima [2012]’s approach targets all types of wealth, which largely depends on the
right-tail of the wealth distribution. The present paper is primarily focused on matching
the left-tail of the wealth distribution, and focuses on liquid wealth since only this form
of wealth can be drawn down by job losers with little penalty. The second reason is that
Nakajima [2012] considers the stochastic steady state of the economy, which can produce
strong offsetting forces. These offsetting effects are the main source of tension along the
transition path, and the focus of the present analysis. And lastly, the present paper consid-
ers a model in which agents make job search decisions, and so their assets directly affect the
submarkets in which they search. This allows credit access to affect the search behavior of
an individual. Concurrent and innovative work by Bethune, Rocheteau, and Rupert [2015]
provides a steady state analysis of the way consumer credit affects labor markets through
firm productivity, and they find that through this channel, consumer credit can boost an
economy. New work by Bethune [2015] extends this framework to think about aggregate
risk. Recent work by Nakajima and Rı́os-Rull [2014] finds that bankruptcy protection can
actually increase the volatility of business cycles, and Athreya, Sánchez, Tam, and Young
[2015] find that bankruptcy protection can actually increase delinquencies in a model with
partial equilibrium labor markets. Lastly, recent work by Lise [2012], Chaumont and Shi
[2017], and Griffy [2017] have integrated risk aversion and savings into random and directed
search settings, respectively, to assess the impact of asset markets on inequality through
on-the-job search.

   The present paper contributes to this research agenda along three dimensions. First,
the paper develops a general equilibrium search and matching model with defaultable debt.
Second, the paper measures the mechanisms through which credit access impacts unemploy-
ment over the business cycle, detailing in a series of experiments the crucial role of credit

                                              5
access growth and its impact on employment recoveries from 1977 to 2012. Third, the paper
constructs aggregate time series for unemployed households’ access to credit and use of credit
from 1970 onwards, where the earlier data come from an archived predecessor survey to the
Survey of Consumer Finances (made available in Online Appendix D).

    Section 1 presents evidence on unemployed credit use and evidence of the procyclicality
of lending standards and borrowing by the unemployed. Section 2 describes the model
environment. Section 3 describes the calibration and steady state differences between the
economy with 1977 levels of credit access and 2010 levels of credit access. Section 4 explores
the model’s mechanisms. Section 5 includes the main transition experiment. Section 6
concludes.



1     Empirical Evidence

In this section, I discuss three pieces of empirical evidence that are important for the model’s
mechanism: (1) unemployed households’ credit access increased enormously from the 1970s
to 2010, (2) unemployed households borrow and default, and (3) various measures of lending
technology have improved over time, (4) access to credit, measured by lending standards,
unemployed borrowing, and denial rates has been procyclical over the last 40 years.


1.1    Unemployed Access to Credit

This section complements the existing empirical work on access to credit among low income
individuals (e.g. Livshits et al. [2016]) by computing historic credit access and credit use
among the unemployed. Table 1 includes unsecured revolving credit access rates among all
households as well as the unemployed. These statistics are based on the Survey of Consumer
Finances (SCF, 1983 to 2010) and its predecessor, the Survey of Consumer Credit (SCC, 1977
and earlier). Unsecured revolving credit refers to the fraction of households with bankcards
that have a revolving feature (when I discuss credit cards, I am referring to bankcards).
Between 1977 and 2010, unsecured revolving credit access rates among the unemployed
increased from 13% to 45%. Among all households including those without credit access,
Table 1 shows that the fraction of unemployed households carrying positive balances tripled
between 1977 and 2010, going from 12% to 33%. Likewise, gross unsecured debt to annual
family income ratios (DTIs) increased from .6% to 5%. These statistics will ultimately inform
the model’s mechanisms. See Online Appendix D for time series and additional measures of

                                               6
self-insurance among the unemployed.


1.2      Borrowing by the Unemployed

While Table 1 describes the stock of unemployed borrowers, what about the flow? Do the
unemployed borrow more? Evidence that the unemployed borrow to replace income is pro-
vided by Sullivan [2008], Hurd and Rohwedder [2010], Collins et al. [2015], and Braxton
et al. [2018]. In an important article, Sullivan [2008] finds that unemployed households with
low assets increase unsecured debt by 11-13 cents per dollar of lost income in both the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics and Survey of Income and Program Participation. To augment
the existing body of evidence, I update Hurd and Rohwedder [2010] and use the RAND
American Life Panel’s (ALP) direct questions about borrowing in response to job loss from
2009-IV to 2015-IV. Table 2 shows that among the 1,600 unemployed households surveyed
in that time period, 25.3% report borrowing in order to replace unemployment related in-
come losses. Likewise 36.1% report skipping obligated non-mortgage payments (including
consumer credit payments) in response to job loss.2 This evidence directly supports the
claim that unemployed households use credit cards to replace income, and among those who
are already indebted or have other obligated payments, many become delinquent (I will also
refer to this as default). The option to default is unique to consumer credit relative to un-
employment insurance or welfare, and this evidence shows that default is a common method
of consumption smoothing among the unemployed.


1.3      Lending Standards and Credit Matching Efficiency

The way credit access expands in the model is through the matching efficiency between
lenders and consumers. The thought experiment is to imagine that a borrower and lender
are put in the same room; matching efficiency includes all unobserved factors that affect the
odds that a lending relationship is formed between the borrower and lender. This measure
of matching efficiency includes both slow moving components such as the adoption of credit
scoring as well as procyclical components such as lending standards and default rates.
  2
      Online Appendix D includes more discussion of the RAND ALP.




                                                  7
1.3.1    Trend Movements

Regarding the slow moving component of credit match efficiency, Livshits et al. [2016] provide
an excellent discussion of the various technological innovations that have occurred in the
lending market. Livshits et al. [2016] provide supporting evidence and discuss the roles that
(1) credit scoring, (2) IT innovation, and (3) securitization played in the large consumer
credit run-up over the last 40 years. Related work by Drozd and Nosal [2008], Narajabad
[2012], Athreya et al. [2012], and Sánchez [2018] also provides additional evidence that the
cost of screening customers has dropped rapidly over the last 40 years.


1.3.2    Cyclical Movements

Regarding the cyclical component of match efficiency, this section provides evidence of pro-
cyclical credit expansions using the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey and composition
corrected statistics from the Survey of Consumer Finances.

    One of the few high-frequency and long-running measures of lending standards is ‘willing-
ness to lend’ from the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey (SLOOS). Figure 1 plots the net
fraction of loan officers in the SLOOS who have an increased willingness to extend install-
ment loans.3 While the quantitative magnitudes are difficult to interpret (since the index
does not reflect quantities), the general pattern is that willingness to lend tapers leading up
to the business cycle, and then expands during recoveries. This echoes a large literature,
inter alia Lown and Morgan [2006], DellAriccia et al. [2012] and references therein, which
uses the SLOOS as well as proprietary mortgage data to show that lending standards are
procyclical.

    There are two additional time series that are informative of the mechanisms in this paper:
(i) borrowing by the unemployed, and (ii) credit denial rates among the unemployed. In what
follows, I show that both time series exhibit significant fluctuations even after controlling for
individual determinants of borrowing and denial rates. The recovery years (1992, 2004, and
2010) exhibit above-trend borrowing, and the 2007-2009 crisis featured above-trend denial
rates.
   3
     This refers to Question 17 on the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey. They survey approximately 80
bank managers and ask, “Please indicate your bank’s willingness to make consumer installment loans now as
opposed to three months ago.” The possible responses include “1. Much more willing / 2. Somewhat more
willing / 3. About unchanged/ 4. Somewhat less willing / 5. Much less willing.” The net percent willing to
lend more is what is reported. From 1968 to the present they asked about installment loans and from 1990
to the present they asked specifically about credit cards. Both time series exhibit similar patterns.



                                                    8
    To control for the demand factors and the composition of unemployed borrowers, Table
3 includes logit regressions of a dummy indicator for whether an unemployed agent borrows
on various demographic, income, and asset controls as well as year dummies. The idea is
that by including individual determinants of borrowing, such as education and position in
the lifecycle, these regressions parse out demand-driven and composition-driven motives for
borrowing. Table 3 reports average marginal effects, and Column (1) includes no controls.
Column (2) shows that there are significant movements of unemployed borrowing even after
including controls for age, income, education, liquid assets as well as other demographics.
Columns (3) and (4) fit a linear trend through the time series for unemployed borrowing and
test whether unemployed borrowing is above or below trend during the post-recession survey
dates. The coefficients reveal that unemployed borrowing is significantly larger during post-
recession survey dates even after controlling for demographics, income, and assets. These
results are consistent with procyclical subprime credit expansions.

    To remove individual-driven components of denial rates, Table 4 regresses two different
definitions of denial rates, all denials (even if the loan was eventually obtained) and strict
denials (loan was not obtained), over the time period in which those variables were collected
in the SCF (1998 onwards) on various demographic, income, and asset controls as well as
year dummies. Table 4 reports average marginal effects for a logit regression of all denials
(Columns 1 and 2) and strict denial (Columns 3 and 4) on various controls. Controlling
for age, income, education, liquid assets as well as other demographics, Columns (2) and
(4) show that denial rates were elevated during the SCF surveys which covered crisis years
(2001-1996 and 2010-2005) and dropped thereafter. Due to the limited sample sizes as well
as potential recall bias, the only significant fluctuation in denial rates occurs during the
2007-2009 recession. However, it is important to note that the presence of controls amplifies
the fluctuations as opposed to dampening the fluctuations (e.g. comparing Columns (3) and
(4)). Table 4 provides suggestive evidence that lenders alter loan standards independent of
age, income, education, and assets over the business cycle.

    Online Appendix I includes two additional long-running public time series on house-
hold lending standards. Both time series, (i) the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
mortgage approval rates (1998 onwards), and (ii) matching efficiency A inferred from the
free-entry condition in the lending market (1991 onwards), exhibit strong procyclicality. On-
line Appendix I also includes additional time series evidence on the cyclicality of technology
adoption.




                                              9
2       Model

The goal of building the model is to measure the impact of credit access on employment
recoveries during periods of both trend credit growth and cyclical fluctuations in credit
(i.e. 1977 to 2012 in the United States). To understand the interaction between individual
employment and credit histories, the model must depart from standard lottery and large
family assumptions and incorporate an extensive margin of credit. The model drops these two
assumptions by drawing elements from the search literature (e.g. Mortensen and Pissarides
[1994]) and defaultable debt literature (e.g. Eaton and Gersovitz [1981]). The model includes
several additional elements including a discrete application stage in order to match flows into
credit access, long-term lending relationships in order to match flows out of credit access,
and expense shocks to match the fact that not all defaults are income driven.


2.1     Household Problem

Time is discrete and runs forever. As in Menzio, Telyukova, and Visschers [2016], there are
T ≥ 2 overlapping generations of risk averse households that face both idiosyncratic and
aggregate risk.4 Each household lives T periods deterministically and discounts the future
at a constant rate β ∈ (0, 1). Every period households first participate in an asset market
where they search for borrowing opportunities and make asset accumulation and default
decisions. After the asset market closes, households enter the labor market where they make
job search decisions. In the final stage of every period, expense shocks are realized (e.g.
Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt [2010]).

    Similar to Dubey, Geanakoplos, and Shubik [2005], consumers maximize the present
discounted value of utility over non-durable consumption (c) and leisure (η) net of any utility
penalties of default, x(D), where D is the fraction of debt defaulted upon.5 Additionally,
agents search for credit at utility cost χC , and I assume that labor is indivisible as well
as separable from consumption. Let t be age and t0 index birth cohort. Let ht,t0 +t equal
one if the agent is employed and let St,t0 +t be an indicator of whether the agent searches for
credit. Then ct,t0 +t , η·(1−ht,t0 +t ), Dt,t0 +t , and χC St,t0 +t respectively denote the consumption,
    4
      The overlapping generation setup is used for two reasons: (1) to generate borrowing (which is primarily
among the young), and (2) to simplify computation and proofs. See Online Appendix O.2 for more discussion.
    5
      Unlike bankruptcy which is acyclical, Herkenhoff [2012] uses Equifax data to show that default (defined
to be 90+ days late) is approximately a continuous choice (i.e. consumers default on 2 or 3 out of 6 credit
lines), is highly procyclical, and occurs 6x more frequently than bankruptcy. Herkenhoff [2012] also shows
that nearly 30% of delinquent credit lines end up in collection, indefinitely, and Furletti [2003] documents
that banks sell defaulting non-bankrupt accounts to collection agencies for 5 cents per 1 dollar.

                                                     10
leisure, default, and credit search outcomes of an age t agent at date t0 + t. The goal of a
newly born in cohort t0 is to maximize
                     "   T                                                                       #
                         X
               Et0             β t u(ct,t0 +t ) + η · (1 − ht,t0 +t ) − x(Dt,t0 +t ) − χC St,t0 +t .
                         t=1


Anticipating the recursive nature of the problem below, I will drop the age and time sub-
scripts from variables and only retain the age subscript t for the value function.
                                                                                
    A household’s state vector consists of their current employment status e ∈ W, U where
                                                                                       
e = W if employed and e = U if unemployed, and their credit access status a ∈ C, N
where a=C indicates the individual has credit access and is synonymous with being matched
to a lender and a=N indicates no credit access. The state vector also contains their current
wage w ∈ W if employed or unemployment benefits z ∈ Z if unemployed, where z = γw and
γ ∈ (0, 1) is the replacement rate. It also includes their net assets b ∈ B, their age t ∈ NT ,
and the aggregate state Ω.6

    The aggregate state Ω includes three components. The first component is aggregate
productivity y, the second component is the aggregate credit matching efficiency A, and the
third component is an infinite dimensional object µ which summarizes the distribution of
                                                           
households across all state variables, i.e. µ : W, U × C, N × W ∪ Z × B × NT → [0, 1].
Let µ0 = Φ(Ω, A0 , y 0 ) be the law of motion for the distribution.

    At the start of every period, households choose whether or not to look for credit.7 Looking
for credit entails a utility cost χC . Lenders then view the entire state-space of potential
borrowers and send credit offers to maximize profits. If a credit offer successfully reaches
a searching household, a match is struck between the lender and household – I call this
obtaining credit access. The terms of the loan are then determined by a limiting case of
Nash-Bargaining which results in a bond price that is similar to competitive models such as
Chatterjee et al. [2007].

    A household remains matched to a lender until the household defaults (defined as D > 0)
or the match is destroyed exogenously (the exogenous breakup rate is given by s̄). Through-
   6
     More formally, their current wage lies in the set w ∈ W ≡ [w, w] ⊆ R+ if employed and UI lies in the
set z ∈ Z ≡ [γw, γw] ⊆ R+ where γ ∈ (0, 1) is the replacement rate if unemployed, and their net assets lie
in the set b ∈ B ≡ [b, b] ⊆ R. The set of operating wage submarkets is an equilibrium object. The bounds
[w, w] are non-binding but used in the existence proofs. Aggregate productivity lies in the set y ∈ Y ⊆ R+
and aggregate credit matching efficiency lies in the set A ∈ A ⊆ R+ .
   7
     Online Appendix D.4 provides evidence on sequential search in credit markets based on the SCF questions
(loosely quoted): ‘were you denied credit,’ and ‘were you subsequently able to obtain credit if initially denied
credit.’

                                                          11
out the paper, I will make the assumption of universal default which means that default
results in the immediate severance of all lending relationships.8 The assumption of universal
default means that today’s bond price depends on the current default decision of the house-
hold. Let s(D) describe the credit relationship breakup probability which is assumed to be
contingent on the default choice D:
                                                 
                                                 1      if D > 0
                                        s(D) =
                                                 s̄     if D = 0


     As is standard in the literature b0 is net assets. If b0 > 0 the agent is saving and if b0 < 0
the agent is borrowing. The discount on the bonds q, in equilibrium, is a function of the
state space of the household; for example, if today’s aggregate state is Ω and the household
has made default decision D at the start of the period, the resulting bond price for an age
t unemployed household (U ) with unemployment benefits z who is requesting a loan of size
b0 is qU,t (z, b0 , D; Ω) (Section 2.2 provides more details about lenders).

   Because I assume that lenders can direct their search toward households, the probability a
household successfully obtains credit is a function of their state-space. I define AψU,t (z, b; Ω)
to be the probability that an age t unemployed (U ) household with net assets b and unem-
ployment benefit income z in aggregate state Ω meets a lender, conditional on that household
searching for credit. Section 2.2 will explain the credit market in more detail. Let UtC (z, b; Ω)
be the value function of an unemployed household matched with a lender and UtN (z, b; Ω) be
the value function of an unemployed household without credit access. Let χC be the time
cost of searching for credit. Using this notation, the Bellman equation for an unemployed
agent that must decide whether or not to look for a lender, Ut (z, b; Ω), is



 Ut (z, b; Ω) = max{AψU,t (z, b; Ω)UtC (z, b; Ω) + 1 − AψU,t (z, b; Ω) UtN (z, b; Ω) − χC , UtN (z, b; Ω)}
                                                                      

                                                                                                 ∀t ≤ T

                                           UT +1 (z, b; Ω) = 0.

After the asset market closes, the aggregate state is realized, and then unemployed agents
   8
    This assumption allows me to rule out model behavior such as a household defaulting on a prior lender
because they found a new lender. This assumption is empirically relevant during the time period studied
(1977 to 2012), as Universal Default rules were common practice until the CARD Act of 2009. Lenders
would charge penalty rates or revoke credit on non-delinquent lines of credit in response to delinquency on
another credit card of a customer.


                                                    12
enter the labor market where they look for jobs paying w̃ ∈ W. Each submarket is indexed
by a wage and age pair (w̃, t) and pt (w̃; Ω0 ) is the probability of successfully matching with
an employer paying w̃. In this section the wage is fixed while employed, but this is relaxed
in Online Appendix H.2 when on-the-job-search is allowed. If an agent successfully matches
with an employer paying w̃ their continuation value is given by Wt+1 (w̃, b0 ; Ω0 ). Section 2.3
will explain the labor market in more detail.

   With no further shocks, the only trigger for default is job loss. To disconnect default from
employment status, agents are subject to expense shocks (e.g. Livshits et al. [2010]). With
probability px , the household begins the next period with an additional debt burden (or a
reduction to their asset stock) of x.9 These expense shocks are designed to capture unmodeled
out-of-pocket expenses associated with health, divorce, spousal job loss etc. Agents either
pay, roll over, or default upon this additional obligation. These expense shocks occur at the
end of the period are captured by the ‘hatted’ value functions.

   The unemployed receive a separable flow utility η from leisure by assumption. For those
with access to credit, their choice set for assets includes loans, i.e. their asset choice is
unrestricted b0 ∈ B. Thus, the problem solved by an age t unemployed agent (U ) with credit
access (C), unemployment benefits z, net assets b in aggregate state Ω is



  UtC (z, b; Ω) = max u(c) − x(D) + η
                    b0 ∈B,D∈[0,1]
                                                                                               
                                     0 cC          0   0                   0        C       0    0
  + (1 − s(D)) · βEΩ0 max pt+1 (w̃; Ω ) Wt+1 (w̃, b ; Ω ) + 1 − pt+1 (w̃; Ω ) Ut+1 (z, b ; Ω )
                                                                                  b
                       w̃∈W
                                                                                                
                                      0 c            0   0                   0                0    0
  +      s(D) ·βEΩ0 max pt+1 (w̃; Ω ) Wt+1 (w̃, b ; Ω ) + 1 − pt+1 (w̃; Ω ) U      bt+1 (z, b ; Ω )
         | {z }         w̃∈W
         Lose Credit

                                                                                              ∀t ≤ T

                                               UTC+1 (z, b; Ω) = 0

subject to the budget constraint,

                                    c + qU,t (z, b0 , D; Ω)b0 ≤ z + (1 − D)b,


      and for each continuation Bellman equation V ∈ {W, W C , U, U C }, households incur ex-
  9
      Online Appendix E includes details about the types of shocks included in the expense shock.




                                                       13
pense shocks with probability px ,

                     Vb (w̃, b0 ; Ω0 ) = px V (w̃, b0 − x; Ω0 ) + (1 − px )V (w̃, b0 ; Ω0 )


   and take as given the law of motion for the aggregate state,

                                Ω0 = (µ0 , A0 , y 0 ),        µ0 = Φ(Ω, A0 , y 0 )                  (1)
                                 y 0 ∼ F (y 0 | y),       A0 ∼ G(A0 | A).


   For those who are unemployed (U) without access to credit (N), the problem is similar
except the household’s asset choice b0 is restricted to be positive, b0 ≥ 0,

      UtN (z,b; Ω) =     max u(c) − x(D) + η
                     b0 ≥0,D∈[0,1]
                                                                                         
                                   0 c         0   0                   0 b          0   0
                                                                         
              + βE max pt+1 (w̃; Ω )Wt+1 (w̃, b ; Ω ) + 1 − pt+1 (w̃; Ω ) Ut+1 (z, b ; Ω ) ∀t ≤ T
                    w̃∈W


                                             UTN+1 (z, b; Ω) = 0

such that the budget constraint holds

                                             1
                                     c+           b0 ≤ z + (1 − D)b
                                           1 + rf

and taking as given the aggregate law of motion (1).

    Employed agents in this economy face a similar credit constraint to unemployed agents.
The only difference is that with probability δ they are laid off and must search for a new job.
In order to have a reasonable unemployment rate with a quarterly calibration, I allow laid-off
workers to search for jobs within the period. Online Appendix A contains these additional
Bellman equations.


2.2     Saving Institutions and Lending Institutions

There is a loanable funds market with a unit measure of risk neutral saving institutions
and a unit measure of risk neutral lending institutions. Saving institutions are competitive
and face a frictionless market where they accept deposits each period. These institutions
have access to a risk-free technology that yields rf on deposits, where rf is exogenous.
With free entry, the yield on savings offered to consumers is this risk free rate rf . Lending

                                                         14
institutions on the other hand send out credit offers to potential borrowers based on the
borrower’s characteristics. Each set of characteristics is a different submarket, where the
cost of sending a credit offer to any submarket is κC . Once matched with a borrower, the
relationship is long lived.

    It is important to note that a credit offer is an invitation to bargain. If a lender success-
fully meets a household who wants to borrow, the lender and household bargain over the
bond price schedule. I assume households have a bargaining weight of unity, i.e. households
make take-it-or-leave-it bond price proposals. As is, this assumption leaves lenders with no
incentives to enter the lending market. To generate incentives for lenders to send credit
offers, I assume that lenders are guaranteed a per-period proportional minimum servicing
fee τ which is based on the loan size. Consumers then bargain over the bond schedule taking
as given the proportional minimum servicing fee τ .10 These assumptions yield a bond price
that is identical to competitive models such as Livshits et al. [2007].11
                     0
    Let b0 = be,t (w, b; Ω) and D = De,t C
                                           (w, b; Ω) be the present-period bond and default
                                  0
choices of the household. Let Db 0 (w , b0 ; Ω0 ) be the expected future default decision of the
                                a      0
                                e ,t+1
household which depends on tomorrow’s employment e0 , access to credit a0 , age t + 1, wage
w0 (which takes into account the risk the household loses its job), loan size b0 , the aggregate
state Ω0 , and the expense shock,

                b a00 (w0 , b0 ; Ω0 ) = px Da00 (w0 , b0 − x; Ω0 ) + (1 − px )Da00 (w0 , b0 ; Ω0 )
                D e ,t+1                    e ,t+1                             e ,t+1



    The equation for lender profit is in Online Appendix A.1. After imposing the bargaining
structure between households and lenders, the bond price is given by,


                                                                                            
                              s̄E 1−D b a00     (w0 ,b0 ;Ω0 ) +(1−s̄)E 1−D
                                                                         b C0      (w0 ,b0 ;Ω0 )
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                        e  ,t+1
                                                            (1+rf +τ )
                                                                           e  ,t+1
                                                                                                  , b0 ∈ B− , D = 0
       qe,t (w, b0 , D; Ω) = 0,                                                                     b0 ∈ B− , D > 0   (2)
                            
                            
                                                                                                    b0 ∈ B+
                             1
                            
                              (1+rf )
                                      ,
  10
     The spread τ could be endogenized as a choice by the household but at the expense of tractability. In
the model, the contact rate between households and lenders adjust such that τ exactly covers the cost of
sending a credit offer. Without τ there would be no incentives for the lender to send a credit offer if the
household makes take-it-or-leave-it offers. In the literature, imposing this wedge τ is common; see Livshits
et al. [2007] for an example.
  11
     Since lenders and households bargain each period, and the household has all of the bargaining weight,
lenders do not have an incentive to send households with existing credit a new offer, since the terms of credit
would remain the same.


                                                             15
   Define A · MC (uC (x), vC (x)) to be the constant returns to scale matching function in
credit submarket x, where uC (x) is the number of households searching for credit with state
vector x, vC (x) is the number of credit offers sent to such households, and A is the exogenous
aggregate credit matching efficiency. Then, the credit-filling rate, which is the probability a
lender matches with a household, is given by,

                                            A · MC (uC,t (e, w, b; Ω), vC,t (e, w, b; Ω))
                        Aφe,t (w, b; Ω) =
                                                         vC,t (e, w, b; Ω)

And the credit-finding rate, which is the probability a household meets a lender, is given by,

                                            A · MC (uC,t (e, w, b; Ω), vC,t (e, w, b; Ω))
                        Aψe,t (w, b; Ω) =
                                                         uC,t (e, w, b; Ω)

The free entry condition will ensure that the contact rate between households and lenders
adjusts so that the spread τ exactly covers the cost of sending a credit offer. The free entry
condition for lenders binds for every submarket of consumers that takes loans:

                                     κC = Aφe,t (w, b; Ω)Qt (e, w, b; Ω)                            (3)


2.3        Firms

As in Shi [2009], Menzio and Shi [2010, 2011], Karahan and Rhee [2011], and Menzio et al.
[2016], I assume that firms post fixed wage contracts and there is free entry of firms, subject
to a vacancy cost κL . In particular, firms post vacancies in certain submarkets that are
indexed by wage w ∈ W ⊂ R++ and age t. The posted wage w is fixed once an employee is
found.12 Let vt (w; Ω) be the number of vacancies posted in the (w, t) submarket and ut (w; Ω)
be the number of unemployed households in that submarket. The constant returns to scale
of the matching function M (u, v) will guarantee that the ratio of unemployed persons to
vacancies is all that matters for determining job finding rates. Let the vacancy filling rate
be given by ft (w; Ω) = M (ut (w;Ω),v      t (w;Ω))
                                    vt (w;Ω)
                                                    and let the job finding rate be given by pt (w; Ω) =
M (ut (w;Ω),vt (w;Ω))
       ut (w;Ω)
                      . With free entry it must be the case that profits are competed away. Let the
submarket tightness be given by θt (w; Ω) = uvtt(w;Ω)      (w;Ω)
                                                                 . Then free entry determines the active
submarkets,

                                 κL = ft (w; Ω)Jt (w; Ω) iff θt (w; Ω) > 0                          (4)
  12
       Online Appendix H.2 allows for on the job search.


                                                       16
    To characterize Jt (w; Ω), I assume that firms operate a linear technology and are subject
to an exogenous job destruction rate δ. The firm value of an ongoing match to a worker of
age t being paid wage w in aggregate state Ω is given below:
                                             h                    i
                       Jt (w; Ω) = y − w + βE (1 − δ)Jt+1 (w; Ω0 ) ∀t ≤ T

                                           JT +1 (w; Ω) = 0

where the aggregate law of motion for Ω0 given by (1) is taken as given.


2.4     Equilibrium, Existence and Uniqueness

In order to solve the problem numerically, I will focus on a subset of competitive equilibria
called Block Recursive Equilibria (see Shi [2009] and Menzio and Shi [2010, 2011]). A block
recursive competitive equilibrium is a recursive competitive equilibrium in which the resulting
decision rules and prices do not depend on the aggregate distribution of agents across states
(i.e µ is not a state variable for the household, lending institutions, saving institutions,
or firms). Under relatively innocuous assumptions, a block recursive equilibrium exists.
Online Appendix C defines a block recursive equilibrium and provides an existence proof, a
uniqueness proof under more restrictive conditions, as well as a theoretic characterization of
the mechanism in the paper.



3      Stochastic Steady State: Calibration and Welfare

The parameters are calibrated so that the model’s stochastic steady state is consistent with
2010 moments. Stochastic steady state means that aggregate labor productivity (y) still
fluctuates but that aggregate credit matching efficiency (A) is constant forever.13 The period
is set to one quarter. I calibrate the aggregate labor productivity process to match the
Bureau of Labor Statistic’s output per worker in the non-farm business sector. The series is
logged and band pass filtered to obtain deviations from trend with periods between 6 and 32
quarters. Aggregate productivity deviations are assumed to fluctuate over time according to
an AR(1) process:
                           ln(y 0 ) = ρ ln(y) + 1 s.t. 1 ∼ N (0, σe2 )
  13
    A long sequence of productivity shocks is drawn according to the AR(1) process for y and large number
of agents (N=60,000) is then simulated for a large number of periods (T=280 quarters, where we discard
the first 100 quarters). Averages are reported over the remaining 180 quarters.

                                                   17
Estimation yields ρ = 0.8961 and σe = 0.0055, and the process is discretized using Rouwen-
hurst’s method.

    The benefit replacement rate is set to 50% (γ = .5) which is in line with OECD estimates
of the replacement rate for the United States. I set the job destruction rate to a constant
10% per quarter as in Shimer [2005], and so δ = .1 across all states. The labor vacancy
posting cost κL is chosen to target a mean unemployment rate of 5.82% which is the average
postwar BLS unemployment rate. For the labor market matching function, I follow den Haan
et al. [2000] and use a constant returns to scale matching function that yields well-defined
                                          u·v
                                                     
job finding probabilities, M (u, v) = (uζ +v ζ )1/ζ ∈ 0, 1). The matching elasticity parameter is

chosen to be ζ = 1.6 as in Schaal [2017].

    I set the the risk free rate to 4% per annum as in Livshits et al. [2007]. Analogous
to Livshits et al. [2010], I directly target a 5.19% gross debt-to-annual-income ratio of un-
employed households in the 2010 SCF, yielding a quarterly household discount factor of
β = .974. This corresponds to an annual discount rate of 10.8%. As I discuss in Appendix
K, to capture the full extent to which individuals utilize credit markets to smooth consump-
tion, I choose to target the fraction of unemployed individuals with positive gross credit
balances. This calibration strategy differs from Nakajima [2012] and Krusell et al. [2010] but
captures the left-tail of the liquid wealth distribution well. Table 8 illustrates the wealth dis-
tribution in the model and data, using two different definitions of liquid wealth. A drawback
of the benchmark calibration strategy is that it under-predicts wealth at the 90th percentile
of the liquid wealth distribution (and therefore the benchmark model also under-predicts
mean wealth, since the bulk of wealth is held by the right-tail). To address these concerns, I
include a version of the model with heterogeneous discount factors, β, in Online Appendix K.
The heterogeneous β version of the model can match the right tail of the wealth distribution
but ultimately produces a very similar result to the benchmark model.

   The aggregate credit matching efficiency A2010 is chosen to match the new-borrower credit
approval rate of 67.2%, which can only be calculated from public data in the 2007-2009 SCF
panel.14 I then use aggregate data on credit card offers in combination with Survey of
Consumer Finance application rates and denial rates to estimate a credit matching elasticity
parameter of ζC = .37 assuming the matching function is also the same as den Haan et al.
[2000]:15 MC (uC , vC ) = ζC uC ζ·vCC 1/ζC ∈ 0, 1). The average real credit card interest rate from
                                            
                            (uC +vC )

  14
     This new-borrower credit approval rate is the approval rate among individuals who did not previously
have a credit card. This statistic is only availably publicly from the 2007-2009 SCF panel. In order to
calculate this approval rate, I must isolate individuals who have no existing credit in 2007 and applied for a
loan between the two survey dates.
  15
     See Online Appendix F for more details. I use non-linear least squares to estimate the elasticity param-
                                                     18
1977-2010 was 12.07%, and very stable over that time period.16 Based on empirical work by
Agarwal et al. [2017], I set the proportional minimum servicing fee to τ =4.9% per annum.17

    I set the exogenous credit separation rate s̄ = .01 based on the lower bound of the
2010 estimates from Fulford [2015]. Fulford [2015] calculates the rate at which individuals
transition from a positive credit limit to a zero credit limit from quarter to quarter; this
statistic can be interpreted as the rate at which individuals lose credit access and therefore
it directly maps to s̄.

   The utility cost of obtaining credit, χC , is set to match the fraction of unemployed
individuals borrowing (holding positive balances from month-to-month), which is 33.1% in
the 2010 SCF. Following an analogous strategy to Shimer [2005], I normalize the credit entry
costs κC = 1.75e−6 such that the implied average credit market tightness lies in the interval
[127.1, 206.1].18

    Preferences are given below (let h=1 for employed persons and h=0 otherwise):

                                                c1−σ − 1                       D
                u(c) + η(1 − h) − x(D) ≡                 + η(1 − h) − κD ·
                                                  1−σ                      1 − D + D

I set the risk aversion parameter to a standard value, σ = 2. The functional form of x(D) is
one of many that satisfies the necessary inada conditions (see Online Appendix C).19 I set
κD to match the average quarterly credit card chargeoff rate of 1.06% in the flow of funds
from 1985-2007.

    To guarantee boundedness of returns, I take D to be an arbitrarily small finite number.
In terms of the flow utility of leisure, I follow most of the quantitative search and matching
literature by setting η to target a labor market moment. I choose η to match the autocorre-
lation of unemployment since the flow utility of leisure determines unemployed households’
willingness to remain out of work.20 The life span is set to T = 120 quarters (30 years), and
newly born agents are born unemployed, with zero assets, and a uniform random draw of
unemployment benefits.21
eter.
   16
      Interest rate data come from the Board of Governors and inflation data come from the BLS.
   17
      This corresponds to the sum of the 1.4% rewards and fraud expense plus 3.5% for operational costs,
discussed in their online appendix.
   18
      As a proxy for the tightness, I use the ratio of credit card mail volume (Synovate) to SCF loan applicants
from 1995 to 2007.
   19
      This particular choice of utility penalty does not impact the main quantitative results.
   20
      This parameter is important for governing business cycle dynamics; however, I am not directly targeting
unemployment volatility
   21
      The newborn’s asset or benefit distributions do not significantly impact the results.


                                                      19
    To calibrate the expense shock, I use the new expenditure data in the PSID from 2005
to 2013. I estimate px = .022 and x = .2625 in order to match the frequency of unmodeled
shocks (e.g. disability, divorce, spousal layoff, or a medical shock) and the resulting increase
in debt observed in the data. Online Appendix E includes details of this estimation.


3.1    Stochastic Steady State Comparison, 1977 vs. 2010: Business
       Cycles and Welfare Gains

I begin the analysis by considering the stochastic steady state of two economies with differ-
ent levels of credit access. Recall that stochastic steady state means that aggregate labor
productivity still fluctuates but that aggregate credit matching efficiency is constant for-
ever. I calibrate the 1977 steady state by holding all other parameters fixed and estimating
A1977 = 0.482 to match the fraction of unemployed households with positive balances in
1977.

    Table 7 illustrates the stochastic steady state results. The model predicts that the unem-
ployment rate is .3 percentage points higher in the economy with 2010 levels of credit access.
The mechanism driving this difference is that credit acts as a safety net allowing households
to search for better-paying and harder-to-find jobs. While a constant but greater credit
safety-net increases the level of unemployment, it has a dampening effect on the dynamics
of the economy. Business cycles, when measured by employment volatility, are actually less
volatile in the 2010 stochastic steady state. I explore the mechanisms behind this result in
Section 4.

    To calculate the welfare gains from expanding access to credit markets, I follow Lucas
[1987] and consider the fraction of ex-ante lifetime consumption newborn agents living in an
economy with 1977 levels of credit access would give up in order to be born in the economy
with 2010 levels of credit access. The middle row of Table 7 shows that newborn agents
would be willing to give up .12% of lifetime consumption to move from the economy with
1977 levels of credit access to 2010 levels of credit access. Among the greater population,
inclusive of newborns and non-newborns, the welfare gains of increased credit access vary.
The last two rows of Table 7 show that unemployed agents are willing to give up .15%
of lifetime consumption to live in an economy with 2010 levels of credit access whereas
the employed are willing to give up roughly .11% of lifetime income. There are two forces
preventing the greater population from enjoying larger welfare gains: (i) the large chargeoff
rate and utility penalties associated with greater amounts of default, and (ii) the increased
credit application rate, which directly lowers utility through the search cost.
                                              20
4    Exploring the Model’s Mechanisms

To understand the way differences in both the levels and the growth of credit can impact
business cycles, I start with a series of impulse response experiments. These experiments
illustrate (i) how steady-state level differences in credit can dampen business cycle dynamics
(I will refer to this as the level effect), and (ii) how procyclical credit growth can slow
recoveries through a short-run loosening of the budget constraint and decrease in job finding
rates (I will refer to this as the expansion effect). The experiments have the following setup:

 i. Consider 2 economies in good times in which productivity is equal to y = 1.015.

 ii. Both economies endure the same temporary productivity drop (y = .985 for 3 quarters).

iii. One economy has a credit expansion while the other does not. I model a credit expansion
     as a change in the credit matching efficiency from A0 to A1 where I will consider several
     different values of A1 .

iv. I assess two timing assumptions:

    A. The credit expansion occurs 5 years before the recession (and so the economies are
       approximately in their respective steady states when the recession occurs)
    B. The credit expansion occurs after the recession

In order to make the magnitudes of the impulse response experiments interpretable, I will
study expansions from 1989 levels of credit to 1992 levels of credit (as calibrated in Section
5). I therefore choose the initial credit level, A0 , such that A0 = A1989 = 0.63 and the new
credit level, A1 , such that A1 = A1992 = 0.74. Let ∆A = A1 − A0 = A1992 − A1989 denote the
size of the credit expansion for the impulse response experiments. I assume that all agents
have the same beliefs about transitions between A0 and A1 given by

                                           "               #
                                               0.75 0.25
                                    PA =
                                                0    1
This transition matrix implies that agents expect the credit expansion to occur within 4
quarters, and once it occurs, it is permanent.




                                               21
4.1    Credit Expands Before Recession: Shallower Business Cycles

The first impulse response experiment illustrates how business cycles are dampened by a
higher, but constant, level of credit access. This is the level effect. Panel (A) of Figure 2
illustrates the productivity decline and the time path for the credit technology, A. In this
experiment, credit expands 5 years prior to the recession in one economy, and remains fixed
in the other, so the two economies are essentially in their respective steady states when the
business cycle occurs.

   Panel (B) of Figure 2 plots the percent change in employment for each economy. Panel (B)
reveals that the economy with greater access to credit has dampened employment dynamics.
Aggregate employment falls by nearly .5% less than in the economy with fixed access. The
economy with fixed access also has a slower employment recovery, taking an additional
quarter to reach pre-recession levels of employment.

   To understand why this is the case, Panel (C) of Figure 2 shows that in the economy
with greater credit access, agents optimally choose to dissave and search in higher wage
submarkets with lower job finding rates before the recession begins. Before the recession,
the aggregate job finding rate is 1.1 percentage points lower in the economy with greater
credit access. Job finding rates fall by 8.2 percentage points in the economy with greater
credit access during the recession; in the economy with fixed credit, job finding rates drop
by 9.6 percentage points, a 15% larger decline. The reason is that in the economy with
greater credit access, 30.3% of individuals are indebted going into the recession, whereas
only 26.2% are indebted in the fixed access economy. When the recession occurs and the
labor market tightens, indebted job losers avoid default by cutting their reservation wage
disproportionately to maintain a high and stable job finding rate (see Online Appendix G for
additional discussion). Therefore, in the long-run after a credit expansion, more individuals
borrow and enter recessions indebted, leading to a less responsive aggregate job finding rate.
As a consequence, employment dynamics are dampened.


4.2    Credit Expands After Recession: Slower Recoveries

In this section, I show that employment recoveries are slower if credit grows during a recovery.
This is the expansion effect. This experiment, which highlights the role of persistent pro-
cyclical credit expansions, is particularly relevant for US employment dynamics over the last
40 years.

   Panel (A) of Figure 3 illustrates the inputs for this experiment, which are identical to the
                                              22
prior experiment, except for the timing of the credit expansion. Credit now expands after
the recession.

   Panel (B) of Figure 3 plots the percentage change in employment following the recession.
When credit expands, on impact, employment is depressed by an additional .25 percentage
points. The slow employment recovery persists throughout the sample period. Panel (C)
of Figure 3 illustrates how the short-run mechanism works through job finding rates. In
response to a credit expansion, households have a larger safety-net and begin to search for
higher-paying but harder to find jobs; this depresses job finding rates and slows down the
business cycle recovery.

    Figure 4 repeats the same exercise for one economy with lower initial credit access and
one economy with higher initial credit access. Both economies receive the same sized credit
expansion (Panel (A)). In the economy with greater initial credit access, the credit expansion
depresses employment by more (Panel (B)). Employment drops by .25 percentage points in
the economy with low initial credit access and by .5 percentage points in the economy with
high initial credit access, nearly twice as large. Figure 4 is important for understanding why
credit fluctuations become larger determinants of employment dynamics from the 1970s to
the present. As the level of credit grows, as it did in the U.S. over the last 40 years, similar
magnitude credit fluctuations affect a larger fraction of the population and the expansion
effect becomes a more important determinant of employment dynamics.



5     Main Quantitative Experiment

The main experiment quantifies the impact of credit fluctuations on employment dynamics
between 1977 and 2010. I compare two economies: (1) an economy with credit access that
remains fixed at 1977 levels (the ‘fixed access’ economy), and (2) an economy in which credit
access stochastically expands and contracts between 1977 and 2010 (the ‘benchmark timing’
economy).

   In the benchmark timing economy, credit matching efficiency linearly expands and con-
tracts each year in order to match the fraction of unemployed individuals borrowing at each
SCF survey date from 1977 to 2010.22 Let A = [A1977 , A1978 , . . . , A2009 , A2010 ] denote the
  22
     The SCF survey dates are 1977, 1983, 1989, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2001, 2004, 2007, 2010. This path of
credit matching efficiency is obtained by solving the transition experiment repeatedly under various guesses
for the entire time-path of credit matching efficiency, updating the time-path of credit at each iteration to
make the model replicate, as close as possible, the fraction of unemployed borrowers in the SCF at each
survey date (the model is averaged over all quarters within the relevant year when compared to the SCF

                                                     23
vector of estimated credit matching efficiencies. A is a 34 state Markov chain, where each
element corresponds to one matching efficiency level per year from 1977 to 2010, and the
vector A is potentially non-monotone (e.g. A2009 may be greater than, less than, or equal to
A2010 ). The transition probabilities are given by PA , described in detail below.

    Both economies begin with the same initial conditions in 1977, where A1977 is calibrated
to match the fraction of unemployed individuals borrowing in 1977. Both economies face the
same Markov chain over credit match efficiencies, described by the vector A and transition
probabilities PA . In the economy with fixed access, the realized shocks are such that credit
matching efficiency remains fixed at A1977 from 1977 to 2010. In the benchmark economy,
the realized shocks are such that the credit matching efficiency follows the path A from 1977
to 2010.

   For computational tractability, credit expansions and contractions occur annually from
1977 to 2010 in the benchmark economy. Since the model period is quarterly, agents un-
derstand that on average, once every four quarters (with a 25% chance per quarter), credit
matching efficiency will change. Therefore the Markov transition probabilities are given by
the following matrix:

                                         A1977   A1978           A2009   A2010
                                                                                
                           A1977 0.75            0.25      ...    0       0
                                                 ..                          
                                                    .                        
                      PA =                                                   
                           A2009
                                 0               0        ...   0.75    0.25 
                                                                              
                           A2010  0               0        ...    0       1     34×34



    Even though the transition matrix may appear to impose monotonicity, the vector of
credit matching efficiencies is not necessarily monotone and thus credit may increase or de-
crease over time (i.e. transiting from A2009 to A2010 does not mean credit matching efficiency
at in 2010 is greater than 2009).23

   Table 9 summarizes how well the path for credit matching efficiency under the benchmark
timing assumption matches the targeted values of unemployed borrowing at each SCF survey
date.24 Panel (A) of Figure 5 illustrates the estimated path for credit matching efficiency
survey data).
   23
      Consider a stylized example in the benchmark economy: A1998 is .5, A1999 is .4, and A2000 is .6. Agents
living in 1998 understand that each quarter, with a 25% chance, matching efficiency will contract to 1999
levels. Agents living in 1999 understand that each quarter, with a 25% chance, matching efficiency will
expand to 2000 levels.
   24
      The transition path begins at A1977 = .45. This is lower than the 1977 stochastic-steady state value of
A = .48 reported in Section 3 due to differences in expectations (agents believe they will exit the steady
                                                      24
under the benchmark timing assumption. Panel (B) illustrates the grid-approximation to
productivity (band-pass filtered output per employee, as described in Section 3). Lastly,
Panel (C) graphically demonstrates that the credit matching efficiency process correctly
replicates the fraction of unemployed borrowers at each SCF survey date.

     Before turning to the main results, it is worth noting that the benchmark timing for credit
matching efficiency is procyclical. As Section 1 discusses, the few publicly available measures
of consumer credit access from 1977 to 2012 are procyclical, and exhibit large contractions
around the 2007-2009 crisis, even after controlling for ‘demand-side’ factors such as changing
incomes, education levels, and assets (e.g. Table 3). The large decline in matching efficiency
leading up to the 2007-2009 crisis can be interpreted as tighter lending standards and a
reduction in credit supply.25 Section 5.4 shows that the benchmark model’s credit matching
efficiency process is capable of generating unemployed DTI dynamics and Synovate Credit
Offer dynamics that are close to the data.

   Finally, Online Appendix H considers perfect foresight transitions as well as quarterly ex-
pansions, Online Appendix I.5 uses the Federal Reserve Board’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion
Survey in conjunction with the free-entry condition in the credit-market to directly mea-
sure credit matching efficiency, and Online Appendix R shows that the benchmark model’s
credit matching efficiency process generates countercyclical chargeoff rates, consistent with
the data.26


5.1     Main Quantitative Results

There are four findings from the benchmark transition experiment: (1) credit growth coming
out of the 1990, 2001, and 2007 recessions increases the severity of each downturn (measured
as the employment loss from peak to trough) (2) in the 2001 and 2007 recessions, credit
growth reduces the speed of recovery (measured as the amount of time it takes the economy
to reach pre-recession employment levels), (3) at every point along the transition path,
state with a high probability). Along the transition path, the slow moving nature of borrowing and the
large fluctuations in productivity imply that credit matching efficiency reaches levels that are higher than
the 2010 stochastic steady state value of A.
  25
     The rapid rebound in credit matching efficiency is consistent with Synovate data (see Section 5.4);
however, several important caveats of the Synovate series are discussed in the paper (importantly, it does
not measure online offers and likely understates the size of the rebound). In Online Appendix I.4, I provide
several sources of evidence that suggest subprime unsecured credit expanded rapidly following the 2007-2009
recession.
  26
     The insight is to infer matching efficiency as a residual from the free entry condition by using proxies
for credit demand (mortgage applications) and credit supply (Synovate credit offers). Appendix I.5 provides
more details on this ‘residual’ method.

                                                     25
newborns would prefer to live in the world with fluctuating, but growing, credit access, even
though the unemployment rate is more volatile, and lastly (4) credit fluctuations, as opposed
to trend credit growth, are primarily responsible for generating slower recoveries.

    1980 Recession – Panel (A) of Figure 6 illustrates the employment response to the 1980-I
recession (I combine the two 1980s recessions). The model actually generates employment
fluctuations that are too large relative to the data. The economies with and without credit
access respond to the recession similarly, with employment dropping by roughly 3 percent-
age points from peak to trough. 16 quarters after the onset of the recession, both model
economies are approximately .8 percentage points below pre-recession employment levels,
whereas the data exhibits an approximately full recovery by that point.27

    1990 Recession – Panel (B) of Figure 6 illustrates the employment response to the 1990-
III recession. From peak to trough, employment drops by 1.36pp in the data, 1.10pp in the
economy with fixed access, and 1.32 percentage points in the economy with growing credit
access. What is striking about the 1990 recession is that the economy with growing credit
access actually recovers at a faster rate than the economy with fixed credit access. This is
because credit growth slows and actually becomes negative during the recovery years of 1992
and 1993 (see Figure 5), leading to a tightening of constraints, and less ability to self-insure.

    2001 Recession – Panel (C) of Figure 6 illustrates the employment response to the 2001-I
recession. In the 2001 recession, credit increases the severity of the recession, and the credit
boom following the recession leads to a slower recovery. From peak to trough, employment
drops by 1.86 percentage points in the data, 1.18 percentage points in the economy with
fixed access, and 1.69 percentage points in the economy with growing credit access.

    The credit boom coming out of the 2001 recession generates a strong, short-run self-
insurance effect that swamps the dampening level effect of credit. As a result, Figure 6 (C)
shows that 16 quarters after the onset of the recession, the economy with fixed credit predicts
a full recovery to prior peak employment, whereas in the economy in which credit expands,
employment is still .77 percentage points below prior peak employment. The mechanism is
that during the post-recession credit boom, unemployed households search for higher-paying,
but harder-to-find jobs.

   2007 Recession – Panel (D) of Figure 6 shows that under the benchmark timing as-
sumption for match efficiency, similar to the 2001 recession, the credit expansion coming out
  27
    Since there are relatively few SCF surveys around the 1980 recession, credit is quite stable in the
benchmark economy. Online Appendix Q considers an extreme path for credit fluctuations in the 1980s
and demonstrates that because so few individuals were borrowing, credit shocks in the 1980s do not alter
employment dynamics. Section 4.2 and Section 5.3 discuss this point in more detail.

                                                  26
of the 2007 recession deepens the trough of employment by over 1 percentage point. The
path of credit matching efficiency during the 2007-2009 crisis implies a near shut-down of
credit cards to new borrowers (i.e. young individuals with no credit), with a strong recovery
following the recession. Similar to the 2001 recession, the strong recovery of consumer credit
following the 2007-2009 recession leads to a short-run self-insurance effect that dominates
the dampening level effect of credit, and the result is a slow employment recovery. Table 11
summarizes these findings, showing that allowing for credit growth and contractions closes
the gap between the model with fixed credit access and the data by 20.5% on average, two
years after the 1990, 2001, and 2007 recessions.

    To formalize this graphical analysis, and make the model’s moments comparable to
other studies, Table 10 computes business cycle moments along the model’s transition path
and compares those moments to the data as well as the Shimer [2005] and Hagedorn and
Manovskii [2008] calibrations of the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides (DMP) model. Relative
to the fixed-access model, the benchmark model generates greater unemployment volatility
(measured relative to productivity volatility), marginally greater persistence of unemploy-
ment, and the credit shocks dampen the correlation between productivity and unemploy-
ment. The reason the model with growing credit access dampens the correlation between
productivity and unemployment is that in a typical business cycle with constant credit, when
productivity recovers, vacancies increase and unemployment drops rapidly; with a procycli-
cal credit expansion, vacancies and productivity still recover, but the unemployment rate
remains elevated since the greater ability to self-insure allows workers to take longer to find
jobs. Therefore the economy with credit growth disconnects the employment recovery from
the productivity recovery.

    While not the focus of this paper, I include other calibrations of search and matching
models in Table 10. The model generally outperforms the standard baseline DMP calibra-
tion, but under performs along several dimensions against the Hagedorn and Manovskii [2008]
calibration. The present calibration, however, succeeds in generating large amounts of unem-
ployment volatility and reducing the correlation between productivity and the unemployment
rate, while preserving a negative relationship between unemployment and vacancies.28
  28
    In Online Appendix H, I consider an economy with on-the-job search (OJS). OJS allows the model fit
the Beveridge closer.




                                                 27
5.2    Welfare Gains from 1977 to 2010

Business cycles are more volatile and protracted along the transition path. Are agents bet-
ter off? Figure 7 illustrates the welfare gains of newly born individuals along the transition
path. The gains are computed in 5-year rolling cohort windows, i.e. the welfare gain re-
ported in 1982 Q-1 (which corresponds to 1982.13 on the graph) is what a typical newly
born agent, born between 1982-Q1 and 1987-Q1, would give up in order to live in a world
with growing credit access (subject to the benchmark timing of credit expansions and con-
tractions). During the late 2000s, individuals are willing to give up approximately .2% of
lifetime consumption to live in an economy with greater credit access, even though business
cycles are more volatile. There are larger welfare gains along the transition path than across
stochastic steady states for two reasons. First, in order to match unemployed borrowing
along the transition path, credit matching efficiency reaches higher levels than steady-state
credit matching efficiency. Second, credit is more valuable during recessions, and thus the
welfare gains are higher for cohorts born during the 2007-2009 crisis.


5.3    The Trend Versus The Cycle

To isolate the role of credit fluctuations relative to trend credit growth, this section considers
the ‘linear timing’ economy which assumes that credit matching efficiency expands at a
constant rate from A1977 to A2010 between 1977 and 2010. The initial and terminal values of
credit matching efficiency in 1977 and 2010 are the same as the benchmark timing economy.
The initial and terminal values of credit matching efficiency determine the linear growth
rate of credit between 1977 and 2010. Expectations about the timing of the credit matching
efficiency expansions are determined by PA .

    To isolate how credit matching efficiency fluctuations and trend credit growth differen-
tially affect the business cycle, Figures 8 and 9 compare employment fluctuations between
the benchmark economy, in which credit is volatile, and the linear credit growth economy,
in which credit slowly and positively expands from 1977 to 2010. Panel (A) of Figure 8
illustrates the credit matching efficiency path, while Panel (B) plots the model’s fraction of
unemployed individuals who borrow.

    The linear timing model generates very different employment dynamics than the bench-
mark economy, especially during the 2007-2009 recession. Panel (D) of Figure 9 demonstrates
that during the recovery of the 1990 recession, the linear timing model has a deeper trough
of employment and slower recovery. This is because credit tightens in the benchmark model

                                               28
after the 1990 recession but continues to slowly expand under linear timing. Panel (F) shows
that in the 2001 recession, the linear timing model predicts a full employment recovery 16
quarters after the recession. This discrepancy between the benchmark model and linear
timing model is due to the fact that a slow linear expansion of credit does not capture the
2000s credit boom. For the 2007-2009 recession, Panel (H) shows that the linear timing
model actually predicts a shallower business cycle. To put this into the terms used in Sec-
tion 4, under linear timing, the expansion effect of credit is very weak and the level effect of
credit dominates. As a result, business cycle dynamics become dampened. Figure 9 makes
it clear that the cyclical component of credit matching efficiency is the main driver of slower
recoveries along the benchmark transition path, and the trend-component of credit matching
efficiency is actually working in the opposite direction, lowering employment volatility.

    While trend growth in credit dampens the economy’s response to productivity fluctu-
ations, greater initial levels of credit access amplify the economy’s response to credit fluc-
tuations. If credit access is extremely low, and therefore few people use credit, cyclical
movements in credit matching efficiency have a much weaker impact on employment dynam-
ics (see Section 4.2). For example, in the 1980s, when a small share of the population has
credit, large declines and rebounds in match efficiency have little impact on employment dy-
namics (see Online Appendix Q). This interaction between the level and cycle is absent from
neoclassical growth models which are scale invariant (i.e. the level of technology does not
impact the response of the economy to technology shocks). As the level of credit grew over
the last 40 years, procyclical credit fluctuations affected a larger fraction of the population
and became more important determinants of employment dynamics.


5.4    Assessing the Model’s Mechanisms

This section provides both micro and macro assessments of the model mechanisms. I first
discuss the micro implications: (i) how credit affects unemployment durations and wage
dynamics, and (ii) default behavior of unemployed agents. Herkenhoff et al. [2015] study
the impact of credit access on unemployment duration and replacement wages of displaced
workers by merging the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) data and in-
dividual credit reports. They find that being able to replace 10% of prior annual income
with revolving credit allows displaced workers to take between .33 and 2 weeks longer to find
a job but their replacement wages are about .5% to 3.9% greater, conditional on finding a
job, consistent with a reservation wage mechanism. They show that even if workers do not
draw down the credit line, the ability to borrow affects every unemployed workers’ search

                                              29
behavior.

    To compare the calibrated model’s predictions to the data, Panel (A) of Table 12 includes
the model’s responses of duration and replacement rates to credit access. To remove produc-
tivity fluctuations from the calculation, I compute duration and replacement rate elasticities
between the 2010 and 1977 steady states. Following Herkenhoff et al. [2015], the duration
elasticity is the change in unemployment duration, measured in weeks, across steady states
divided by the change in the credit-to-income ratio across steady states.29 Likewise, the re-
placement rate elasticity is the change in the ratio of the wage 1 year after layoff to the wage
1 year before layoff divided by the change in the credit-to-income ratio. following Herkenhoff
et al. [2015], this is computed among job finders. Appendix J includes detailed formulas for
the computation of these elasticities.

     Panel (A) of Table 12 compares the model’s elasticities to three measures of the duration
and replacement rate elasticities corresponding to (i) the elasticity implied by a raw OLS
regression of duration on credit-to-income, (ii) an instrumental variable (IV) approach using
Gross and Souleles [2002]’s account-age instrument as an IV for credit-to-income, and lastly
(iii) Musto [2004]’s bankruptcy-flag removal as an instrument for credit-to-income. The
model’s duration elasticity is 1.16, and the model’s replacement wage elasticity is .01. These
estimates mean that agents take 1.39 weeks longer to find a job if they can replace 10% more
of their prior annual income with credit, and agents find jobs that pay .1% greater if they
can replace 10% more of their prior annual income with credit. The duration elasticity lies
between the data estimates, whereas the replacement wage elasticity is toward the low-end
of the data estimates.

    These numbers are also in line with existing studies of UI, and a majority of the US
evidence supports the claim that a greater UI safety net tends to improve wage outcomes
including Ehrenberg and Oaxaca [1976], Feldstein and Poterba [1984], Addison and Black-
burn [2000], and Hagedorn et al. [2013].30 While this search mechanism is very similar to
unemployment insurance in the static sense (i.e. a credit limit increase is an increase in liq-
uid resources available to a household just like an increase in unemployment insurance), the
main difference between unemployment insurance and credit is in the dynamics: (1) loans
must be repaid or defaulted upon (2) unemployment claimant rates have been very stable
over the last 3 decades (Auray et al. [2012]) whereas credit access has grown enormously,
and (3) the line of credit can be drawn down before a household ever loses its jobs (in which
  29
     The credit-to-income ratio is computed using annual income in the denominator. In the numerator,
available credit is proxied by the average approval rate multiplied by the largest loan observed in each
steady state, |ψ̂bmin |.
  30
     Online Appendix J provides more discussion.
                                                  30
case the household begins the unemployment indebted and is forced to find a job faster than
if it had never borrowed to begin with).

    The way unemployed agents use credit to smooth consumption is not limited to borrow-
ing; those with existing debts can default to smooth consumption. This is also an important
mechanism in the model, and it is not targeted in the calibration. Panel (B) of Table 12
illustrates the fraction of defaulters (defined as any type of chargeoff) in the model who are
unemployed relative to the PSID (which only measures mortgage delinquency), and the SCF
(which measures general delinquencies over the 12 months prior to the SCF survey date).
Roughly 10.2% of the agents in the model defaulted because of an unemployment spell.31
Between 23% and 24% of mortgage defaulters in the PSID had an unemployment shock over
the prior year, and roughly 23% of defaulters in the SCF had an unemployment spell over the
prior 12 months. These statistics suggest that the model is capturing (although somewhat
understating), the link between unemployment and delinquency, which is a crucial form of
self-insurance for indebted, constrained agents.

    I now turn to macro implications of the model’s mechanisms: (i) debt to income dynamics
of the unemployed, (ii) credit offers, and (iii) the cyclicality of chargeoffs. In Online Appendix
L, I demonstrate that the model is also consistent with the rise in unemployment duration,
the rise in bankruptcies, and the decline in savings observed from 1977 to 2010. On the
intensive margin, Figure 10 shows that the benchmark model does well at matching how
much the unemployed borrow over time, not just the fraction that borrow. While the 2010
Gross Debt to Income (DTI) ratio of unemployed agents was targeted, no other SCF DTI
survey data point was targeted along the transition path. This provides an important test
of the calibrated transition path, as well as the model’s mechanism. The model successfully
captures the rise in DTI among the unemployed after the 2001 and 2007 recessions, and
while the levels are off in the early 1990s, the model also successfully predicts a rise in DTI
among the unemployed following the 1990 recession.

   As an additional assessment of the credit matching efficiency paths, Figure 11 compares
the model’s credit offers per capita to Synovate/Mintel Comperemedia data.32 There are
several caveats about using Synovate as a benchmark measure of credit supply: (i) direct-
mail marketing has been in steep decline, which may severely bias time series comparisons (ii)
  31
     The remainder default due to the expense shock or exogenous lender separations.
  32
     To construct a similar series to the data, which includes offers to all existing cardholders as well as new
cardholders, I assume that individuals who already have access to credit receive X offers per annum in the
model. This number of X offers is chosen so that the model series exactly matches the Synovate series in
2011 (for the benchmark model X=14.1, and X=9.59 in the linear timing model). Then I add that to the
offers received by newly applying individuals in the model (i.e. those who apply for initial credit access), to
arrive at the total number of offers in the model.
                                                      31
the Synovate mail monitor data does not include actual credit approval rates, which declined
in 2005 and 2006 (e.g. Figure 17 in Online Appendix I), (iii) Synovate data only provides a
simple count of pieces of credit mail, and (iv) Synovate’s sampling procedure is not publicly
available, nor do they provide weights, and the series is subject to major revisions.33 With
these caveats in mind, Figure 11 shows that the benchmark timing assumption for credit
matching efficiency captures the general upward trend in credit offers, as well as the 2000s
credit boom, and it comes close to generating the credit supply dynamics observed during
the 2007 recession.

    Lastly, Figure 12 illustrates that the baseline economy produces a strong countercyclical
chargeoff rate which closely mirrors the data over the last 30 years. Since the benchmark
timing assumption bases credit dynamics on low-income unemployed individuals, and since
those individuals are the most likely to default (in both the model and data, e.g. Gerardi
et al. [2017]), the benchmark model naturally generates a close correlation with chargeoffs.



6        Conclusions

Unemployed households’ access to unsecured revolving credit has grown remarkably since
the 1970s, and existing studies have shown that such access is an empirically meaningful
consumption smoothing mechanism for job losers. The objective of this paper has been to
understand how this increased access to unsecured revolving credit affected business cycles
and welfare.

    There are three main results. First, the quantitative analysis reveals that credit expan-
sions and contractions are partly responsible for deepening and protracting recessions over
the last 40 years. As the level of credit access increased over the last 40 years, credit shocks
affected a larger fraction of the population and became more important determinants of
employment dynamics. Second, even though business cycles are more volatile, later cohorts
of newborn agents are willing to give up .2% of lifetime consumption in order to live in the
economy in which credit is stochastically expanding to 2010 levels of credit, as opposed to
the economy with fixed 1977 levels of credit. And finally, in the absence of procyclical credit
fluctuations, trend credit growth may actually dampen business cycle fluctuations.

       This paper is the first step in a broader research agenda to understand the interaction
  33
    E.g. between 2013, when this paper was written, and 2016, Mintel Comperemedia (who bought Synovate)
adjusted the historic credit offer series upwards by 2 billion additional offers per annum in 2006, to 8.1 billion,
on a prior estimate of 6 billion offers for 2006, with no explanation of the reweighting or sampling adjustments.


                                                        32
between consumer credit markets and employment. We have already begun the next phase
of the research agenda which is to use employer-employee records linked to credit reports
by social security number to empirically address the relationship between consumer credit
and employment. Several important questions are being addressed: (1) What is the im-
pact of credit access on job finding rates and wages? (2) Does credit access interact with
unemployment benefits? And if so, should the government use loan programs in place of
unemployment insurance or is there an optimal mix (e.g. Braxton et al. [2018])? (3) Does
consumer credit access impact the decision to become an entrepreneur?




References
Daron Acemoglu and Robert Shimer. Efficient unemployment insurance. Journal of political Econ-
  omy, 107(5):893–928, 1999.
John T Addison and McKinley L Blackburn. The effects of unemployment insurance on postunem-
  ployment earnings. Labour Economics, 7(1):21–53, 2000.
Sumit Agarwal, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel. Do banks
  pass through credit expansions to consumers who want to borrow? The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 133(1):129–190, 2017.
Michelle Alexopoulos. Read all about it!! what happens following a technology shock?      The
  American Economic Review, 101(4):1144–1179, 2011.
Annamaria Andriotis and Robin Sidel. Credit-card lenders pursue riskier borrowers. Wall Street
  Journal, page June 26, 2014.
Kartik Athreya, Xuan S Tam, and Eric R Young. A quantitative theory of information and unse-
  cured credit. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(3):153–183, 2012.
Kartik Athreya, Juan M Sánchez, Xuan S Tam, and Eric R Young. Labor market upheaval, default
  regulations, and consumer debt. Review of Economic Dynamics, 18(1):32–52, 2015.
Kartik B. Athreya and Nicole B. Simpson. Unsecured debt with public insurance: From bad to
  worse. Journal of Monetary economics, 53(4):797–825, 2006.
Stephane Auray, David L Fuller, and Damba Lkhagvasuren. Unemployment insurance take-up
  rates in an equilibrium search model. Technical report, Working Paper, Concordia University,
  2012.
Ruediger Bachmann. Understanding jobless recoveries. University of Michigan, manuscript, 2009.


                                             33
John M Barren and Michael Staten. The value of comprehensive credit reports: Lessons from the
  us experience. Credit reporting systems and the international economy, 8:273–310, 2003.
Allen N Berger, Anil K Kashyap, and J.M. Scalise. The transformation of the us banking industry:
  What a long, strange trip it’s been. Brookings papers on economic activity, 1995(2):55–218, 1995.
Allen N Berger, Adrian M Cowan, and W Scott Frame. The surprising use of credit scoring in
  small business lending by community banks and the attendant effects on credit availability, risk,
  and profitability. Journal of Financial Services Research, 39(1-2):1–17, 2011.
David Berger. Countercyclical restructuring and jobless recoveries. Manuscript, Yale, 2012.
Zachary Bethune. Consumer credit, unemployment, and aggregate labor market dynamics. Working
  Paper, 2015.
Zachary Bethune, Guillaume Rocheteau, and Peter Rupert. Aggregate unemployment and house-
  hold unsecured debt. Review of Economic Dynamics, 18(1):77–100, 2015.
David M Blau and Philip K Robins. Job search outcomes for the employed and unemployed.
  Journal of Political Economy, pages 637–655, 1990.
Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. Consumption inequality and family
  labor supply. The American Economic Review, 106(2):387–435, 2016.
Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
J. Carter Braxton, Kyle F Herkenhoff, and Gordon Phillips. Can the unemployed borrow? impli-
  cations for public insurance. Manuscript, 2018.
Paul L Burgess and Jerry L Kingston. Impact of unemployment insurance benefits on reemployment
  success, the. Indus. & Lab. Rel. Rev., 30:25, 1976.
Glenn B Canner, Thomas A Durkin, and Charles A Luckett. Recent developments in home equity
  lending. Fed. Res. Bull., 84:241, 1998.
Satyajit Chatterjee, Dean Corbae, Makoto Nakajima, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. A quantitative
  theory of unsecured consumer credit with risk of default. Econometrica, 75(6):1525–1589, 2007.
Gaston Rene Chaumont and Shouyong Shi. Wealth accumulation, on the job search and inequality.
  Manuscript, 2017.
Raj Chetty. Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance. Journal of political
  Economy, 116(2):173–234, 2008.
J. Michael Collins, Kathryn Edwards, and Maximilian Schmeiser. The role of credit cards for
  unemployed households in the great recession. Manuscript, 2015.
Diego A Comin and Martı́ Mestieri. Technology diffusion: Measurement, causes and consequences.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.
Thomas F Crossley and Hamish Low. Borrowing constraints, the cost of precautionary saving and
  unemployment insurance. International Tax and Public Finance, 18(6):658–687, 2011.



                                                34
Andrew Davidson. The supply of credit in the card market. Mintel Comperemedia, page February
  22, 2011.
Giovanni DellAriccia, Deniz Igan, and Luc UC Laeven. Credit booms and lending standards:
  Evidence from the subprime mortgage market. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44(2-3):
  367–384, 2012.
Wouter J den Haan, Garey Ramey, and Joel Watson. Job destruction and propagation of shocks.
  American Economic Review, 90(3):482–498, 2000.
Lukasz A Drozd and Jaromir B Nosal. Competing for customers: A search model of the market
  for unsecured credit. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Wisconsin, 2008.
Pradeep Dubey, John Geanakoplos, and Martin Shubik. Default and punishment in general equi-
  librium. Econometrica, 73(1):1–37, 2005.
Jonathan Eaton and Mark Gersovitz. Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical
  analysis. The Review of Economic Studies, pages 289–309, 1981.
Ronald G Ehrenberg and Ronald L Oaxaca. Unemployment insurance, duration of unemployment,
  and subsequent wage gain. The American Economic Review, pages 754–766, 1976.
David S Evans and Richard Schmalensee. Paying with plastic: the digital revolution in buying and
  borrowing. MIT Press, 2005.
Martin Feldstein and James Poterba. Unemployment insurance and reservation wages. Journal of
  Public Economics, 23(1):141–167, 1984.
Scott L Fulford. How important is variability in consumer credit limits?     Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 72:42–63, 2015.
M. Furletti. Consumer bankruptcy: how unsecured lenders fare. Technical report, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Philadelphia, 2003.
Kristopher Gerardi, Kyle F Herkenhoff, Lee E Ohanian, and Paul S Willen. Cant pay or wont pay?
  unemployment, negative equity, and strategic default. The Review of Financial Studies, 31(3):
  1098–1131, 2017.
Grey Gordon. Evaluating default policy: The business cycle matters. Quantitative Economics, 6
  (3):795–823, 2015.
Ben Griffy. Borrowing constraints, search, and life-cycle inequality. Manuscript, 2017.
Daniel Grodzicki. The evolution of competition in the credit card market. Technical report, Working
  paper. Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, 2012.
David B Gross and Nicholas S Souleles. Do liquidity constraints and interest rates matter for
  consumer behavior? evidence from credit card data. The Quarterly journal of economics, 117
  (1):149–185, 2002.
Veronica Guerrieri and Guido Lorenzoni. Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the liquidity
  trap. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.


                                                35
Marcus Hagedorn and Iourii Manovskii. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and
  vacancies revisited. The American Economic Review, 98(4):1692–1706, 2008.
Marcus Hagedorn, Fatih Karahan, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. Unemployment benefits
  and unemployment in the great recession: the role of macro effects. Economics working paper,
  University of Pennsylvania, 2013.
Song Han and Wenli Li. Fresh start or head start? the effects of filing for personal bankruptcy on
  work effort. Journal of Financial Services Research, 31(2-3):123–152, 2007.
Gary D Hansen and Ayşe İmrohoroğlu. The role of unemployment insurance in an economy with
  liquidity constraints and moral hazard. Journal of political economy, pages 118–142, 1992.
Kyle F Herkenhoff. Informal unemployment insurance and labor market dynamics. Federal Reserve
  Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2012-057A, 2012.
Kyle F Herkenhoff and Lee E Ohanian. Labor market dysfunction during the great recession. The
  Cato Papers on Public Policy 2011, 1:173, 2011.
Kyle F Herkenhoff and Lee E Ohanian. The impact of foreclosure delay on us employment. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.
Kyle F Herkenhoff, Gordon Phillips, and Ethan Cohen-Cole. How credit constraints impact job
  finding rates, sorting, & aggregate output. Manuscript, 2015.
Michael D Hurd and Susann Rohwedder. Effects of the financial crisis and great recession on
  american households. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.
Erik Hurst and Frank Stafford. Home is where the equity is: mortgage refinancing and household
  consumption. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, pages 985–1014, 2004.
Julapa Jagtiani and Wenli Li. Credit access after consumer bankruptcy filing: new evidence. Am.
  Bankr. LJ, 89:327, 2015.
Nir Jaimovich and Henry E Siu. The trend is the cycle: Job polarization and jobless recoveries.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.
Fatih Karahan and Serena Rhee. Housing and the labor market: The role of migration on aggregate
  unemployment. Manuscript, 2011.
Alan Krueger and Andreas Mueller. Job search and job finding in a period of mass unemploy-
  ment: Evidence from high-frequency longitudinal data. Technical report, Princeton University,
  Department of Economics, Industrial Relations Section., 2011.
Per Krusell, Toshihiko Mukoyama, and Ayşegül Şahin. Labour-market matching with precautionary
  savings and aggregate fluctuations. The Review of Economic Studies, 77(4):1477–1507, 2010.
Wei Li and Laurie Goodman. A better measure of mortgage application denial rates. Washington:
  Urban Institute, 2014.
Wenli Li et al. What do we know about chapter 13 personal bankruptcy filings? Business Review,
  (Q4), 2007.


                                               36
Jeremy Lise. On-the-job search and precautionary savings. The Review of Economic Studies, page
  rds042, 2012.
Igor Livshits, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. Consumer bankruptcy: A fresh start. American
  Economic Review, 97(1):402–418, 2007.
Igor Livshits, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. Accounting for the rise in consumer bankruptcies.
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(2):165–193, 2010.
Igor Livshits, James C MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. The democratization of credit and the rise in
  consumer bankruptcies. The Review of Economic Studies, page rdw011, 2016.
Lars Ljungqvist and Thomas J. Sargent. The european unemployment dilemma. Journal of Political
  Economy, 106(3):514–550, 1998.
Cara Lown and Donald P Morgan. The credit cycle and the business cycle: new findings using the
  loan officer opinion survey. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, pages 1575–1597, 2006.
Robert E Lucas. Models of business cycles, volume 26. Basil Blackwell Oxford, 1987.
Brian T Melzer. The real costs of credit access: Evidence from the payday lending market. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1):517–555, 2011.
Guido Menzio and Shouyong Shi. Block recursive equilibria for stochastic models of search on the
  job. Journal of Economic Theory, 145(4):1453–1494, 2010.
Guido Menzio and Shouyong Shi. Efficient search on the job and the business cycle. Journal of
  Political Economy, 119(3):468–510, 2011.
Guido Menzio, Irina A Telyukova, and Ludo Visschers. Directed search over the life cycle. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.
Guido Menzio, Irina A Telyukova, and Ludo Visschers. Directed search over the life cycle. Review
  of Economic Dynamics, 19:38–62, 2016.
Loretta J Mester. What’s the point of credit scoring? Business review, 3:3–16, 1997.
Kurt Mitman and Stanislav Rabinovich. Do changes in unemployment insurance explain the emer-
  gence of jobless recoveries? 2012.
Dale T. Mortensen and Christopher A. Pissarides. Job creation and job destruction in the theory
  of unemployment. The review of economic studies, 61(3):397–415, 1994.
Casey B. Mulligan. A depressing scenario: Mortgage debt becomes unemployment insurance.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2008.
David K. Musto. What happens when information leaves a market? evidence from postbankruptcy
  consumers. The Journal of Business, 77(4):725–748, 2004.
Makoto Nakajima. Business cycles in the equilibrium model of labor market search and self-
  insurance. International Economic Review, 53(2):399–432, 2012.
Makoto Nakajima and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. Credit, bankruptcy, and aggregate fluctuations. Tech-
  nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

                                                37
Borghan N Narajabad. Information technology and the rise of household bankruptcy. Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 15(4):526–550, 2012.
NCES. Financing postsecondary education in the united states. Institute of Education Sciences,
  page May, 2013.
Arash Nekoei and Andrea Weber. Does extending unemployment benefits improve job quality?
  American Economic Review, 107(2):527–61, 2017.
Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau. Credit, vacancies and unemployment fluctuations. Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 17(2):191–205, 2014.
Gajendran Raveendranathan. Improved matching, directed search, and bargaining in the credit
  card market. 2018.
Silvio Rendon. Job search and asset accumulation under borrowing constraints. International
  Economic Review, 47(1):233–263, 2006.
Juan M Sánchez. The information technology revolution and the unsecured credit market. Economic
  Inquiry, 56(2):914–930, 2018.
Edouard Schaal. Uncertainty and unemployment. Econometrica, 85(6):1675–1721, 2017.
Johannes F Schmieder, Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. The effect of unemployment benefits
  and nonemployment durations on wages. American Economic Review, 106(3):739–77, 2016.
Shouyong Shi. Directed search for equilibrium wagetenure contracts. Econometrica, 77(2):561–584,
  2009.
Daniel R Shiman. The nature and causes of the increase in direct mail volume in the last half of
  the twentieth century. Available at SSRN 547042, 2001.
Robert Shimer. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. American
  economic review, pages 25–49, 2005.
Michael A Stegman. Payday lending. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(1):169–190, 2007.
James X. Sullivan. Borrowing during unemployment. Journal of Human Resources, 43(2):383–412,
  2008.
Etienne Wasmer and Philippe Weil. The macroeconomics of labor and credit market imperfections.
  The American Economic Review, 94(4):944–963, 2004.
Martha C. White. Uh-oh: Subprime lending comes roaring back. Time, April 11, 2012.
Michelle White. Why don’t more households file for bankruptcy? Journal of Law Economics and
  Organization, 14(2):205–231, 1998.




                                              38
Figure 1: Net Percent of Banks with More Willingness to Make Installment Loans from 1966
to 2013 (Source: Federal Reserve Board, Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey 1966-2012)




Notes: historic willingness to lend data available here https: // www. federalreserve. gov/ boarddocs/ snloansurvey/ 199802/ febdata. txt . Recent willingness

to lend data available here: https: // fred. stlouisfed. org/ series/ DRIWCIL .




                                                                                  39
           Figure 2: Impulse Response Experiment: Credit Expansion Before Recession
     (A)                                     (B)                                      (C)
40




           Figure 3: Impulse Response Experiment: Credit Expansion After Recession
     (A)                                     (B)                                      (C)
Figure 4: Impulse Response Experiment: Larger Fraction Borrowing Amplifies Credit Shocks
                      (A)                                      (B)




Figure 5: Transition Experiment: Calibration Targets and Credit Matching Efficiency Path




                                           41
       Figure 6: Transition Experiment: Employment Fluctuations
(A) 1980-I Recession Inputs                 (B) 1980-I Recession Employment




(C) 1990-III Recession Inputs              (D) 1990-III Recession Employment




(E) 2001-I Recession Inputs                 (F) 2001-I Recession Employment




(G) 2007-IV Recession Inputs               (H) 2007-IV Recession Employment




                                  42
                     Figure 7: Welfare Along Transition Path




Figure 8: Trend vs. Cycle: Calibration Targets and Credit Matching Efficiency Path




                                        43
           Figure 9: Trend vs. Cycle: Employment Fluctuations
(A) 1980-I Recession Inputs                  (B) 1980-I Recession Employment




(C) 1990-III Recession Inputs               (D) 1990-III Recession Employment




(E) 2001-I Recession Inputs                  (F) 2001-I Recession Employment




(G) 2007-IV Recession Inputs                (H) 2007-IV Recession Employment




                                   44
Figure 10: Transition Experiment: Gross        Figure 11: Credit Card Offers, Model v.
DTI of Unemployed                              Data (Source: Synovate and Mintel)




    Figure 12: Chargeoff Dynamics, Deviations from Trend (HP Filter, λ = 1600)




                                          45
Table 1: Credit Access and Credit Use Among the Unemployed and All Households (Source:
1977 SCC and 2010 SCF)

                                  Unemployed Households            All Households
                                  1977            2010             1977             2010
      Fraction with Unsecured     12.8%           45.0%            37.6%            65.0%
      Revolving Credit Access
      Fraction Borrowing (Posi-   11.5%           33.1%            15.7%            34.1%
      tive Balance)
      Gross DTI                   0.6%            5.2%             0.6%             3.9%
      N                           78              416              2563             6482
Notes. See Online Appendix D for more details.

    Table 2: Borrowing by the Unemployed (Source: RAND ALP, 2009-IV to 2015-IV)

                                                          In response to job loss, percent who...
       Borrow                                             25.3%
       Skip payments (non-mortgage related)               36.1%
       N                                                  1680
Notes. See Online Appendix D for more details.




                                                     46
Table 3: SCF Composition Corrected Time Series for Unemployed Borrowing. Logit Regres-
sions. Average Marginal Effects Reported (Source: SCF 1970-2013)

                                           (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
  Dependent Variable:                      Borrowing (d)    Borrowing (d)   Borrowing (d)   Borrowing (d)
 1977 (d)                                  0.0884**         0.129***
                                           (0.0393)         (0.0484)
 1983 (d)                                  0.0965***        0.118***
                                           (0.0259)         (0.0267)
 1989 (d)                                  0.148***         0.193***
                                           (0.0501)         (0.0550)
 1992 (d)                                  0.220***         0.238***
                                           (0.0378)         (0.0369)
 1995 (d)                                  0.218***         0.251***
                                           (0.0375)         (0.0373)
 1998 (d)                                  0.249***         0.280***
                                           (0.0424)         (0.0428)
 2001 (d)                                  0.244***         0.259***
                                           (0.0458)         (0.0467)
 2004 (d)                                  0.328***         0.319***
                                           (0.0445)         (0.0421)
 2007 (d)                                  0.245***         0.248***
                                           (0.0445)         (0.0445)
 2010 (d)                                  0.304***         0.275***
                                           (0.0290)         (0.0268)
 2013 (d)                                  0.253***         0.224***
                                           (0.0309)         (0.0287)
 Year                                                                       0.00601***      0.00423***
                                                                            (0.000838)      (0.000868)
 Post-Recession Dummy (1992, 2004, 2010)                                    0.0526**        0.0420**
                                                                            (0.0212)        (0.0209)
 Demographic and Income Controls           N                Y               N               Y
 Pseudo-R2                                 0.0364           0.0984          0.0291          0.0853
 Observations                              2,209            2,169           2,209           2,169

 Notes. Robust Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Sample includes
unemployed individuals as of the survey date. (d) denotes dummy. Dependent variable is dummy of positive
credit card balance. Demographic and income controls include age, income, liquid assets, as well as race,
sex, and education dummies. Regressions are weighted using SCF survey weights. 1970 and 1977
observations are equally weighted since no weights are available in those years.




                                                       47
Table 4: SCF Unemployed 5-Year Credit Denial Probabilities. Logit Regression. Average
Marginal Effects Reported (Source: 1998-2013 SCF)

                                          (1)               (2)            (3)                 (4)
  Dependent Variable:                     Denied (d)        Denied (d)     Strict Denial (d)   Strict Denial (d)
 1996-2001 (d)                            0.0490            0.0979         0.000953            0.0568
                                          (0.0894)          (0.0833)       (0.0784)            (0.0781)
 1999-2004 (d)                            0.0335            0.0652         -0.0128             0.0180
                                          (0.0798)          (0.0758)       (0.0695)            (0.0648)
 2002-2007 (d)                            0.0304            0.0516         0.0525              0.0810
                                          (0.0837)          (0.0778)       (0.0769)            (0.0713)
 2005-2010 (d)                            0.167**           0.203***       0.116*              0.153***
                                          (0.0684)          (0.0649)       (0.0622)            (0.0589)
 2008-2013 (d)                            0.123*            0.124*         0.0864              0.0955
                                          (0.0707)          (0.0674)       (0.0641)            (0.0626)
 Demographic and Income Controls          N                 Y              N                   Y
 Total Balance Control                    N                 Y              N                   Y
 Observations                             719               706            719                 706
 Pseudo R2                                0.0115            0.0862         0.00963             0.0920

 Notes. Robust Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Sample includes
unemployed individuals as of the survey date. (d) denotes dummy. Dependent variable in columns (1) and
(2) is a dummy for any type of credit denial in the past 5 years. Dependent variable in columns (3) and (4)
is a dummy for a credit denial in which the household was unable to eventually obtain the full amount in
the past 5 years. Demographic and income controls include age, income, liquid assets, as well as race, sex,
and education dummies. Total balance control includes total credit balance. Regressions are weighted using
SCF survey weights. 1970 and 1977 observations are equally weighted since no weights are available in
those years.




                                                       48
  Table 5: Summary of Parameters, 2010 Stochastic Steady State Calibration

       Parameter         Value     Description
       Non-Calibrated
       s̄                0.01      Exogenous credit separation rate
       rf                0.04      Annualized Risk Free Rate
       τ                 0.049     Annualized Proportional Servicing Fee
       δ                 0.1       Job Destruction Rate
       ρ                 0.8961    Auto Correlation of Labor Productivity
       σ                0.0055    Standard Deviation of Labor Productivity
       γ                 0.5       Benefit Replacement Rate
       ζ                 1.6       Labor Match Elasticity
       ζC                0.37      Credit Match Elasticity
       κC                1.75e−6   Credit Vacancy Cost
       σ                 2         Risk Aversion
       T                 120       Lifespan in Quarters
       px                0.022     Probability of expense shock
       x                 0.263     Size of expense shock

       Calibrated
       κL                0.021     Vacancy Posting Cost
       κD                0.184     Disutility of Default
       χC                0.210     Utility cost of applying
       η                 0.604     Flow Utility of Leisure
       A2010             0.718     Credit Matching Efficiency
       β                 0.974     Discount Factor


    Table 6: Simulated Moments, 2010 Stochastic Steady State Calibration

     Parameter                Target                Model    Data            Source
         κL             Unemployment Rate           0.0586   0.0582     BLS (1948-2013)
         κD                Chargeoff Rate           0.0107   0.0106 Flow of Funds (1985-2007)
         χC      Fraction of Unemployed Borrowing   0.3316   0.3310        SCF (2010)
          η      Autocorrelation of Unemployment    0.9045   0.9360       Shimer (2005)
        A2010              Approval Rate            0.6769   0.6720  SCF Panel (2007-2009)
          β             Gross Unempl. DTI           0.0576   0.0519        SCF (2010)


                    Table 7: Stochastic Steady State Comparison

                                                      2010           1977    Ratio (2010/1977)
Fraction Unemployed Borrowing                      0.33          0.13                             2.56
Avg. Unemployment Rate                           5.87%         5.56%                              1.06
Unemployment Volatility                            14.0          14.4                             0.97
Credit Matching Efficiency (A)                     0.72          0.48                             1.49
Newborns: Fraction of Lifetime Consumption Willing to Forego to Move                            0.12%
from 1977 to 2010 SS
Employed Newborns and Non-newborns: Fraction of Lifetime Consump-                               0.11%
tion Willing to Forego to Move from 1977 to 2010 SS
Unemployed Newborns and Non-newborns: Fraction of Lifetime Con-                                 0.15%
sumption Willing to Forego to Move from 1977 to 2010 SS

                                              49
                        Table 8: 2010 Liquid Asset Distribution: Model v. Data

                                             Ratio of Liquid Wealth to Annual Income (2010)
                  Benchmark Model            Model with Het- Data 1: SCF 2010                       Data 2: SCF 2010
                                             erogeneous β (On-
                                             line Appendix K)
     Definition   Net Liquid Assets (b)      Net Liquid Assets (b) Most Liquid Assets (Check-       Net Worth Excluding Pensions
                                                                   ing +Saving +Money Mar-          and Home Equity (Checking
                                                                   ket -Credit Card Debt)           +Saving +Money Market +CDs
                                                                                                    +Mutual funds +Bonds +Stocks
                                                                                                    -Credit Card Debt)
     p10          -0.038                     -0.028                      -0.056                     -0.060
     p25          0.000                      0.000                       0.000                      0.000
     p50          0.038                      0.057                       0.025                      0.031
     p75          0.095                      0.131                       0.109                      0.211
     p90          0.160                      1.415                       0.365                      1.405
     Mean         0.047                      0.325                       0.204                      0.509




                     Table 9: Credit Matching Efficiency Along Transition Path

                                           1977       1983       1989        1992    1995     1998       2001       2004        2007    2010
Credit Matching Efficiency (At )           0.450      0.546      0.633       0.744   0.615    0.743      0.621      0.861       0.407   0.832
Model: Unemployed Borrowing                0.116      0.124      0.177       0.245   0.242    0.272      0.267      0.356       0.269   0.331
Data: Unemployed Borrowing                 0.115      0.123      0.175       0.247   0.245    0.276      0.271      0.355       0.272   0.331




            Table 10: Transition Experiment: Summary of Labor Market Moments

   Growing Access, Benchmark Timing                                                  Baseline  DMP     (Shimer      2005),
                                                                                     [Hagedorn-Manovskii (2008) in Square
                                                                                     Brackets]
   Variable x =            u1      v         θ          y         UE                 u1        v          θ          y          UE
                                                                  Rate                                                          Rate
   SD(x)/SD(y)             11.430 3.686      4.697      1.000     4.815              0.45      1.35       1.75       1          0.5
                                                                                     [11.2]    [13.0]     [22.5]     [1]
   Autocorr(x)             0.903   0.504     0.784      0.832     0.846              0.94      0.94       0.94       0.89       0.91
                                                                                     [.83]     [.56]      [.75]      [.77]

   Corr(u,x)               1.000   -0.163    -0.868     -0.778    -0.972             1         -0.93      -0.96      -0.96      -0.96
                                                                                     [1]       [-.72]     [-.92]     [-.89]

   Fixed Access                                                                      Data (Shimer 2005)
   Variable x =            u1      v         θ          y         UE                 u1     v       θ                y          UE
                                                                  Rate                                                          Rate
   SD(x)/SD(y)             9.677   3.055     3.646      1.000     3.984              9.50      10.10      19.10      1.00       5.90
   Autocorr(x)             0.896   0.567     0.801      0.832     0.840              0.94      0.94       0.94       0.88       0.91

   Corr(u,x)               1.000   -0.110    -0.878     -0.845    -0.972             1.00      -0.89      -0.97      -0.41      -0.95
   Notes: Model data are logged, and then HP filtered with smoothing parameter 105 to be consistent with Shimer [2005]. To
                                                                                                                          v
   be consistent with the data, u1 is calculated as the fraction of unemployed households at the end of a quarter. θ = u1 +u2
   includes the measure of households that immediately found jobs (u2 ), hence the low volatility as that mass is quite large
   and very stable.



                                                                    50
Table 11: Reduction in Employment Discrepancy Between Model and Data by Including
Credit Matching Efficiency Expansions

                                   Percentage Change in Employment 8Q Since Peak
                                     No Access               Access                   Data                    Reduction in Employment
                                                                                                              Discrep.
  1990 Recession                     -0.07                   0.00                     -1.33                   -6.1%

  2001 Recession                     -1.07                   -1.23                    -1.55                   33.8%
  2007 Recession                     -1.81                   -2.85                    -4.86                   33.9%
  Average                            –                       –                        –                       20.5%

Notes. Data is Nonfarm Business Sector Employment. E(t) is employment in period t after recession.
Percentage change formula: 100*(E(8)/E(0)-1) where E(0) is employment in period prior to NBER dated
recession. *Reduction in Employment Discrep. stands for “the reduction in employment discrepancy
between the model and the data by including credit expansions.” The formula for calculating the reduction
in employment discrepancy between the model and the data by including credit expansions is given by:
(E(Fixed Access)-E(Access))/(E(Fixed Access)-E(Data)) where E(·) is employment.




Table 12: Comparison of model to data: unemployment duration, wage replacement rate,
and default rate. (Sources: Herkenhoff et al. [2015], PSID 2009-2013, and SCF 1998-2013)

 Panel (A)                               Model             Data: OLS (HPC)                     Data: IV-GS (HPC)                   Data: Bankruptcy Flag
                                                                                                                                   Removal (HPC)
 Duration Elasticity                     1.16              0.279***                            0.442***                            1.696*
 Replacement Elasticity                  0.01              0.0605***                           0.134***                            0.398**

 Panel (B)                               Model             Data:   60 Days Late                Data:             Foreclosure       Data: Minor delinquency
                                                           Mortgage (PSID)                     (PSID)                              (SCF)
 Fraction       Unemployed               10.2%             22.9%                               23.8%                               22.8%
 within 1 Year of Default


 Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. HPC Notes: Sample includes LEHD from 2001 to 2008. Estimates from Herkenhoff, Phillips, Cohen-Cole 2015 (HPC)
 (see Appendix J for additional details). PSID Notes: Sample includes heads from 2009 to 2013. 60 Days Late Mortgage refers to fraction of Heads Unemployed
 within 1 Year of 60 day Mortgage Delinquency (including date of default). Foreclosure refers to fraction of Heads Unemployed within 1 Year of Foreclosure Start
 (including date of default). SCF Notes: Sample includes heads from 1998 to 2013. Minor delinquency refers to fraction of Heads Unemployed within 1 Year of
 Minor Delinquency (including date of default). Model Notes: Benchmark Timing (Pooled, 1977-2012).




                                                                               51
