                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IMPACTS OF A CARBON TAX ACROSS US HOUSEHOLD INCOME GROUPS:
               WHAT ARE THE EQUITY-EFFICIENCY TRADE-OFFS?

                                      Lawrence H. Goulder
                                      Marc A. C. Hafstead
                                         GyuRim Kim
                                        Xianling Long

                                       Working Paper 25181
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25181


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2018




We are grateful to Ted Bergstrom, Danny Cullenward, Don Fullerton, Kyle Meng, Gib Metcalf,
Ishuwar Seetharam, John Taggart, and Rob Williams for helpful comments; and we gratefully
acknowledge the Energy and Climate Program at Resources for the Future and the Natural Gas
Initiative (Grant 123376WPIAT) and Hoover Energy Task Force at Stanford University for their
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25181.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Lawrence H. Goulder, Marc A. C. Hafstead, GyuRim Kim, and Xianling Long. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Impacts of a Carbon Tax across US Household Income Groups: What Are the Equity-Efficiency
Trade-Offs?
Lawrence H. Goulder, Marc A. C. Hafstead, GyuRim Kim, and Xianling Long
NBER Working Paper No. 25181
October 2018
JEL No. D58,H23,Q52,Q54

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper assesses the impacts across US household income groups of carbon taxes of various
designs. We consider both the source-side impacts (reflecting how policies affect nominal wage,
capital, and transfer incomes) and the use-side impacts (reflecting how policies alter prices of
goods and services purchased by households). We apply an integrated general equilibrium
framework with extended measures of the source- and use-side impacts that add up to the overall
welfare impact. The distributional impacts depend importantly on the revenue recycling method
and treatment of transfer income. In the absence of compensation targeted to particular income
groups, use-side impacts tend to be regressive and source-side impacts progressive, with the
progressive source-side impacts fully offsetting the regressive use-side impacts. Both types of
impact are considerably larger under our more comprehensive welfare measures than under more
conventional measures. The efficiency costs of targeted compensation to achieve distributional
objectives depend critically on the recycling method and compensation target. These costs are an
order of magnitude higher when the revenues that remain after compensation are used for
corporate income tax cuts than when the remaining revenues are used in other ways. Efficiency
costs rise dramatically when targeted compensation extends beyond the lowest income quintiles.

Lawrence H. Goulder                            GyuRim Kim
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building 328                  UCLA
Stanford University                            Los Angeles, CA
Stanford, CA 94305                             kgr0427@ucla.edu
and NBER
goulder@stanford.edu                           Xianling Long
                                               Department of Management Science
Marc A. C. Hafstead                            & Engineering
Resources for the Future                       Stanford University
1616 P St NW                                   Stanford, CA 94305
Washington, DC 20036                           xianling@stanford.edu
Hafstead@rff.org




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25181
1. Introduction


         Economists tend to consider a carbon tax as the most cost-effective approach to reducing
CO2 emissions.1 However, cost-effectiveness is not the only feature relevant to assessing this
policy option. The distribution of the policy’s impacts and the associated implications for
fairness are also important considerations. The distribution of a carbon tax’s impacts across
household income groups, in particular, is a central consideration.2
         The impacts on households can be decomposed into what economists have termed use-
side and source-side effects. The use-side impact is the effect on purchasing power or well-being
that stems from changes in the prices of goods and services that households purchase. A carbon
tax alters the relative prices of the goods and services that households purchase. The goods and
services that are more carbon-intensive in their production will generally rise relative to prices of
other goods and services. This has distributional consequences: households that rely relatively
more on those goods will experience a greater reduction in real income than households less
reliant on those goods.
         The source-side impact is the change in purchasing power or well-being attributable to
policy-induced changes in a household’s nominal labor, capital, and transfer income. A carbon
tax generally will affect (positively or negatively) after-tax wages, returns to capital, and
transfers. This differently affects different households to the extent that their reliance on these
different forms of income differs.


1
  Several attributes of a carbon tax contribute to its greater cost-effectiveness. One is flexibility: rather than require a
particular way to reduce emissions, a carbon tax gives firms flexibility to find the lowest-cost way to achieve the
reductions. A second is the ability of a carbon tax (if broad-based) to promote equality of marginal abatement costs
across firms that directly or indirectly use carbon-based fuels. Such equality is a condition for minimizing the
aggregate costs of emissions abatement. On this, see, for example, Fischer et al. (2001). Third, a carbon tax tends to
encourage more demand-side conservation than conventional regulations that impose the same effective marginal
cost of abatement. This is because, in contrast with conventional regulations, a carbon tax not only promotes
emissions reductions but also charges for remaining emissions; this helps ensure a more efficient output price and a
more efficient level of demand-side conservation. See Goulder and Parry (2008) for a discussion of this point.
Finally, because it brings in revenues, a carbon tax creates opportunities for revenue recycling in the form of cuts in
the rates of preexisting distortionary taxes. As discussed by Oates (1993), Fullerton and Metcalf (2001), and others,
this can reduce policy costs.
2
  The impacts across producers or industries are also relevant to fairness (and to political feasibility). A large number
of studies have investigated the potential impacts of a carbon tax across industries. See, for example, Jorgenson et al.
(2013). Since industry impacts are ultimately felt by workers, managers, and owners of firms, in some ways the
question of fairness ultimately must involve relative impacts across individuals rather than firms.
         This paper assesses the distribution of the impacts across US household income groups of
carbon taxes of various designs, taking into account both the use- and source-side impacts. We
explore both the absolute impacts on various household income groups and the relative impacts,
such as the extent to which the impacts are regressive or progressive. In addition, we examine the
potential aggregate costs of reducing or avoiding regressivity, or of avoiding absolute losses of
welfare to households in the lowest income groups.
         Our paper builds on earlier literature that has considered the source- and use-side impacts
of carbon taxes. Some studies focus exclusively on the use side, and these studies tend to obtain
regressive impacts. Fremstad and Paul (2017) and Grainger and Kolstad (2010) employ input-
output models to assess the use-side impacts.3 Mathur and Morris (2014) consider these impacts
using a general equilibrium model. In contrast, Rausch et al. (2011), Fullerton et al. (2011), and
Williams et al. (2015) examine both use- and source-side effects. These analyses tend to find
progressive source-side impacts that fully offset the use-side impacts, causing the overall impacts
of carbon taxes to be progressive.4
         The present paper builds on this work in four ways. First, it offers an especially
consistent theoretical framework and numerical approach. The theoretical framework fully
integrates the source- and use-side impacts on utility while revealing their separate contributions
to welfare. In addition, rather than employ separate empirical models to measure the two types of
impacts, this study applies a single general equilibrium modeling framework to assess the
impacts on the source and use sides as well as to quantify the efficiency costs of achieving
various distributional goals.
         Second, in contrast with earlier work, our analysis develops and applies more complete
measures of the household welfare impacts. The measures of source-side impacts account for the
effects of policies on the value of households’ time (labor and leisure), rather than just on the
value of the labor income. And the measures of use-side impacts account for policy effects on
the price of leisure (another “good” that households consume) in addition to the prices of other

3
  Grainger and Kolstad (2010) show that the regressivity of the use-side impact varies with different recycling
methods.
4
  Rausch et al. (2011) find that the source-side impact is progressive and sufficient to overcome the regressive use-
side impact when the carbon tax policy involves lump-sum recycling. Fullerton et al. (2011) find that progressivity
in US transfer program indexing significantly offsets regressivity on the use side. Williams et al. (2015) show that
the source-side impact is highly progressive when revenues are recycled as lump-sum payments to households,
making the overall impact progressive. Cronin et al. (2017) focus mainly on the use-side impact; however, they
consider transfers and argue that the impact of a carbon tax is progressive once one accounts for the indexing of
transfers.

                                                          2
goods and services. To reveal the significance of these broader measures, we compare the
welfare impacts that they yield with the impacts that result when the often-used narrower
measures are applied.
         Third, whereas previous studies have tended to focus on the distributional impacts at a
single point in time (usually the present), we exploit the multiperiod property of our numerical
model to examine changes in the distributional impacts over time.
         Fourth, we compare policies with and without targeted compensation to assess the
efficiency costs of avoiding certain distributional outcomes.
         We find that under a range of recycling methods, the source-side impacts are generally
progressive, while the use-side impacts are consistently regressive. The progressive source-side
impacts tend to offset fully the regressive use-side impacts, so the overall impacts are either
slightly progressive or close to proportional. Under central case assumptions, the lowest income
quintile enjoys a positive source-side impact sufficient to enable the household to experience a
positive overall welfare impact from the climate change policy.5 We also find that both the
source- and use-side impacts are considerably larger once one takes into account the more
comprehensive measures that we employ in this study. Inflation-indexed transfers avoid what
otherwise would be significantly regressive overall impacts of climate policy by providing
additional nominal transfers to compensate for higher overall consumer prices from climate
change policy.
         The efficiency sacrifices required to avoid adverse welfare impacts depend critically on
the method of recycling and the particular households targeted. Efficiency costs are about an
order of magnitude higher when remaining revenues are to be used for corporate income tax cuts
than when the remaining revenues are used in other ways. These costs are also an order of
magnitude higher under the more ambitious hybrid policy of avoiding an adverse impact on the
lowest three quintiles, a reflection of the much higher level of rebates required under this policy.
         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an analytical model of
household behavior and utility that shows the channels through which a carbon tax yields the
source- and use-side utility impacts. The next two sections focus on the numerical model’s
structure (Section 3) and data and parameters (Section 4). Sections 5–9 present and evaluate the


5
 This is not to suggest that all households in the lowest quintile would experience a welfare gain. Given the
heterogeneity of expenditure patterns and income sources within a quintile, the welfare impacts within a quintile will
vary.

                                                          3
numerical model’s results for the carbon tax’s impacts. Section 5 provides the economic
outcomes in our reference (no-policy-change) case. Section 6 describes the carbon tax’s
aggregate impacts on emissions, prices and output. Section 7 then examines and interprets the
distribution of impacts across household groups. Sections 8 evaluates the efficiency costs of
achieving certain distributional objectives, while Section 9 focuses on the importance of
government transfers to the distributional results. Section 10 offers conclusions.




2. Identifying and Measuring the Welfare Impacts

        Here we derive analytical expressions for the source- and use-side impacts of a carbon
tax (or other policy change) on a household that maximizes utility over an infinite horizon. We
show that these two impacts combine to produce the total impact on utility.


2.1. The Utility-Maximization Problem


        Consider the following dynamic (infinite-horizon) utility-maximization problem. A
household receives an initial nonhuman wealth endowment W0 and an annual labor endowment

lt , and chooses “full consumption” Ct to maximize its lifetime utility, taking the price of
consumption and the returns to nonhuman and human wealth as given. Utility is given by
                                              
                                       U   t U (Ct ) .                                (1)
                                             t 0

Nonhuman wealth evolves according to

                                 Wt1  Wt  wt lt  rtWt  Pt Ct .                      (2)

The left-hand side is the change in nonhuman wealth over two successive periods. This change is

equal to after-tax wage income plus capital income minus the value of full consumption. In the

above expression, Pt is the price of full consumption, wt is the (after-tax) wage, and rt is the

(after-tax) return on capital.

        The intertemporal budget constraint is

                                                     4
                                                                         

                                      P C  d  W   w l  d
                                             t    t     t         0                t t   t               (3)
                                     t0                              t0

where
                                                             t                1

                                                 dt   1 ru  .                                       (4)
                                                            u0

The transversality condition,

                                                      lim Wt1dt  0 ,                                   (5)
                                                      t


is imposed to rule out eternal speculative bubbles. Equation (3) states that the present value of

full consumption must not exceed the sum of financial and human wealth, where the latter is the

present value of the time endowment.6

           Full consumption at any point in time is a nested composite of current consumption of
goods and services, Ct , and current consumption of leisure, ℓ t :

                                                  Ct  C(Ct , ℓ t ) .                                   (6)
Total expenditure is the value of full consumption and is equal to expenditure on consumer
goods and services plus the value of leisure:Pt Ct  pt Ct  wt ℓ t , where pt is the price of a unit of
consumption of goods and services, and leisure is valued at the opportunity cost of time not spent
working.7
                       U C           U C
           Let U C          and U ℓ        . The first-order conditions for the utility-
                       C C          C ℓ
maximization problem are

                                            L
                                               : U C (Ct , ℓ t )  t pt                                 (7)
                                            C
                                            t
                                            L
                                                  : U ℓ (Ct , ℓ t )  t wt                              (8)
                                            ℓ t




6
    We assume the intertemporal budget constraint is binding.
7
    In the numerical model, the consumption good Ct is a composite of 24 consumer goods, and the price pt is the
ideal price index based on the prices of the 24 different after-tax (or subsidy) consumer good prices.

                                                                      5
                                          L
                                               : t   (1 rt1 )t1                                  (9)
                                         Wt1
where t is the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint. Equation (9) represents the
intertemporal Euler condition. The expenditure functions that satisfy the first-order conditions
can be written as
                                               Ct  c( pt , wt , t )                                  (10)

                                              ℓ t  ℓ ( pt , wt , t )
                                                                        .                              (11)


2.2. Measuring the Welfare Impacts


         As indicated above, a carbon tax affects utility by changing returns to factors and the
prices of goods and services purchased. We measure the welfare impact of these changes in
prices using the equivalent variation, the change in wealth under reference case (status quo)
conditions that would have the same impact on utility as that of the policy change (Mas-Colell et
al. 1995). In our intertemporal context, the equivalent variation can be expressed as the
difference in expenditure across two intertemporal scenarios. The first, the reference case
scenario, is defined by the vectors pt (ref ) , wt (ref ) , and rt (ref), which represent the time

profiles of the prices of consumption, wages, and returns to capital, respectively, in the absence
of a change in policy. The second, the policy case scenario, is defined by the vectors pt (pol),

wt (pol) , and rt (pol) , which are the time profiles of the prices of consumption, wages, and
returns to capital under the policy change.
       As indicated in equations (10) and (11), the optimal values of Ct and ℓ t in the reference
and policy cases are functions of pt , wt , and t , where t follows the optimal trajectory given
by the Euler condition (9). Thus Ct (ref )  ℓ ( pt (ref ), wt (ref ), t (ref )) ,
                                 

ℓ t (ref )  ℓ ( pt (ref ), wt (ref ), t (ref )) Ct (pol)  c( pt (pol), wt (pol), t (pol))
                                                  ,                                            , and

 ℓ (pol)  ℓ ( pt (pol), wt (pol), t (pol)) .
t
         Let U s (pol) denote intertemporal utility over the interval from period 0 to S in the policy
case. U s (pol) is given by



                                                                6
                                                         S

                          U S (pol)   t U  Ct (pol), ℓ t (pol)  .               (12)
                                     t0

The overall welfare impact of a policy change, as measured by the equivalent variation, is the
difference in expenditure between the reference case and policy case optimal paths. To calculate
the equivalent variation for a given household, we generate new paths for Ct and ℓ t using
reference case prices and an altered time profile for t , subject to the condition that intertemporal
utility to that household (reflecting the adjustment to its wealth) match its utility under the
carbon tax policy. Let tev represent the value of t along the path that yields, with reference
case prices, the policy case utility. Consumption and leisure along this altered path are given by
C t ( tev )  c ( pt (ref), wt (ref), tev ) and ℓ t ( tev )  ℓ ( pt (ref), wt (ref), tev ) .
                                                   
          Let EXS, ref and EX S, ev          represent the levels of expenditure over time in the reference case

and in the case generated by the altered time path for t that yields policy case utility,
respectively. The equivalent variation EVS is

                                                     EVS  EXS, ev  EXS, ref                            (13)

where
                                                 S
                                EXS, ref    pt (ref)Ct (ref)  wt (ref)ℓ t (ref)  dt               (14)
                                          t0

and
                                             S
                     EX S, ev    pt (ref)Ct (tev )  wt (ref)ℓ t (tev )  dt ,                    (15)
                               t0

respectively, and where
                                                                                  t                 1

                         dt  (1 r0 (ref ))dt (ref )  (1 r0 (ref )) 1 ru (ref )  .              (16)
                                                                                 u0




2.3. Decomposing the Welfare Impact into Source- and Use-Side Effects


          We can decompose the overall welfare impact into its use- and source-side components
as follows. Let EX S, pol denote total expenditures by the household in the policy case. EX S, pol is

expressed by


                                                                       7
                                        S
                     EX S, pol    pt (pol)Ct (pol) wt (pol)ℓ t (pol)  dt .      (17)
                                t0

where pt and wt are policy case prices.8 Applying the definition of the equivalent variation, we

can rewrite expression (13) as

                          EX S , ev                              EX                               
                  EVS                EX       EX            S , ev EX            EX             (18)
                          EX S , pol  S , pol      S , ref 
                                                                 EX S , pol
                                                                              S , ref      S , ref
                                                                                                   
Presently, we will show that the first and second terms on the right-hand side of (18) are the
source- and use-side impacts, respectively. We denote these as SSS and USS .
        The source-side impact is the change in welfare that results from changes in the value of
the endowments of time and capital. In equation (18), the source-side impact is

                                                  EX S , ev
                                      SS S                   EX       EX S , ref  .                (19)
                                                  EX S , pol  S , pol

This is the change in the present value of expenditures multiplied by the fraction EX S , ev /EX S , pol

.9 From the household’s intertemporal budget constraint (equation 3), the present value of
expenditures is also equal to the present value of the returns to labor and capital:
                                              S
                                 EX S    wt lt (1 rt )Wt Wt1  dt .                            (20)
                                             t0

This implies that the change in the present value of expenditures in expression (19) is equal to
the changes in returns to labor and capital, respectively. Therefore, we can write the source-side
impact as

                                                       EX S , ev
                                            SS S                    SS SL SS SK                     (21)
                                                       EX S , pol                 

where the labor and capital source-side components are
                                                  S
                                  SSSL    wt (pol)  wt (ref) lt  dt                            (22)
                                               t0

and


8
  The reference case discount factor is used to avoid confounding differences in expenditures by period with changes
in the interest rate.
9
  Scaling the source-side impact by the change in the price of full consumption ensures that the source and use-side
impacts add up to the full welfare impact.

                                                                       8
                               S
                   SS SK    rt (pol)  rt (ref )  Wt (pol)  dt  WS 1 (pol)  WS 1 (ref )  d S ,      (23)
                             t 0

respectively. The labor source-side impact captures changes in the value of the time endowment
(human wealth) caused by changes in the after-tax wage. The capital source-side impact captures
changes in the return to financial wealth and the change in wealth in the terminal period.10

            The use-side impact is the change in welfare stemming from changes in the prices of
consumption and leisure, holding total nominal expenditures fixed. Using the definition of full
consumption, Pt Ct  pt Ct  wt ℓ t , we can express the use-side impact as

                                                            C ( tev )Pt (ref)dt 
                                                                s
                    EX S , ev
            US S               EX S , ref  EX S , ref    s t
                                                               t0                   EX          EX S , ref .   (24)
                                                            C (pol)Pt (pol)dt 
                                                                                         S , ref
                    EX S , pol
                                                              t0 t                
The expression to the right of the second equal sign indicates that the use-side effect reflects the
ratio of the discounted weighted sum of reference case prices to the discounted weighted sum of
policy case prices, where the weights are the utility-equivalent path of full consumption
( Ct (tev ) ) and the policy-change path of full consumption ( Ct (pol) ), respectively.11
            As the utility-maximization problem presented in Section 2.1 is for an infinitely lived
household, the full measure of welfare applies when S   .12 However, it is also useful to
consider the welfare impacts measured over finite intervals. In the numerical analysis below, we
assess the source- and use-side impacts over various finite horizons as well as over the infinite
horizon.




10
     It follows from manipulation of the budget constraint that
                      S

            SSS    (1  rt (pol))Wt (pol)  Wt 1 (pol)    (1  rt (ref ))Wt (ref )  Wt 1 (ref )  dt
               K


                     t 0

                       S

                      rt (pol)  rt (ref )  Wt (pol)  dt WS 1 (pol)  WS 1 ( ref )  d S
                      t 0
11
  In a static model, the utility-equivalent and policy-change levels of consumption would be equal (to ensure
equivalent utility), and the expression would reduce to Pt (ref) EX  EX . In the intertemporal model, price
                                                         Pt (pol)
                                                                   S,ref    S,ref


levels are more important to the use-side impact in periods in which households consume relatively more of the full
consumption good.
                                                                      
12
     Because of the transversality condition, SSK    rt (pol)  rt (ref)Wt (pol)  dt , and the infinite-horizon capital
                                                                                      
                                                                      t0
source-side impact captures only changes in the return to capital.

                                                                                 9
           The analysis above considers only time and capital endowments. In the numerical
analysis below, the endowments also include government transfers and (in some cases) lump-
sum rebates of some or all of the revenues from a carbon tax. These additional endowments
would enter the above analysis in the same way that the expression for the source-side impact
accounts for the time and capital endowments.




3. The Numerical Approach


           We employ a numerical model to solve, for a representative household in each of five
household income groups, the utility-maximization problem introduced in Section 2. The carbon
tax alters consumer prices and the returns to factor endowments. Because households have
different expenditure patterns and factor endowments, the use- and source-side impacts from
changes in prices and factor returns will vary across households. To generate the paths of
consumer prices and factor returns over time in the reference case and under various carbon tax
policies, we use the Goulder-Hafstead Environment-Energy-Economy (E3) model, a detailed
general equilibrium model of the US economy. This model solves for market-clearing prices of
goods and factors in each period, employing a framework with a single representative household.
These general equilibrium prices are inputs into our disaggregated household (DH) model.
Below, we offer brief descriptions of the E3 and DH models. Section 4 describes the data inputs
for the models and the procedures employed to achieve a consistent linkage of the models.


3.1. The E3 Model


           The E3 model, briefly described here,13 comprises 35 distinct industries, a single
representative household, and a single representative government for the US economy. It
captures the interactions among these agents and solves for market-clearing prices in each
period. Each agent has perfect foresight. The model is solved at annual intervals, beginning in
the benchmark year, 2013.



13
     A complete description is in Goulder and Hafstead (2017).

                                                          10
       Two features of the E3 model are especially relevant for this study’s evaluation of the
impacts across households. First, it contains a detailed treatment of the US tax system. This
allows us to measure how price and factor returns vary with how carbon tax revenue is recycled
to households, and this in turn enables us to measure, with the DH model, how the welfare
impacts across households vary with the form of revenue recycling. Second, the E3 model
recognizes the adjustment costs associated with installing (or removing) physical capital.
Adjustment costs affect the distribution of policy impacts in two ways. They imply windfall
gains to quasi-immobile capital, yielding impacts on capital incomes that differ across
households according to differences in capital ownership. They also influence the rate at which
capital stocks will adjust through time. This affects the speed at which the distributional impacts
change with time.


3.1.1. Producers and Carbon Dioxide Emissions


       The 35 industry categories identify the industries that supply carbon-based fuels and
those that use these fuels intensively. The carbon-based primary fuels in the model are crude oil,
natural gas, and coal. Producers sell these fuels to secondary energy producers, which in the
model include electricity generators, natural gas distributors, and petroleum refiners. Electricity,
natural gas, and petroleum products are then sold to other industries, the representative
household, and the representative government. The production functions have the constant-
elasticity-of-substitution (CES) functional form. Table 1 displays the E3 industries, their
benchmark output levels, the value share of energy as an input into each industry’s production,
and the carbon intensity of each good.
       In each industry, a representative firm combines variable inputs (labor, energy, and
material inputs) and capital to produce its distinct output. Firms choose variable inputs to
minimize unit costs and determine investment levels (subject to capital adjustment costs) to
maximize the value of the firm.
       The outputs from the 35 industries are used as intermediate inputs in the production of
consumer goods. The input intensities of the producer goods used to create any given consumer
good are fixed. Table 2 displays, for each consumer good, the benchmark expenditures on that
good, the expenditure as a percentage of total consumption, and the carbon intensity. The carbon
tax’s impact on a consumer good’s price depends significantly on the direct and indirect carbon

                                                 11
intensity of the good. As indicated in the table, electricity, natural gas, motor vehicle fuels, and
heating oil are the most carbon-intensive goods.
        Technological progress takes the form of labor-augmenting Harrod-neutral technological
change. Thus effective hours worked are actual hours worked adjusted for annual productivity
gains. We assume that all industries enjoy the same rate of labor productivity growth.
        In the E3 model, the carbon tax is imposed as a tax on coal, crude oil, and natural gas
inputs into production, where the tax is in proportion to the carbon content of each fuel. The
representative household does not directly pay the carbon tax but generally faces higher prices on
carbon-intensive goods as a result of the tax. The model calculates emissions by applying carbon
dioxide coefficients to the quantities of the fossil fuels purchased. This yields a close estimate of
the ultimate CO2 emissions associated with fossil fuel demand,14 even though some emissions
occur when refined fuels are combusted downstream.


3.1.2. Representative Household


        In both the E3 and DH models, the structure of the household utility maximization
matches the structure described in Section 2. This structure allows climate policy to affect
behavior along several important dimensions: labor-leisure choice, the choice between current
and future consumption, and the allocation of expenditures across various goods and services at
each point in time.
        The two models also employ the same functional forms for all components of the nest.
Figure 1 displays the nested consumption structure that applies to both models. At the lowest
nest, the representative household uses a CES function to aggregate domestically and foreign
supplied goods from producers. At the next level of the nest, a Leontief aggregation function is
used to add transportation and trade costs (provided by domestic transportation and trade
industries) to the final cost of the consumption good. At the top level of the nest, an aggregation
function combines the consumption of each good into the composite consumption good.


3.1.3. Representative Government



14
  Carbon content of fossil fuels accounts for ultimate CO2 emissions, except for noncombustible uses of these fuels.
In the United States, noncombustible uses currently account for less than 6 percent of fossil fuel use.

                                                        12
         The government represents a combination of federal, state, and local governments in the
United States. Government purchases of goods and services (including fixed investment
expenditures), labor, and household transfers are financed through tax revenue and new debt
issue. The government uses labor, capital, and intermediate goods to produce government
services. In each policy experiment, real government spending in any given period is maintained
at the same level as in the reference case. In most simulations,15 we assume that government
transfers are indexed so that they are maintained at reference case levels in real terms. Under a
carbon tax policy involving lump-sum rebates, the rebates represent another government outlay.
         Tax revenues are collected from households (personal income taxes and sales taxes) and
firms (corporate income taxes, payroll taxes, and carbon taxes). All policies considered are
revenue-neutral in the sense that the present value of revenues (net of tax-base impacts) must
equal the present value of revenues returned to the private sector either through cuts in the
marginal rates of existing taxes or through lump-sum rebates.16


3.2. The Disaggregated Household Model


         The general structure of the household problem for both the E3 and DH models was
described in Section 2. Here we indicate the functional forms and associated first-order
conditions. We assume constant elasticity of substitution form to represent substitutability of
consumption across time. With this functional form, equation (1) translates to
                                                
                                                       1
                                        U0    t        (C q )1                                       (25)
                                               t0    1  t
where q indicates the household (or quintile),  is the discount factor, and 1 /  is the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution. These parameters are assumed to be equal across
households and match the values for the E3 household. Using a CES functional form, full
consumption is




15
   In the E3 model, we set nominal transfers at levels that imply reference case real transfers, where the translation
from nominal to real values is based on the consumer price index. To assess the distributional implications of
transfer indexing, we compare our central case involving fixed real transfers with a counterfactual case in the DH
model in which transfers to each quintile are fixed in nominal terms.
16
   In individual years, the net revenues might slightly exceed or fall short of the revenues returned; such
discrepancies are offset through lump-sum adjustments to taxes. In present value, these adjustments sum to zero.

                                                          13
                                                                                         q
                                                q 1                1                
                                                                                  q 1  q 1

                             Ctq  (Ct )     q q
                                                          ( ℓq ) (ℓ t )     q q
                                                                                                       (26)
                                                                      q


                                                                                     
                             
where  q is the elasticity of substitution between goods and leisure, and  ℓq is the leisure
                                                                           
intensity parameter. These parameters are calibrated to match data on consumption and leisure
across households and generally vary across households. In general, they also differ from the
values for the representative household in E3. (See Section 4 for further discussion.)
        The first-order conditions for each household are
                                                                       1 q

                     Lq            q 1               1                
                                                                 q 1 ( q 1)               1

                        : (Ct )  q q
                                              ( ) (ℓ t )
                                                   q q
                                                   ℓ
                                                              q q
                                                                                    (C )  tq ptq
                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                        (27)
                    Ctq 
                                                                                            t
                                                                         
                   
                                                                  1 q

                 L                                             
                   q            q 1             1         q 1 ( q 1)             1           1

                       : (Ct )
                             q q
                                         ( ) (ℓ t )
                                              q q
                                              ℓ
                                                         q q
                                                                               ( ) (ℓ )  tq wt
                                                                                    q q
                                                                                    ℓ
                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                                        (28)
                 ℓ qt 
                                                                                                 t
                                                                
                
                                         Lq
                                              : tq   (1 rt1 )t1
                                                                   q
                                                                                                        (29)
                                        Wt1
                                           q



These first-order conditions determine each household’s allocation of expenditure between the
consumption composite and leisure, given w and the composite price p . The price p , in turn,
depends on the composition of the bundle of consumer goods that make it up. Because
consumption bundles differ, the unit price for the consumption of goods and services generally
differs across households.
        In the numerical models, households have Cobb-Douglas preferences over consumption

goods and services with constant expenditure share parameters  j . The price of the aggregate
                                                                C, q




consumption good for each household is given by


                                                                                                        (30)

where      denotes the price of consumer good or service j at time t, as determined by the E3

model, inclusive of any commodity taxes and net of any subsidies. All households face the same
after-tax or subsidy prices. However, the five representative households in the DH model have




                                                                14
different expenditure shares  j ; hence the composite price ptq in the first-order equations
                               C, q




differs across households.
        In the numerical models, the budget constraint expands on the simple budget constraint
presented in the analytical model of Section 2. There, households received endowments only of
time and capital. In the DH and E3 models, we also include endowments of transfer income (held
fixed in real terms across policies), a lump-sum component of taxes, and (in some policy cases)
lump-sum rebates. The augmented equation of motion for household wealth is
                  W q Wtq  wt lt q  rtWtq  Gtq  LStq Ttq  ptqCtq  wt ℓ qt  (31)
                   t1
where G , LS , and T refer to nominal levels of government transfer income, lump-sum rebates
(if any), and lump-sum taxes, respectively.
        The returns on labor and capital, wt and rt , are from the E3 model. We specify them as
the same across households in both the reference and policy cases.17 Total transfers from the E3
model are allocated across the five representative households according to their shares in data
described below from the Survey of Consumer Finances. This applies in both the reference and
policy cases. Consequently, under a carbon tax policy, the percentage change in household
transfer income is the same across households. In most policy scenarios, we specify equal
allocations of lump-sum transfers across households, but in Section 8, we consider policies
involving differing allocations designed to achieve certain distributional objectives.
        The cuts in marginal tax rates or the total lump-sum rebates needed for revenue neutrality
are determined in the E3 model. We apply the same marginal tax cuts in percentage terms to
each of the separate household groups in the DH model. To the extent that lump-sum rebates
apply, each household receives an equal share of the overall rebate from E3 in each period.
        Because households in the DH model respond to policy changes, their tax payments are
endogenous. To check on the consistency between the DH and E3 models, we aggregate these
tax payments and compare them with the payments from E3. We find that these payments nearly
perfectly aggregate to the levels from E3, never differing by more than 0.9 percent. This close
correspondence reflects the consistent aggregation in the initial allocation of endowments,
income sources, and expenditures in the DH model. The next section describes the relevant
procedures.

17
  We assume that Harrod-neutral (labor-augmenting) technological progress applies uniformly across all household
groups. Hence the relative returns to labor across households do not change over time.

                                                       15
4. Data and Parameters


4.1. Data Sources


          Here we briefly describe the data sources and the ways we organize the data to obtain the
complete dataset. We also describe the steps we make to achieve consistency between the E3 and
DH models. Details are provided in the appendix.
          For the DH model, we obtain data on before-tax income from the 2013 Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF). The SCF data indicate before-tax household income by source (labor,
capital, and transfer income) for a representative sample of 6,015 households. The appendix
offers details on the elements of each source of income.
          We obtain household after-tax incomes by applying tax information from the National
Bureau of Economic Research’s TAXSIM model (Feenberg and Coutts 1993) to the SCF before-
tax data.18 The TAXSIM data do not break down tax liabilities by income source. To provide this
breakdown, we calculate for each household the share of before-tax income from each source
and multiply each share by the total tax liability.
          We obtain household expenditures on each consumer good using the 2013 Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) microdata collected by the US Department of Labor’s Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS). The CEX provides data on expenditures, income, and demographic
characteristics of representative consumers in the United States.
          These data are collected through two surveys: the Interview Survey and Diary Survey.
The Interview Survey focuses on large consumer goods, such as spending on housing, vehicles,
and health care. The Diary Survey collects data on weekly expenditures of different households
that are followed for only two weeks. To account for a complete listing of expenditures for each
household, we combine data from the two surveys. The appendix describes our procedure in
detail.




 The SCF does not provide state of residence. We randomly assign each household to a state based on population
18

weights to determine state tax liabilities.

                                                      16
           We combine the SCF income data and CEX expenditure data in a way that ensures that
for each quintile, household expenditure is consistent with income and saving. As described in
the appendix, this involves matching expenditure data from the CEX to each SCF household and
using CEX data to calculate household saving for each household quintile.
           When defining quintiles, we rank households both by expenditure and by income. In this
study, we focus on results by expenditure quintiles, but we also display (in Section 7) some
results when quintiles are defined in terms of income.
           Table 3 shows the average after-tax income by source by quintile, and Table 4 shows the
average expenditure shares by good by quintile, when quintiles are defined in terms of their total
expenditure.


4.2. Achieving Consistency in Aggregation


           We adjust the data so that the benchmark outcome of the DH model, when aggregated
across households, matches the outcome of the more aggregated E3 model. Specifically, we
impose the requirement that aggregate after-tax income (by source), consumption (by good), and
savings match across models in the benchmark dataset. Using the merged SCF-CEX dataset, we
calculate quintile shares of income source, consumption good, and savings. For each quintile in
the DH model, the level of after-tax income, consumption, and savings is equal to the quintile
share times the E3 level of after-tax income, consumption, and savings.


4.3. Parameters


           Here we briefly describe the household utility parameters for the E3 and DH models.19 In
the E3 model, the discount factor  is calibrated to be consistent with a long-run interest rate of
4 percent. We use a value of 2 for , which implies an intertemporal elasticity of substitution in
consumption ( 1 /  ) of 0.5, a value between time-series estimates (Hall 1988) and cross-sectional
studies (Lawrence 1991). We apply the same values to the DH households.
           In the E3 model, the compensated elasticity of labor supply and the nonlabor income
elasticity are functions of the consumption-leisure ratio, the price of consumption–after tax wage

19
     Details are provided in Goulder and Hafstead (2017).

                                                            17
ratio, the elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure,             , and the fraction of time
spent working. Conditional on our data for prices, consumption, and labor supply, we set the
values of the elasticity of substitution and between consumption and leisure and the fraction of
time spent working to 0.773 and 0.66, respectively, so the compensated elasticity of labor supply
is 0.3 and the nonlabor income elasticity is 0.25.20 In the DH model, we assume each household
spends the same fraction of time working. Given the differences in consumption-leisure ratios,
we recalibrate the elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure for each quintile,
 q , so that each household has the same compensated elasticity of labor supply and nonlabor
income elasticity as in the E3 model. Expenditure shares  j are derived from our SCF-CEX
                                                           C, q




household data set.




5. The Reference Case Path and Carbon Tax


5.1. The Reference Case


        With the data described in the previous section, the E3 model would generate a balanced
growth path. In particular, the ratio of CO2 emissions to GDP would be constant along that path.
However, such an outcome would not be consistent with the business-as-usual projections from a
range of leading private and government studies. To generate a more plausible reference
(business-as-usual) time profile of emissions, we introduce some changes to the model structure
and key parameters. This causes the model to generate a reference case path that approximates
the business-as-usual forecast offered by the Energy Information Administration’s Annual
Energy Outlook 2016 (AEO; EIA 2016). We focus on matching AEO 2016 forecasts for
economic growth, fossil fuel prices, electric generation shares, and total emissions.21


5.2. Carbon Tax Design

20
   The compensated elasticity if labor supply is at the high end of estimates for married men and single women (0.1–
0.3) and in the middle range of estimates for married women (0.2–0.4). McClelland and Mok (2012) provide a
review of recent labor supply estimates.
21
   See Goulder and Hafstead (2017) for a complete description of the reference case calibration procedure. Chen et
al. (2018) describe the sensitivity of future emissions to alternative baseline forecasts.

                                                        18
         We consider a tax with the following features:22


         Time Profile: The tax starts at $40 per metric ton in 2013$ in 2020 after a three-year
         phase-in. In 2018 and 2019, the tax is $13.33 and $26.67, respectively. After 2020, the
         tax increases in real terms at a rate of 2 percent annually. The tax is held constant in real
         terms after 2050. Figure 2 displays the time profile of the carbon tax.

         Coverage: The tax covers all direct purchases of primary fossil fuels and imports of
         refined products such as gasoline, diesel, and heating oil. This specification covers 99.9
         percent of all domestic emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels.23

         Point of Regulation: The tax is imposed midstream—that is, at the industrial user’s gate
         and the port of entry for imports of refined products. It is based on the carbon content of
         the fuel purchased, and it covers emissions from both industrial combustion of the
         product and combustion of any downstream products. Relative to the case where the
         points of regulation are upstream (at the wellhead or minemouth), midstream
         implementation allows for alternative specifications of the sectoral coverage of the
         policy.

         Revenue Recycling: We consider four revenue-neutral uses of carbon revenue: (1) lump-
         sum rebates, (2) payroll tax cuts, (3) personal income tax cuts, and (4) corporate income
         tax cuts. The revenue returned to the private sector is equal to the net revenue yield of the
         carbon tax, where the latter is the gross carbon tax revenue adjusted for any revenue
         impacts of policy-induced changes in the tax base of other taxes.24 Such recycling leaves
         unchanged the revenue available to finance government expenditures.




6. Aggregate Impacts of the Carbon Tax


         Here we focus on aggregate (economy-wide) impacts, displaying and interpreting the
carbon tax’s impacts on emissions, prices, factor returns, GDP, and (according to the equivalent
variation) welfare. We consider the impacts across several recycling options.




22
   The price path we apply has some similarities to the one in the proposed Whitehouse-Schatz American
Opportunity Carbon Fee Act, which calls for a price starting at $49 (in 2018$) in 2018 and rising at 2 percent above
inflation.
23
   The model does not rebate taxes paid on crude oil that is ultimately exported in the form of refined products.
24
   By affecting incomes, the carbon tax influences the tax base of income and payroll taxes. It can also indirectly
alter revenues from sales and other commodity taxes to the extent that it affects patterns of consumer spending.

                                                         19
           Figure 3 displays the CO2 emissions in the reference case and under the carbon tax when
revenues are recycled through lump-sum tax cuts.25 The carbon tax reduces emissions by 17 and
30 percent in 2020 and 2035, respectively. Over the interval 2017–50, 64–68 percent of annual
reductions are due to reductions in emissions from the power sector, reflecting electric utilities’
substitution away from coal-fired generation and toward natural gas generation and non-fossil-
based generation.
           Tables 5–7 indicate the carbon tax’s impacts on prices of inputs, consumer goods, and
returns to factors. Table 5 shows the percentage change in producer good prices relative to the
reference case, for years 2020, 2035, and 2050. As expected, the price impacts are largest in the
industries with the greatest carbon intensities (coal-fired and other fossil electricity generation,
petroleum refining, and electricity transmission and distribution). The reduction in the prices of
coal and natural gas reflect the backward shifting of the burden of the carbon tax, which is
imposed on the purchasers of these fuels (e.g., coal-fired electricity generators and natural gas
distributors). This reduces the demands for coal and natural gas, which results in a decrease in
the producer prices of coal and natural gas in those two extractive industries. The higher relative
prices of carbon-intensive inputs motivate producers to substitute away from these inputs, and
such substitution represents a channel through which emissions reductions are achieved.
           Tables 6 and 7 show the percentage changes in consumer good prices and in returns to
factors that result from the carbon tax. A household that relies disproportionately on consumer
goods with relatively large percentage increases in prices will experience a larger adverse use-
side impact than other households. Similarly, a household that relies disproportionately on a
source of income with a relatively large increase in that factor’s return will experience a larger
positive source-side impact.
           The differing percentage changes in these tables underlie differences across households
in their use- and source-side impacts. To the extent that households differ in their reliance on the
goods and services or sources of income whose prices have changed by different amounts, the
household impacts will differ. It should be noted that the choice of numeraire good, by affecting
the absolute changes in prices, also affects the calculated percentage changes. However, the
choice of numeraire does not affect the rankings of the percentage changes across goods or
across factor returns. Thus, while the percentage changes shown in Tables 6 and 7 stem from a


25
     Emissions reductions are similar under the other forms of recycling.

                                                           20
particular numeraire choice,26 the tables convey which goods and factor returns have the largest
relative price changes irrespective of this choice. Hence they indicate the distributional
implications of differences across households in expenditure shares or in sources of income.
         As indicated in Table 6, the carbon tax causes the largest relative price increases for
motor vehicle fuels, fuel oils, electricity, and natural gas. This is in keeping with the high carbon
intensities of those goods and services shown in Table 2. Thus the adverse use-side impacts will
be disproportionately large for households with higher expenditure shares for these goods. We
address the expenditure-share differences in our assessment of distributional impacts in the next
section.
         Table 7 shows the carbon tax’s impact on the after-tax returns to labor, capital, and
transfer endowments—the impacts that underlie the source-side effects.27 The table displays the
change in these returns across the four recycling options, for years 2020, 2035, and 2050. Three
key results emerge from the table. First, in the shorter term (up to 2020), the return to capital
falls relative to the return to labor under every form of recycling except corporate tax recycling.
Capital goods are relatively carbon-intensive in their production. As a result, much of the burden
of a carbon tax falls on capital. The decline in capital’s return relative to labor’s is greatest when
recycling is via lump-sum rebates. In that case, recycling does not involve any reduction in rates
on individual or corporate capital income. In contrast, the return to capital rises relative to the
return to labor under corporate tax recycling, reflecting the focused reduction in corporate
income tax rates in this case.
         Second, over the longer term, the adverse impact on the return to capital tends to
diminish. This is in keeping with the adverse impact of the carbon tax on investment. In the
longer term, the lower capital intensity of the economy implies higher returns to capital.
         Third, in all cases, the carbon tax implies higher nominal transfers. Our simulations
assume that transfers are indexed to the consumer price index (CPI). Hence the carbon tax
prompts changes in nominal transfers in proportion to the policy-induced change in the CPI.
Generally, the carbon tax raises the CPI, and thus the carbon tax implies an increase in nominal
transfers. As we will see in the next section, this positive source-side impact is especially


26
   We employ the consumer good “financial services and insurance” as the numeraire good. We offer our rationale
for this choice in Section 7.1.
27
   All figures in the table are in nominal terms. Nominal returns apply here because the use-side effects capture the
impacts associated with the loss of purchasing power from the changed prices of goods purchased.

                                                          21
important for low-income households, for whom transfers represent an especially large share of
income. Previous studies have pointed out that changes in nominal transfers can significantly
influence the source-side impacts of a carbon tax.28 In the next section, we consider the
implications of transfer indexing by comparing our central case outcomes with the results from a
counterfactual simulation in which transfers are fixed in nominal terms.
        Table 8 shows the GDP and aggregate welfare impacts of the carbon tax in the E3 model
under the four forms of recycling. In the model, the corporate income tax is more distortionary
than the individual income tax and payroll tax; that is, it has the highest marginal excess burden.
Accordingly, recycling through cuts in corporate income tax rates offers the largest benefit, and
thus both the GDP costs and the aggregate welfare costs are lowest in this case. The GDP and
welfare costs are highest under lump-sum recycling. This form of recycling does not involve any
cuts in marginal rates and thus does not reap the potential efficiency gains from rate reductions.




7. Distributional Impacts in the Absence of Targeted Compensation


        Here we examine the impacts across the five representative household groups. As
mentioned in Section 4, the households are grouped and ranked by total expenditure.29 When
aggregated, the results from the DH model conform to the more aggregated outcomes of the E3
model.30


7.1. Use- and Source-Side Impacts

        As indicated in Section 2, in this analysis the overall welfare impacts applying to each
household group are expressed as the equivalent variation relative to the household’s reference
case wealth. This measure of the welfare impact is a ratio whose value is independent of the
choice of numeraire. However, the division of the overall welfare impact between the source-


28
   See, for example, Fullerton et al. (2011) and Cronin et al. (2017).
29
   Expenditure more closely correlates with lifetime income than with income from a single year.
30
   The reference case and policy case outcomes from the DH model do not perfectly aggregate to those in the single-
household E3 model, but the differences are very small, in keeping with the perfect aggregation that we impose on
the benchmark data. Under all recycling options, the difference between the sum of the equivalent variation welfare
impacts summed across quintiles and the equivalent variation for the E3 model’s representative consumer is never
above 3 percent.

                                                        22
and use-side components does depend on the particular numeraire employed.31 We selected a
numeraire under which the carbon tax increases the price of a consumer good according to the
increase in cost associated with the direct and indirect carbon intensity of that good. Consistent
with this goal, we sought as numeraire a good with an exceptionally low direct and indirect
carbon intensity—thus a good whose price is likely to be relatively unaffected by the carbon tax.
With such a good as numeraire, the changes in prices of other goods can be attributed to their
higher direct and indirect carbon intensities, and hence to the carbon tax itself. Based on these
considerations, we chose the good in the category “financial services and insurance” as the
numeraire good. Table 2 indicates that this good has the lowest carbon intensity of all the
consumer goods distinguished in the E3 and DH models.32


7.1.1. Use-Side Impacts


         We gauge the use-side welfare impacts two ways: either at specified moments (periods)
of time or over given intervals of time.
         Figure 4 displays single-period use-side impacts by quintile and under the four recycling
options. In the recycling cases involving tax cuts, we assume that the rate cuts are the same for
all quintiles. Impacts are shown for the years 2020, 2030, and 2050 and are expressed as a
percentage of reference case wealth.
         The two columns calculate the impacts in two ways. In the left-hand column, the use-side


31
   We are grateful to Gib Metcalf, Don Fullerton, and Rob Williams for pointing this out to us. To see this, imagine
that a very carbon-intensive good were chosen as numeraire. In that case, most goods’ prices would decline when
expressed in terms of that numeraire, suggesting that the carbon tax produced a negative use-side effect. Obtaining a
division between use- and source-side impacts requires careful choice of numeraire. Williams et al. (2015) provide
an insightful discussion of related issues. Rausch et al. (2011) offer an alternative method for examining the
distributional implications of the use- and source-side price changes, an approach in which numeraire choice takes
on less significance because the focus is mainly on the distributional rather than absolute welfare impact of each
effect. Below, we briefly present and evaluate results from the application of this alternative approach.
32
   Instead of choosing a single good, one could consider employing a broad price index as numeraire. But this poses
difficulties because such an index would already incorporate the prices of carbon-intensive goods and thus would be
affected by the carbon tax’s impact on prices. One wants to be able to evaluate price changes relative to the
numeraire, and this is not possible if the numeraire itself already incorporates the price impacts. Using the CPI, for
example, would imply that a carbon tax induced no change in average consumer good prices, which in turn would
imply that the use-side impact is zero and that all the impact is on the source side. Analogous difficulties arise with
the use of producer-good-related indices. A further difficulty is that calculating the index itself requires prior choice
of numeraire: one cannot calculate any price index without already having chosen a numeraire to obtain the values
of the prices on which the index is built.



                                                           23
impact accounts for the policy-induced changes in the prices of goods and services, excluding
the impact on the price of leisure (another “good” that a household can “purchase” by working
less and sacrificing income). The right-hand column offers results from our broader measure, one
that accounts for policy-induced changes in the price of leisure.
         Figure 4 gives rise to four key findings. First, under each of the recycling options, the
use-side impact is regressive: the welfare impact is more negative the lower the expenditure rank
of the quintile. This reflects the fact that lower-quintile households spend a larger share of their
incomes on carbon-intensive goods and services than do higher-quintile households. The
outcome is regressive regardless of whether changes in the price of leisure are ignored (left-hand
column) or considered (right-hand column).33
         Second, for all quintiles, the magnitude of the use-side impact increases with time,
paralleling the increasing size of the carbon tax and the associated increases in the scale of the
price impacts.
         Third, the magnitude of the use-side welfare impact in any given year depends on the
type of recycling. The impacts are smallest when recycling is via cuts in the corporate income
tax. This is in keeping with the fact that the corporate tax induces households to save more and
consume less, which implies smaller increases in consumer good prices.
         Fourth, when recycling takes the form of payroll tax cuts or individual income tax cuts,
the use-side impacts are larger when changes in the price of leisure are accounted for: effects in
the right-hand column are larger than those in the left-hand column. Each of these two forms of
recycling involves cuts in the tax on wages. This raises the after-tax wage, which is also the price
of leisure. Accounting for the increased price of leisure enlarges the use-side effect.
         Figure 5 shows the use-side impacts when measured over time intervals rather than at
points in time, indicating the effects over the intervals 2018–20 and 2018–40, as well as over the
interval of infinite length that begins in 2018. As with our first measure, it provides the dollar
equivalent to the change in utility. And as before, the two columns compare results without and
with consideration of impacts on the price of leisure.34
         The results in Figure 5 parallel those in Figure 4. Again, the results are regressive and

33
   Earlier studies also have tended to obtain regressive use-side impacts, although the earlier studies did not include
attention to the influence of changes in the price of leisure. Nor did they consider how the impacts change over time.
34
   In all present value calculations, we use the reference case nominal interest rate to discount future values back to
the initial period of the policy.


                                                          24
increase with the amount of attention to the longer term. And accounting for the impact on the
price of leisure again expands the adverse welfare impact in the cases of recycling via cuts in the
payroll tax or individual income tax.


7.1.2. Source-Side Impacts


         Now we consider the source-side impacts. These reflect the changes in the values of
sources of income or leisure, measured in nominal terms. Nominal values are appropriate since
the use-side impacts already account for how changes in goods prices affect the real purchasing
power associated with given levels of nominal income or endowment value. Again, we examine
the impacts at given points in time (Figure 6) and over specified intervals of time (Figure 7) and
under the four forms of revenue recycling considered previously. The impacts depend on the
nature of revenue recycling. In Figures 6 and 7, the results for the case of lump-sum rebates are
from policies in which each quintile receives one-fifth of the total rebate provided in each period.
(Later, we consider alternative rebate schemes aimed at achieving certain distributional
objectives.) In the cases involving recycling via cuts in marginal tax rates, the tax rate cuts are in
the same proportion for all households.
         In each figure, the left-hand column shows results based on the narrower, typical
“income-only” measure of the source-side impact, one that considers only the policy’s effects on
after-tax labor income, after-tax capital income, and transfer income. The right-hand column
offers a measure that is broader in that it considers the impact of policy on each household’s
overall endowment of labor—the sum of the value of labor supplied and the value of the
household’s nonlabor (leisure) time. The broader measure can offer a more accurate assessment
of the welfare consequences of changes in labor supply. When a household decides to work less,
its labor income is reduced. A welfare measure that considers only this loss of income would
overstate the welfare loss associated with this change, since the value of the increase in nonwork
(leisure) time compensates to an extent for the reduction in income. Our broader measure
accounts for this offset.35

35
  The broader measure also accounts for the impact of policy on each household’s savings in a given period or
during the time interval of focus. Any increase (decrease) in saving implies greater (lower) potential for future
consumption and utility. Although some of this change in future consumption can occur beyond the period or time
interval of focus, the source of this change is in the period or during the interval of focus; hence it can be attributed
to those points in time. Accounting for the savings impact also has the virtue of enabling the sum of the source- and

                                                           25
         The key messages from Figures 6 and 7 are similar. First, in almost every case, the
source-side impacts are positive, in contrast with the impacts on the use side. One factor behind
the positive welfare impacts is revenue recycling. Each form of recycling contributes to nominal
income: the lump-sum rebates do so directly, while the cuts in the marginal rates of payroll,
individual income, or corporate income taxes do so by increasing the after-tax returns to factors.
Changes in nominal transfers are another key factor behind the positive source-side impacts. As
mentioned, our simulations assume that government transfers are kept constant in real terms.
Because the carbon tax raises overall prices to consumers, nominal transfers must be higher
under the carbon tax than in the reference case to maintain their real value. This is especially
important for low-income households, for which transfers constitute a large share of overall
income.
         Second, the impacts are generally progressive—although there are some exceptions in
some years under corporate income tax recycling.36 The progressive outcome is strongest in the
case of recycling through lump-sum rebates, in keeping with the fact that the rebates (of equal
value for every household) are larger relative to the household’s benchmark expenditure the
lower the quintile (or benchmark expenditure) of the household. Also contributing to the
progressivity is the fact that the carbon tax tends to reduce after-tax returns to capital more than
returns to labor, as indicated in Table 7. Because higher quintiles rely more on capital income
than do lower quintiles, this exerts a progressive impact.
         Third, the source-side impacts are considerably larger when the broader measure is
employed. Recycling through cuts in the payroll tax or the individual income tax reduces labor
taxes and thereby raises the after-tax wage. This not only increases labor income but also raises
the value of leisure. The broader measure captures this latter effect by considering the impact on
the labor time endowment.
         Rausch et al. (2011) offer an alternative approach for identifying the distributional
impacts on the use and source sides. Their approach employs two counterfactual simulations. In
one, all households are specified as having equal expenditure shares across goods. This
simulation helps focus on the source-side distributional impact by indicating what the overall



use-side impacts to perfectly match the overall welfare impact, as measured by the equivalent variation for the
period or interval in question.
36
   In the short term under the income-only measure, the results are close to proportional under payroll tax and
individual income tax recycling.

                                                         26
(use- plus source-side) welfare impact would be if the use-side impact were distributionally
neutral—that is, if all households experienced the same (average) use-side impact. The authors
find that in this case, the overall impact is significantly progressive. We have performed the same
counterfactual with our models and data and also obtain progressive overall impacts under all
forms of recycling.37 In the other counterfactual simulation, Rausch et al. specify all households
as having identical income shares. This helps isolate the distribution of the impacts from the use
side. The welfare impact is negative and regressive in this case. We obtain similar results under
all forms of recycling when we implement this approach in our model. An attraction of this
approach is that the choice of numeraire has little bearing on the results. It is worth noting that in
contrast with the main approach used in this paper, the Rausch et al. approach does not separate
the use- and source-side impacts. Rather, it shows what the combined use- and source-side
impact would be if one of the effects had homogeneous impacts across households.


7.2. Overall Welfare Impacts


        As indicated in Section 2, the full welfare impact, as measured by the equivalent variation
(EV), is exactly equal to the sum of our broader use- and source-side impacts. Figures 8 and 9
display the overall welfare impacts based on these comprehensive measures. Figure 8 shows the
impacts for selected years; Figure 9 shows them over selected intervals of time.
        The figures illustrate that the overall impacts are progressive under recycling via lump-
sum rebates: the very progressive source-side impacts outweigh the regressive impacts on the use
side. The overall impact is most progressive under lump-sum recycling, reflecting the strong
progressive source-side impact of this form of recycling. Under corporate income tax recycling,
the absolute size of the impacts is smaller than under the other recycling methods, and the results
are close to proportional. Recycling via a corporate income tax cut is especially beneficial to
higher-income households on the source side, and as a result the source-side effect is only mildly
progressive. This accounts for the fact that the overall (source- plus use-side) impact is the least
progressive.
        We have offered results across households sorted into quintiles by expenditure, which, as
mentioned earlier, is often viewed as a rough proxy for lifetime income. An alternative is to rank

37
  This squares with our earlier finding that the source-side impact, when separated from the use-side effect, is
progressive. The progressivity is strongest under lump-sum rebates and weakest under corporate income tax cuts.

                                                        27
households by income. Figure 10 compares the results under the two sorting methods. Changing
the ordering of households mainly alters impacts on the source side, especially for the lowest
quintile. Ranking by income puts more retirees in the lowest quintile than when households are
ranked by expenditure. Retirees tend to have greater wealth than the average individual in
quintile 1 under expenditure ordering. As a result, quintile 1 has more wealth under income
ordering than under expenditure ordering. Since the welfare effects are expressed as a percentage
of wealth, these percentages are often smaller when households are ranked by income. The
overall shapes of the impacts are fairly similar.38
        The general picture emerging from this section is that the source-side impacts tend to be
progressive, offsetting the regressivity of the use-side effect. Our results also show that both the
scale and the regressivity or progressivity of the overall (use- plus source-side) impacts depend
importantly on the method of recycling, which exerts a strong influence on the source side. The
extent of progressivity is greatest under lump-sum recycling, although it is significant under
payroll tax and individual income tax recycling as well. The overall impact is close to
proportional under corporate income tax recycling. The scale of the overall impact is much
smaller under corporate income tax recycling than under the other recycling approaches.
        Impacts change over time. In the cases involving recycling through cuts in payroll or
individual income tax rates, the household groups tend to experience larger welfare losses over
time, in keeping with the steady rise in the carbon tax rate. However, in the case of recycling
through cuts in the corporate income tax, the scale of the impacts for a given quintile does not
change much over time, a reflection of the higher rates of investment and higher incomes
associated with the corporate tax cuts. This growing beneficial impact offsets the potentially
increasing adverse impact of rising carbon tax rates.



8. Policies with Targeted Compensation: Impacts and Trade-Offs

        Many commentators have expressed concern about the potential regressive impact of a
carbon tax. However, our results suggest that the outcome is not regressive once one accounts for
the impact on the source side. As a percentage of baseline expenditure, the adverse impacts on

38
  Other studies have observed larger differences between the results under expenditure- and income-ranked
household groups. For example, Fullerton and Heutel (2010) find that ranking by expenditure implies significantly
greater regressivity on the use side. Metcalf et al. (2012) obtain significantly less regressivity in this case.

                                                        28
the lowest two quintiles tend to be no larger than the impacts on the higher quintiles.
         This could suggest that the outcome under these forms of recycling is fair and that no
additional compensation elements are needed to bring about a desirable outcome. Fairness can
also depend on absolute (as opposed to relative) impacts, however. As Figure 9 indicates, over
the longer term, quintiles 2 and 3 experience welfare losses under recycling involving marginal
rate cuts. (The lowest quintile enjoys gains under all forms of recycling.) To the extent that
considerations of fairness call for reducing the impacts on these groups of households, it is worth
considering the potential trade-off in avoiding adverse impacts.
         Here we apply the numerical model to quantify this potential trade-off. We examine the
impacts of two sets of “hybrid” policies that involve a combination of recycling through lump-
sum rebates and recycling through cuts in payroll, individual, or corporate income tax rates.
Some of the net revenue from the carbon tax is devoted to lump-sum rebates, while the rest is
devoted to one of the three tax cuts. In the rebate and tax cut combination, the rebates are
targeted either (a) to lowest two income quintiles at a level just sufficient to prevent a welfare
loss to the second quintile or (b) to the lowest three income quintiles at a level just sufficient to
prevent a welfare loss to the third quintile. The total rebate is split evenly across the two (in case
a) or three (in case b) quintiles that receive the targeted compensation.
         Figure 11 shows the distribution of welfare impacts from the hybrid policies and the
previously discussed “pure” policies involving recycling through lump-sum rebates alone or tax
cuts alone under the full infinite-horizon welfare measure. The top and bottom panels display
outcomes for the hybrid policies designed to prevent a welfare loss to quintile 2 (upper figure) or
quintiles 2 and 3 (lower figure). Under the former hybrid policies, quintiles 1 and 2 are better off
relative to the corresponding pure recycling policies, while quintiles 3–5 are slightly worse off.
Under the latter hybrid policies, the differences between the hybrid and pure policies are more
stark, as quintile 3 requires very large rebates as targeted compensation to avoid adverse welfare
impacts (and, by design, quintiles 1 and 2 also receive these significant rebates).39
         Table 9 compares the economy-wide welfare costs in the hybrid cases with those in the
pure recycling cases. Targeted compensation raises overall costs by reducing the amount of
remaining revenue for financing cuts in distortionary taxes. The table shows that these cost
increases are very sensitive to both the way that remaining revenues are to be recycled and the

39
  More complex policies could involve levels of compensation that were differentiated across the targeted quintiles
in such a way as to prevent an increase in welfare to the representative household in any of the targeted quintiles.

                                                         29
span of the groups targeted for compensation. Lump-sum compensation has an opportunity cost:
it reduces the amount of revenue available to finance cuts in distortionary taxes.40 This
opportunity cost is highest when compensation takes away revenues that otherwise would have
been used to cut corporate income taxes. As mentioned earlier, the corporate tax is the most
distortionary among the taxes compared in Table 9; hence the lowered ability to reduce the
corporate tax rate is especially costly. For any given recycling method, the cost of compensation
is an order of magnitude higher under the more ambitious hybrid policy that prevents a welfare
loss to both quintiles 3 and 2, a reflection of the much higher level of lump-sum rebates required
under this policy. We leave it to the reader to assess the importance of the distributional
objectives served by these policies and decide whether achieving these objectives is worth the
sacrifice of efficiency.




9. The Role of Transfer Income


         As discussed in Section 7, increases in nominal transfer income are a key factor behind
the positive and progressive source-side impacts under most recycling options. Under current US
policy, government transfers are indexed to inflation. Accordingly, in our central analysis, we
assume in both the E3 and DH models that the time profile of transfers is maintained in real
terms for every representative household. By raising the prices of consumer goods, a carbon tax
leads to an increase in the price level, which necessitates an increase in nominal transfers. Higher
transfers contribute to a positive source-side impact.
         To gauge the contribution of transfer indexing to the overall impact on the source side,
we consider a counterfactual case where households in the DH model receive fixed nominal
transfers. Figure 12 offers a comparison of results in the indexed transfers (left side) and fixed
nominal transfers (right side) cases. In the figure, the results involve the full source-side measure
that includes changes in the value of leisure and changes in savings rates. When transfers are not
indexed, the potential beneficial source-side impact from indexing is absent, and the overall

40
   Under the hybrid policies that prevent a welfare loss to the representative household in the second quintile, the
targeted lump-sum compensation reduces gross revenues available for payroll, individual, and corporate tax cuts by
1.7, 1.1, and 1.1 percent, respectively. Under the more extensive hybrid policy that prevents a welfare loss to the
representative household in both the second and third quintiles, compensation reduces gross revenues for cuts in
payroll, individual, and corporate taxes by 16.9, 15.6, and 10.8 percent, respectively.

                                                         30
source-side impacts are slightly regressive under tax recycling options. Thus the progressive
source-side impacts in our main analysis under tax recycling options are strongly driven by
policy-induced increases in nominal transfer income. Further, while the source-side impacts are
positive in the case involving indexed transfers, in the case of recycling via cuts in the corporate
income tax, these impacts tend to be negative.
       The left and right columns of Figure 13 display the overall welfare impacts across
households for three time intervals in cases of indexed and fixed (nonindexed) nominal transfers.
Over the longer term, the welfare impact is negative for all households under all recycling
options when transfers are fixed in nominal terms, except for quintile 1 under recycling via
lump-sum rebates. As in the earlier cases involving indexed transfers, the outcome is strongly
progressive under lump-sum recycling. But in contrast with the indexed transfers case, the
impact under other forms of recycling is regressive, reflecting both the regressive use- and
source-side impacts in the absence of transfer income. These results reinforce the arguments in
Fullerton et al. (2011) and Cronin et al. (2017) that the indexing of transfers contributes
significantly to progressive outcomes. In fact, in the DH model, indexing completely mitigates
the adverse impacts of a carbon tax on the average household in the lowest expenditure quintile.




10. Conclusions


       We have examined the distribution of the impacts of a carbon tax across US households,
considering both source- and use-side impacts under a variety of revenue-recycling scenarios.
       We find that under a range of recycling methods, the use-side impacts are consistently
regressive, while the source-side impacts are usually progressive. The source-side impacts tend
to more than fully offset the use-side impacts, so the overall impact is either progressive or close
to proportional.
       Our approach differs methodologically from earlier studies in several ways. We offer an
analytical approach that employs broader measures of the source- and use-side effects; in
contrast with more conventional measures, our measures together yield the full welfare impact.
In addition, we consider a range of recycling methods, an approach that reveals that the




                                                 31
distributional impacts are sensitive to the nature of recycling—particularly the distribution of
impacts on the source side.
         Ours is not the first study to find that the overall impact of a carbon tax can be
progressive. Some recent studies that consider both the source- and use-side impacts have
reached a similar conclusion. However, in contrast with earlier studies, we find that under
plausible assumptions, the lowest household income quintile does not suffer an absolute
reduction in welfare under the carbon tax.41 We also find larger source- and use-side impacts
than what the narrower welfare measures used in previous studies would predict.
         Inflation-indexed government transfers very significantly influence the distributional
impacts of climate policy. They avoid what otherwise would be significantly regressive overall
impacts providing additional nominal transfers to compensate for higher overall consumer prices
from climate change policy. Since transfers represent an especially large share of income for
low-income households, the increase in nominal transfers exerts a significant progressive impact.
         We apply our general equilibrium model to assess the costs of including targeted
compensation as part of a carbon tax policy. The costs of avoiding adverse impacts depend
critically on the method of recycling and the particular target involved. The costs of
compensation are about an order of magnitude higher when remaining revenues are to be used
for corporate income tax cuts than when the remaining revenues are used in other ways. These
efficiency costs also are an order of magnitude higher under the more ambitious hybrid policy of
avoiding an adverse impact on the middle quintile, a reflection of the much higher level of
rebates required under this policy.
         Two caveats are in order. First, our analysis has not considered the extent of
heterogeneity of impacts within quintiles.42 Second, we have considered the distributional
impacts across only one household dimension—income. Fairness (and political feasibility) of
climate policy can depend on the distribution along other demographic dimensions.
         These results underscore the importance of an integrated approach to distributional
analysis, one that considers closely the use of policy-generated revenues and the nature of


41
   In contrast, Goulder and Hafstead (2017) show that in the absence of compensation, firms in some industries
would suffer significant profit losses, with significant impacts on the wealth of owners of these firms. This suggests
that providing compensation to certain industries might be critical to the political feasibility of a carbon tax.
42
   Cronin et al. (2017) analyze policies involving redistribution of carbon tax revenues, accounting for heterogeneity
within income groups. Fischer and Pizer (2017) examine how to account for household heterogeneity in the
evaluation of carbon taxes and tradable performance standards.

                                                         32
existing government transfer programs. In addition, they reveal that one’s conclusions as to the
distributional consequences of policies depend on the welfare measure employed. We find that
the results under the more comprehensive measures we have introduced differ significantly from
those under the narrower, more conventional measures.




                                                33
References


Chen, Yunguang, Lawrence H. Goulder, and Marc A. C. Hafstead. 2018. “Quantifying the
Determinants of Future CO2 Emissions.” Climate Change Economics 9 (1): 18400012.

Cronin, Julie-Anne, Don Fullerton, and Steven Sexton. 2017. “Vertical and Horizontal
Redistributions from a Carbon Tax and Rebate.” BePress Working Paper.
http://works.bepress.com/don_fullerton/79/.
EIA (US Energy Information Administration). 2016. Annual Energy Outlook 2016: With
Projections to 2040.

Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM model.” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 12 (1): 189–94.

Fischer, Carolyn, Suzi Kerr, and Michael A. Toman. 2001. “Using Emissions Trading to
Regulate National Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” In Climate Change Economics and Policy,
edited by Michael A. Toman, 108–18. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.

Fischer, Carolyn, and William A. Pizer. 2017. “Equity Effects in Energy Regulation.” Duke
Environmental and Energy Economics Working Paper EE 17-03. Durham, NC: Duke University.

Fremstad, Anders, and Mark Paul. 2017. “A Distributional Analysis of a Carbon Tax and
Dividend in the United States.” Political Economy Research Institute Working Paper 434.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts.

Fullerton, Don, and Garth Heutel. 2010. “Analytical General Equilibrium Effects of Energy
Policy on Output and Factor Prices.” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10 (2).

Fullerton, Don, Garth Heutel, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 2011. “Does the Indexing of Government
Transfers Make Carbon Pricing Progressive?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 94
(2): 347–53.

Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 2001. “Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and Pre-
Existing Distortions.” Journal of Public Economics 80 (2): 249–67.

Goulder, Lawrence, and Marc Hafstead. 2017. Confronting the Climate Challenge: A General
Equilibrium Assessment of US Policy Options. New York: Columbia University Press.

Goulder, Lawrence H., and Ian W. H. Parry. 2008. “Instrument Choice in Environmental
Policy.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 2 (2): 152–74.

Grainger, Corbett A., and Charles D. Kolstad. 2010. “Who Pays a Price on Carbon?”
Environmental and Resource Economics 46 (3): 359–76.

Jorgenson, Dale W., Richard J. Goettle, Mun S. Ho, and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 2013. “Double
                                              34
Dividend: Environmental Taxes and Fiscal Reform in the United States.” Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael Dennis Whinston, and Jerry R. Green. 1995. Microeconomic
Theory. Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press.

Mathur, Aparna, and Adele C. Morris. 2014. “Distributional Effects of a Carbon Tax in Broader
US Fiscal Reform.” Energy Policy 66: 326–34.

Metcalf, Gilbert E., Aparna Mathur, and Kevin Hassett. 2012. “Distributional Impacts in a
Comprehensive Climate Policy Package.” In Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy,
edited by Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram, 21–34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

McClelland, Robert, and Shannon Mok. 2012. “A Review of Recent Research on Labor Supply
Elasticities.” Working Paper 2012–12. Washington, DC: Congressonal Budget Office.

Oates, Wallace E. 1993. “Fiscal Decentralization and Economic Development.” National Tax
Journal 46 (2): 237–43.

Rausch, Sebastian, Gilbert E. Metcalf, and John M. Reilly. 2011. “Distributional Impacts of
Carbon Pricing: A General Equilibrium Approach with Micro-Data for Households.” Energy
Economics 33: S20–S33.

Williams, Roberton, Hal Gordon, Dallas Burtraw, Jared Carbone, and Richard Morgenstern.
2015. “The Initial Incidence of a Carbon Tax across Income Groups.” National Tax Journal 68
(1): 195–214.




                                              35
Table 1. Benchmark Outputs, Energy Inputs, and Carbon Intensities by Industry

                                                                    Pct. of total      Energy          Energy      Carbon
 Industry                                              Outputa           output         inputb     value share   intensityc
 Oil extraction                                           277.3            1.1%             7.6          2.8%     0.00553
 Natural gas extraction                                   118.2            0.5%             2.9          2.5%     0.02254
 Coal mining                                               41.1            0.2%             2.4          5.8%     0.02439
 Electric transmission and distribution                   389.2            1.5%          214.2          55.0%     0.00347
 Coal-fired electricity generation                         74.5            0.3%            21.5         28.9%     0.00724
 Other fossil electricity generation                       67.9            0.3%            36.7         54.0%     0.01118
 Non-fossil electricity generation                         59.2            0.2%             0.1          0.1%     0.00003
 Natural gas distribution                                 136.2            0.5%            50.5         37.1%     0.00798
 Petroleum refining                                       719.2            2.8%          576.1          80.1%     0.00437
 Pipeline transportation                                   42.4            0.2%             3.2          7.5%     0.00027
 Mining support activities                                 47.5            0.2%             5.9         12.4%     0.00075
 Other mining                                             196.2            0.8%             5.9          3.0%     0.00057
 Farms, forestry, fishing                                 435.9            1.7%            26.4          6.1%     0.00023
 Water utilities                                           84.2            0.3%             2.0          2.4%     0.00039
 Construction                                           1,365.6            5.2%            53.9          3.9%     0.00044
 Wood products                                             92.4            0.4%             3.0          3.3%     0.00063
 Nonmetallic mineral products                             105.2            0.4%             6.4          6.1%     0.00122
 Primary metals                                           288.9            1.1%            19.8          6.8%     0.00052
 Fabricated metal products                                337.3            1.3%             7.5          2.2%     0.00029
 Machinery and misc. manufacturing                      1,376.8            5.3%            13.5          1.0%     0.00039
 Motor vehicles                                           593.1            2.3%             4.8          0.8%     0.00050
 Food and beverage                                        817.7            3.1%            15.1          1.8%     0.00036
 Textile, apparel, leather                                 86.7            0.3%             1.7          1.9%     0.00055
 Paper and printing                                       231.1            0.9%            12.8          5.5%     0.00102
 Chemicals, plastics, and rubber                        1,010.5            3.9%            68.2          6.7%     0.00016
 Trade                                                  2,465.6            9.4%            38.7          1.6%     0.00104
 Air transportation                                       163.5            0.6%            36.8         22.5%     0.00033
 Railroad transportation                                  106.0            0.4%             6.2          5.8%     0.00094
 Water transportation                                      51.9            0.2%             9.8         18.8%     0.00087
 Truck transportation                                     288.1            1.1%            51.5         17.9%     0.00051
 Transit and ground passenger transportation               58.5            0.2%             5.9         10.1%     0.00143
 Other transportation and warehousing                     291.5            1.1%            16.9          5.8%     0.00037
 Communiction and information                           1,186.1            4.5%             5.3          0.4%     0.00009
 Services                                               9,935.6           38.0%          125.8           1.3%     0.00014
 Real estate and owner-occupied housing                 2,606.8           10.0%            90.9          3.5%     0.00016


 Total                                                 26,148.1           100%          1,549.6         5.9%
 a Inbillions of 2013$.
 b Inbillions of 2013$. Energy inputs include the values of purchases of fossil fuels, wholesale
  electricity, distributed natural gas, and refined petroleum products.
 c Metric tons of catbon dioxide emissons per dollar.




                                                               36
Table 2. Consumption Good Benchmark Expenditures and Carbon Intensities

                                                                                          Pct. of total       Carbon
 Consumption category                                                   Consumptiona     consumption        intensityb
Motor vehicles                                                                  549.0            4.8%        0.00026
Furnishings and household equipment                                             394.5            3.4%        0.00035
Recreation                                                                    1,022.1            8.9%        0.00020
Clothing                                                                        425.8            3.7%        0.00025
Health care                                                                   2,372.1           20.7%        0.00022
Education                                                                       277.1            2.4%        0.00014
Communication                                                                   283.1            2.5%        0.00010
Food                                                                            750.3            6.5%        0.00038
Alcohol                                                                         124.7            1.1%        0.00034
Motor vehicle fuels (and lubricants and fluids)                                 381.8            3.3%        0.00298
Fuel oil and other fuels                                                         26.6            0.2%        0.00255
Personal care                                                                   245.3            2.1%        0.00032
Tobacco                                                                         108.0            0.9%        0.00037
Housing                                                                       1,780.9           15.5%        0.00016
Water and waste                                                                 136.4            1.2%        0.00020
Electricity                                                                     169.1            1.5%        0.00347
Natural gas                                                                      51.2            0.4%        0.00796
Public ground                                                                    42.3            0.4%        0.00047
Air transportation                                                               49.5            0.4%        0.00104
Water transportation                                                              3.2            0.0%        0.00073
Food services and accommodations                                                714.7            6.2%        0.00014
Financial services and insurance                                                826.7            7.2%        0.00014
Other services                                                                  700.5            6.1%        0.00015
Net foreign travel                                                               44.2            0.4%        0.00101


Total                                                                        11,478.9         100.0%
 a
     In billions of 2013$.
 b   Metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions per dollar.


Table 3. Average After-Tax Income Shares by Source by Quintile


                            Quintile 1            Quintile 2           Quintile 3       Quintile 4        Quintile 5
Labor                            53%                   71%                  76%              80%               50%
Capital                           9%                    8%                  12%              13%               47%
Transfer                         38%                   21%                  12%               6%                3%

Total                             100%                     100%            100%             100%              100%


                                                                  37
Table 4. Average Expenditure Shares by Good by Quintile



                              Quintile 1 Quintile 2 Quintile 3 Quintile 4 Quintile 5
Motor vehicles                    2.2%          3.5%       5.5%     5.6%       5.2%
Furnishings and household
                                  2.2%          2.5%       3.0%     3.2%       4.0%
Equipment
Recreation                        7.3%          7.9%       7.9%     8.4%       9.7%
Clothing                          4.1%          3.7%       3.5%     3.8%       3.9%
Health care                      23.3%         22.8%      20.0%    21.5%      19.5%
Education                         0.6%          0.8%       1.8%     2.3%       2.7%
Communication                     2.4%          2.7%       3.0%     2.9%       2.3%
Food                              8.7%          8.6%       7.9%     7.1%       5.8%
Alcohol                           0.9%          1.5%       1.3%     1.2%       1.2%
Motor vehicle fuels (and
                                  3.9%          4.5%       4.7%     4.4%       3.4%
lubricants and fluids)
Fuel oil and other fuels          0.3%          0.2%       0.2%     0.2%       0.3%
Personal care                     2.0%          2.1%       2.2%     2.2%       2.2%
Tobacco                           3.1%          2.8%       1.9%     1.2%       0.7%
Housing                          26.4%         20.8%      19.0%    14.8%      12.5%
Water and waste                   1.6%          1.6%       1.6%     1.5%       1.3%
Electricity                       2.4%          2.0%       1.9%     1.6%       1.3%
Natural gas                       0.5%          0.5%       0.5%     0.5%       0.5%
Public ground                     0.4%          0.4%       0.3%     0.3%       0.4%
Air transportation                0.1%          0.2%       0.4%     0.5%       0.8%
Water transportation              0.0%          0.0%       0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
Food services and
                                  1.7%          3.0%       4.2%     6.0%       8.1%
accommodations
Financial services and
                                  3.5%          5.1%       5.8%     6.8%       8.0%
insurance
Other services                    2.3%          2.6%       3.2%     3.9%       5.7%
Net foreign travel                0.1%          0.2%       0.3%     0.3%       0.5%

Total                           100.0%         100.0%     100.0%   100.0%    100.0%




                                          38
Table 5. Impacts on Producer Prices (Percentage Changes from Reference Case Values)

Industry                                                       2020     2035     2050
Oil extraction                                                  0.7      1.9      2.4
Natural gas extraction                                        –13.6     –0.1      0.1
Coal mining                                                   –16.8     –2.5      0.4
Electric transmission and distribution                         10.1     14.9     16.1
Coal-fired electricity generation                              40.2     75.4    106.6
Other fossil electricity generation                            21.6     31.8     41.0
Non-fossil electricity generation                              17.7      6.6      3.0
Natural gas distribution                                        5.9     15.2     20.3
Petroleum refining                                             13.0     16.5     19.7
Pipeline transportation                                         0.3      3.6      4.6
Mining support activities                                       0.4      1.8      2.1
Other mining                                                   –0.8      0.4      0.5
Farms, forestry, fishing                                        0.4      1.3      1.5
Water utilities                                                 0.3      0.4      0.6
Construction                                                    0.4      0.7      0.8
Wood products                                                   0.2      0.8      0.9
Nonmetallic mineral products                                    0.2      1.1      1.3
Primary metals                                                  1.1      2.3      2.5
Fabricated metal products                                       0.1      0.7      0.8
Machinery and misc. manufacturing                              –0.4      0.3      0.3
Motor vehicles                                                 –0.1      0.5      0.5
Food and beverage                                               0.3      0.9      1.0
Textile, apparel, leather                                       0.1      0.4      0.5
Paper and printing                                              0.3      1.0      1.1
Chemicals, plastics, and rubber                                 1.1      2.6      2.9
Trade                                                          –0.1      0.1      0.1
Air transportation                                              2.0      3.1      3.6
Railroad transportation                                        –1.5      0.4      0.9
Water transportation                                            1.8      2.7      3.1
Truck transportation                                            1.9      2.6      2.8
Transit and ground passenger transportation                     1.1      1.3      1.4
Other transportation and warehousing                            0.4      0.8      0.8
Communication and information                                  –0.2     –0.1      0.0
Services                                                        0.0      0.0      0.0
Real estate and owner-occupied housing                          0.3      0.4      0.6

All industries (Producer Price Index)                           0.8      1.6      2.0


                                              39
Table 6. Impacts on Consumer Good Prices (Percentage Changes from Reference Case
Values)


 Consumption category                                         2020    2035     2050
 Motor vehicles                                                0.0      0.2     0.2
 Furnishings and household equipment                           0.0      0.4     0.4
 Recreation                                                   –0.1      0.1     0.1
 Clothing                                                     –0.1      0.2     0.1
 Health care                                                   0.0      0.1     0.2
 Education                                                     0.0     –0.1    –0.1
 Communication                                                –0.2     –0.1     0.0
 Food                                                          0.2      0.6     0.7
 Alcohol                                                       0.2      0.5     0.6
 Motor vehicle fuels (and lubricants and fluids)               7.5     10.2    12.8
 Fuel oil and other fuels                                      7.4     10.0    12.5
 Personal care                                                 0.1      0.3     0.4
 Tobacco                                                       0.3      0.6     0.8
 Housing                                                       0.3      0.4     0.6
 Water and waste                                               0.2      0.3     0.5
 Electricity                                                   9.7     14.3    15.4
 Natural gas                                                   5.6     14.5    19.3
 Public ground                                                 0.9      1.2     1.3
 Air transportation                                            1.2      2.0     2.2
 Water transportation                                          1.3      2.0     2.3
 Food services and accommodations                              0.0      0.0     0.0
 Financial services and insurance                              0.0      0.0     0.0
 Other services                                                0.0      0.0     0.0
 Net foreign travel                                            1.5      2.4     2.7

 All consumer goods (Consumer Price Index)                      0.6     1.0        1.2




                                               40
Table 7. Impacts on Factor Prices and Transfers (Percentage Changes from Reference
Case Values)
                                                     After-tax
                               After-tax wage      interest rate        Transfers

 Lump-sum rebates
          2020                      –0.2               –2.2                0.6
          2035                      –0.5               –1.0                1.0
          2050                      –0.7               –0.4                1.2



 Payroll tax cuts
             2020                    0.7               –1.8                0.6
             2035                    0.4               –0.9                1.0
             2050                    0.2               –0.4                1.2



 Individual income tax cuts
             2020                    0.4               –1.2                0.5
             2035                    0.3               –0.5                0.9
             2050                    0.1               –0.2                1.1



 Corporate income tax cuts
            2020                    –0.1                0.4                0.5
            2035                     0.1                0.1                0.7
            2050                     0.1                0.0                0.8




                                           41
Table 8. GDP and Welfare Costs of a Carbon Tax under Alternative Recycling Options


                                                  ——————— Recycling method ———————


                                                                        Cuts in                            Cuts in
                                                                      employee        Cuts in            corporate
                                                 Lump-sum               payroll    individual              income
                                                   rebates                taxes income taxes                 taxes
GDP costsa

      - as pct. of reference GDP                        0.28%             0.13%               0.16%         0.19%

      - per ton of CO2 reducedb                        $54.67             $26.41              $31.25        $38.38

Welfare Costsc                                      $2,563.44         $2,046.83          $1,684.82        $380.99

      - as pct. of wealth                               0.43%             0.34%               0.28%         0.06%

      - per dollar of gross revenue                      $0.39             $0.31               $0.26         $0.06

      - per ton of CO2 reduced                         $46.97             $37.63              $31.08         $7.25

a
    GDP costs measured as present value of real GDP loss, 2016–50, using 3 percent real interest rate.
b
    Present value of cumulative tons reduced, using 3 percent real interest rate.
c
    Welfare costs are the negative of the equivalent variation, expressed in billion 2013$.




                                                           42
Table 9. Aggregate Welfare Costs of a Carbon Tax With and Without Targeted
Compensation


                                                     ———Tax rate recycling method———

                                                                        Individual
                                                    Payroll               income              Corporate
                                                    tax cuts             tax cuts              tax cuts
No targeted compensation

Welfare costsa                                      $2,046.83            $1,684.82              $380.99

      - per ton of CO2 reduced                          $37.63               $31.08               $7.25



Targeted compensation
to prevent adverse impact
on quintile 2b

Welfare costsa                                      $2,075.97            $1,716.51              $468.40
                                                       (1.4%)               (1.9%)              (22.9%)

      - per ton of CO2 reduced                          $38.16               $31.66               $8.90
                                                        (1.4%)               (1.9%)             (22.7%)

Targeted compensation
to prevent adverse impact
on quintiles 2 and 3b

Welfare costsa                                      $2,345.02            $2,155.90             $1,222.72
                                                      (14.6%)             (28.0%)              (220.9%)

      - per ton of CO2 reduced                         $43.03                $39.63              $22.93
                                                      (14.3%)               (27.5%)            (216.2%)



a
    Welfare costs are the negative of the equivalent variation, expressed in billion 2013$.
b
    Numbers in parentheses express percentage changes in welfare costs relative to the “no
 targeted compensation” case.



                                                           43
                             Figure 1. Nested Consumption Structure




                          Figure 2. Time Profile of Carbon Tax, 2017–50



                    $80

                    $70

                    $60
Per ton CO2 2013$




                    $50

                    $40

                    $30

                    $20

                    $10

                    $0
                          2017

                                 2020


                                        2025


                                               2030


                                                           2035


                                                                  2040


                                                                         2045


                                                                                2050

                                                                                       2052




                                                       Year




                                                      44
    Figure 3. Economy-Wide Carbon Dioxide Emissions, 2017–50




                                            Reference Case            Carbon Tax
                       6.0

                       5.0
Billions metric tons CO2




                       4.0

                       3.0

                       2.0

                       1.0

                       0.0
                             2017

                                    2020


                                           2025


                                                   2030


                                                               2035


                                                                       2040


                                                                               2045


                                                                                      2050
                                                             Year




                                                          45
                                                Figure 4. Use-Side Impacts by Year by Quintile



                                     Goods-Only Measure                                                              Goods and Leisure Measure

                                                                                  (a) 2020


                                       Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                                            Q1        Q2          Q3         Q4          Q5
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                         (as percentage of wealth)
                              0.00                                                                                            0.00
                             -0.10                                                                                            -0.10
                                                                                                                              -0.20
     Use-side impact




                                                                                              Use-side impact
                             -0.20
                             -0.30                                                                                            -0.30
                             -0.40                                                                                            -0.40
                             -0.50                                                                                            -0.50
                             -0.60                                                                                            -0.60
                             -0.70                                                                                            -0.70
                             -0.80                                                                                            -0.80
                             -0.90                                                                                            -0.90
                             -1.00                                                                                            -1.00



                            Lump-Sum        Payroll   Individual        Corporate                                    Lump-Sum              Payroll        Individual        Corporate



                                                                                  (b) 2030


                                       Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                                       Q1        Q2          Q3         Q4        Q5
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                         (as percentage of wealth)




                              0.00                                                                                     0.00
                             -0.10                                                                                    -0.10
     Use-side impact




                                                                                              Use-side impact




                             -0.20                                                                                    -0.20
                             -0.30                                                                                    -0.30
                             -0.40                                                                                    -0.40
                             -0.50                                                                                    -0.50
                             -0.60                                                                                    -0.60
                             -0.70                                                                                    -0.70
                             -0.80                                                                                    -0.80
                             -0.90                                                                                    -0.90
                             -1.00                                                                                    -1.00


                            Lump-Sum        Payroll   Individual        Corporate                                    Lump-Sum              Payroll        Individual        Corporate



                                                                                  (c) 2050


                                       Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                                       Q1        Q2          Q3         Q4        Q5
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                         (as percentage of wealth)




                              0.00                                                                                     0.00
                             -0.10                                                                                    -0.10
     Use-side impact




                                                                                              Use-side impact




                             -0.20                                                                                    -0.20
                             -0.30                                                                                    -0.30
                             -0.40                                                                                    -0.40
                             -0.50                                                                                    -0.50
                             -0.60                                                                                    -0.60
                             -0.70                                                                                    -0.70
                             -0.80                                                                                    -0.80
                             -0.90                                                                                    -0.90
                             -1.00                                                                                    -1.00


                            Lump-Sum        Payroll   Individual        Corporate                                    Lump-Sum              Payroll        Individual        Corporate




                                                                                    46
                                      Figure 5. Use-Side Impacts over Time Intervals, by Quintile



                                     Goods-Only Measure                                                                  Goods and Leisure Measure

                                                                             (a) 2018–20


                                      Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                               Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                        (as percentage of wealth)
                              0.00                                                                                    0.00
                             -0.10                                                                                   -0.10
     Use-side impact




                                                                                             Use-side impact
                             -0.20                                                                                   -0.20
                             -0.30                                                                                   -0.30
                             -0.40                                                                                   -0.40
                             -0.50                                                                                   -0.50
                             -0.60                                                                                   -0.60
                             -0.70                                                                                   -0.70
                             -0.80                                                                                   -0.80
                             -0.90                                                                                   -0.90
                             -1.00                                                                                   -1.00


                            Lump-Sum       Payroll   Individual        Corporate                                    Lump-Sum      Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                             (b) 2018–40


                                      Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                               Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                        (as percentage of wealth)

                              0.00                                                                                    0.00
                             -0.10                                                                                   -0.10
     Use-side impact




                                                                                             Use-side impact




                             -0.20                                                                                   -0.20
                             -0.30                                                                                   -0.30
                             -0.40                                                                                   -0.40
                             -0.50                                                                                   -0.50
                             -0.60                                                                                   -0.60
                             -0.70                                                                                   -0.70
                             -0.80                                                                                   -0.80
                             -0.90                                                                                   -0.90
                             -1.00                                                                                   -1.00


                            Lump-Sum       Payroll   Individual        Corporate                                    Lump-Sum      Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                             (c) 2018–


                                      Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                               Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                        (as percentage of wealth)




                              0.00                                                                                    0.00
                             -0.10                                                                                   -0.10
     Use-side impact




                                                                                             Use-side impact




                             -0.20                                                                                   -0.20
                             -0.30                                                                                   -0.30
                             -0.40                                                                                   -0.40
                             -0.50                                                                                   -0.50
                             -0.60                                                                                   -0.60
                             -0.70                                                                                   -0.70
                             -0.80                                                                                   -0.80
                             -0.90                                                                                   -0.90
                             -1.00                                                                                   -1.00


                            Lump-Sum       Payroll   Individual        Corporate                                    Lump-Sum      Payroll   Individual        Corporate




                                                                                   47
                                            Figure 6. Source-Side Impacts by Year by Quintile


                                    Income-Only Measure                                                                         Full Measure

                                                                                (a) 2020

                                     Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1        Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                   3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                       (as percentage of wealth)
                            2.50                                                                                   2.50
   Source-side impact




                                                                                          Source-side impact
                            2.00                                                                                   2.00
                            1.50                                                                                   1.50
                            1.00                                                                                   1.00
                            0.50                                                                                   0.50
                            0.00                                                                                   0.00
                            -0.50                                                                                  -0.50
                            -1.00                                                                                  -1.00


                     Lump-Sum             Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum             Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                                (b) 2030

                                     Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1        Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                   3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                       (as percentage of wealth)

                            2.50                                                                                   2.50
   Source-side impact




                                                                                          Source-side impact




                            2.00                                                                                   2.00
                            1.50                                                                                   1.50
                            1.00                                                                                   1.00
                            0.50                                                                                   0.50
                            0.00                                                                                   0.00
                            -0.50                                                                                  -0.50
                            -1.00                                                                                  -1.00


                     Lump-Sum             Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum             Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                                (c) 2050


                                     Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1        Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                   3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                       (as percentage of wealth)




                            2.50                                                                                   2.50
   Source-side impact




                                                                                          Source-side impact




                            2.00                                                                                   2.00
                            1.50                                                                                   1.50
                            1.00                                                                                   1.00
                            0.50                                                                                   0.50
                            0.00                                                                                   0.00
                            -0.50                                                                                  -0.50
                            -1.00                                                                                  -1.00


                     Lump-Sum             Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum             Payroll   Individual        Corporate




                                                                                  48
                                    Figure 7. Source-Side Impacts over Time Intervals, by Quintile



                                      Income-Only Measure                                                                         Full Measure

                                                                             (a) 2018–20

                                      Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                    3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                        (as percentage of wealth)
                            2.50                                                                                    2.60
   Source-side impact




                                                                                           Source-side impact
                                                                                                                    2.20
                            2.00
                                                                                                                    1.80
                            1.50                                                                                    1.40
                            1.00                                                                                    1.00
                            0.50                                                                                    0.60
                                                                                                                    0.20
                            0.00
                                                                                                                    -0.20
                            -0.50                                                                                   -0.60
                            -1.00                                                                                   -1.00


                     Lump-Sum              Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                            (b) 2018–40


                                      Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                    3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                        (as percentage of wealth)



                            2.50                                                                                    2.50
   Source-side impact




                                                                                           Source-side impact




                            2.00                                                                                    2.00
                            1.50                                                                                    1.50
                            1.00                                                                                    1.00
                            0.50                                                                                    0.50
                            0.00                                                                                    0.00
                            -0.50                                                                                   -0.50
                            -1.00                                                                                   -1.00


                     Lump-Sum              Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                             (c) 2018–


                                      Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                    3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                        (as percentage of wealth)




                            2.50                                                                                    2.50
   Source-side impact




                                                                                           Source-side impact




                            2.00                                                                                    2.00
                            1.50                                                                                    1.50
                            1.00                                                                                    1.00
                            0.50                                                                                    0.50
                            0.00                                                                                    0.00
                            -0.50                                                                                   -0.50
                            -1.00                                                                                   -1.00


                     Lump-Sum              Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate




                                                                                   49
Figure 8. Overall Welfare Impacts by Year, by Quintile



                                                       (a) 2020
                                         Q1       Q2              Q3          Q4          Q5
                               2.25


                               1.75


                               1.25




   (as percentage of wealth)
        Welfare impacts        0.75


                               0.25


                               -0.25


                               -0.75


                               -1.25


                                       Lump-Sum   Payroll        Individual   Corporate



                                                       (b) 2030
                                         Q1       Q2              Q3          Q4          Q5
                               2.25


                               1.75


                               1.25
   (as percentage of wealth)




                               0.75
        Welfare impacts




                               0.25


                               -0.25


                               -0.75


                               -1.25


                                       Lump-Sum   Payroll        Individual   Corporate



                                                       (c) 2050
                                         Q1       Q2              Q3          Q4          Q5
                               2.25


                               1.75


                               1.25
   (as percentage of wealth)




                               0.75
        Welfare impacts




                               0.25


                               -0.25


                               -0.75


                               -1.25


                                       Lump-Sum   Payroll        Individual   Corporate




                                                            50
Figure 9. Overall Welfare Impacts over Time Intervals, by Quintile



                                                        (a) 2018–20
                                               Q1       Q2              Q3          Q4          Q5
                                     2.25


                                     1.75


                                     1.25




         (as percentage of wealth)
              Welfare impacts        0.75


                                     0.25


                                     -0.25


                                     -0.75


                                     -1.25


                                             Lump-Sum   Payroll        Individual   Corporate



                                                        (b) 2018–40
                                               Q1       Q2              Q3          Q4          Q5
                                     2.25


                                     1.75


                                     1.25
         (as percentage of wealth)




                                     0.75
              Welfare impacts




                                     0.25


                                     -0.25


                                     -0.75


                                     -1.25


                                             Lump-Sum   Payroll        Individual   Corporate



                                                        (c) 2018–
                                               Q1       Q2              Q3          Q4          Q5
                                     2.25


                                     1.75


                                     1.25
         (as percentage of wealth)




                                     0.75
              Welfare impacts




                                     0.25


                                     -0.25


                                     -0.75


                                     -1.25


                                             Lump-Sum   Payroll        Individual   Corporate




                                                                  51
                                    Figure 10. Distributional Impacts over the Infinite Horizon
                                                   under Alternative Orderings of Households
                                                             (using full welfare measure)


Households Ranked by Expenditure                                                                                    Households Ranked by Income


                                                                       (a) Use-Side Impact

                                    Q1       Q2        Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            0.00                                                                                     0.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                        (as percentage of wealth)
                            -0.10                                                                                   -0.10
                            -0.20                                                                                   -0.20
     Use-side impact




                                                                                             Use-side impact
                            -0.30                                                                                   -0.30
                            -0.40                                                                                   -0.40
                            -0.50                                                                                   -0.50
                            -0.60                                                                                   -0.60
                            -0.70                                                                                   -0.70
                            -0.80                                                                                   -0.80
                            -0.90                                                                                   -0.90
                            -1.00                                                                                   -1.00


                     Lump-Sum            Payroll     Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                  (b) Source-Side Impact

                                    Q1       Q2        Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                     3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                        (as percentage of wealth)




                            2.50                                                                                     2.50
   Source-side impact




                                                                                           Source-side impact




                            2.00                                                                                     2.00
                            1.50                                                                                     1.50
                            1.00                                                                                     1.00
                            0.50                                                                                     0.50
                            0.00                                                                                     0.00
                            -0.50                                                                                   -0.50
                            -1.00                                                                                   -1.00


                     Lump-Sum            Payroll     Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                        (c) Overall Impact


                                    Q1       Q2        Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            2.25                                                                                     2.25
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                        (as percentage of wealth)




                            1.75                                                                                     1.75
     Welfare impacts




                                                                                             Welfare impacts




                            1.25                                                                                     1.25

                            0.75                                                                                     0.75

                            0.25                                                                                     0.25

                            -0.25                                                                                   -0.25

                            -0.75                                                                                   -0.75

                            -1.25                                                                                   -1.25


                     Lump-Sum            Payroll     Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate




                                                                                   52
                  Figure 11. Results under “Pure” and “Hybrid” Revenue Recycling
                                     Impacts over the Infinite Horizon, by Quintile


                                (a) Targeted Compensation to Prevent Loss to Quintile 2

                                       Q1           Q2           Q3             Q4        Q5
                              2.25

                              1.75
 (as percentage of wealth)




                              1.25
      Welfare impacts




                              0.75

                              0.25

                             -0.25

                             -0.75

                             -1.25
                                              Payroll            Payroll - Hybrid
                                              Individual         Individual - Hybrid
                                              Corporate          Corporate - Hybrid
                                              Lump-Sum



                            (b) Targeted Compensation to Prevent Loss to Quintiles 2 and 3

                                       Q1           Q2           Q3            Q4         Q5
                             2.25

                             1.75
(as percentage of wealth)




                             1.25
     Welfare impacts




                             0.75

                             0.25

                             -0.25

                             -0.75

                             -1.25
                                               Payroll           Payroll - Hybrid
                                               Individual        Individual - Hybrid
                                               Corporate         Corporate - Hybrid
                                               Lump-Sum




                                                            53
Figure 12. Source-Side Impacts over Time Intervals, Full Measure, by Quintile



                             Indexed Transfer Income                                           Fixed Nominal Transfer Income

                                                                           (a) 2018–20

                                    Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                  3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                      (as percentage of wealth)
                            2.50                                                                                  2.50
   Source-side impact




                                                                                         Source-side impact
                            2.00                                                                                  2.00
                            1.50                                                                                  1.50
                            1.00                                                                                  1.00
                            0.50                                                                                  0.50
                            0.00                                                                                  0.00
                            -0.50                                                                                 -0.50
                            -1.00                                                                                 -1.00


                     Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                           (b) 2018–40


                                    Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                  3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                      (as percentage of wealth)




                            2.50                                                                                  2.50
   Source-side impact




                                                                                         Source-side impact




                            2.00                                                                                  2.00
                            1.50                                                                                  1.50
                            1.00                                                                                  1.00
                            0.50                                                                                  0.50
                            0.00                                                                                  0.00
                            -0.50                                                                                 -0.50
                            -1.00                                                                                 -1.00


                     Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                           (c) 2018–


                                    Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            3.00                                                                                  3.00
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                      (as percentage of wealth)




                            2.50                                                                                  2.50
   Source-side impact




                                                                                         Source-side impact




                            2.00                                                                                  2.00
                            1.50                                                                                  1.50
                            1.00                                                                                  1.00
                            0.50                                                                                  0.50
                            0.00                                                                                  0.00
                            -0.50                                                                                 -0.50
                            -1.00                                                                                 -1.00


                     Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate




                                                                                 54
                             Figure 13. Overall Welfare Impacts over Time Intervals, by Quintile




                             Indexed Transfer Income                                           Fixed Nominal Transfer Income


                                                                           (a) 2018–20


                                    Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            2.25                                                                                  2.25
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                      (as percentage of wealth)
                            1.75                                                                                  1.75
     Welfare impacts




                                                                                           Welfare impacts
                            1.25                                                                                  1.25

                            0.75                                                                                  0.75

                            0.25                                                                                  0.25

                            -0.25                                                                                 -0.25

                            -0.75                                                                                 -0.75

                            -1.25                                                                                 -1.25


                     Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                           (b) 2018–40

                                    Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            2.25                                                                                  2.25
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                      (as percentage of wealth)




                            1.75                                                                                  1.75
     Welfare impacts




                                                                                           Welfare impacts




                            1.25                                                                                  1.25

                            0.75                                                                                  0.75

                            0.25                                                                                  0.25

                            -0.25                                                                                 -0.25

                            -0.75                                                                                 -0.75

                            -1.25                                                                                 -1.25


                     Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate



                                                                           (c) 2018–


                                    Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5                                              Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5
                            2.25                                                                                  2.25
(as percentage of wealth)




                                                                                      (as percentage of wealth)




                            1.75                                                                                  1.75
     Welfare impacts




                                                                                           Welfare impacts




                            1.25                                                                                  1.25

                            0.75                                                                                  0.75

                            0.25                                                                                  0.25

                            -0.25                                                                                 -0.25

                            -0.75                                                                                 -0.75

                            -1.25                                                                                 -1.25


                     Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate                             Lump-Sum            Payroll   Individual        Corporate




                                                                                 55
