                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PRICE SALIENCE AND PRODUCT CHOICE

                                         Thomas Blake
                                         Sarah Moshary
                                         Kane Sweeney
                                         Steven Tadelis

                                       Working Paper 25186
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25186


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2018




We are grateful to executives and employees at Stubhub for sharing the data for this study. We
thank numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25186.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Thomas Blake, Sarah Moshary, Kane Sweeney, and Steven Tadelis. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Salience and Product Choice
Thomas Blake, Sarah Moshary, Kane Sweeney, and Steven Tadelis
NBER Working Paper No. 25186
October 2018
JEL No. C93,D12,D83,L11

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the effect of price salience on whether a product is purchased and, conditional on
purchase, the quality purchased. Consistent with our theoretical predictions, we find that making
the full purchase price salient to consumers reduces both the quality and quantity of goods
purchased. The effect of salience on quality accounts for at least 28% of the overall revenue
decline. Evidence shows that the effects persist beyond the first purchase and impact even
experienced users. Detailed click-stream data shows that price-obfuscation makes price
comparisons difficult and results in consumers spending more than they otherwise would. We
also find that sellers respond to the increased price obfuscation by listing higher quality tickets.


Thomas Blake                                     Kane Sweeney
eBay Research Labs                               Uber, Marketplace Optimization
2065 Hamilton Ave                                1455 Market St #400
San Jose, CA 94125                               San Francisco, CA 94103
tomblake@gmail.com                               kanesweeney@gmail.com

Sarah Moshary                                    Steven Tadelis
University of Chicago Booth                      Haas School of Business
School of Business                               University of California, Berkeley
5807 S Woodlawn Ave                              545 Student Services Building
Chicago, IL 60637                                Berkeley, CA 94720
Sarah.moshary@chicagobooth.edu                   and NBER
                                                 stadelis@haas.berkeley.edu
1        Introduction
        Textbook models of consumer choice assume that economic agents are
fully rational and sophisticated in their ability to discern a product’s true
price, including fees, taxes, and possible add-on features. However, a growing
literature demonstrates that consumers often struggle to determine final prices.
For example, Chetty et al. (2009) document that tax salience affects consumers’
decisions to purchase personal care goods in grocery stores, implying that
consumers have trouble inferring final prices when taxes are not displayed
on the shelf. Morowitz et al. (1998) find that students in a lab react less to
surcharges presented as percentages rather than dollars, suggesting a cognitive
difficulty in calculating prices. Hossain and Morgan (2006) present evidence
that eBay buyers respond more to list price than to shipping cost.1
        In this paper, we employ a large-scale field experiment to show that price
salience not only affects a consumer’s decision to purchase any product, but
also which product to purchase. To illustrate our approach, consider the case
of a percentage fee levied on all goods in a market. Price salience affects
consumers along two margins. First, increasing salience makes all goods appear
more expensive, impacting the extensive margin by leading more consumers
to opt out of the market. Second, because a percentage fee levies a larger fee
level for more expensive goods, salience changes the perceived marginal cost of
quality. As a result, increasing salience encourages the consumer to substitute
towards cheaper, lower-quality goods. The contribution of our paper is to
offer a more complete analysis of the effect of price salience on consumers’
choices by quantifying the importance of both margins.2
    1
      See also Brynjolfsson and Smith (2001) and Sullivan (2017), who considers resort fees and hotel rates. In
a related vein exploring choices that are more demanding on cognition, Allcott and Taubinsky (2015) find
that consumers underestimate the cost savings from choosing energy efficient lightbulbs, and Abaluck and
Gruber (2011) find that seniors place more weight on medical plan premiums than on expected out-of-pocket
costs. See DellaVigna (2009) for an overview the literature.
    2
      In their working paper version, Chetty et al. (2009) note that the revenue effect is bigger than the quantity
effect, which is potentially due to consumers switching to lower priced items. Their data is insufficient to
investigate that possibility further.


                                                        1
   We begin our analysis by developing a simple model of consumer choice
in the spirit of Bordalo et al. (2013), which illustrates the impact of price
salience on purchase decisions. The model demonstrates that if prices are
made more salient—i.e., fees are listed clearly upfront—then consumers are
not only less likely to purchase any good, but conditional on purchasing, they
purchase lower quality goods.
   We take these predictions to data generated from a large-scale field experi-
ment conducted by StubHub, a leading online secondary ticket marketplace.
Before the experiment was launched in August 2015, the platform used an
Upfront Fee (UF) strategy, where the site showed consumers the final price
including fees and taxes from their very first viewing of ticket inventory. The
platform then experimented with a Back-end Fee (BF) strategy, where fees
(such as shipping and handling) were shown only after consumers had selected
a particular ticket and proceeded to the checkout page.
   StubHub randomly selected 50% of users for the UF experience, while
the remaining 50% chose tickets based on the seller’s listing price, while the
fee-inclusive price only appeared at the final checkout process. This provides
exogenous variation in fee salience in a setting where we can collect detailed
data on consumer choices, including choice sets, signals of purchase intent (e.g.
product selection and clicks toward checkout), and final purchases. These
rich data allow us to infer the effect of salience on both the extensive and
intensive margins of product choice. Our empirical results support the model’s
predictions: price obfuscation distorts both quality and quantity decisions. A
simple lower-bound estimate shows that the intensive margin accounts for at
least 28% of the increase in revenue raised from Back-end Fees.
   Further analysis of detailed individual-level clickstream data suggests that
Back-end Fees play on consumer misinformation. UF users are more likely to
exit before exploring any ticket, while BF users differentially exit at checkout,
when they first see the fee. Furthermore, BF users go back to examine other

                                       2
listings more often than their UF counterparts. They are more likely to go back
multiple times, which suggests that Back-end Fees make price comparisons
difficult. Finally, Back-end Fees affect even experienced users, although on a
smaller scale, which is consistent with consumers facing optimization costs
even when they anticipate a fee, as in Morowitz et al. (1998).
   Last, we investigate how sellers who list on Stubhub respond to the change
in fee salience across the platform following the experiment’s conclusion.
Because the platform shifted entirely to the BF experience, which causes
buyers to purchase more tickets, and in particular more expensive tickets,
the two-sided nature of the platform should influence sellers to list more
expensive, higher quality tickets. Using row-numbers as a proxy for quality,
our analysis shows that sellers indeed choose to list higher quality tickets
after the transition to the BF experience. Hence, consistent with Ellison and
Ellison (2009), we find that sellers respond to the change in buyer experience.
   As a robustness check, we present evidence on price salience from an earlier
experiment at StubHub performed in 2012, when the default user experience
was BF. This second experiment randomized at the event- rather than user-
level, and therefore suffers from a separate set of vulnerabilities. Reassuringly,
the results are broadly consistent with our findings from the 2015 experiment.
   Our paper also contributes to studies of alternative methods of obfuscation,
such as add-on pricing and partitioned pricing. Ellison (2005) and Gabaix
and Laibson (2006) explore models where some consumers ignore the price of
complimentary goods (e.g. parking at a hotel) when making purchase decisions.
Predictions from these models have been examined in recent empirical work,
such as Ellison and Ellison (2009) and Seim et al. (2017). In the language
of Gabaix and Laibson (2006), StubHub fees constitute surcharges rather
than add-ons because they are unavoidable. Rather, we might interpret the
StubHub fee as a form of partitioned pricing because it is broken out from
the base price of the ticket (see Greenleaf et al. (2016) for a review of the

                                        3
partitioned pricing literature.) One interpretation of our findings is that
salience amplifies the effect of partitioned pricing. Salience may therefore help
explain the persistence of markups and price dispersion in online markets, as
documented by Brynjolfsson and Smith (2001), among others.
    The next section presents a simple model of price salience and derives
empirical implications. Section 3 discusses the experiment run at StubHub,
as well as the data used in the analysis. Section 4 describes robustness checks
on the randomization, while section 5 presents our main results. Section 6
contains evidence on mechanisms and section 7 offers robustness checks based
on a second experiment. Section 8 concludes.


2    A Model of Consumer Choice with Limited Fee Salience

    Consider a consumer who makes purchase decisions under two regimes. In
the first, which we call Upfront Fees (UF), the final purchase price including
all fees is shown to consumers when they browse the set of available tickets.
In the second, which we call Back-End Fees (BF), consumers observe only list
prices when they browse available products, and fees are revealed only after a
particular ticket is selected for purchase.
    First, we consider a consumer’s choice when she observes fees upfront. She
is presented with a convex and compact set of available tickets J, where her
utility vj from ticket j ∈ J depends on its price pj and quality qj (e.g. section
and row, delivery method, etc.) as follows:

                                 vj = θqj − pj .

    The consumer’s willingness to trade off quality for money is captured by
her type θ ∈ [0, θ̄]. Let 0 denote the outside option, with q0 = p0 = 0. Figure
1 illustrates her optimization problem: the set J of available tickets lies on
and above the curved line, and the dashed line v0 = 0 marks the consumer’s


                                       4
                          Figure 1: Optimal Ticket Choice




indifference curve from not purchasing. The consumer chooses the ticket
j ∗ ∈ J on her highest indifference curve, yielding a utility of v ∗ > 0. A
higher θ consumer will purchase a higher quality ticket at a higher price. For
consumers with low enough values of θ (less steep indifference curves in Figure
1), their indifference curve v0 = 0 lies fully below the set J, and they will not
purchase any ticket. It therefore follows that given a set of tickets J, there
exists a threshold type θ > 0 such that a consumer of type θ will purchase a
                         ¯
ticket if and only if θ > θ.
                          ¯
   We model consumer optimization with Back-end Fees as a shift in the
boundary of J. Namely, her choice now depends on the perceived price p̃j of
ticket j rather than its true final price. This is akin to reducing the salience
of prices relative to quality as in Bordalo et al. (2013) and is also similar to
the way Finkelstein (2009) models salience. The consumer then selects j ∈ J
to solve her optimization problem:

                            max ṽj = max θqj − p̃j
                             j∈J        j∈J

where the perceived price of not purchasing a ticket is also zero, p̃0 = p0 = 0.

                                        5
                                   Figure 2: Optimal Ticket Choice




The established view on price salience is that p̃j < pj . That is, when fees
are obfuscated, prices appear lower to consumers than they actually are, as
illustrated in Figure 2. The true price-quantity frontier is still J, however
when the consumer chooses a ticket for purchase she perceives the frontier to
   ˜ choosing the ticket j̃ ∗ which has quality q̃ ∗ and perceived price p̃∗ .
be J,
       Upon reaching the checkout and purchase phase, the ticket’s actual price—
including all fees—is revealed to be p̃0 > p̃∗ . We assume, however, that the
consumer will continue with the purchase at this final stage of the purchase fun-
nel rather than go back to the selection stage with a newfound understanding
that the true choice set is J.3
   Recall that the set of consumers with θ < θ will prefer not to purchase if
                                                ¯
they perceive the set of tickets to be J. Some of these consumers, however,
                                                                            ˜ It
will select a ticket for purchase if they perceive the set of tickets to be J.
follows immediately that there exists a threshold type θ̃ ∈ [0, θ] such that a
                                                       ¯        ¯
consumer of type θ will purchase a ticket if and only if θ > θ̃. Hence, the
                                                               ¯
   3
    Several frictions could prevent consumers who reach checkout from going back to purchase a different
ticket, such as loss aversion or the anticipation of re-optimization costs (e.g. having to calculate the fee for
each set of tickets). We remain agnostic as to which of these best explain why consumers do not re-optimize,
which is what we find in the data.

                                                       6
analysis above implies that fee obfuscation has two effects on consumer choice:

(1) Quantity Effect: Under the Back-end Fee treatment, a consumer is
more likely to purchase.

This prediction is consistent with the existing literature: more salient fees
reduce the likelihood of purchase. However, it precludes at least two alternative
effects of salience: first, if consumers anticipate fees (or hold unbiased beliefs)
then perceived prices may not be lower than actual prices. Second, it is
also possible that price obfuscation generates a “disgust” factor, wherein
last-minute fees upset consumers. In that case, the quantity effect could be
negative, contravening the standard price salience model.
   When true final prices are higher than perceived prices and the difference
is increasing in the listing price, then the model generates a second prediction:
customers buy higher quality items than they would under the Upfront Fee
regime. This condition would be satisfied, for example, if consumers simply
ignored or underestimated a proportional fee or tax. More formally, for any
ticket j, let p̃j be the perceived BF price excluding fees and let p0j be the true
final price observed at checkout. We have,

(2) Quality Upgrade Effect: If p0j − p̃j > 0 and p0j − p̃j is increasing in
qj , then consumers buy higher quality tickets under BF.

Conditional on purchasing, consumers upgrade to higher quality tickets under
Back-end Fees and therefore spend more on the site. The earlier salience
literature overlooks this effect, perhaps because previously studied settings
offered little vertical product differentiation (e.g. Electronic Toll Collection
systems as in Finkelstein (2009) or supermarket beauty aids as in Chetty et
al. (2009)). Indeed, the log-log demand specification favored by earlier work
leaves no scope for quality upgrades.
   The Quality Upgrade Effect emphasizes how identification strategies must


                                        7
respect the impact of salience on quality choice. Consider the alcohol sales
analysis of Chetty et al. (2009). They compare an excise (lump sum) tax to a
sales (percentage) tax. The excise tax should arguably not effect the quality
of beer chosen (conditional on purchase), since it makes each can of beer “in
the choice set” more expensive by the same amount. The sales tax, however,
may affect both the quantity and quality margins, since it is a percentage of
the price. Simple comparisons of the revenue effects of excise and sales tax
salience may therefore lead to inconclusive results.
        The next section elaborates our empirical strategy for separately estimating
the quantity effect, bounds on the quality upgrade effect, revenue effects, and
the change in the average purchase price.


3         Experimental Design

        We exploit an experiment in price salience performed on StubHub, a
platform for secondary market ticket sales. Between 2013 and 2015, the
platform showed all fees upfront, so the initial price a consumer saw when
browsing ticket inventory was the final checkout price. Between August 19
and August 31 of 2015, the firm ran an experiment where treated consumers
were initially shown ticket prices without fees.4 For treated customers, fees
were added at the checkout page, much like taxes at the register of a store.
We refer to this user experience as Back-end Fees.5 StubHub’s fee structure is
non-linear: the buyer fee is 15% of the ticket price plus shipping and handling,
if applicable. StubHub also charges seller fees, which peak at 15%.
        The experimental condition was assigned at the cookie-level, which identifies
a browser on a computer. Half of site visitors were assigned to the treatment
(BF) group at their first touch of an event page. On the event page, users
are shown a list of tickets. Consumers assigned to the pre-experimental UF
    4
        Ethan Smith, “StubHub Gets Out of All-In Pricing.” Wall Street Journal, August 31, 2015.
    5
        Ticketmaster and other platforms also employ a similar Back-End Fee pricing scheme.


                                                      8
experience (the control group) were shown conspicuous onsite announcements
confirming that the prices they saw upfront included all charges and fees. On
the other hand, treated users in the BF group were shown only the base price
when they perused available listings. Once a user in the BF group selected
a ticket, they were taken to a ticket details page, where they could log in
to purchase the ticket and then review the purchase. It is at this point that
the BF group was shown the total price (ticket cost plus fees and shipping
charges). Users could then checkout or abandon the purchase.
   First, we exploit the randomization to estimate the quantity effect described
in section 2. Let Qi be an indicator that consumer i purchases a ticket, and
let Ti be a BF treatment indicator. The quantity effect is the difference in
the likelihood of purchase between UF and BF users:

                     ∆Q = E[Qi |Ti = 1] − E[Qi |Ti = 0].                     (1)

Because sellers on StubHub cannot price discriminate between BF and UF
users, we need not worry that the two groups face different prices because
of the treatment (nor do we include other control variables). In practice, we
estimate the following regression equation via OLS,

                              Qi = α + βTi + i ,                            (2)

where β represents the difference in the levels of Qi for BF compared to UF
users. To protect business-sensitive information, however, we report estimates
of αβ , which is the percent change in the likelihood of purchase for BF users.
   Measuring the Quality Upgrade Effect is challenging because the random
assignment of the BF experience changes the marginal consumer. As Figure 2
demonstrates, the marginal consumer who purchases under BF has a lower θ,
and chooses lower quality tickets. Measuring the Quality Upgrade Effect needs
to adjust for this selection. Namely, conditional on i making a purchase, let Pi


                                       9
be the purchase price of the ticket that i selects. Let Qi0 be an indicator for
whether consumer i purchases a ticket when he observes fees upfront (Ti = 0)
and Qi1 for when he observes fees at the back-end (Ti = 1). We formulate the
Quality Upgrade Effect using the potential outcomes notation as:

            QUE = E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 1] − E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 0]          (3)

The second term is observed by the econometrician and is the average price
of tickets purchased by UF users. The challenge is that the econometrician
cannot observe the first term, which is the average price of tickets UF users
would buy if they were exposed to the BF treatment. Instead, we observe the
change in the average price, conditional on purchasing:

         ∆P = E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 1] − E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 0]
             = QUE + E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 1] − E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 1]       (4)
             ≤ QUE.

∆P constitutes a lower bound for the Quality Upgrade Effect because of the
change in the marginal consumer, and the standard monotonicity of choice
for a given consumer of type θ (i.e., P r{Qi1 = 1|Qi0 = 1} = 1). ∆P combines
two separate effects: first, the Quality Upgrade Effect, where BF encourages
consumers to purchase more expensive tickets than they would otherwise, and
second, a change in the marginal consumer, as BF induces more consumers
to purchase tickets (the types θ ∈ [θ̃, θ]). The former increases the average
                                    ¯ ¯
purchase price while the latter depresses it in the BF group because the
marginal consumers θ ∈ [θ̃, θ] buy cheaper tickets. ∆P is therefore a lower
                        ¯ ¯
bound for the Quality Upgrade Effect. We estimate (4) using regression
specification (2) with price as the left-hand side variable.
   We derive an upper bound for the Quality Upgrade Effect by setting the
purchase price among marginal consumers to zero. That is, we assume that


                                       10
users who buy under BF but abstain under UF get tickets for free under the
BF treatment. Formally, consider the following expression for ∆P ,

∆P = E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 1] − E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 0]
    = E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 1, Qi0 = 1] · P r{Qi0 = 1|Qi1 = 1}
      + E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 1, Qi0 = 0] · P r{Qi0 = 0|Qi1 = 1}
      − E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 0]
                               P r{Qi0 = 1}
    = E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 1] ·
                               P r{Qi1 = 1}
                                             P r{Qi0 = 1} 
      + E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 1, Qi0 = 0] · 1 −
                                              P r{Qi1 = 1}
      − E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 0]
                                P r{Qi0 = 1}                             P r{Qi0 = 1}
      + E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 0] ·              − E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 0] ·
                                P r{Qi1 = 1}                             P r{Qi1 = 1}
             P r{Qi0 = 1}                                 P r{Qi0 = 1} 
    = QUE ·                − E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 0] · 1 −
             P r{Qi1 = 1}                                  P r{Qi1 = 1}
                                             P r{Qi0 = 1} 
      + E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 1, Qi0 = 0] · 1 −
                                              P r{Qi1 = 1}
        |                         {z                        }
                                   >0

The first equality follows from a conditional probability decomposition of
E[Pi |Qi1 = 1, Ti = 1]. The second equality follows from choice monotonicity,
                                             P r{Qi0 =1}
which implies that P r{Qi0 = 1|Qi1 = 1} =    P r{Qi1 =1} ,   and we add and subtract
an additional term to create a term including QUE. The last equality contains
three expressions, the last of which includes the expected price of tickets
bought by the marginal users who buy under BF but abstain under UF (the
types θ ∈ [θ̃, θ]), which we cannot observe but is greater than zero. If we
           ¯ ¯
assume that these consumers buy at a price of zero, therefore setting this last
term to zero, we obtain the following upper bound on QUE:

            P r{Qi1 = 1}                             P r{Q = 1}
                                                           i1
                                                                      
 QUE ≤ ∆P ·              + E[Pi |Qi0 = 1, Ti = 0] ·                − 1 (5)
            P r{Qi0 = 1}                              P r{Qi0 = 1}

                                        11
Importantly, all of the terms on the left-hand-side in equation (5) can be
estimated directly from the data.
        We note that the change in average purchase price is inherently interesting
in this setting, as it maps to a change in platform revenue. We decompose
expected revenue using conditional probability as:

                E[Ri ] = E[Pi |Qi = 1] · P r{Qi = 1} = E[Pi |Qi = 1] · E[Qi ],

and the change in revenue from treatment is


                  ∆E[Ri ] = ∆E[Pi |Qi = 1] ·E[Qi ] + ∆E[Qi ] ·E[Pi |Qi = 1].                              (6)
                            |    {z      }           | {z }
                                         ∆P                          ∆Q


4         Randomization Check

        The experiment included several million users who visited the site over
ten days. To check randomization, we test whether we can reject a 50%
treatment assignment probability. Results are shown in Table 1. While the
odds of assignment to the treatment group are 50.11% in the full sample, the
large scale of the experiment allows us to reject the null hypothesis of a 50%
assignment probability at the 5% level. Upon closer scrutiny, we discovered
two glitches in the randomization: first, all users who logged in during the first
30 minutes of the experiment were assigned to the treatment group. Second,
users on a particular browser-operating system combination were also skewed
to the treatment group. After eliminating these two groups we can no longer
reject a 50% assignment at the 1% level.6 We therefore exclude these users in
our main analysis.7 Although the probability of treatment remains slightly
above 50%, the difference is economically insignificant.
        As a robustness check on randomization, we test whether UF and BF users
    6
        Or at the 5% level in a one-sided test against the null that the treatment assignment is > 50%.
    7
        However, our main results are robust to their inclusion in the sample.



                                                        12
                                   Table 1: Treatment Assignment

 Sample                   % Unidentified         % Site in Sample    % Back-end Fees         T-statistic
 Full                          0.78%                   100%               50.11%               4.28
 Time Restriction              0.78%                  99.82%              50.09%               3.41
 Time & Browser
 Restriction                   0.82%                  66.12%              50.06%               1.99

Notes: This table reports the assignment of StubHub users (cookies) to different treatment cells. Each row
corresponds to a different sample restriction. The T-statistics is from a two-sided test with a null of a 50%
assignment probability.

                                       Table 2: Covariate Balance

                 User Characteristic          % Difference               T-statistic
                 Experience                        0.01                     0.02
                 Hour                              -0.08                     -1.6
                 Mac User                          0.16                     0.01

Notes: This table presents summary statistics for differences between the BF (treatment) and UF (control)
groups in our experiment from August 19 - 31, 2015.


share similar observable characteristics. Unfortunately, as treatment was
assigned before users are required to log-in, the set of observables is limited.
For example, we observe a user’s purchase history only if they log on to the
site during the experiment or if they have not cleared their cookies after a
recent visit. However, we do see site visits since the last cookie-reset, which
we use to measure experience. We use this proxy as a left-hand side variable
in specification (1). Row 1 of Table 2 shows that the two groups have almost
identical experience levels. BF and UF users also visit the site at similar
hours-of-the-day, and are equally likely to use mac computers (rows 2 and 3).
These results give us confidence that the randomization was successful.




                                                     13
5         Results

        Theory indicates that obfuscation should encourage consumers on the
margin (low values of θ) to switch from the outside option to purchasing a
ticket on StubHub, and also encourage consumers to switch from purchasing
lower to higher quality tickets. Table 3 column 1 shows the net effect on
revenue of the price salience treatment. Consumers identified with cookies in
the Back-end Fee group, where fees are shrouded, spend almost 21% more
than those assigned to the Upfront Fee group. We show revenue effects for
the session (same-day) and over the entire experiment (10 days), and point
estimates are large and statistically significant at the 1% level for both.
        Unfortunately, quantifying salience is difficult, so it is hard to benchmark
our estimate to Chetty et al. (2009). (While the change in user experience in
the StubHub experiment is similar in spirit to their experiment of adding fees
to supermarket shelf prices, it is not clear how closely they align.) They find
that obfuscating a 7.35% tax leads to an 8% revenue increase. On StubHub,
obfuscating a 15% fee leads to a 21% revenue boost.8 Our findings, detailed
below, suggest that upgrades augment the salience effect in our setting.

5.1        Quantity Effect

        We first examine the effect of salience on quantity, as defined in equation (1).
The third row of Table 3 shows that price obfuscation increased the transaction
rate over the full course of the experiment by 14.1%. The second from last row
shows within a cookie-session, consumers in the BF group are 12.43% more
likely to purchase a ticket during a visit (the estimate is significant at the
1% level). Fees average roughly 15% of ticket prices, suggesting a per-session
salience elasticity of 0.1243/0.15 = 0.87, which is a similar order of magnitude
to the elasticity of 1.1 found in Chetty et al. (2009). The 10-day elasticity
    8
    Fee documented in: Katy Osborn. September 1, 2015. “Why StubHub is tacking on ticket fees again.”
The Wall Street Journal.


                                                 14
                             Table 3: Effect of Salience on Purchasing

                                             Back-end vs Upfront Fees % Difference

                                              Baseline              Conditional on Purchasing

       Cookie 10-day                          20.64%                           5.42%
       Revenue                                 (1.38)                          (1.37)

       Average Seat Price                         _                            5.73%
                                                                                (1.5)

       Propensity to Purchase                  14.1%                              _
       at Least Once                           (0.09)

       # Transactions within                  13.24%                           -0.9%
       10 Days                                 (0.88)                          (0.58)

       # Seats within 10 Days                 11.37%                           -2.32%
                                               (1.17)                           (0.84)

       12-Month Churn                             _                            -3.29%
                                                                                (0.66)

       Cookie Session                         18.96%                           5.61%
       Revenue                                 (1.27)                          (1.27)

       Cookie Session                         12.43%                              _
       Propensity to Purchase                  (0.6)

Notes: This table presents coefficient estimates from equation 2 for different right-hand side measures of
purchasing. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.


is larger than the session elasticity (0.141/0.15 = 0.94), suggesting that the
long-run effects of salience may be even greater.
   Table 3 also provides estimates of how salience impacts the number of
tickets purchased. Our simple model abstracts from the consumer’s decision
of how many seats to buy and describes a world where consumers need a fixed
number of seats and either buy that exact number or buy none at all. In
reality, of course, consumers might enlarge their parties if they perceive prices
to be lower. To the contrary, we find that Back-end Fee users buy 2.4% fewer


                                                      15
seats, conditional on making at least one purchase at StubHub. Admittedly,
this effect is swamped by the increased probability of buying at least one
ticket on StubHub, but hints at the nuance in salience responses. The lower
number of seats suggests that the marginal consumers lured by the Back-end
Fee treatment buy slightly fewer tickets.

5.2   Quality Upgrade Effect

   The second column of Table 3 compares differences in the Back-end and
Upfront Fee groups’ behavior conditional on a purchase. This comparison
allows us to assess how salience affects average purchase prices: BF users spend
5.42% more than their UF counterparts. From the platform’s perspective, the
combination of the Quantity Effect and the Quality Upgrade Effect implies
that the effect of salience on their bottom line is substantially larger than
suggested in the earlier literature, which did not consider product choice.
   Using equation (6) we can calculate the increased revenues that are due
separately to the Quantity effect and the Quality Upgrade Effect. From
Table 3, we observe that ∆P = 5.42P and ∆Q = 14.1Q and hence, rewriting
Equation (6) without the expectations operator and subscripts for brevity,

              ∆R = ∆P · Q + ∆Q · P = 5.42 · QP + 14.1 · QP.                 (7)

Dividing both the left- and right-hand sides by revenues, QP , we calculate
the percent change in revenues to be 19.52%, of which 5.42% (about 28%
of increased revenues) are from the Quality Upgrade Effect. Note that the
number of seats declines slightly, so that the change in the average purchase
price per seat is even greater (5.73%).
   We interpret the change in purchase price as evidence of an upgrade effect,
where shrouding fees leads consumers to buy more expensive, higher quality
tickets. This finding is consistent with Lynch and Ariely (2000), who find


                                       16
that subjects in a lab experiment buy higher quality wine when prices are not
displayed alongside product descriptions (and are only shown at checkout).
Our model indicates that the change in the average purchase price constitutes
a lower bound for the upgrade effect – and while smaller than the quantity
effect, even this lower bound is economically meaningful. Our calculation of
the upper bound (5) is 16.52%, suggesting that the Quality Upgrade Effect
may even exceed the Quantity Effect.
          Figure 3: Difference in Likelihood of Purchase by Row (BF versus UF users)
                            3        2
                 % Difference in PDF
                          1 0
                            -1




                                         A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
                                                                 Row



      We provide auxiliary evidence on the upgrade effect using data on seat
locations. In particular, we examine whether Back-end Fee users buy seats
closer to the stage. Rows are often labeled using letters, where letters earlier in
the alphabet correspond to a better view.9 Conditional on purchasing a ticket,
we separately calculate the probability that a BF and UF user purchases a
seat in each row. Figure 3 graphs the relative probability (the ratio of the
two probability mass functions), along with 95% confidence intervals, which
are calculated point-wise. Back-end Fee users are relatively more likely to
  9
      As numbering schemes vary across venues, letter position only proxies for quality.

                                                               17
purchase seats in rows A through D, which are the very first rows, and the
likelihood declines for rows later in the alphabet. These trends provide further
evidence of the Quality Upgrade Effect.


6       Mechanisms

6.1       Misinformation

       In this section, we leverage StubHub’s detailed data to better understand
why fee salience affects consumers so greatly. First, we examine consumer
misinformation using web-browsing behavior. If consumers do not anticipate
fees, then they will receive a negative surprise at check-out and should be
more likely to exit when the fee first appears. For consumers who are nearly
indifferent between purchasing at the base ticket price, the fee makes the
outside option their utility-maximizing choice. Importantly, a misinformation
theory offers implications about where (in the purchase funnel) Back-end and
Upfront Fee users will differentially exit.
       To buy a ticket, a user follows StubHub’s “purchase funnel” on the website
as follows: (1) the consumer first sees the event page, which contains a seat
map and a sidebar with top ticket results, sorted by price in ascending order;
(2) once a consumer clicks on a ticket, the ticket details page appears; (3) the
consumer proceeds to the checkout page where a final purchase decision is
made; (4) the purchase confirmation page completes the process.10 BF users
are shown lower prices than their UF peers until stage (3), when they are
shown the final price, inclusive of fees. If consumers are ignorant of fees, there
should be a larger drop off between stages (1) and (2) for the UF group, since
they see higher prices initially. But there should be a larger drop-off between
stages (3) and (4) for the BF group. If the former is larger than the latter,
  10
    Before reaching the Checkout page, a log-in page appears unless the consumer was already logged into
their account. Many searches are non-linear, where consumers examine multiple event pages (see Blake et al.
(2016)). BF users might even return to stage (1) once they see the additional fees leveed at stage (4).


                                                    18
then Back-end Fees increase the quantity sold.
                       Table 4: Purchase Funnel Behavior by Fee Salience

                    Percentage Click Through from Prior Page                Average Ticket Price
                         BF            UF        % Difference         BF            UF      % Difference
 Event Page               _             _               _           $1.00          $0.84       18.73%


 Ticket Details         27.96         23.56         18.67%          $0.86          $0.78       10.16%
                        (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.00)
 Review & Submit          _             _               _           $0.56          $0.52       7.44%


 Purchase               18.52         33.41        -44.58%          $0.42          $0.39       6.57%
                        (0.06)        (0.1)         (0.00)

Notes: This table reports means and standard errors (in parentheses) on user behavior in the StubHub
purchase funnel. Average ticket prices are normalized by the average price of tickets selected by Back-end
Fee users on the Event Page.


   The left panel of Table 4 shows the absolute and relative rate of UF and
BF user arrivals between these key steps in the purchase process. Consistent
with misinformation, Back-end Fee users are almost 19% more likely to select
tickets (transition from stage 1 to 2) than Upfront Fee users. The difference
is statistically significant at the 1% level and economically large. In contrast,
the drop off rate at the final stage (purchase) is much larger for BF users, as
they are almost 45% less likely to purchase at checkout.
   The right panel of Table 4 presents the average selected ticket price at each
step in the purchase funnel for a subset of events. The average price of tickets
under consideration declines at each step, suggesting that quality also drops.
As the theory predicts, UF users always select cheaper tickets than BF users,
but the difference narrows as users move closer to purchase. When fees are
revealed, the gap is just under 7% compared to an initial difference of almost
19%. In sum, BF users are more likely to contemplate expensive tickets but
when fees are revealed, more of the (potentially surprised) BF users exit than
the UF users who see no change in their expected outlay.

                                                   19
      One important question, from both the firm’s and a policy maker’s per-
spective, is whether consumers learn about the fees over time. As an example,
consumers could act as if they do not anticipate fees in their ticket selection
each time they visit the site. In this case, websites stand to gain substantially
by shrouding fees. This implication contrasts with a model where consumers
anticipate a fee, but do not know the exact level. In a model with learning,
once a consumer makes a purchase, she updates her priors on future StubHub
fees and does not make the same ‘mistake’ twice.
      To examine learning, we repeat our principal analysis (Table 3) separately
by level of user experience. If consumers learn, then experience ought to
lessen the response to obfuscation. Of course, experience is endogenous, so
experienced users may react differently to salience for other reasons (as an
example, they may be higher income). Nonetheless, examining responses
across experience groups hints at how learning might work in this setting.
      To measure experience, we calculate the number of visits each cookie has
made to StubHub prior to the experiment. A 2006 ComScore study found
that 31% of users clear their cookies within 30 days, so we interpret this
as a short-term measure of experience.11 Unfortunately, we cannot exploit
information about logged-in users (like number of past transactions) because
log-in is a potential response to our treatment; users who see lower prices
initially may be more likely to log in to the website in order to purchase. Our
measure does capture the most recent interactions with StubHub, which are
likely to be the most relevant for a user’s knowledge of the site.
      We hypothesize that frequent StubHub users ought to be aware of fees
and therefore less sensitive to salience. We split users into three groups: new
users (no recorded visits), low experience (1-9 visits), and high experience
(10 or more visits). Table 5 shows that the treatment effect is smaller for
cookies with at least 10 site visits: the revenue effect is 15% compared to
 11
      https://www.comscore.com/Insights/Blog/When-the-Cookie-Crumbles



                                                20
21%. These results suggest that salience may be most important in markets
where consumers purchase infrequently (for example, real estate or automobile
markets). However, effects are still large for the most experienced group (the
top 6% of users), which indicates only limited consumer learning. Because
experience is not randomly assigned in the population, we interpret this
evidence as suggestive, rather than causal.
                                   Table 5: Salience by User Experience

                                                                  % Difference

                                            New User             Low Experience          High Experience
 User 10-day Revenue                         21.52%                 21.80%                   15.09%
                                              (0.02)                 (0.02)                   (0.04)
 Propensity to Purchase at Least
 Once                                        15.33%                  13.68%                  10.19%
                                             (0.007)                  (0.01)                  (0.02)
 # Transactions within 10 Days               14.33%                  13.53%                   8.81%
                                              (0.01)                  (0.01)                  (0.03)
 % Sample                                      67%                     27%                      6%

Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates 2 for users of different experience levels. Heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors in parentheses. See table 3 for pooled estimates.


    We examine user churn to understand the long-run effects of salience. If
obfuscation preys on misinformation, then marginal BF consumers, who would
not purchase if shown fees upfront, may be more likely to abandon StubHub
after seeing fees for the first time. Unfortunately, we cannot identify marginal
consumers among the pool of BF consumers. We also cannot compare the
return rates of all BF and UF users, as there is no way to track future
purchases of users who do not log-in to the site. Instead, we compare the
return rates of BF and UF users who purchase during the experiment. As
Table 3 shows, BF users are 3.3% less likely to churn, which is inconsistent
with the simple misinformation story. We emphasize caution in interpreting
churn, however, as it potentially confounds multiple treatments: BF users
may learn about the platform fees when they make a purchase, but they may

                                                       21
also learn about StubHub’s reliability, speed, quality, etc. This additional
learning may increase a consumer’s likelihood of purchase, even if obfuscation
effects are short lived.
   As a robustness check, we compare the likelihood of return for consumers
who were logged into StubHub before the experiment. We can track these users’
purchases after the experiment’s conclusion, regardless of whether they made
a purchase during the experiment window. The difference between BF and
UF return rates drops to 0.65% and loses statistical significance. While this
sample contains consumers with high attachment to StubHub, this comparison
also indicates that salience effects persist beyond initial misinformation.
   Finally, to shed light on the persistence of salience, we construct a panel
dataset that tracks the purchases of BF and UF users over a six month
period centered around the experiment window (May 18 through December 1,
2015). We have already established that BF users spend more, conditional on
purchasing, during the experiment. On September 1, the entire site switched
to BF, so that the only difference between users who had been assigned to BF
versus UF is their experience with the back-end fees. If salience effects are
short-lived, then we would expect UF users, who now experience back-end
fees for the first time, to outspend their BF counterparts who have 10 days
of experience. On other hand, if salience effects persist, then the UF-BF
difference should dissipate after the experiment, as both groups spend more
than they would have in an UF environment. If i denotes the user and t the
purchase date, we model purchase price using the following specification:

   ln pit = α1 · Beforet + α2 · Duringt + α3 · Aftert
                                                                                (8)
           + β1 · Beforet × Ti + β2 · Duringt × Ti + β3 · Aftert × Ti + it ,

where Beforet is an indicator that the purchase happened before the experi-
ment, and similarly for Duringt and Aftert . We estimate equation (8) using
the sample of users who purchase during the experiment window because

                                        22
  Figure 4: Spending Before, During, and After the Platform Switch to Back-end Fees




                                     .08
                 between BF and UF Purchasers
                                           .06
                    Log Spending Difference

                   .02        .04    0




                                                 Before    During   After




these are the only users we can reliably track. During the purchase process,
users log into the site, allowing us to identify their prior and subsequent
purchases. We also cluster standard errors at the user level to account for
serial correlation in individual purchasing decisions.
  Figure 4 displays the estimates of the interactions between the BF treatment
indicator and each time period. BF and UF users spend similar amounts
before the experiment, when both groups experience UF. As in Table 3, we
find that during the experiment, BF users spend almost 6% more than UF
users, conditional on purchasing at least one ticket. However, in the three
month period following the experiment, when all users experience BF, there
is no difference in spending between the two groups. The results are robust to
the inclusion of both buyer and day fixed effects. These event study findings,
taken together with our results on experienced users and churn, indicate
that salience effects are persistent. They suggest that users do not learn to
anticipate the correct fee level after going through the purchase funnel with
back-end fees at least once.




                                                          23
                            Figure 5: Number of Listings Viewed by Fee Salience




                     80
                     60
                  % Users
                  40 20
                     0




                                  1         2               3        4            5+

                                            Back-end Fees          Upfront Fees




Notes: Pearsons Chi-square of 6700 rejects hypothesis that distribution over rows is same in test and control.
(p-value of 0.000)


6.2     Consideration Sets and Search Frictions

    In this section, we present evidence on forces beyond misinformation
that might contribute to the importance of salience: consideration sets and
search frictions. First, we consider whether fee obfuscation widens users’
consideration sets. A growing body of literature (e.g. Goeree (2008)) suggests
that potential consumers often ignore a large fraction of inventory, and instead
focus on choosing between a few products. StubHub presents inventory to
consumers in ascending price order, so that expensive tickets are not visible
to the consumer unless she actively scrolls down or filters the results (e.g., by
section). It is possible that obfuscating fees might draw user attentions to a
wider array of products, leading BF users to make different purchase decisions
than their UF counterparts. We find that BF users scroll 10% more often, a
difference that is statistically significant at the 1% level.


                                                      24
         Table 6: Average Price of Tickets Viewed Relative to UF Initial Selections

                        Back-end Fees                               Upfront Fees
            Initial Checkout    Follow-up Actions        Initial Checkout   Follow-up Actions
                  8.3%                0.8%                     0.0%               1.8%
                   (1.9)              (1.2)                      (–)              (0.6)

Notes: This table reports means and standard errors for the relative price of tickets viewed across groups.
Estimates are normalized by the price of tickets initially brought to check-out by UF users.


   When fees are revealed, BF consumers are already at check-out with their
tickets, but they may choose to go back to the event page if they wish to
re-optimize and purchase cheaper seats. We find that less than a quarter
of BF users exercise this option, which is consistent with a search friction
beyond misinformation. Figure 5 shows the average number of tickets viewed
by BF and UF users. BF cookies are 56% more likely to view multiple ticket
listing compared to their UF counterparts. Table 6 shows that BF users view
cheaper tickets upon their return to the listings page from the checkout page
(six percentage points lower). In contrast, UF users, who are less likely to
return overall, view more expensive tickets if they do.
   Figure 5 shows that BF users are twice as likely to view three or more
listings than their UF counterparts. Viewing more than two tickets suggests
the effects of price obfuscation extend beyond an initial confusion about fees.
BF consumers who return to the event page have seen fees for their initial
selection, but they must calculate the StubHub fee for each new ticket they
consider. If calculation costs are high, as hypothesized by Morowitz et al.
(1998) or Ellison and Ellison (2009), consumers might choose to go down the
funnel multiple times rather than compute the fees themselves. Obfuscation
as a search friction is consistent with our findings on experienced customers,
who ought to anticipate fees but might still bear a higher search cost when
fees are hidden. This evidence is in line with Ellison and Ellison (2009), who
find that firms endogenously create such frictions to soften price competition.


                                                    25
           Figure 6: Google Queries for Competing Ticket Resale Platforms




6.3   Competition with Other Platforms

  Marginal consumers who choose to abandon StubHub may exit the market
or they may purchase tickets through a rival platform. Understanding where
marginal consumers go has important welfare implications. As an example, if
all ticket sellers multi-home, then consumers might buy the same exact tickets
on Ticketmaster that they would have under Back-end Fees at StubHub.
Obfuscation would then have only limited efficiency consequences (through
the product selection margin for users who remain on StubHub). On the other
hand, if consumers who leave StubHub under Upfront Fees exit the market,
then the change in consumer surplus could be much larger.
  To investigate the effect of StubHub’s switch to BF, we employ data from
GoogleTrends on queries for its main competitors: Ticketmaster and SeatGeek.
Both sites act as a secondary market for tickets, with Ticketmaster serving as
the primary market for certain sporting and music events. Google provides
data on weekly query volume for these sites, but normalizes the data separately
for each platform (by dividing by the site’s peak over 2012-2017). Figure

                                        26
6 shows the evolution of queries for 2015 and 2016. The lift in SeatGeek
queries in August 2015 (indicated by a vertical line) suggests that consumers
attracted by BF at StubHub do not detract from other sites.
   We formally test for a change in Ticketmaster (TM) and SeatGeek (SG)
queries using an event-study design akin to (8). We interact indicator variables
for each site with indicators for the time period (Duringt corresponds to the
two weeks when the experiment was running and Aftert corresponds to all
weeks thereafter). Our specification is

  Log(Queriesit ) = β0 + β1 · Aftert + β2 · Aftert × T Mi + β3 · Aftert × SGi
                   + β4 · Duringt + β5 · Duringt × T Mi + β6 · Duringt × SGi
                   + β7 · T Mi + β8 · SGi + it .
                                                                                 (9)

If salience on StubHub affects other platforms, then we should reject the null
hypothesis that the interaction terms coefficients (β2 , β3 , β5 , and β6 ) are zero.
   Table 7 columns 1 & 2 present the regression analogue of Figure 6, cor-
responding to the coefficients on the four interaction terms in equation (9).
There is no discernible break for StubHub or Ticketmaster queries at the
time of the experiment, and the effect on SeatGeek queries is positive and
statistically significant. These findings suggest that the switch to BF at
StubHub was market-expanding, rather than pure business-stealing.

6.4   Seller Responses

   Our focus so far has been on consumer behavior, but changes to the buyer
experience may affect seller behavior. As an example, if obfuscation increases
seller profits, then more sellers may enter the marketplace. In turn, increased
seller participation may bolster competition and help buyers. These sorts of
externalities complicate welfare analysis in two-sided markets.


                                         27
           Table 7: Listing Quality and Google Searches Following Back-end Fees

                                                 Query Index                 Log Listings
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
         Ticketmaster ⨉ Experiment          -6.05          -6.05           _             _
                                           (4.00)         (3.70)
         SeatGeek ⨉ Experiment               2.82           2.82           _              _
                                           (5.56)         (2.51)
         Log Position ⨉ Experiment             _             _            -0.17         -0.17
                                                                         (0.05)        (0.05)
         Ticketmaster ⨉ Post                4.58          4.58              _             _
                                           (4.83)        (4.79)
         SeatGeek ⨉ Post                    0.85          0.85             _              _
                                           (6.10)        (3.26)
         Log Position ⨉ Post                 _             _              -0.15         -0.15
                                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)
         Fixed Effects                       −           Week               −            Day
         Obs                                78            78                −             −

Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates that correspond to equation 9. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors in parentheses. Observations from 06/01/2015 - 12/01/2015, at the weekly level in columns 2
and 3 and at the daily level in columns 3 and 4. Columns 1 and 2 include main effects for Ticketmaster and
SeatGeek. All regressions include main effects for Post (8/31 onwards) and Experiment (8/16-8/30).


    We examine whether inventory responds to the use of BF pricing, with
a focus on ticket quality. Section 5.2 shows that buyers upgrade to higher
quality seats when fees are less salient, making StubHub a more attractive
platform to sellers of high quality tickets. Figure 7 shows the evolution of
inventory on StubHub over time by row letter. Visual inspection suggests
that the relative number of seats in front rows (A-E) compared to back rows
(U-Z) increase after the switch to BF. Consistent with Ellison and Ellison
(2009), we find that sellers respond to the change in the buyer’s experience.
    To further investigate seller responses, we test for a break in listing quality
during and after the experiment, when the whole site switched to BF. To
measure quality, we construct a row number variable, Position, which counts
the number of rows in between the seat and row A plus one (taking a value
of one for seats in row A). We then construct an event study, as in equation


                                                    28
                                                                  Figure 7: Fraction of Listings by Row Letter




                                           8
           # Listings Relative to Rows U-Z
                   2      4 0      6


                                                           04jun2015

                                                                       18jun2015

                                                                                   02jul2015

                                                                                               16jul2015

                                                                                                           30jul2015

                                                                                                                        13aug2015

                                                                                                                                    27aug2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 01jan2016
                                               21may2015




                                                                                                                                                10sep2015

                                                                                                                                                            24sep2015

                                                                                                                                                                        08oct2015

                                                                                                                                                                                     22oct2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                 05nov2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                             19nov2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         03dec2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17dec2015
                                                                                                                       Rows A-E                                                     Rows F-J
                                                                                                                       Rows K-O                                                     Rows P-T




9, with a set of interactions between the log of Position and time dummies.
Table 7 presents the coefficient estimates on the interaction terms, which
are negative and statistically significant at conventional levels for both the
experiment and its aftermath. The point estimates imply that a ticket listed
on StubHub is 15% more likely to be in row A than row B following the
experiment (under BF) compared to before (under UF). The increase in high
quality listings underscores the complexity of platform design, as changes to
one side of the market influence the entry decisions on the other.


7    A Second Experiment: Event-Level Randomization

    The 2015 experiment randomized salience across users so that BF and
UF users had the same StubHub experience, but for the addition of fees
in the latter’s search results. In a earlier experiment performed in 2012 at
StubHub, fee salience was randomized at the event level, which presents
distinct challenges, but offers a nice robustness check for the 2015 experiment.

                                                                                                                                         29
   First, StubHub’s unique inventory threatens the independence assumption
for the 2015 experiment, but not for its 2012 counterpart. Suppose that price
obfuscation merely accelerates, but does not actually alter, the consumer’s
purchase decision. In this case, BF users will tend to buy early in the 2015
experiment, which may reduce inventory for UF users. Comparing purchase
probabilities without taking this censorship into account would mistakenly
indicate a positive treatment effect. In other words, treating user A affects
user B. Blake and Coey (2014) discuss this challenge on eBay. Fortunately,
the 2012 experiment does not suffer from the same contamination concern
because all tickets for a particular event share the same treatment status.
   A second challenge that the 2012 experiment addresses is multi-device
use. In the 2015 experiment, we sort users into BF or UF the first time they
touch an event page on StubHub during the experiment period. StubHub
employs cookies to track users, so that the user remains in the appropriate
group throughout the trial. However, cookies differ across devices, and a
user would be re-randomized into the BF or UF group if she used a different
devise. Switching devices is particularly problematic if its incidence depends
on initial treatment assignment. As an example, if UF users – upon seeing
higher initial prices – delay their purchases and revisit StubHub on a second
device, then the BF treatment would be positively correlated with purchasing.
In the 2012 experiment, tickets to each event retain their treatment status
regardless of the device that consumers use.
   Finally, randomization at the event level provides additional insight into
general equilibrium effects examined in section 6.4. We have shown that
when StubHub alters the consumer’s experience, it alters sellers’ behavior.
Salience might also affect price levels, which is hard to gauge given the unique
inventory on StubHub. For example, if price obfuscation attracts more elastic
buyers, then sellers might lower their prices. If these effects are large, then the
2015 experiment does not provide the true counterfactual of interest: what

                                        30
                                  Table 8: 2012 Experiment Results
                                      Back-end vs Upfront Fees

                                                           % Difference
                  Purchase Probability                       -12.38%
                                                              (6.63)
                  Percentile of Choice Set
                  Selected                                   -11.97%
                                                              (5.62)

Notes: This table reports coefficients estimates based on data from the 2012 StubHub experiment. Standard
errors are clustered at the event level and reported in parentheses.


happens when all users face BF? Instead, the econometrician only observes
what happens on StubHub when fees are shrouded for 50% of users. The
2012 experiment answers this question because a ticket-seller for a particular
match faces an entirely BF or UF audience, but not a mix of both.
       In the 2012 experiment, 33 out of 99 Major League Soccer Games were
randomly selected for UF. Prices for tickets to these games included fees, even
from the initial event page. The remaining 66 matches had the BF experience.
       The results from the 2012 experiment, displayed in table 8, confirm our
2015 findings: fee salience reduces revenue substantially. Consumers are 13%
less likely to buy tickets to an Upfront Fee match.12 The difference has a
p-value of 0.076, with standard errors clustered at the event-level.
       We also examine whether users upgrade to more expensive tickets for BF
games. Unfortunately, tests based on purchase prices are under-powered
because of the high sampling variance across matches. To control for the
unobserved popularity of matches, we test whether users purchase from the
same quantile of price in BF versus UF matches. For each transaction, we
calculate where the purchase ranks in a user’s choice set (StubHub’s entire
inventory for the match at the time of purchase). On average, consumers buy
  12
       Note that fees were approximately 10% in 2012.



                                                    31
          Figure 8: Percentile of Choice Set Purchased in the 2012 Experiment




                   2.5
                   21.5
                Density
                   1
                   .5
                   0




                          0   .2            .4             .6           .8   1
                                   Percentile of Choice Set Purchased

                                    Upfront Fees             Back-end Fees




from a 12% lower quantile for UF compared to BF games. Figure 8 shows
the full distribution of purchase quantiles for BF and UF matches.
    While these results are heartening, we prefer the 2015 experiment for its
larger sample size. Further, experimentation at the event-level suffers from a
different kind of contamination bias: consumers may substitute away from UF
matches (which appear more expensive) to BF matches. The 2015 experiment
is not vulnerable to this type of contamination. The ability to execute two
experimental designs is one advantage of the StubHub setting.


8    Discussion

    Using data from a randomized control trial on StubHub, we find that
shrouding buyer fees increases total revenue by about 20%. The control group
was shown fee-inclusive prices from the initial search page, while the treatment
group was shown base prices until the checkout page. We decompose the
impact of obfuscation into a quantity effect and a quality effect. The latter
accounts for about 28% of the revenue bump because consumers upgrade to


                                               32
higher quality products when they observe lower prices initially. We find that
consumers who are shown fees upfront drop off early in the purchase funnel,
while those shown fees later are more likely to exit after the site displays total
prices, consistent with consumer misinformation.
       We find that salience persists beyond initial misinformation. Experienced
users, who arguably should anticipate the fee, spend 15% more on StubHub
when the fee is shrouded. More strikingly, after the platform switched to Back-
end Fees, the users exposed to the BF treatment during the experiment spend
similar amounts to those newly exposed to Back-end Fees. This behavior
suggests that experience with Back-end Fees does not give users an advantage
in anticipating true final prices. These patterns suggest that salience is not
a one-off phenomenon, which becomes irrelevant as consumers learn about
the sales environment. It is perhaps unsurprising, if not reassuring, that we
find that sellers respond to changes in the salience of the buyer experience.
Sellers are more likely to list high quality tickets when fees are presented at
the back-end, highlighting the nuance of salience effects on a platform.
       Our results also demonstrate that price salience looms large in markets
where consumers purchase only intermittently. The existing literature focuses
on contexts where consumers purchase frequently, such as grocery stores in
Chetty et al. (2009). In these settings, consumers plausibly hold strong beliefs
about both the amount and presentation of fees and taxes,13 and so we might
interpret their response to an abrupt change in salience as a reaction to off-
equilibrium path play. In contrast, most users who visit StubHub during our
experiment are new to the site. Their reactions to salience may more closely
parallel reactions in markets like real estate, higher education, or automobiles,
where policymakers might play a role in mandating fee disclosure.14
       To underscore the magnitude of these salience effects, Table 9 presents
  13
     Chetty et al. (2009) provide survey evidence that the modal consumer in their setting identifies the
correct tax level.
  14
     E.g., starting in 2012, the Department of Transportation requires airlines to advertise fee-inclusive prices.



                                                       33
                             Table 9: Fee Presentation across Platforms

  Marketplace       Salience                                             Fee
  AirBnB              BF                     6-12% Service Fee + Cleaning Fee* + Tax
  DoorDash        Mix BF/UF Service Fee (7-15%) + Delivery Fee (0.99−7.99, for non-subscribers) + Tax
  eBay                BF                          Any Shipping Fees + Sales Tax
  Etsy                BF         Any Shipping Fees + Sales Tax (Buyer, Depending on Residency)
  HomeAway            BF                    5-9% Service Fee + Cleaning Fee ** + Taxes
  Hotels.com          BF                           Variable Service Fee + Taxes
  Instacart           BF                                5% Fee + Any Tip
  Postmates           BF            Service Fee + Delivery Fee (3.99−5.99, for non-subscribers)
  SeatGeek            UF                          20% (Includes Any Delivery Fee)
  TaskRabbit      Mix BF/UF        15% Upfront Service Fee + 7.5% Back-end Trust & Safety Fee
  Ticketmaster        BF                 20% + (Service + Any Facility or Processing Fees)

Notes: Fee levels taken from platform where possible, otherwise from news articles describing the platform.
The third column (Fee) contains links to references for fee level information. Salience data collected by hand
in September 2018.


information on fee levels and presentation at other online ticket retailers and
decentralized marketplaces. The variation across firms is striking: while Tick-
etmaster uses Back-end Fees, SeatGeek defaults to Upfront Fees. Taskrabbit,
a home improvement labor market, includes a 15% service fee in the upfront
price, but adds a 7.5% trust and safety fee on the back-end. More work
exploring the equilibrium determinants of obfuscation across industries and
companies would help shed light on the use and impacts of price obfuscation.




                                                     34
References
Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber, “Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Evidence
  from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program,” The American Economic Review, June 2011,
  101 (4), 1180–1210.

Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Evaluating Behaviorally Motivated Policy: Experi-
  mental Evidence from the Lightbulb Market,” The American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (8),
  2510–2538.

Blake, Thomas and Dominic Coey, “Why Marketplace Experimentation is Harder than it
  Seems: The Role of Test-Control Interference,” Proceedings of the 2014 ACM Conference on
  Economics and Computation, 2014, EC15, 567–582.

  , Chris Nosko, and Steven Tadelis, “Returns to Consumer Search: Evidence from eBay,”
  Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, 2016, EC17, 531–545.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, “Salience and Consumer Choice,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (5), 803–843.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Michael D. Smith, “Consumer Decision-making at an Internet Shopbot:
  Brand Still Matters,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 2001, XLIX (4), 541–558.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,”
 The American Economic Review, September 2009, 99 (4), 1145–1177.

DellaVigna, Stefano, “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journals of Eco-
  nomics Literature, 2009, 47 (2), 315–372.

Ellison, Glenn, “A Model of Add-On Pricing,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2005,
  120 (2), 585–637.

   and Sara Fisher Ellison, “Search, Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities On The Internet,”
  Econometrica, March 2009, 77 (2), 427–452.

Finkelstein, Amy, “E-Z Tax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2009, 124 (3), 969–1010.

Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson, “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
  Supression in Competitive Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2006, pp. 505–539.

Goeree, Michelle Sovinsky, “Limited Information and Advertising in the U.S. Personal Computer
  Industry,” Econometrica, September 2008, 76 (5), 1017–1074.



                                               35
Greenleaf, Eric A., Eric J. Johnson, Vicki G. Morowitz, and Edith Shalev, “The Price
  Does Not Include Additional Taxes, Fees, and Surcharges: A Review of the Research on Partitioned
  Pricing,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 2016, 26 (1), 105–124.

Hossain, Tanjim and John Morgan, “...Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue (Non) Equivalence
  in Field Experiments on eBay,” Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 2006, 6 (2), 1–30.

Lynch, John G. Jr. and Dan Ariely, “Wine Online: Search Costs Affect Competition on Price,
  Quality, Distribution,” Marketing Science, 2000, 19 (1), 83–103.

Morowitz, Vicki G., Eric A. Greenleaf, and Eric T. Johnson, “Divide and Prosper: Con-
  sumers’ Reactions to Partitioned Prices,” Journal of Marketing Research, November 1998, 35 (4),
  453–463.

Seim, Katja, Maria Ana Vitorino, and David M. Muir, “Drip Pricing When Consumers
  Have Limited Foresight: Evidence from Driving School Fees,” Working Paper, February 2017.

Sullivan, Mary W., “Economic Analysis of Hotel Resort Fees,” Economic Issues, Bureau of
  Economics Federal Trade Commission, 2017.




                                               36
