NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM SCOPE AND SPILLOVERS FROM NEW PRODUCT INNOVATION:
EVIDENCE FROM MEDICAL DEVICES
Matthew Grennan
Charu Gupta
Mara Lederman
Working Paper 25183
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25183

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018

Data for this research was provided by Millennium Research Group (www.mrg.net), and financial
assistance was provided by the Mack Institute for Innovation Management. Thanks to Kira
Fabrizio, Jon Kolstad, Robin Lee, Gabriel Natividad, Bob Town, and seminar participants at the
NYU Economics of Strategy Conference, Strategy Research Forum, and Toronto Strategy
Brownbag for helpful comments. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Matthew Grennan, Charu Gupta, and Mara Lederman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm Scope and Spillovers from New Product Innovation: Evidence from Medical Devices
Matthew Grennan, Charu Gupta, and Mara Lederman
NBER Working Paper No. 25183
October 2018
JEL No. D22,D4,D43,D62,I11,K21,L1,L13,L25,L38,L4,L5,M2,M21,O25,O31,O32,O33
ABSTRACT
When firms span related product categories, spillovers across categories become central to firm
strategy and industrial policy, due to their potential to foreclose competition and affect innovation
incentives. We exploit major new product innovations in one medical device category, and
detailed sales data across related categories, to develop a causal research design for spillovers at
the customer level. We find evidence of spillovers, primarily associated with complementarities
in usage. These spillovers imply large benefits to multi- vs. single-category firms, accounting for
nearly one quarter of sales in the complimentary category (equivalent to four percent of revenue
in the focal category).
Matthew Grennan
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
grennan@wharton.upenn.edu
Charu Gupta
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
guptac@wharton.upenn.edu

Mara Lederman
Joseph L. Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6 Canada
Mara.Lederman@Rotman.Utoronto.Ca

1

Introduction

When firms sell products in multiple categories (as they do in many industries including
consumer electronics, automobiles, internet software, and biomedical technology), success
in one product category may generate spillovers in performance to the firm’s other product
categories. Such spillovers arise for several reasons. On the demand side, spillovers can result
from usage complementarities between products or brand preferences that extend across
product categories (Cabral 2000; Chatain 2011). On the supply side, spillovers can arise if
firms that are successful in one category can then exploit economies of scope in activities
like advertising, sales, or R&D which improve their performance in other product categories
(Panzar and Willig 1981; Teece 1982). In addition, multi-product firms may be able to
create spillovers through contracting practices that offer buyers some form of benefit if they
concentrate their purchases with that firm (Whinston 1990). The importance of spillovers,
as well as their source, is at the heart of many recent firm strategy and industrial policy
discussions, due to their potential to foreclose competition and affect innovation incentives.1
In this paper, we estimate the presence and magnitude of spillovers across firms’ categories
at the individual buyer level. Empirically identifying such spillovers is difficult for two
reasons. First, it requires detailed buyer-level data on purchases of multiple products sold
by the same firm. Second, actual spillovers – where success in one product category causes
improvements in performance in others – must be disentangled from firm-specific capabilities
or investments that result in a firm producing superior products across multiple categories.
This requires a source of variation in the performance of a subset of the firm’s products
that is uncorrelated with the performance of its other products, other than through possible
spillovers.
Our setting is the medical device industry – specifically, devices in the area of interventional cardiology. We use monthly data from 2005 to 2013 on a sample of hospitals’ purchases
of three categories of interventional cardiology devices: stents, balloons, and guidewires.
These data allow us to measure each manufacturer’s market share within each device category in each hospital in each month. The raw data indicate that, for firms selling in multiple
categories, their shares across categories within a hospital are highly correlated with one
another, with correlation coefficients at the manufacturer-hospital-month level in the US
market all exceeding 0.4. The goal of this paper is to estimate the extent to which these
1

For example, Steve Jobs termed Apple’s resurgence in the computer market in the 2000s an “iPod
halo effect,” as their experience with the iPod influenced non-Mac users to buy their first Mac computers
(Rawson 2011; Stone 2011). Recent antitrust rulings in telecommunications (Winkler 2018) and internet
software (Brogan 2017) have been driven by concerns about spillovers and innovation. Scale economies and
spillovers have also been central to modern biomedical technology markets for some time (Caves et al. 1991).

2

correlations represent spillovers, rather than firm capabilities, and to identify possible mechanisms underlying any spillovers that we measure.
Our causal research design leverages several institutional details of the market we study.
We consider three devices – stents, balloons and guidewires – that are used together in
angioplasty procedures that treat blockages in the arteries surrounding the heart. Stents
– mesh metal tubes left in the artery to maintain open bloodflow – are the critical device
in these procedures. While balloons and guidewires are used to execute the procedure,
they are less directly critical to long-term patient outcomes. The stent market experiences
significant innovation during our sample period with the introduction of several new drugeluting stents (DES). DES constitute an important technological advance, improving patient
outcomes over previously existing stents (Burt and Hunter 2006; Htay and Liu 2005), and
their introduction resulted in movements of market share to the innovating manufacturers.
Indeed, each of these entry events represents a major shock to stent market shares.2
Uncertainties surrounding the timing of regulatory approval (Stern 2017) mean that the
precise timing of a DES’s approval is unlikely to be correlated with trends in the balloon or
guidewire markets (which are relatively stable technologies during this time period). Furthermore, because stents are the critical and most profitable component of an angioplasty
procedure, it is unlikely that manufacturers would adjust the timing of their innovation in the
stent market in response to events in the balloon or guidewire markets. As a result, we are
able to combine our detailed product market data with difference-in-differences regressions
that exploit this plausibly exogenous variation in stent shares to estimate whether increases
in the share of stents that a hospital purchases from a given manufacturer causally influence
the share of balloons and guidewires that the hospital purchases from that same manufacturer. We also shed light on some of the mechanisms underlying spillovers across categories
in this setting, leveraging the fact that stents have potential usage complementarities with
balloons but not with guidewires.3
While our setting is fruitful because it offers a source of plausibly exogenous variation
in a single product’s share, the medical device industry, in general, is one in which product
spillovers may be economically important for several reasons. First, some medical procedures
involve the use of multiple devices in combination. Manufacturers that produce both (or all)
of the devices used in a procedure can design physical complementarities into their products
2

This type of product-specific variation is relatively rare. It is analogous to observing a large shift in a
search engine’s market share and measuring the ensuing effect on the engine’s other consumer products such
as email or shopping tools.
3
Stents and balloons are both mounted on catheters that are manipulated through a patient’s blood
vessels, and these catheters can share similar controls and design (e.g. the rigidity of the catheter) across
the balloon and stent platforms.

3

such that they work better together than when used with a device from another manufacturer. Second, the success of any procedure involving a medical device depends on both
the inherent quality of the device and the physician’s capability and comfort level using that
device.4 Even when devices are not actually used together in a procedure, complementarities
between a firm’s products may arise if the products share usability features that enable a
physician who is comfortable with one of the products to more easily and successfully use the
other product. Third, innovation is frequent in the medical device industry and the life cycle
of new devices is short, typically about 2 to 3 years. Frequent innovation means that market
leadership in a given category can shift, creating the potential for changes in market share in
other product categories due to spillovers, even if product offerings in those other categories
remain constant. As emphasized by Teece (1986), this can have important implications for
the returns to innovation and overall competitiveness of firms with a portfolio of products
spanning multiple categories relative to more focused firms. Finally, medical devices are
comprise a market where shared capabilities in R&D and sales are potentially important
drivers of correlated success across categories, making the null hypothesis that true causal
spillovers may be a negligible driver of the raw correlations in the data a viable possibility.
Our empirical analysis consists of a series of regressions that relate the share of a given
manufacturer’s balloons or guidewires in a given hospital in a given month to the manufacturer’s share of stents in that hospital in the same month. Our data allow us to carry out this
analysis for hospitals in the US and the EU. While angioplasty is performed in the same way
in the EU as in the US, and provides the same benefits to patients, the regulatory barriers
to entry are much lower in the EU in terms of clinical trials required. This leads to more
firm entry in the EU, but also less information about product quality available upon entry,
than in the US (Grennan and Town 2018). Consequently, this means that the EU market is
less concentrated and has more firms with varying levels of multi-category presence, but at
the same time, new stent introductions have a less pronounced impact on market shares, requiring more assumptions to validate our research design. Since our objective is to estimate
a causal relationship, we focus on analysis of the US market in the body of the paper and
provide results for the EU in Appendix B. We note here that the results from the EU are
qualitatively and quantitatively similar to the US, suggesting the robustness of our findings.
In our preferred specification, we estimate a difference-in-differences model using sevenmonth windows surrounding three major DES introductions in the US. We find that a
10-percentage-point (about one third of a standard deviation) increase in a manufacturer’s
within-hospital stent share raises its within-hospital balloon share by 2.5 percentage points.
4

Indeed, physicians often collaborate with device manufacturers during the design phase (Chatterji et al.
2008; Chatterji and Fabrizio 2012, 2016).

4

When we estimate the impact on guidewires, which do not share a usage complementarity
with stents, our point estimates are much smaller and not statistically significant, suggesting
that familiarity with a manufacturer’s other products may be a source of the spillovers in
this setting.
Given that the average multi-category device manufacturer has a stent share of 0.25 at
the hospital level, our estimate implies that spillovers from stent sales to balloon sales provide
the average multi-category firm in our data with a 6.25 percentage point advantage in its
within-hospital balloon share, relative to a single-category firm selling only balloons. This
is equivalent to a 25 percent increase in the average within-hospital manufacturer balloon
share in US hospitals. With balloon prices at roughly 16 percent of stent prices, these balloon
spillovers provide the average multi-category stent manufacturer the equivalent of additional
4 percent revenue boost in the US, relative to a single-product manufacturer with no such
spillover benefits.
For both guidewires and balloons, we further explore the underlying mechanisms by decomposing spillovers into their extensive and intensive margins. Specifically, we investigate
whether changes to a manufacturer’s stent use in a hospital results in the hospital beginning to use the manufacturer’s other products and/or the hospital increasing its use of those
products (conditional on already using them). Consistent with the usage complementarities mechanism, we find that hospitals that increase their stent usage along the intensive
margin also increase the amount of balloons used from the same manufacturer, but not the
amount of guidewires used from that manufacturer. When we explore the impact of hospitals’ changes in stent usage along the extensive margin, we find that hospitals which begin
buying a manufacturer’s stents are more likely to move on the extensive margin into buying
both that manufacturer’s balloons and its guidewires. This latter finding is suggestive of
economies of scope in contracting costs unrelated to demand directly and adds to a growing
body of literature documenting the value of buyer-supplier relationships and the frictions
to developing new ones (Chatain 2011; Elfenbein and Zenger 2013; Grennan and Swanson
2018a).5
The spillovers we estimate imply that firms which sell products in multiple categories will
reap larger rewards to innovation in a focal market than a smaller firm which operates only
in the focal market and therefore cannot benefit from the additional revenue generated by
such spillovers. This finding contributes empirical evidence to the debate about whether and
how the profitability of innovation relates to firm size and scope (Schumpeter 1942; Teece
5
Grennan and Swanson (2018a), in particular, find a similar extensive margin relationship at the
manufacturer-hospital level in a different sample of hospitals, across a wide variety of device categories,
but without a clear causal research design like the stent entry events in this study.

5

1986; Cohen and Levin 1989). These results also relate broadly to recent antitrust debates in
the technology and telecom sectors where there has been much concern about market power
in one product category affecting competition and innovation in related product categories.
More specifically, they add to the growing body of research on the factors influencing innovation incentives in medical technology in particular (Chatterji and Fabrizio 2012; Nistor
and Tucker 2015; Chatterji and Fabrizio 2016; Galasso and Luo 2017; Stern 2017; Grennan
and Town 2018; Galasso and Luo 2018).
This paper also contributes to literatures in business strategy, industrial organization
economics, and the economics of innovation on the returns to firm scope and the relationship
between firm scope and innovation. In particular, we focus on issues of firm scope that arise
in multi-product and multi-category industries (see Bailey and Friedlaender (1982); Teece
(1982) for an overview of many relevant issues). Similar to work by Borenstein (1991) and
by Lederman (2007, 2008) in the airline industry and by Chatain (2011) in legal markets, we
directly measure spillovers between different products (or categories of products) offered by
the same firm to the same buyer. There is a growing number of studies using a combination
of detailed data and causal research designs to measure the magnitude of – and mechanisms
behind – spillovers at the buyer level. These studies include: Hendricks and Sorensen (2009)
which examines information shocks that spill over between new and old albums for the same
musical artist; Ho et al. (2012) which studies how suppliers use contracting to “force” related
DVD titles onto video rental store buyers (a mechanism suggested in theoretical work on
tying, bundling, and cross-subsidization of products to deter entry by new firms (Whinston
1990; Nalebuff 2000, 2004); Cabral and Natividad (2016) which studies the combination of
both information and contracting mechanisms in the retail DVD market; and Elfenbein and
Zenger (2013) which studies the development of buyer-supplier relationships in the context
of manufacturer commodity procurement. To our knowledge, we are the first to provide
causal evidence on the primary spillover mechanism suggested by our analysis – similarities
in user experience across product categories.6
We do not examine the advantages of preemption via product proliferation in the same
category as in Schmalensee (1978) or Burton (1994), or the broader issues around corporate
diversification into potentially unrelated business areas as in Montgomery and Wernerfelt
(1988) and the related literatures. Our estimated causal effect also excludes advantages such
as economies of scope in research and development (Henderson and Cockburn 1996; Macher
and Boerner 2006) or firm-specific capabilities or focus (Siggelkow 2003) in product or sales
team quality. However, comparing the magnitudes of our causal estimates to the magnitudes
6

This result also relates to prior theoretical work on firm strategies surrounding product compatibility
(Matutes and Regibeau 1988).

6

of the estimates obtained when we estimate less restrictive specifications suggests that, while
these other mechanisms may operate, the spillovers we measure are a large component of the
full set of factors underlying the observed correlations in within-firm sales across categories
in our setting.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 descries our empirical
setting and provides relevant institutional background. Section 3 provides details regarding
the dataset construction and descriptive patterns. Section 4 presents our empirical approach.
Section 5 reports and discusses our results. A final section concludes.

2

Industry background

In this section, we provide relevant institutional background information on the specific
medical devices we study and the procedures for which they are used, the hospital purchasing
process, and the regulatory approval process for medical devices. We conclude the section
with a discussion of the possible sources of spillovers in this setting.

2.1

Interventional cardiology

Interventional cardiologists focus on the treatment of coronary and vascular conditions using nonsurgical, catheter-based treatments. Interventional treatments may offer several advantages over surgical options, for example, in recovery time, patient satisfaction, lower
procedural risk, and avoidance of cardio-pulmonary bypass in certain patients (Tobis and
Abudayyeh 2015). The size of the global interventional cardiology market makes it an economically meaningful industry for study. One estimate valued the global market in 2013 at
approximately $15 billion and forecasts it to reach more than $25 billion by 2020 (PRNewsire,
2018). In our data, we focus on the three interventional cardiology medical devices most
commonly purchased by hospitals: stents, balloons, and guidewires.
Balloon angioplasty was introduced in the 1960s to relieve obstruction and narrowing
of the coronary artery. A guidewire is used to guide a balloon catheter (we use the term
balloon and balloon catheter interchangeably throughout the text) to a blockage in the artery,
and the balloon is expanded at high pressure to push open the blockage. Stents – small,
expandable mesh tubes that provides support to the artery – were approved by the FDA in
1994 and improved the effectiveness of angioplasty.
Importantly, stents are inserted into the body mounted and compressed onto a balloon
catheter. The stent and balloon are then guided to the blockage (which has been previously
pushed open by a high-pressure balloon), and the balloon is expanded and then released to

7

deploy the stent into the arterial walls. Though the balloons that deploy stents operate under
different pressure than those used to push open blockages, they are constructed similarly
and have similar controls. Consequently, physicians who develop experience with a given
manufacturer’s stents will naturally be familiar with that manufacturer’s balloons. While
interventional cardiologists also use guidewires during balloon angioplasty, no such usage
complementarities exist between stents and guidewires.
Our empirical strategy (discussed in more detail in Section 4 below) exploits the introduction of drug-eluting stents (DES), stents that are coated with a drug that is slowly
released over time to inhibit scar tissue growth. Many large randomized clinical trials showed
improved outcomes from DES relative to bare-metal stents (Htay and Liu, 2005), and successive generations of DES improved to the point that angioplasty has replace coronary artery
bypass graft as the most prevalent treatment for coronary artery disease.

2.2

Hospital purchasing process

It is useful to keep in mind some basic facts about the structure of decision making and the
players in this market. First, hospitals generate revenue by performing a procedure (such
as an angioplasty with a stent) and the price of the device is an input cost the hospital
incurs. The physician who performs the procedure will typically be compensated either as
a salaried employee of the hospital or on a fee-for-service basis for the procedure. Notably,
in either case, the financial benefits to the physician are unrelated to the specific brand of
device used. Physicians typically have strong preferences over which specific product to use
for a given patient/lesion type because devices are differentiated in physical characteristics
of the implanted device itself (for stents: examples are shape, strength, flexibility, and type
of drug/polymer) and also characteristics that affect ease of implantation (for stents: unexpanded size and flexibility, and controls and capabilities of the catheters and balloons used
in delivery). In fact, stents and other devices critical to their procedures are often referred
to as “physician preference items.” The supply side of the market is thus a differentiated
oligopoly, and prices are typically negotiated between manufacturers and hospitals, hospital
systems, or regional purchasing authorities.
There is no “search” by buyers in the conventional sense because a given brand can
only be purchased directly from its manufacturer. The manufacturer holds inventory onsite at the hospital and the purchase is made when the physician pulls the product off the
shelf and implants it into the patient. Stent contracts typically specify a linear price for
the contract duration, often a year, but renegotiated more frequently if market conditions
change. For more details on hospital purchasing, we refer the reader to Grennan and Swanson

8

(2018b), who find that purchasing practices via which these contracts are negotiated vary
widely across organizations. Some hospitals have large materials management or purchasing
departments with agents who specialize in negotiations. Sometimes a large business unit,
such as a catheter lab in the case of stents, will coordinate its own purchasing separately
from the rest of the hospital. Hospitals also vary in access to information on the prices other
hospitals pay via GPOs, hospital system membership, or informal networks of peers.7

2.3

Regulatory approval process

Medical device regulation in the US mandates that the FDA determine a device “safe and
effective” to grant market access. Devices fall into classes (I, II and III), based on perceived
health risk. A Class III device is defined as one used in “supporting or sustaining human
life, of substantial importance in preventing impairment of human health, or presents a
potential unreasonable risk of illness or injury.” Stents are Class III, while balloon catheters
and guidewires are Class II. In the US, the approval process for a Class III device generally
requires data from randomized clinical trials, involving thousands of patients and costing
tens of millions of dollars to complete.
In the EU, the regulatory process is quite different, governed primarily by the Medical
Devices Directive of June 1993, which has been adopted by each EU member state, and
relies heavily on third parties known as “notified bodies,” which are independent, commercial
organizations that are designated, monitored, and audited by member states via “competent
authorities.” To obtain EU approval, a Class III medical device needs to demonstrate safety
and performance which can usually be demonstrated with simpler and cheaper clinical trials
than required in the US by the FDA. Once a device has been approved for use in one EU
country, it can be marketed in any member country.
The gap between the two regulatory systems is the focus of a number of consulting and
government reports and an academic study by Grennan and Town (2018) using the same
stent data we use here (and to which we refer the reader for greater detail and data on these
processes). For the purposes of this study, the most important differences between the two
markets are: (1) the lower monetary and time costs of obtaining EU approval which results
in more and earlier market entry in the EU than US (particularly for stents, where the
gap in processes is largest); and (2) the lower information requirements for EU entry which
leads to more gradual market adoption of new products as US trial evidence accrues. Our
empirical strategy described below exploits three major DES entry events; these product
7

Grennan and Swanson (2018b) provide a host of evidence that there is no systematic use of quantity,
market share, or bundled discounts in pricing for stents, balloons, and guidewires. Appendix C.2 examines
price variation in our data and finds our results unaffected.

9

introductions lead to gradual changes in market share in the EU whereas they lead to rapid
shifts in market share in the US as the device relative quality advances are well known by
that time.8

2.4

Potential sources of spillovers

There are several potential sources of spillovers in the medical device setting, which we aim
to disentangle from firm-specific capabilities that may result in success across all categories.
First, as discussed above, usage complementaries may exist between some devices, enabling
physicians who use them to simultaneously become familiar with more than one device. In
addition to usage complementarities, economies of scale and scope in manufacturer-physician
relationships can also contribute to spillovers across categories.
These extend beyond the hospital setting to other activities which have drawn more
scrutiny from policy makers. With the rapid pace of new technology development, physicians
require continuous education and training. Much of this training is sponsored by device
manufacturers, and larger manufacturers are able to defray the fixed costs of travel, space,
and setup over a larger portfolio of product types. On the flip side, many of these physicians
at the technological frontier also play an important role as developers of the next generation
of technologies (Chatterji et al., 2008), and they formalize this role with consulting contracts
with the manufacturers. Despite the legitimate benefits of these consulting and training
relationships, they do open the door for potential conflicts of interest. While we do not
speak to these conflicts of interest directly, our investigation into mechanisms does shed some
light on this issue indirectly – to the extent that spillovers are driven by complementarities
(concentrated in balloons vs. present across balloons and guidewires), this would seem less
consistent with bias due to conflicts, at least in driving spillovers.

3

Data and descriptive statistics

3.1

Data

Our data come from Millennium Research Group’s (MRG) MarketTrack survey of hospital
medical device purchasing patterns. The survey is a key source of market intelligence in the
medical device sector and aims to produce representative estimates of the distribution of
market shares and prices of medical devices by country. Our data cover a random sample of
hospitals in the US and EU, covering about ten percent of hospitals by revenue from January
8

Appendix A.4 shows the changes in market share for innovating firms with DES product entries.

10

2005 through June 2013. The data contain information on the precise quantities of each interventional cardiology device purchased by a hospital in a month. We limit our sample to
the three categories of devices within interventional cardiology (based on MRG’s segmentation) that hospitals most often purchase: stents, balloon catheters and guidewires. Because
manufacturers may produce multiple products within the same category (e.g., several different balloon catheters), we aggregate a hospital’s purchases of different products from the
same manufacturer in the same category. The resulting dataset is at the manufacturerhospital-month level and includes 81,065 manufacturer-hospital-month observations in the
US and 612,162 observations in the EU.9
Figure 1 shows the distribution of firms based on the number of categories of interventional cardiology devices in which they sell products. Averaging across firm-months in the
data, 62% of firms which sell devices in one of the three device categories we consider, sell
in all three. 37% of firms sell in only a single line in month. Almost no firms sell in two of
the three categories. In the EU, the distribution is less bimodal. About 44% of firms sell in
only a single category in the typical month while 34% sell in two and 22% sell in all three.
The prevalence of firms selling in multiple categories creates the potential for spillovers to
operate. The remainder of the body of the paper will focus on the US market with the
corresponding analysis for the EU presented in Appendix B.

3.2

Variables and summary statistics

Our main variables of interest are the within-category shares for each manufacturer in each
hospital-month. Specifically, we construct scjht which measures the overall share of all devices
in category c purchased by hospital h in month t that are produced by manufacturer j. It
is calculated as the total number of units q manufacturer j sells in category c to hospital
h divided by the total number of units of devices in that category that hospital h buys
from all manufacturers. Our overall share measure accounts for censoring at zero by explicitly including manufacturer-category-hospital-month observations with zero units purchased
c
(qjht
= 0), provided the manufacturer has a product in that category available in the market
during that month. In some specifications, we distinguish changes in hospitals’ usage along
the intensive and extensive margin. To capture the extensive margin, we construct an indicator 1{scjht>0 } which equals one if hospital h purchases any quantity of devices in category
c from manufacturer j during month t. The intensive margin share variable is then simply
9
Because the MRG survey is focused first on collecting data on coronary stents, other product category
data is missing in a small number of hospitals. We restrict our sample for analysis to hospital-months reporting data on all three of our categories of interest. We also account for censoring at zero by explicitly including
c
zero-unit observations (qjht
= 0), provided that hospital-month is reporting data and the manufacturer has
a product available in any category. More details on sample construction are available in Appendix A.

11

Figure 1: Number of categories across firms

60

62.1

36.9
33.9

22.4

20

Percent of firms
40

43.7

0

0.9

one

two

three

one

US

two

three

EU

Figure depicts monthly averages across the sample period, January 2005 through
June 2013. Total number of manufacturer-market-month observations is 674 in
the US and 3,330 in the EU.

the conditional share scjht |1{scjht>0 } . Precise variable definitions appear in Appendix A.
The first three columns of Table 1 provide means and standard deviations of the hospitallevel share variables. The last two columns show the mean number of manufacturers active
in a category at the market and hospital level, respectively. On average, across months in
our data, there are between 3.9 and 5.9 manufacturers active in each device category and
between 2 and 3 manufacturers active in each hospital, indicating that the market is more
concentrated at the hospital level than country level. The means of the indicator variables
reveal that, on average, in a given month, a manufacturer will sell its devices to about 30
percent of the hospitals in the market (27 percent for balloons, 30 percent for guidewires
and 32 percent for stents). Conditional on selling to a hospital, on average, a manufacturer
accounts for between 40 and 48 percent of the devices purchased by the hospital in the
category.
To motivate our analysis, we examine the raw correlation between a manufacturer’s
within-hospital shares in different categories. We see a strong positive correlation between manufacturers’ within-hospital stent shares and within-hospital balloon shares (0.711).
We also observe a positive correlation between a manufacturer’s within-hospital stent and
guidewire shares (0.462) as well as between its balloon and guidewire shares (0.539), though

12

Table 1: Summary statistics
scjht

1{scjht>0 }

scjht |1{scjht>0 }

c
|
|Jm

|Jhc |

stents

0.128
(0.257)

0.321
(0.467)

0.398
(0.313)

3.95
(0.22)

2.53
(0.92)

balloons

0.128
(0.281)

0.266
(0.442)

0.480
(0.357)

4.82
(0.39)

2.09
(0.89)

guidewires

0.128
(0.261)

0.297
(0.457)

0.430
(0.315)

5.91
(0.96)

2.33
(0.92)

Table provides mean values for the hospital-level shares by category in the typical month. Note that the
overall share variable has the same mean across categories due to our inclusion of zero-quantity observations
to address censoring. |J c | gives mean number of manufacturers active in the market by category, and |Jh |
gives mean number of manufacturers active in a given hospital by category. Standard deviations are in
parentheses. Mean number of US hospitals in the sample in the typical month is 101.6, with a standard
deviation of 4.3. Total number of US manufacturer-hospital-month observations is 81,065.

the magnitudes are smaller. Of course, these correlations cannot distinguish spillovers from
other unobservable factors that may cause a hospital to concentrate its purchase of devices
in different categories with the same manufacturer. The empirical strategy we develop below
aims to do this.

4

Empirical approach

4.1

Panel regressions of cross-category spillovers

The goal of our empirical analysis is to estimate whether success in one category causes
improvements in the performance of a firm’s other categories. To do this, we estimate a
series of regressions which relate a manufacturer’s within-hospital share of either balloons or
guidewires to its within-hospital share of stents, controlling for flexible time trends.10 Our
main estimating equation is the following:
balloons/gwires

sjht

= β0 + β1 sstents
+ δjt + δjh + jht
jht

10

(1)

We do not find evidence of meaningful effects on prices, and including price limits our sample size (price
data is not reported by all hospitals, and is unavailable when usage is zero); so we focus on changes in
quantities as our primary metric of success. Appendix C.2 provides results of our main specifications with
price as the dependent variable, showing that prices of balloons and catheters do not change with the stent
introductions we examine. It also provides extensions of our results, adding price as an independent control
variable, where we find our results unchanged. This is consistent with anecdotal evidence that physician
decisions about what product to use are not very responsive to price, which has been confirmed in previous
studies of coronary stent demand (Grennan 2013, 2014; Grennan and Town 2018) and demand for other
medical devices (Grennan and Swanson 2018a) that find very small effects of price on quantities.

13

The key parameter of interest is β1 which captures how a manufacturer’s within-hospital
balloon (or guidewire) share changes as its within-hospital stent share changes. The primary
challenge in estimating this equation is disentangling spillovers from unobservables that may
influence a firm’s performance in multiple categories simultaneously. For example, firms that
produce higher quality products may sell more of all of their products to particular hospitals.
Alternatively, firms that initiate a marketing campaign may experience increases in the sales
of all of their devices.
We use several strategies to control for unobservable factors that may result in a correlation in the within-hospital shares of a manufacturer’s different products. First, we include
manufacturer-hospital fixed effects δjh in our models. These fixed effects control for timeinvariant unobservable factors that may influence a manufacturer’s sales of all three devices
to a given hospital. With the inclusion of these fixed effects, our estimates are identified by
changes in the shares of products that a hospital purchases from a manufacturer, rather than
differences in levels across hospitals, thus controlling for the possibility that some hospitals
prefer devices from particular manufacturers.
Second, we control for manufacturer-time fixed effects δjt (at the monthly level). This
controls for the possibility that, over time, manufacturers may take actions that improve
the attractiveness of all of their products simultaneously. For example, this could result
from a new advertising campaign or from positive or negative press coverage. By including
these effects, we control for such changes, and we only identify spillovers from changes in
a manufacturer’s stent performance in a particular hospital that is over and above any
performance changes that manufacturer has in the market overall in that month. This
ensures that we are estimating a hospital-level (buyer-level) relationship change.
Finally, to further eliminate the possibility of time-varying unobservables that impact the
within-hospital shares of all of a manufacturer’s products simultaneously, we focus on the
discrete changes to stent shares that result from innovative DES product entry. The regulatory requirements for introducing a new coronary stent are expensive and time-consuming
in the US, with the precise timing and outcomes of completing clinical trials and obtaining
regulatory approval being uncertain (Stern 2017; Grennan and Town 2018). This uncertainty
allows us to consider the stent share changes that result from new product introductions as
plausibly exogenous with respect to balloon and guidewire market trends, especially within
the narrow time windows we study in our tightest specification.
The three particular events that we focus on – Medtronic Endeavor, Abbott Vascular
Xience V, and Medtronic Resolute Integrity – had the largest immediate impact on the
innovating firm’s US stent market share during our sample period.11 Figure 2 demonstrates
11

Appendix A.4 provides information on all DES introductions over our sample period.

14

Market share
.2
.4

.6

Figure 2: Three major DES introductions and stent market shares

xience v

resolute integrity

0

endeavor

2005m1 2006m1 2007m1 2008m1 2009m1 2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1
Date
Medtronic
Boston Scientific

Abbott Vascular
Cordis

Markers indicate the three major DES introductions of interest; lines give overall market share in
stents. We plot market share for the four manufacturers active in the US stent market: Boston
Scientific, Abbott Vascular, Cordis, and Medtronic. Appendix Table 4 provides more details on
the major manufacturers active across the stent, balloon, and guidewire device categories.

15

this first stage – the product introductions we exploit induce variation in stent market share.
For the US, we see immediate changes in shares around all three events.
As discussed above, the introduction of these new stents is unlikely to be correlated with
other changes that would (directly) impact a manufacturer’s sales of balloons or guidewires.
We can therefore use these three product introductions as “event studies” for estimating
spillovers. Specifically, we estimate how changes in a manufacturer’s within-hospital stent
share after the introduction of one of these new stents influenced that manufacturer’s withinhospital balloon or guidewire share and we interpret this estimate as capturing the causal
effect. It is worth noting that while we focus on three introductions, these product introductions induce changes in the stent shares of both the introducing firms and competing firms,
both of which serve to identify our coefficient of interest. Thus, the key identifying assumption in our event study analysis is that the new product introductions are not correlated
with unobserved changes made by either the introducing firm or other firms that influence
their sales of balloons and guidewires.
Finally, we note that while these three DES introductions assist with the identification
of spillovers, they also share the challenges of external validity due to the fact that they
necessarily limit the analysis to narrow windows around these specific events. Because of
this, we also estimate spillovers using the panel regression model above and the full data.
We then zero in on the event studies.

4.2

Decomposition into extensive and intensive margins

After obtaining estimates of spillovers using the major DES introductions, we decompose
those spillovers into changes in the intensive and extensive margins. In particular, we estimate whether spillovers result when hospitals which already used a manufacturer’s stents
use them more and/or when hospitals that did not use a manufacturer’s stents begin using
them. We look at spillovers in terms of both the intensity of balloon (or guidewire) use and
the probability of using that manufacturer’s balloons (or guidewires). Characterizing the
pattern over spillovers along these different margins helps shed light on which mechanisms
may be causing the spillovers to exist. In particular, usage complementarities suggest that
intensive margins should be linked for stents and balloons, but not for stents and guidewires.

5

Results: Spillovers across product categories

Table 2 present coefficient estimates from regressions of a firm’s within-hospital share of
either balloons or guidewires on that firm’s within-hospital stent share. We first present the

16

specification with no fixed effects and then separately add manufacturer and manufacturerhospital fixed effects to control for firm capabilities and buyer preferences which could result
in certain manufacturers having a high within-hospital share for all of their devices. In the
final specification of each panel, we focus on variation in stent shares that results from the
three DES introductions, restricting to three-month windows around each event (for seven
months total including the introduction month).
We begin our discussion with these event study specifications (Column 5 for balloons and
Column 10 for guidewires), which we consider our most credible specifications for identifying
causal spillovers. Looking first at spillovers from stents to balloons, we find a coefficient on
the within-hospital stent share of 0.25, indicating that a 10-percentage-point increase (about
one third of a standard deviation) in a manufacturer’s stent share in a hospital generates a
2.5-percentage-point increase in its balloon market share in that same hospital.
This result has nontrivial implications for the performance of multi- vs. single-category
firms. To quantify this, consider that the average multi-category device manufacturer offering
stents and balloons has a within-hospital stent share of 25 percent, and thus enjoys an
advantage over a single-category firm selling only balloons of 6 percentage points (β1 ∗(sstents
∗
jht
100) = 0.25 · 25 = 6.25). This is 25 percent of the average within-hospital manufacturer
balloon share of 25 percent in US hospitals. Thus focused balloon firms seem to be at a
substantial disadvantage in the balloon market, all else equal. Relatedly, with balloon prices
at roughly 16 percent of stent prices, this spillover provides the average multi-category stent
manufacturer the equivalent of additional 4 percent revenue boost in the US, relative to a
single-category stent manufacturer with no such spillovers.12
Table 2: US Spillovers
Balloons

sstents
jht

Observations
Adj. R2
Mfr FE
Mfr-Hosp FE
Mfr-Month FE

Guidewires

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.778***
(0.0216)

0.540***
(0.0273)

0.224***
(0.0289)

0.255***
(0.0308)

0.246***
(0.0377)

0.469***
(0.0261)

0.207***
(0.0331)

81,065
0.506

81,065
0.627
yes

81,065
0.865

80,475
0.870

15,803
0.902

81,065
0.213

81,065
0.573
yes

yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

(8)

(9)

0.0528** 0.0288
(0.0213) (0.0222)

(10)
0.0170
(0.0271)

81,065
0.893

80,475
0.895

15,803
0.919

yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

for balloon specifications and sguidewire
for guidewire specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the
The dependent variable is sballoons
jht
jht
hospital level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.
12
Appendix A.3.2 provides summary stats by multi- and single-category status. Appendix C.2 provides
summary statistics on prices (as well as results of regressions including price as a control variable, which has
no effect on the results). Marginal costs in these medical device markets are typically thought to be very
low relative to prices, with margins of 80 percent or more, making revenue a good proxy for profits (Burns
2005).

17

Columns (1-4), which build up to our preferred specification, provide some insight into
the robustness and relative magnitude of our main spillover estimate. Column (4) uses the
exact same specification but is estimated on the full dataset instead of restricting to the
window around the three major entry events. The spillover estimate from the full sample
is statistically indistinguishable from the estimate in the event windows, which we find
reassuring in terms of external validity: It suggests that there is not some other important
source of variation in stent shares with a distinct spillover on balloons that we do not capture
in analyzing the entry event time periods.
Columns (1-3) build up our fixed effects.13 Column (3) differs from (4) in that it removes
the manufacturer-time fixed effects. The fact that the spillover estimate remains statistically
identical between these two specifications is consistent with our understanding from qualitative analysis that there is little independent variation in the balloon market over time.
Column (2) differs from (3) in that it includes only manufacturer fixed effects (rather than
manufacturer-hospital fixed effects). The larger coefficient estimate – specifically, 0.54 as
compared to 0.23 – indicates that there are unobserved factors at the manufacturer-hospital
level – potentially preferences or sales effort – that are positively correlated across stents
and balloons for the same manufacturer. The difference between these two specifications
demonstrates the importance of controlling for these factors and also that our causal estimate of spillovers represents a large portion of all factors that drive these correlations across
categories within a manufacturer-hospital pair. Finally, Column (1) provides a coefficient
estimate of 0.78 with no controls. The positive difference between (1) and the specification with manufacturer fixed effects in (2) is indirect evidence that there are unobserved
manufacturer-specific attributes – potentially R&D or sales capabilities – which result in
some manufacturers having higher shares of both stents and balloons. That said, the magnitude of our causal estimate – relative to the estimate in Column (1) – suggests that within
the broad class of all potential explanations of why sales might be correlated across categories
within a manufacturer, the hospital-level spillovers we identify are quantitatively important.
Columns 6 through 10 present the same regressions as in the first five columns but
with a manufacturer’s within-hospital guidewire share as the dependent variable. As in the
previous table, with the inclusion of manufacturer and manufacturer-hospital fixed effects
(Columns 7 and 8), the coefficient estimates on within-hospital stent share fall relative to the
specifications with no fixed effects (Column 6). Moving from the specification with no fixed
effects to one which includes manufacturer-hospital fixed effects decreases the coefficient on
13

Appendix C.1 includes robustness checks where we do not add manufacturer-month fixed effects but
instead explicitly include the leave-out within-market share as a control in the regressions; our conclusions
do not change.

18

US within-hospital stent share from 0.47 to 0.05. The large relative decline in the coefficient
suggests that the raw correlation between stent and guidewire shares is to a large extent a
product of fixed manufacturer and manufacturer-hospital specific factors shared across these
two categories.
As Column 9 adds manufacturer-time fixed effects and Column 10 restricts to windows of
time around the three stent entry events, the coefficient on stent share decreases further and
is no longer statistically significant at conventional levels. Thus, in contrast to the case of
balloons, we find limited evidence of within-hospital spillovers in guidewires – manufacturerspecific effects and time trends appear to play a greater role. Given that there are usage complementarities between stents and balloons but not between stents and guidewires,
this pattern of results suggests these complementarities may be a cause of within-hospital
spillovers in this setting.

5.1

Decomposition into extensive and intensive margins

Table 3 provides results that decompose extensive and intensive margin effects at the hospital
level. This decomposition directly tests the extent to which the spillover mechanism is related
to the amount of usage conditional on contracting (intensive) or related to the contracting
process itself (extensive), which adds to a growing body of literature documenting evidence
regarding the value of buyer-supplier relationships and the frictions to developing new ones
(Chatain 2011; Elfenbein and Zenger 2013; Grennan and Swanson 2018a). It also provides
further indirect evidence regarding the usage complementarity mechanism: To the extent
that the strength of usage complementarities increase in the amount of usage, we would
expect that mechanism to be evident primarily in the intensive but not extensive margin.
Looking first at spillovers onto balloons, Column 1 of Table 3 replicates our event study
specification from the previous table. In Column 2, we decompose the spillovers we measure
into the intensive and extensive margins by adding an indicator for whether or not manufacturer j sells any stents in hospital h at time t as a regressor. Once we do so, the original
overall share measure now represents the intensive margin and the indicator, the extensive
margin. The statistically insignificant and nearly zero coefficient on the indicator variable
tells us that the increase in balloon share measured in our main specification is driven by
changes in the intensive margin of stent usage. Specifically, when hospitals that already
purchase stents from a given manufacturer increase their stent share, they also increase the
share of balloons they purchase from that manufacturer.
Next, we explore whether changes in a hospital’s stent purchases influence the probability
that it purchases balloons from the same manufacturer. To capture probability of use (rather

19

Table 3: US Decomposition
Balloons
sballoons
jht

sstents
jht

Guidewires
1{sguidewires }
sguidewires
jht
jht>0

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.246***
(0.0377)

0.239***
(0.0384)
0.0100
(0.00933)

0.244***
(0.0350)

0.154***
(0.0339)
0.122***
(0.0244)

0.0170
(0.0271)

0.00889
(0.0281)
0.0111
(0.00685)

0.0401
(0.0290)

0.00338
(0.0356)
0.0499**
(0.0202)

15,803
0.902
yes
yes

15,803
0.902
yes
yes

15,803
0.821
yes
yes

15,803
0.823
yes
yes

15,803
0.919
yes
yes

15,803
0.919
yes
yes

15,803
0.844
yes
yes

15,803
0.844
yes
yes

1{sstents
jht>0 }

Observations
Adj. R2
Mfr-Hosp FE
Mfr-Month FE

1{sballoons
jht>0 }

Robust standard errors clustered at the hospital level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.

than intensity of use), we employ as the dependent variable an indicator for whether a
hospital purchases balloons from a given manufacturer in a month. The results in Column
3 indicates that a 10-percentage-point increase in stent share increases the probability of a
hospital purchasing balloons by the same manufacturer by 2.4 percentage points. In Column
4, we decompose this result into the intensive and extensive margins for stent purchases.
For hospitals that begin to purchase stents from a particular manufacturer, after the major
DES introductions, the probability that they purchase balloons from that manufacturer is
12 percentage points higher than hospitals that do not purchase the manufacturer’s stents.
This is a meaningful increase, equal to more than a quarter of a standard deviation and
almost half the mean of hospital propensity to contract with a given balloon manufacturer.
Conditional on using a manufacturer’s stents, a 10-percentage-point increase in the share of
stents purchased increases balloon purchases by over 1.5 percentage points. Thus changes in
the probability of purchasing balloons from a given manufacturer are driven by changes in
stent purchasing on both the intensive and extensive margins.
The findings that greater usage of a manufacturer’s stents on the intensive margin drives
greater balloon use on both the extensive and intensive margins provide further evidence
consistent with usage complementarities driving spillovers from stents to balloons, for a
given manufacturer at a given hospital. Interestingly, the correlation between the extensive
margin of beginning to use a manufacturer’s stents and beginning to use that manufacturer’s
balloons is suggestive that spillovers might also be driven by some contracting frictions at
the buyer-supplier relationship level.
Columns 5 through 8 decompose the stent-to-guidewire spillovers. As before, Column 5
replicates our event study specification. Column 6 decomposes the spillover result by stent
20

intensive and extensive margins and Columns 7 and 8 repeat the same specifications, but
with the extensive margin of whether or not the hospital uses the manufacturers guidewires
at all as the dependent variable. We find that there is an economically and statistically significant relationship between stent and guidewire usage at the manufacturer-hospital level,
but it operates entirely at the extensive margin. When a hospital begins using a manufacturer’s stents, it becomes 5 percentage points more likely to begin using that manufacturer’s
guidewires – an 18 percent increase at the hospital propensity to contract with a given
guidewire supplier.
The balloon and guidewire decomposition results provide further evidence for the primary source of demand spillovers in this setting being complementarities in usage of these
products. While other mechanisms that link demand for a firm’s products across categories
(e.g. correlated preferences or signaling) would suggest correlations for both balloons and
guidewires across all margins, the fact that intensive margin usage only moves for balloons
(where usage complementarities are known to exist), and only moves as a function of intensive margin stent usage, supports the hypothesis of usage complementarities.
Finally, the relationships we estimate along the extensive margin – that when hospitals
begin to contract with a manufacturer for its stents, they are also more likely to contract
for its balloons and guidewires – are consistent with economies of scope in contracting costs,
where hospitals and manufacturers can more easily contract with each other in other areas
once they contract in one area.14

6

Conclusion

This paper estimates the presence and magnitude of spillovers in performance in the medical
device industry, using a novel empirical strategy and detailed data set that allows spillovers
to be distinguished from firm-specific capabilities. The introduction of early generations of
DES, a new class of stents, generates variation in firms’ within-hospital stent shares; we
estimate how these changes in stent shares impact hospitals’ usage of the firms’ other interventional cardiology devices. Uncertainty around the timing of regulatory approval (and the
profitability of the stent category relative to other product categories) means that the precise
timing of the introduction of the new stents is unlikely to be correlated with other factors
affecting firms’ performance in the balloon or guidewire categories. The estimates from our
preferred specifications indicate spillovers between stents and balloons exist. Specifically, we
14

Although our data do not allow us to test it, this mechanism may be hospital-specific (buyer-specific)
but not doctor-specific (user-specific). Using data on all hospital purchase orders in a different sample and
time period, Grennan and Swanson (2018a) find similar evidence for economies of scope in contracting costs
at the device manufacturer/vendor level, even for device categories that are not used by the same buyers.

21

find that when hospitals increase their intensive margin usage of a manufacturer’s stents,
they also increase their intensive margin usage of that manufacturer’s balloons. They also
become more likely to use that manufacturer’s balloons, if they were not using them before.
These findings are consistent with the usage complementarities that exist between stents
and balloons. Because stents come mounted onto a balloon, physician familiarity and comfort
with a manufacturer’s stents will directly translate into familiarity and comfort with that
manufacturer’s (stand-alone) balloon catheters. When we look at spillovers from stents to
guidewires, which do not share a usage feature with stents, we only find evidence of spillovers
along the extensive margins. That is, when hospitals begin using a manufacturer’s stents,
they also become more likely to use that manufacturer’s guidewires, but there is no relation
between the amount of stents used and amount of guidewires used. This relationship is
suggestive of economies of scope in contracting which have been documented in other settings
and in the medical device setting, using a much larger set of devices.
Our findings of economically meaningful spillovers in performance have several important implications. First, they suggest that multi-product or multi-category firms may face
stronger incentives to innovate since innovation in one category may generate returns not
only in the focal category but in other categories as well. This is closely related to recent policy and strategy discussions in the internet technology and telecom sectors, where spillovers
across categories (and their potential effect on innovation) have been decisive. Data availability at the buyer level and exogenous variation in market share of the primary business
lines (e.g. search engines) remain challenges to applying a research design similar to ours
here to those contexts.

References
Bailey, E. E. and Friedlaender, A. F. (1982). Market structure and multiproduct industries.
Journal of Economic Literature, 20(3):1024–1048.
Borenstein, S. (1991). The dominant-firm advantage in multiproduct industries: Evidence
from the U.S. airlines. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4):1237–1266.
Brogan, J. (2017).
Why the EU just slapped Google with a $2.7 billion fine.
Slate. http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2017/06/27/why_the_european_
union_fined_google_2_7_billion.html. Accessed August 28, 2018.
Burns, L. R., editor (2005). The Business of Healthcare Innovation. Cambridge.

22

Burt, H. M. and Hunter, W. L. (2006). Drug-eluting stents: A multidisciplinary success
story. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 58(3):350–357.
Burton, P. S. (1994). Product portfolios and the introduction of new products: An example
from the insecticide industry. RAND Journal of Economics, pages 128–140.
Cabral, L. (2000). Stretching firm and brand reputation. RAND Journal of Economics,
31(4):658–673.
Cabral, L. and Natividad, G. (2016). Bundling and cross-selling: Theory and evidence from
home video. RAND Journal of Economics, 47(1):29–47.
Caves, R., Whinston, M. D., and Hurwitz, M. A. (1991). Patent expiration, entry, and
competition in the U.S. pharmaceutical industry. Brookings Papers: Microeconomics,
pages 1–66.
Chatain, O. (2011). Value creation, competition, and performance in buyer-supplier relationships. Strategic Management Journal, 32(1):76–102.
Chatterji, A. K. and Fabrizio, K. R. (2012). How do product users influence corporate
invention? Organization Science.
Chatterji, A. K. and Fabrizio, K. R. (2016). Does the market for ideas influence the rate
and direction of innovative activity? evidence from the medical device industry. Strategic
Management Journal.
Chatterji, A. K., Fabrizio, K. R., Mitchell, W., and Schulman, K. A. (2008). Physicianindustry cooperation in the medical device industry. Health Affairs, 27(6):1532–1543.
Cohen, W. M. and Levin, R. C. (1989). Empirical studies of innovation and market structure.
Handbook of Industrial Organization, 2:1059–1107.
Elfenbein, D. W. and Zenger, T. R. (2013). What is a relationship worth? Repeated exchange and the development and deployment of relational capital. Organization Science,
25(1):222–244.
Galasso, A. and Luo, H. (2017). Tort reform and innovation. Journal of Law and Economics,
pages 385–412.
Galasso, A. and Luo, H. (2018). How does product liability risk affect innovation? evidence
from medical implants. CEPR discussion paper 13036.

23

Grennan, M. (2013). Price discrimination and bargaining: Empirical evidence from medical
devices. American Economic Review, 103(1):145–177.
Grennan, M. (2014). Bargaining ability and competitive advantage: Empirical evidence from
medical devices. Management Science, 60(12):3011–3025.
Grennan, M. and Swanson, A. (2018a). Diagnosing price dispersion. Working paper.
Grennan, M. and Swanson, A. (2018b). Transparency and negotiated prices: The value of
information in hospital-supplier bargaining. NBER Working Paper 22039.
Grennan, M. and Town, R. J. (2018). Regulating innovation with uncertain quality: Information, risk, and access in medical devices. NBER Working Paper 20981.
Henderson, R. and Cockburn, I. (1996). Scale, scope, and spillovers: The determinants of
research productivity in drug discovery. RAND Journal of Economics, 27(1):32–59.
Hendricks, K. and Sorensen, A. (2009). Information and the skewness of music sales. Journal
of Political Economy, 117(2):324–369.
Ho, J., Ho, K., and Mortimer, J. (2012). The use of full-line forcing contracts in the video
rental industry. American Economic Review, 102(2):686–719.
Htay, T. and Liu, M. W. (2005). Drug-eluting stent: A review and update. Vascular Health
and Risk Management, 1(4):263.
Lederman, M. (2007). Do enhancements to loyalty programs affect demand? The impact of
international frequent flyer partnerships on domestic airline demand. RAND Journal of
Economics, 38(4):1134–1158.
Lederman, M. (2008). Are frequent flyer programs a cause of the “hub premium”? Journal
of Economics and Management Strategy, 17(1):35–66.
Macher, J. T. and Boerner, C. S. (2006). Experience and scale and scope economies: Tradeoffs and performance in development. Strategic Management Journal, 27(9):845–865.
Matutes, C. and Regibeau, P. (1988). “Mix and match”: Product compatibility without
network externalities. RAND Journal of Economics, 19(2):221–234.
Montgomery, C. A. and Wernerfelt, B. (1988). Diversification, Ricardian rents, and Tobin’s
q. RAND Journal of Economics, 19(4):623–632.

24

Nalebuff, B. (2000). Competing against bundles. In Hammond, P. J. and Myles, G. D.,
editors, Incentives, Organization, and Public Economics: Papers in Honour of Sir James
Mirrlees, chapter 17, pages 323–336. Oxford University Press, New York.
Nalebuff, B. (2004).
119(1):159–187.

Bundling as an entry barrier.

Quarterly Journal of Economics,

Nistor, C. and Tucker, C. E. (2015). Certification intermediaries: Evidence from the medical
device industry. unpublished manuscript.
Panzar, J. C. and Willig, R. D. (1981). Economies of scope. American Economic Review,
71(2):268–72.
PRNewsire (2018).
Interventional cardiology devices market size to grow swiftly,
expected to surpass $25 billion by 2020.
https://www.prnewswire.com/newsreleases/interventional-cardiology-devices-market-size-to-grow-swiftlyexpected-to-surpass-25-billion-by-2020--million-insights-681905181.html.
Accessed July 29, 2018.
Rawson, C. (2011). How Steve Jobs changed Apple. Engadget. https://www.engadget.
com/2011/08/24/how-steve-jobs-changed-apple/. Accessed Mar. 17, 2018.
Schmalensee, R. (1978). Entry deterrence in the ready-to-eat breakfast cereal industry. Bell
Journal of Economics, 9:305–327.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1942). Socialism, capitalism and democracy. Harper and Brothers.
Siggelkow, N. (2003). Why focus? A study of intra-industry focus effects. Journal of
Industrial Economics, 51(2):121–150.
Stern, A. D. (2017). Innovation under regulatory uncertainty: Evidence from medical technology. Journal of Public Economics, 145:181–200.
Stone, B. (2011). Steve Jobs: The return, 1997 - 2011. Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2011-10-06/steve-jobs-the-return-1997-2011. Accessed Mar.
17, 2018.
Teece, D. J. (1982). Towards an economic theory of the multiproduct firm. Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, (3):39–63.
Teece, D. J. (1986). Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration,
collaboration, licensing and public policy. Research Policy, 15:285–305.
25

Tobis, J. M. and Abudayyeh, I. (2015). New devices and technology in interventional cardiology. Journal of Cardiology, 65(1):5–16.
Whinston, M. D. (1990). Tying, foreclosure, and exclusion. American Economic Review,
837(852-54):856.
Winkler, E. (2018). AT&T not out of the legal woods yet. Wall Street Journal. https:
//www.wsj.com/articles/at-t-not-out-of-the-legal-woods-yet-1533549600. Accessed August 28, 2018.

26

Appendices
A
A.1

Data appendix
Data construction

Our data come from Millennium Research Group’s (MRG) MarketTrack survey of hospitals,
tracking their medical device usage at the product-hospital-month level. The data in this
paper cover a random sample of hospitals in the US and EU from January 2005 through
June 2013. We limit our analysis to the three categories (based on MRG’s segmentation)
of interventional cardiology devices most frequently purchased by these hospitals: stents,
balloon catheters, and guidewires. Because manufacturers may produce multiple products
within the same category (e.g., several different balloon catheters), we aggregate a hospital’s
purchases of different products by the same manufacturer in the same category. Because the
MRG survey is focused first on collecting data on coronary stents, other product category
data is missing in a small number of hospitals. We restrict our sample for analysis to
hospital-months reporting data on all three of our categories of interest. We also account
c
for censoring at zero by explicitly including zero-unit observations (qjht
= 0), provided that
hospital-month is reporting data and the manufacturer has a product available in category
c. The resulting dataset is at the manufacturer-hospital-month level and includes 81,065
manufacturer-hospital-month observations in the US and 612,162 observations in the EU.
One challenge in the data is identifying DES products that may be recorded under different names by different hospitals but are in fact the same product. To address this issue, we
first employ standard text regularization methods. We correct for capitalization inconsistencies; remove common expressions that appear in some entries and not in others; and remove
excess spaces between words and leading and trailing spaces. For more complex cases, we
search for information online and make deductions based on approval dates and product
descriptions. For instance, we correct purchases of the DES “Sprint” from Medtronic to be
“Endeavor Sprint,” as Medtronic does not have a stent by the name Sprint. We also see
numerous records of “Promus 2.25” in our US data; “2.25” is not part of the stent name but
rather its 2.25-mm diameter. We recode these observations to “Promus” prior to November
2011 and to “Promus Element” from November 2011 and on, as the FDA approved Promus
Element in November 2011 and the first US purchases of “Promus Element” appear then
in our data. We similarly clean the few instances where manufacturer names are recorded
inconsistently. We also recode “Guidant” as “Abbott Vascular” to account for Abbott’s 2006
purchase of Guidant’s vascular intervention business.

27

A.2

Variable definitions

Our share measures incorporate manufacturer-hospital-month observations with no units
c
= 0), provided the manufacturer has a product available (in any
sold in that category (qjht
category) in the market during that month. That is, we calculate these shares for every
hospital h ∈ Hmt , the set of all hospitals purchasing devices in stents, balloons, AND
guidewires in market m in month t, and for every manufacturer j ∈ Jmt , the set of all
manufacturers active in market m in month t.
A.2.1

Overall share measures

Within-hospital share. Share of manufacturer j in category c in hospital h in month t
(where hospital h is located in market m):
scjht

=P

c
qjht

k∈Jmt

(2)

c
qkht

Within-market share. Share of manufacturer j in category c in market m in month t:
scjmt

=P

c
qjmt

k∈Jmt

P
c
qkmt

=P

h∈Hmt

h∈Hmt

P

c
qjht

k∈Jmt

c
qkht

(3)

Leave-out within-market share. Share of manufacturer j in market m excluding hospital
l in month t:
P
c
c
qjm
h6=l∈Hmt qjht
−l t
c
P
P
sjm−l t = P
=
(4)
c
c
k∈Jmt qkm−l t
h6=l∈Hmt
k∈Jm−l t qkht
P
c
c
h∈Hmt qjht − qjlt
P
P
=P
(5)
c
c
h∈Hmt
k∈Jmt qkht −
k∈Jmt qklt
A.2.2

Extensive share measures

Whether active in hospital:

1{scjht>0 }


1, if manufacturer j is actively selling in category c in hospital h in month t
=
0, otherwise
(6)

where h ∈

c
Hmt

and j ∈ Jmt .

28

Whether active in market:

1, if manufacturer j is actively selling in category c in market m in month t
c
1{sjmt>0 } =
0, otherwise
(7)
where j ∈ Jmt .
A.2.3

Intensive (conditional) share measures

Our intensive share measures differ from the overall and extensive metrics in that we restrict
the universe of manufacturers to only those manufacturers actively selling within a given
category c in either hospital h or market m in month t. That is, our within-hospital intensive share is calculated for all manufacturers j ∈ Jhtc and our within-market intensive share,
c
for all manufacturers j ∈ Jmt
Within-hospital share conditional on active in hospital. Share of manufacturer j
in category c in hospital h in month t, conditional on manufacturer j actively selling in
category c in hospital h (where hospital h is located in market m):
c


qjht
scjht | 1{scjht>0 } = 1 = P
c
k∈Jht

c
qkht

(8)

Within-market share conditional on active in market. Share of manufacturer j in
category c in market m in month t, conditional on manufacturer j actively selling in category
c in market m:
P
c
c


q
jmt
h∈Hmt qjht
c
P
=P
(9)
sjmt | 1{scjmt>0 } = 1 = P
c
c
c qkmt
c qkht
k∈Jmt
h∈Hmt
k∈Jmt
Leave-out within-market share conditional on active in market. Share of manufacturer j in market m excluding hospital l in month t, conditional on manufacturer j actively
selling in category c in market m:
P
c
c
qjm


h6=l∈Hmt qjht
−l t
P
P
1{scjmt>0 } = 1 = P
=
c
c
qkht
c qkm t
c
k∈Jmt
h6=l∈Hmt
k∈Jm
−l
−l t
P
c
q c − qjlt
Ph∈Hmt cjht P
=P
c
c qkht −
c qklt
h∈Hmt
k∈Jmt
k∈Jmt

scjm−l t |

29

(10)
(11)

A.2.4

Decomposition of overall within-market share

Below we decompose the overall within-market share into functions of the within-hospital
share and the leave-out within-market share. For simplicity, the category c superscript is
omitted.
P
qjmt
h∈Hmt qjht
P
(12)
=P
sjmt = P
k∈Jmt qkht
k∈Jmt qkmt
h∈Hmt
P
qjlt + h∈Hmt qjht − qjlt
P
= P
(13)
k∈Jmt qkht
h∈Hmt
P
qjht − qjlt
qjlt
P
=P
+ P h∈HmtP
(14)
k∈Jmt qkht
k∈Jmt qkht
h∈Hmt
h∈Hmt
P
P
P
P
k∈Jmt qkht
k∈Jmt qkht
k∈Jmt qkht −
h∈Hmt
P
P
P
= sjht P
+ sjm−l t
h∈Hmt
k∈Jmt qkht
h∈Hmt
k∈Jmt qkht
(15)

A.3
A.3.1

Manufacturer heterogeneity
Largest manufacturers by market share

Table 4 provides the 10 largest firms by mean market share in the US and EU across the three
product categories. We notice a number of details regarding market structure. First, there
are more manufacturers in the EU than in the US across all product categories. Second, the
US market is more concentrated than that of the EU in all categories. Four firms are active
in the US stent market: Boston Scientific, Abbott Vascular, Cordis and Medtronic. These
four firms also encompass nearly 77 percent of the EU stent market share, however the EU
market still has many more active firms. The same four firms account for nearly all of the
US balloon market as well. Third, success across product categories is correlated. In our
empirical strategy we separate such firm-specific trends from actual spillovers in innovative
product success by exploiting discrete shocks to a firm’s share in the stent market.

30

Table 4: Largest firms by market share
US

EU

Category

Manufacturer

sm |1m 1h

sh |1h Manufacturer

sm |1m 1h

sh |1h

stents

boston scientific
abbott vascular
cordis
medtronic

.43
.269
.187
.114

.844
.745
.459
.466

.536
.352
.367
.219

boston scientific
abbott vascular
medtronic
cordis
biotronik
b. braun
biosensors international
terumo
cid vascular
hexacath

.237
.219
.209
.101
.065
.042
.027
.027
.023
.013

.825
.739
.67
.486
.344
.209
.146
.213
.177
.155

.317
.296
.283
.166
.187
.196
.163
.142
.112
.106

balloons

boston scientific
abbott vascular
medtronic
cordis
angioscore

.578
.293
.095
.027
.009

.875
.596
.378
.139
.12

.653
.48
.263
.284
.057

boston scientific
abbott vascular
medtronic
terumo
cordis
biotronik
invatec
orbusneich
b. braun
cid vascular

.485
.176
.151
.063
.033
.024
.015
.011
.01
.007

.804
.473
.438
.289
.191
.134
.141
.032
.106
.056

.571
.344
.352
.231
.166
.212
.107
.153
.174
.125

guidewires

abbott vascular
boston scientific
medtronic
cordis
terumo
argon medical
other
vascular solutions
wilson-cook
merit medical systems

.578
.283
.07
.039
.033
.007
.006
.004
.002
.002

.908
.804
.241
.227
.157
.007
.01
.01
.01
.005

.624
.377
.255
.168
.161
.405
1
.15
.153
1

abbott vascular
boston scientific
biotronik
terumo
asahi intecc
cordis
medtronic
st. jude medical
b. braun
spectranetics

.59
.176
.117
.039
.036
.022
.015
.003
.002
0

.892
.574
.235
.185
.261
.13
.053
.008
.008
.003

.693
.305
.402
.18
.097
.203
.299
.343
.164
.057

Table gives the 10 largest firms in terms of mean intensive within-market share by device category from
January 2005 through June 2013. Using a shorthand notation, sm |1m gives the mean intensive withinmarket share in each category, 1h gives the mean proportion of hospitals the manufacturer is active in (in
that category), and sh |1 is the firm’s mean share conditional on being active in a hospital (in that category).
Total number of manufacturer-hospital-month observations is 81,065 in the US and 612,162 in the EU.

31

A.3.2

Multi- and single-category manufacturers

Tables 5 and 6 provide mean within-hospital shares for multi- and single-category manufacturers, respectively. Table 5 restricts to those manufacturer-months where the manufacturer
is actively selling in all three categories of interest: stents, balloons, and guidewires. Shares
are higher here relative to those seen with our full data sample for two reasons: the first
being a mechanical result of our incorporating zero shares to account for censoring, and the
second, that these multi-category manufacturers active in all three categories are among the
largest manufacturers, including Boston Scientific, Medtronic, Cordis, and Abbott Vascular.
Overall within-hospital shares in the US are about 0.25 across all three categories, with each
of these firms possessing one-fourth of the interventional cardiology market. Conditional on
selling in a US hospital in a given category, the typical multi-category manufacturer provides
that hospital between 40 and 50 percent of its devices in that category.
Table 5: Within-hospital shares for multi-category manufacturers
US
scjht
stents

EU

1{scjht>0 }

scjht |1{scjht>0 }

scjht

1{scjht>0 }

scjht |1{scjht>0 }

0.254
(0.315)

0.637
(0.481)

0.398
0.313)

0.123
(0.197)

0.479
(0.500)

0.257
(0.215)

balloons

0.252
(0.354)

0.503
(0.500)

0.501
(0.353)

0.129
(0.255)

0.347
(0.476)

0.372
(0.311)

guidewires

0.246
(0.323)

0.550
(0.497)

0.446
(0.316)

0.134
(0.282)

0.288
(0.453)

0.466
(0.349)

Table provides mean values for the hospital-level shares by category in the typical month. Number of
manufacturer-hospital-month observations is 40,821 in the US and 103,592 in the EU.

While Table 5 explores multi-category manufacturers, Table 6 looks at the single-category
manufacturers in our sample. As such, each panel of Table 6 encompasses a different set of
manufacturers. Our data do not include any manufacturers selling only stents in the US.
All three within-hospital share metrics are substantially lower for the single-category firms
relative to the multi-category manufacturers. In the US, single-category manufacturers in
both balloons and guidewires have low within-hospital overall shares (from less than one
to 1.6 percent). Conditional on selling balloons to a hospital, a balloon manufacturer will
provide roughly 6.3 percent of that hospital’s balloon devices in a given month. For guidewire
manufacturers, this figure is higher, at 20.4 percent.

32

Table 6: Within-hospital shares for single-category manufacturers

scjht
stents

US
1{scjht>0 } scjht |1{scjht>0 } N

scjht

EU
1{scjht>0 } scjht |1{scjht>0 } N

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

0.003
(0.030)

0.024
(0.154)

0.121
(0.150)

130,710

balloons

0.008
(0.031)

0.121
(0.326)

0.063
(0.066)

8,156

0.002
(0.027)

0.018
(0.133)

0.113
(0.165)

68,570

guidewires

0.016
(0.080)

0.080
(0.271)

0.204
(0.206)

18,909

0.010
(0.061)

0.068
(0.251)

0.142
(0.192)

20,347

Table provides mean values for the hospital-level shares by category in the typical month. N gives number
of manufacturer-hospital-month observations.

A.4

DES entry events

Table 7 gives all DES introductions in the US during our sample period, January 2005
through June 2013, and corresponding within-hospital stent shares in the three months
before and after the introductions for the innovating firm. In our empirical approach, we
exploit the three entry events with the largest change to the innovating firm’s stent market
share: Medtronic Endeavor, Abbott Vascular Xience V, and Medtronic Resolute Integrity.
Table 8 gives DES introductions in the EU for the largest 10 firms in terms of mean stent
market share over the same sample period. Overall, new product introductions have less of
an immediate effect on the innovating firm’s market share in the EU and our three entry
events of interest do not necessarily produce the largest shocks. Nonetheless, we think an
EU analysis is useful given its firms have more varying levels of multi-category presence.

33

Table 7: US DES entry events
Date

Manufacturer

Product

Presstent
jht

Postsstent
jht

Diff

2008m10
2008m11
2008m11
2008m2
2008m7
2008m7
2009m6
2011m11
2011m11
2011m4
2011m6
2012m2
2013m1

boston scientific
boston scientific
medtronic
medtronic
boston scientific
abbott vascular
boston scientific
abbott vascular
boston scientific
boston scientific
abbott vascular
medtronic
abbott vascular

taxus express atom
taxus liberte
endeavor sprint
endeavor
promus
xience v
taxus liberte atom
xience prime
promus element
ion
xience nano
resolute integrity
xience xpedition

.387
.397
.099
.057
.398
.205
.421
.377
.443
.428
.367
.137
.384

.432
.436
.107
.149
.397
.37
.415
.413
.431
.438
.377
.236
.391

.044
.039
.008
.092
-.001
.164
-.005
.036
-.013
.01
.01
.099
.007

DES introductions in the US from during our sample period. Date refers to first instance product
appears in our data.

34

Table 8: EU DES entry events
Date

Manufacturer

Product

Presstent
jht

Postsstent
jht

Diff

2005m7
2005m9
2006m10
2006m10
2006m12
2006m2
2006m9
2006m9
2007m11
2007m12
2007m3
2007m9
2009m11
2009m3
2009m8
2009m9
2010m5
2010m6
2011m6
2011m9
2012m1
2012m11
2012m8
2012m8
2013m3
2013m6
2013m6

medtronic
boston scientific
cordis
terumo
biosensors intl
cid vascular
b. braun
abbott vascular
medtronic
boston scientific
boston scientific
medtronic
boston scientific
cid vascular
abbott vascular
cid vascular
boston scientific
medtronic
biotronik
cid vascular
biosensors intl
boston scientific
abbott vascular
abbott vascular
boston scientific
biosensors intl
biosensors intl

endeavor
taxus liberte
cypher select plus
nobori
biomatrix
janus flex
coroflex please
xience v
resolute
taxus liberte long
promus
endeavor sprint
promus element
not classified
xience prime
optima
taxus element
resolute integrity
orsiro
cre8
biomatrix flex
synergy
xience xpedition
xience pro
promus premier
biomatrix neoflex
axxess

.163
.332
.16
.016

.169
.334
.148
.019
.002
.036
.037
.154
.203
.207
.248
.202
.206
.022
.23
.013
.203
.203
.066
.016
.061
.226
.283
.283
.227

.007
.002
-.012
.004

.034
.036
.143
.208
.229
.255
.209
.201
.026
.23
.017
.195
.201
.075
.008
.051
.223
.255
.255
.226
.06
.06

.002
.001
.011
-.004
-.021
-.007
-.007
.005
-.004
0
-.003
.008
.002
-.009
.008
.011
.003
.028
.028
.001

DES introductions in the EU for top 10 firms in terms of mean stent market share. Date refers to
first instance product appears in our data.

35

B

EU analysis

In this section, we replicate the paper’s analysis for the EU market. Table 9 provides means
and standard deviations of the hospital-level share variables. Relative to the US, the EU
market is less concentrated than in the EU. The EU has between 9.6 and 26.9 manufacturers
active in each device category (relative to between 3.9 and 5.9 for the US; see Table 1).
Consistent with this, EU manufacturers sell to a smaller percentage of hospitals, between
5 and 10 percent. As in the US, hospitals concentrate their sales with a small number of
manufacturers per category and, on average, do not purchase from all manufacturers in a
category. In the EU, conditional within-hospital shares of between 23 and 42 percent indicate
that purchases are quite concentrated.
Table 9: Summary statistics
scjht

1{scjht>0 }

scjht |1{scjht>0 }

c
|
|Jm

|Jhc |

stents

0.024
(0.097)

0.102
(0.302)

0.231
(0.209)

26.87
(3.68)

4.33
(2.00)

balloons

0.024
(0.118)

0.069
(0.253)

0.342
(0.308)

23.16
(2.96)

2.95
(1.61)

guidewires

0.024
(0.127)

0.056
(0.229)

0.423
(0.351)

9.65
(1.59)

2.37
(1.03)

Table provides mean values for the hospital-level shares by category in the typical month. Note that the
overall share variable has the same mean across categories due to our inclusion of zero-quantity observations
to address censoring. |J c | gives mean number of manufacturers active in the market by category, and |Jh |
gives mean number of manufacturers active in a given hospital by category. Standard deviations are in
parentheses. Mean number of EU hospitals in the sample in the typical month is 147.4, with a standard
deviation of 25.0. Total number of EU manufacturer-hospital-month observations is 612,162.

Figure 3 shows our entry events and corresponding stent market shares for the focal
firms, other major manufacturers, and the remaining. As noted previously, changes to stent
market share are more gradual in the EU for the innovating firm. Nonetheless, we think an
EU analysis is useful given its firms more varying levels of multi-category presence.

36

resolute integrity

endeavor
xience v

0

.1

Market share
.2
.3

.4

Figure 3: Three major DES introductions and stent market shares in the EU

2005m1 2006m1 2007m1 2008m1 2009m1 2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1
Date
Medtronic
Boston Scientific
Other

Abbott Vascular
Cordis

Markers indicate the three major DES introductions of interest; lines give overall market share in
stents. We plot market share for the four manufacturers active in the US stent market: Boston
Scientific, Abbott Vascular, Cordis, and Medtronic. These are also the four largest stent manufacturers in the EU in terms of market share; we combine all other stent manufacturers in the EU
as “Other.”

37

Table 10: EU Spillovers
Balloons

Guidewires

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

sstents
jht

0.651***
(0.0238)

0.359***
(0.0345)

0.160***
(0.0251)

0.162***
(0.0247)

0.125***
(0.0379)

0.536*** 0.166***
(0.0249) (0.0312)

Observations
Adj. R2
Mfr FE
Mfr-Hosp FE
Mfr-Month FE

612,162
0.283

612,162
0.459
yes

612,162
0.775

607,939
0.780

103,782
0.822

612,162
0.165

yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

(6)

(7)

612,162
0.586
yes

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.0360***
(0.0114)

0.0290**
(0.0115)

0.0116
(0.0135)

612,162
0.896

607,939
0.898

103,782
0.932

yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

The dependent variable is sballoons
for balloon specifications and sguidewire
for guidewire specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the hospital
jht
jht
level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.

Table 11: EU Decomposition
Balloons
sballoons
jht

sstents
jht

sguidewires
jht

Guidewires
1{sguidewires }
jht>0

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.125***
(0.0379)

0.123***
(0.0425)
0.00126
(0.00616)

0.220***
(0.0454)

0.119**
(0.0489)
0.0769***
(0.0132)

0.0116
(0.0135)

0.00199
(0.0146)
0.00738*
(0.00412)

0.0300
(0.0223)

-0.00652
(0.0222)
0.0281***
(0.00784)

103,782
0.822
yes
yes

103,782
0.822
yes
yes

103,782
0.753
yes
yes

103,782
0.754
yes
yes

103,782
0.932
yes
yes

103,782
0.932
yes
yes

103,782
0.834
yes
yes

103,782
0.834
yes
yes

1{sstents
jht>0 }

Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Mfr-Hosp FE
Mfr-Month FE

1{sballoons
jht>0 }

Robust standard errors clustered at the hospital level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.

In Tables 10 and 11 we replicate the paper’s analysis in the EU market. Qualitatively, the
EU results are similar to those of the US. In our preferred specification Column 5 of Table
10, a ten-percentage-point increase in a manufacturer’s stent share in a hospital generates
a 1.25-percentage-point increase in its balloon market share in that same hospital. The
effect disappears in our preferred specification for guidewires (Column 10). Thus we again
see strong evidence of within-hospital spillovers in balloons and limited evidence of withinhospital spillovers in guidewires. In Table 11, we again see greater usage of a manufacturer’s
stents driving greater balloon use on both the extensive and intensive margins while any
spillovers onto guidewire use are driven entirely by the manufacturer’s new stent users.

38

C
C.1

Robustness checks
Inclusion of leave-out within-market share as a control

Tables 12 through 15 replicate our prior analyses but exclude manufacturer-month fixed
effects in order to explicitly include the leave-out within-market share as a control. Doing
so does not change our conclusions.
Table 12: US spillovers
Balloons

sstents
jht

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.778***
(0.0216)

0.540***
(0.0273)

0.224***
(0.0289)

0.258***
(0.0312)
-0.164***
(0.0474)

0.252***
(0.0404)
-0.160***
(0.0600)

0.469***
(0.0261)

0.207***
(0.0331)

0.0528**
(0.0213)

0.0314
(0.0229)
0.106***
(0.0372)

0.0203
(0.0295)
0.0895*
(0.0460)

81,065
0.506

81,065
0.627
yes

81,065
0.865

81,065
0.866

16,300
0.899

81,065
0.213

81,065
0.573
yes

81,065
0.893

81,065
0.894

16,300
0.918

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

sstents
jm−l t

Observations
Adj. R2
Mfr FE
Mfr-Hosp FE

Guidewires

sguidewire
jht

sballoons
jht

for balloon specifications and
The dependent variable is
hospital level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.

for guidewire specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the

Table 13: EU spillovers
Balloons

sstents
jht

Observations
Adj. R2
Mfr FE
Mfr-Hosp FE

Guidewires

(2)

0.651***
(0.0238)

0.359***
(0.0345)

0.160*** 0.161***
(0.0251) (0.0256)
-0.0237
(0.0742)

0.120***
(0.0410)
-0.0554
(0.130)

0.536*** 0.166***
(0.0249) (0.0312)

612,162
0.283

612,162
0.459
yes

612,162
0.775

612,162
0.775

105,294
0.817

612,162
0.165

yes

yes

yes

sstents
jm−l t

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(1)

(7)

612,162
0.586
yes

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.0360***
(0.0114)

0.0307**
(0.0119)
0.131**
(0.0566)

0.0116
(0.0146)
0.122
(0.0859)

612,162
0.896

612,162
0.896

105,294
0.931

yes

yes

yes

for balloon specifications and sguidewire
for guidewire specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the
The dependent variable is sballoons
jht
jht
hospital level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.

39

Table 14: US Decomposition
Balloons
sballoons
jht

sstents
jht

Observations
Adjusted R2
Mfr-Hosp FE

sguidewires
jht

Guidewires
1{sguidewires }
jht>0

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.252***
(0.0404)

0.249***
(0.0372)

0.0895*
(0.0460)

0.00997
(0.0304)
0.0136*
(0.00753)
0.0779*
(0.0463)

0.0430
(0.0326)

0.00538
(0.0964)

0.139***
(0.0360)
0.145***
(0.0258)
-0.118
(0.0996)

0.0203
(0.0295)

-0.160***
(0.0600)

0.240***
(0.0417)
0.0155
(0.00945)
-0.173***
(0.0613)

0.232***
(0.0815)

-0.00491
(0.0388)
0.0634***
(0.0219)
0.178**
(0.0806)

16,300
0.899
yes

16,300
0.899
yes

16,300
0.814
yes

16,300
0.817
yes

16,300
0.918
yes

16,300
0.918
yes

16,300
0.841
yes

16,300
0.841
yes

1{sstents
jht>0 }
sstents
jm−l t

1{sballoons
jht>0 }

Robust standard errors clustered at the hospital level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.

Table 15: EU Decomposition
Balloons
sballoons
jht

sstents
jht

1{sballoons
jht>0 }

sguidewires
jht

Guidewires
1{sguidewires }
jht>0

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.120***
(0.0410)

0.214***
(0.0500)

0.0116
(0.0146)

0.122
(0.0859)

0.00242
(0.0158)
0.00701
(0.00443)
0.119
(0.0867)

0.0347
(0.0240)

-0.0808
(0.188)

0.0993*
(0.0534)
0.0875***
(0.0144)
-0.116
(0.187)

0.497***
(0.112)

-0.00387
(0.0243)
0.0294***
(0.00867)
0.485***
(0.112)

105,294
0.746
yes

105,294
0.748
yes

105,294
0.931
yes

105,294
0.931
yes

105,294
0.831
yes

105,294
0.831
yes

sstents
jm−l t

-0.0554
(0.130)

0.112**
(0.0456)
0.00568
(0.00669)
-0.0577
(0.130)

Observations
Adjusted R2
Mfr-Hosp FE

105,294
0.817
yes

105,294
0.817
yes

1{sstents
jht>0 }

Robust standard errors clustered at the hospital level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.

40

C.2

Price impacts

Including prices in the paper’s analysis is made difficult by the lack of reporting on price
data for the vast majority of hospitals in the survey. An analysis including price would
also prevent us from exploring changes on the extensive margin. Below we restrict to those
hospital-months reporting price data on stents, balloons, and guidewires. Doing so limits the
sample to 2,850 manufacturer-hospital-month observations in the US and 2,923 in the EU.
Table 16 presents summary statistics on the intensive hospital-level price and share variables.
We calculate a manufacturer’s monthly price for category for a hospital as a weighted average
of all products they sell to that hospital in that category. Tables 17 and 18 show that the
prices do not drive our results. Looking at Columns 4 (and 8) of both tables shows that
the prices of a manufacturer’s balloons (guidewires) have no effect on the shares of balloons
(guidewires), and thus prices are not driving our spillover results.
Table 16: Summary statistics
variable
pstents
jht
pballoons
jht
pgwires
jht
sstents
jht |1{sstents
jht>0 }
sballoons
|1{sballoons
jht
jht>0 }
sgwires
|1{sgwires }
jht
jht>0

US

EU

1518.8
(460.1)
238.8
(86.3)
82.6
(16.3)

1189.2
(622.8)
321.8
(288)
101.1
(67.3)

.457
(.299)
.544
(.353)
.473
(.318)

.293
(.22)
.445
(.307)
.454
(.351)

Table provides mean values for hospital-level prices and intensive shares in the typical month. We restrict to those
hospital-months reporting price data on stents, balloons, AND
guidewires. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Total number of manufacturer-hospital-month observations is 2,850 in the
US and 2,923 in the EU.

41

Table 17: Price impacts for balloons

sstents
jht

sballoons
jht
(4)

pstents
jht
(5)

pballoons
jht
(6)

EU
sballoons
jht
(7)

0.244***
(0.0432)

0.241***
(0.0425)
-0.000294**
(0.000124)

-15.52
(72.84)

17.55
(44.13)

0.0918
(0.0611)

0.0918
(0.0608)
6.35e-07
(9.58e-05)

2,773
0.871
yes
yes

2,773
0.873
yes
yes

2,798
0.873
yes
yes

2,798
0.898
yes
yes

2,798
0.799
yes
yes

2,798
0.799
yes
yes

pstents
jht
(1)

pballoons
jht
(2)

US
sballoons
jht
(3)

385.4***
(56.46)

-10.07
(10.21)

2,773
0.790
yes
yes

2,773
0.756
yes
yes

pballoons
jht

Observations
Adj. R2
Mfr-Hosp FE
Mfr-Month FE

sballoons
jht
(8)

Robust standard errors clustered at the hospital level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.

Table 18: Price impacts for guidewires

sstents
jht

pstents
jht
(1)

pguidewires
jht
(2)

385.4***
(56.46)

0.625
(1.542)

2,773
0.790
yes
yes

2,773
0.733
yes
yes

US
sguidewires
jht
(3)

pstents
jht
(5)

pguidewires
jht
(6)

0.0417**
(0.0199)

0.0422**
(0.0202)
-0.000894**
(0.000441)

-15.52
(72.84)

53.86
(51.59)

0.000693
(0.0317)

-0.00123
(0.0322)
3.57e-05
(4.01e-05)

2,773
0.902
yes
yes

2,773
0.902
yes
yes

2,798
0.873
yes
yes

2,798
0.590
yes
yes

2,798
0.910
yes
yes

2,798
0.910
yes
yes

pguidewires
jht

Observations
Adj. R2
Mfr-Hosp FE
Mfr-Month FE

EU
sguidewires
jht
(7)

sguidewires
jht
(4)

Robust standard errors clustered at the hospital level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.

42

sguidewires
jht
(8)

