                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               AN ECONOMIST’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE SCIENCE

                                       Solomon Hsiang
                                       Robert E. Kopp

                                      Working Paper 25189
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25189


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2018




We thank Tamma Carleton, Daniel Gilford, Gordon Hanson, Megan Lickley, Enrico Moretti, DJ
Rasmussen, and Timothy Taylor for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Solomon Hsiang and Robert E. Kopp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science
Solomon Hsiang and Robert E. Kopp
NBER Working Paper No. 25189
October 2018
JEL No. Q54

                                        ABSTRACT

Climate change management is a global challenge that requires social science as much as it
requires natural science. We provide a brief introduction to the physical science of climate
change, written to provide essential background for economists and other social scientists. We
also highlight some key areas in which economists—including those studying macroeconomics,
political economy, and development—are in a unique position to help climate science advance.


Solomon Hsiang
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
shsiang@berkeley.edu

Robert E. Kopp
Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences
Wright Labs, 610 Taylor Road
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8066
Robert.Kopp@rutgers.edu
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                         Hsiang and Kopp



Humans have engaged in large-scale transformation of natural systems for millennia. Stone Age
hunting technologies led to extinctions of large mammals; agricultural revolutions transformed
forests into farmlands; pursuit of minerals has carved the earth’s surface; dams and reservoirs
now manipulate the flow of almost all rivers; and synthetic fertilizers now flood the nitrogen
cycle. But among all these grand planetary transformations, the restructuring of the global carbon
cycle and the accompanying alteration of the climate stands apart in its sheer scale, complexity,
and economic significance. Essentially all humans that have ever lived contributed, in their own
small ways, to reshaping this planetary-scale system. Thousands of years of forest clearance
added hundreds of billions of tons of carbon to the atmosphere. In the industrial era, every home
lit by a coal or natural gas-fired power plant and every petroleum-powered train, plane, and
motor vehicle has contributed to the accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The
average human contributes about 5 tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2) every year (Le Quéré et al.
2018), about a quarter of which will remain in the atmosphere for well over a millennium
(Archer et al. 2009).

Those tonnes of CO2, together with other greenhouse gases, distort the planet’s energy balance.
In steady state, the sunlight that makes it to the Earth’s surface is absorbed and then re-radiated
to space as an equal quantity of heat (technically, infrared light). The accumulation of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere blocks some of this re-radiation, redirecting energy back
toward the Earth’s surface: about 27 trillion watts (0.05 watts per square meter) per 1 percent
increase in atmospheric CO2 concentrations, equivalent to the energy of one Hiroshima-scale
atomic bomb spread over the surface of the Earth every 2.3 seconds. The resulting climatic
distortion affects not just temperatures around the world, but also where clouds form, when it
floods, how cyclones move, and the volume of water in the ocean. Thus, while fossil-fueled
human industriousness has raised unprecedented multitudes out of poverty, the scale of the
climate change externality it has produced is similarly extraordinary.

At least since Nordhaus (1977)’s presentation at an American Economic Association annual
meeting, the analysis and management of climate change has been recognized as an important
economic problem, and a growing number of economists are lending the world their expertise in
understanding the problem and developing solutions. However, numerous conversations with
colleagues indicate to us that a general discomfort with physical sciences—a subject sometimes
not studied since high school—prevents many economic minds from engaging more deeply with
the problem of climate change.

The goal of this article is to provide a brief introduction to the physical science of climate
change, aimed towards economists and other social scientists. We begin by describing the
physics that control global climate, how scientists measure and model the climate system, and
the magnitude of human-caused emissions of carbon dioxide. We then summarize many of the
climatic changes of interest to economists that have been documented and that are projected in
the future. We conclude by highlighting some key areas in which economists are in a unique
position to help climate science advance. An important message from this final section, which
we believe is deeply underappreciated among economists and thus highlight here, is that all
climate change forecasts rely heavily and directly on economic forecasts for the world. On time
scales of a half-century or longer, the largest source of uncertainty in climate science is not
physics, but economics (Hawkins and Sutton 2009).



                                                 1
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                        Hsiang and Kopp




Basics of Climate Change Science

For most economic and scientific purposes, climate can be defined as the joint probability
distribution describing the state of the atmosphere, ocean, and freshwater systems (including
ice). Each of these systems is itself an extraordinarily high-dimensional system, so it is appealing
to work with summary statistics such as global mean surface temperature or temperature
distributions for major cities. Indeed, global mean surface temperature is intimately tied to the
fundamental physics of planetary energy balance that explain global warming. However,
consumers of climate science should recognize that such simplifications, while sometimes
useful, do not capture the entire picture.

The idea that human activity could alter the climate has a long history, going back almost two
centuries (for an overview, see Weart 2018). However, it took focused research during the
second half of the twentieth century to achieve the level of confidence we now possess that
human activity is altering the climate (Thomas F. Stocker et al. 2013; USGCRP 2017). This
confidence comes from many lines of evidence based on observations at Earth’s surface and
throughout different layers of the atmosphere and oceans, geological reconstructions of historical
climates, and two centuries of physical theory. The null hypothesis that humans have had no
influence on global climate is now easily rejected given available data (for example, Hegerl et al.
2007).

Planetary energy balance and greenhouse gasses

Sunlight continuously enters our planet’s atmosphere from space. In order for the earth to
maintain a stable surface temperature, this flow of incoming energy must be balanced by a flow
of energy leaving the atmosphere. For the Earth, about 30 percent of incident sunlight is
immediately reflected back out to space from the surface or from clouds. The remaining 70
percent is absorbed by the Earth’s surface and atmosphere, and must be balanced by the planet’s
own emission of infrared radiation to space, which intensifies with higher temperatures. Without
greenhouse gases, the equilibrium global mean surface temperature would be -18°C, fully
determined by the Sun’s temperature, the Earth’s distance from the Sun, and the reflectivity (also
known as ‘albedo’) of the Earth. If a larger flow of energy somehow were to reach the Earth’s
surface – for example, if the Sun were to grow in brightness, or the Earth to decline in albedo –
the planet would heat up until the additional outgoing flow of infrared radiation exactly offset
this new source of energy.

Greenhouse gases distort Earth’s energy balance because they are transparent to incoming visible
and ultraviolet sunlight but absorb infrared radiation, hindering the return flow of this energy
from the surface and the lower atmosphere into space. When a greenhouse gas molecule
intercepts infrared radiation headed from the surface to space, the absorbed energy is re-emitted
in all directions, sending some that might otherwise have escaped to space back down to the
surface of the Earth. This causes the surface and lower atmosphere to warm up, increasing their
emission of infrared radiation slightly. Equilibrium is re-established when the intensified
outgoing infrared radiation is sufficient to offset the trapping effects of the greenhouse gases.



                                                 2
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                         Hsiang and Kopp




Because of the presence of greenhouse gases, the average height in the atmosphere from which
infrared radiation can escape to space and contribute to balancing the planet’s energy budget is
not the Earth’s surface; it is a level of the atmosphere known as the “effective radiating level.” At
present, Earth’s effective radiating level occurs at about 5.5 km altitude; on average, this level
has the necessary temperature of about -18°C – the same that the Earth’s surface would have in
the absence of greenhouse gases. The relationship between temperature and altitude in Earth’s
lower atmosphere – on average about 6°C/km – makes the surface nearly 33°C warmer.

When greenhouse gases are added to the atmosphere, the first reaction is that the height of the
“effective radiating level” moves further upward. This temporarily leads to a decrease in the
amount of radiation escaping from the Earth to space; but conservation of energy implies the
surface and lower atmosphere must then warm up, so the higher (and originally cooler) effective
radiating level would warm to the equilibrium temperature of -18°C. In the absence of additional
feedbacks, doubling carbon dioxide concentrations would lead to the effective radiating level
being about 200 meters higher, which in turn would lead to an equilibrium surface warming of
about 1.2°C (Hansen et al. 1981).

However, the warming surface and atmosphere trigger feedbacks, which change the shift in
effective radiating level and surface temperature associated with a given change in greenhouse
gas concentration. Estimates of equilibrium climate sensitivity that include atmospheric and sea
ice feedbacks are generally 2.0-4.5°C (Collins, Knutti, and others 2013). The most important
feedback is the water vapor feedback: a warmer atmosphere is a more humid atmosphere, and
water vapor is the most powerful natural absorber of longwave infrared radiation. Other
important feedbacks determining the thermal response to greenhouse gas emissions involve sea
ice (which reflects incoming solar energy), clouds (which can both trap heat and reflect incoming
solar energy), and the response to warming of the ocean and land biospheres (which drive most
of the flow of CO2 out of the atmosphere and can also affect albedo).

Because greenhouse gases alter the climate by changing the radiative properties of the
atmosphere, their influence is measured in units of “radiative forcing,” defined as the extent to
which the human-generated stock of gas distorts the net flow of radiation into the atmosphere on
average (incoming minus outgoing), relative to a pre-industrial baseline. For example, a rise in
atmospheric CO2 concentrations from the historical baseline of 278 parts per million to the
current (as of 2018) level of 409 parts per million exerts about 2.1 W/m2 of radiative forcing. For
reference, the energy from the sun reaching the top of Earth’s atmosphere is 342 W/m2, and
central estimates of the equilibrium warming associated with a change in radiative forcing are
about 0.8°C per W/m2; thus the equilibrium warming associated with the current level of CO2
forcing is about 1.6°C above the pre-industrial baseline.

Radiative forcing by greenhouse gas emissions does not translate immediately into surface
warming, in part because the deep ocean takes centuries to warm and, through exchange of heat
with the surface ocean, slows overall warming. Nonetheless, modeling experiments indicate that
– because of the relative timescales over which the planet warms and CO2 is naturally removed
from the atmosphere – most of the warming associated with a marginal emission of CO2 occurs
within a couple decades and persists for millennia (Joos et al. 2013). Thus, the climatic changes



                                                 3
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                                        Hsiang and Kopp



experienced today are a result of both relatively recent emissions and also cumulative emissions
during the past centuries of fossil fuel combustion and past millennia of deforestation.

Establishing baseline climates

Within climate science, paleoclimatology is a well-developed subfield that focuses on the
reconstruction of historical climates, thus setting a baseline for explaining climate changes. For
examples, gases trapped in air bubbles of ice contain information on atmospheric chemistry at
the moment they froze (for example, Luthi et al. 2008); the width of tree rings reflect growing-
season temperatures and rainfall (for example, P. D. Jones et al. 2009); microscopic fossils in
salt-marsh sediments reflect changes in salinity, and thus in local sea level (for example,
Edwards and Horton 2000); and the relative abundances of different isotopes of oxygen in ocean
sediments reflect the extent of “ice ages” because polar ice sheets lock up lighter isotopes,
thereby restricting their supply to the deep ocean (for example, Cramer et al. 2011). In some
cases, physical data is corroborated with observations in historical weather records, such as
records of cyclone-caused shipwrecks maintained by insurers (Valerie Trouet, Harley, and
Domínguez-Delmás 2016). While most proxies and historical observations are inherently local,
spatio-temporal statistical methods and comparison to physical models can be used to estimate
global-mean values of quantities such as surface temperature and sea level from local data.

Figure 1 presents reconstructions of atmospheric CO2 concentrations, global-mean surface
temperature and global-mean sea level over two different time scales. In the context of the last
11.6 thousand years, known as the Holocene Epoch, the recent sharp jump in atmospheric CO2
concentrations is quite striking and is unequivocally explained by human-caused emissions
(Luthi et al. 2008; MacFarling Meure et al. 2006). The higher-resolution, post-1958
observational record from Manua Loa also reflects higher-frequency patterns of largely natural
variability: the seasonal cycle and interannual variability in the strength of the land and ocean
carbon sink (Keeling et al. 2001). The Holocene temperature record reveals a long-term decline,
caused by slow variations in Earth’s orbit, that began around 5.5 thousand years ago (Marcott et
al. 2013).1 The post-1850 reconstruction from direct observations reveals that this decline was
interrupted in the 20th century, by a rise totaling about 1.0°C from the late-nineteenth to the
early-twenty-first century (Rohde et al. 2014). This rise, which is superimposed by a spectrum of
higher-frequency variability, some internal to the climate system and some driven by changes in
forcing, is well-explained by the response to human-caused emissions.




1
  The Milanković cycles are global periodic climate changes driven by variations in the orientation of Earth’s axis of
rotation (19 and 23 thousand year frequencies), the tilt of Earth’s axis of rotation (41 thousand year frequencies),
and the shape of Earth’s orbit around the Sun (roughly 100 and 400 thousand year frequencies) (Berger
2012). Changes in incoming solar radiation caused by these cycles, amplified by natural feedbacks, serve as the
pacemaker for ice ages over the last 2.6 million years.
          The exact timing of the Holocene decline is currently contested. Marsicek et al. (2018) suggest that the
global analysis underlying Figure 1 is seasonally biased and conceals a more complex pattern, at least in North
America and Europe, where their analysis suggests summer temperatures declining starting around 5.5 thousand
years ago, but winter temperatures not cooling until about 2 thousand years ago.


                                                          4
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                        Hsiang and Kopp




Figure 1: Historical atmospheric CO2 concentrations from ice cores and direct
measurements (top), reconstructed historical global-mean surface temperatures relative to
the 1850-1900 average (middle), and reconstructed global-mean sea level relative to the
1991-2009 average (bottom), over the last 11,000 years (left) and since 1850 CE (right).
Data sources in legends, shaded areas are 95% confidence intervals. (Luthi et al. 2008;
MacFarling Meure et al. 2006; Keeling et al. 2001; Marcott et al. 2013; Rohde et al. 2014;
Lambeck et al. 2014; Kopp, Kemp, et al. 2016; Hay et al. 2015; GSFC 2018)


Sea level responds more sluggishly than temperature to changes in forcing because both the
oceans (which expand when they absorb heat) and ice sheets (which can shrink in response to
warming temperature) are large systems with an ability to absorb tremendous quantities of heat
while only warming up modestly. The first half of the Holocene is characterized by relatively
rapid sea-level rise, which ended with the final disappearance of Laurentide Ice Sheet in North
America. This rise was a delayed response to about 5°C warming since the thermal nadir of the
last ice age (about 21 thousand years). The twentieth-century rise was the fastest in at least 2800
years, and the last quarter-century was characterized by a rate about twice as fast as the 20th
century average (Sweet et al. 2017).

In general, a core challenge to determining whether humans are changing the climate is assessing
whether systematic changes in the behavior of the climate system are explained or confounded
by the sources of natural variation. As one example of such natural variation, the El Niño-
Southern Oscillation is the dominant pattern in the global climate at annual frequencies and
occasionally studied by economists (for example, Hsiang and Meng 2015). Other longer-term
ocean-related oscillations include the North Atlantic Oscillation, which varies on seasonal,
annual, decadal, and centennial time-scales (Hurrell 1995; V. Trouet, Scourse, and Raible 2012);
the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (Mantua and Hare 2002); and the Atlantic Multidecadal
Oscillation (Clement et al. 2015). Climate models form the basis for inference in this setting,




                                                 5
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                                      Hsiang and Kopp



separating out a secular trend signal from these oscillating sources of noise, because they can be
used to construct counterfactuals.

Climate Models

Climate models mathematically represent physical understanding of the climate system. They
fall along a hierarchy of complexity, from simple models that capture key aspects of the longer-
term, global-scale response and enable more thorough uncertainty quantification, to detailed,
full-complexity Earth system models that provide greater insight into processes at finer temporal
and spatial scales (Hayhoe et al. 2017).

The simplest climate change models, called energy balance models, can simulate millennia of
global-mean climate change in a single second on a laptop. These models are based on a
budgeting of sunlight and thermal energy in the atmosphere, as well as the role of key feedbacks.
Early, pen-and-paper versions of such models date back to the work of Svante Arrhenius in the
1890s; by the 1960s, they had also been adapted to include a single spatial dimension
representing the vertical structure of the atmosphere, which allowed the models to describe
vertical motions of air (Manabe and Strickler 1964).

In the 1960s, the equations of fluid dynamics were incorporated to produce early atmospheric
“general circulation models” that capture both the three-dimensional structure and dynamical
evolution of the global atmosphere (for example, Manabe and Smagorinsky 1965). Later model
generations elaborated their representation of the ocean, as well as of sea ice, land surfaces, and
atmospheric chemistry. These general circulation models2 were the ancestors of today’s full-
complexity Earth system models, which also endogenize vegetation dynamics and the carbon
cycle. Full-complexity Earth system models represent the best tools available for simulating
spatial patterns of the climate response, but they have several drawbacks.

First, they are computationally expensive, taking several hours on a high-performance computing
cluster just to simulate one year of climate. Second, although such models provide fairly high
spatial resolution – with grid cells that are roughly 100 km along a side in the generation of
models used in the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) – this resolution may still be inadequate for capturing details relevant to many economic
impacts. Third, detailed models may produce baseline climate projections of that can differ from
observed historical patterns. To address these last two issues, the climate science community has
developed post-processing technique for bias-correction and spatial “downscaling,” thus
increasing the spatial resolution of the final output. Such techniques include both statistical
approaches (like using quantile regressions to mimic historical variability around the mean) and
physical modeling approaches that embed higher-resolution regional climate models within
boundary conditions set by a global model (as in Wood et al. 2004). In addition, cutting-edge
climate models are run at increasingly higher resolutions; some of the most recent models have
resolutions below 50 km x 50 km, and in some cases can achieve local resolutions as high as 10
km x 10 km.


2
  As general circulation models evolved to include more than just the fluid dynamics of the ocean and the
atmosphere, the acronym ‘GCM’ was sometimes adapted to stand for “global climate model.”


                                                         6
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                          Hsiang and Kopp




Within the context of a single climate model simulation, uncertainty arises from the imperfect
representation of physical processes—that is, from structural and parametric uncertainty—as
well as from the imperfectly known initial conditions of a model run. As famously discovered by
Lorenz (1963) in early numerical weather models, tiny errors in initial conditions can produce
dramatically different forecasts within the same model, chaotic behavior known colloquially as
“the butterfly effect.” This endogenous chaotic behavior turns out to be more difficult to predict
than global average conditions, which are tightly constrained by energy budgets. As a result,
climate modeling teams usually run their model multiple times with perturbed initial conditions,
creating a collection of results known as an initial-conditions ensemble. Individual realizations of
the model are never interpreted as literal forecasts; rather, the ensemble as a whole is thought
capture statistical properties of the climate system. Indeed, most climate scientists generally
avoid the terms “forecast” and “prediction,” preferring instead the term “projection” to describe a
simulation of future climate under an assumed emission scenario. Producing decadal predictions
with global climate models is a frontier research area, with one of the key challenges being
aligning the internal variability of a climate model with the internal variability of the real climate
(Meehl et al. 2009).

Emissions of radiative pollutants

Not all the greenhouse gases emitted by humans remain in the atmosphere today; a substantial
fraction has been absorbed by carbon sinks on land (e.g., plants and soil) and in the ocean (e.g.,
phytoplankton and chemical dissolution). If all 1433.5 Gt of fossil CO2 emitted since 1750 had
stayed in the atmosphere, the current atmospheric CO2 concentration would be about 475 ppm
rather than the observed 405 ppm, even without considering emissions from deforestation.3
However, cumulative emissions of CO2 are nonetheless an exceedingly useful metric, as the
CO2-caused warming is approximately proportional to cumulative emissions (Allen et al. 2009),
with every trillion tons of CO2 causing about 0.2-0.7°C of warming.

Table 2 presents the estimated cumulative emissions of CO2 from fossil fuels and cement
production during 1751-2014, as well as the flow of emissions in 2014 (Boden, Marland, and
Andres 2017). The United States is responsible for over a quarter of historical emissions,
followed by China (12 percent) and Russia (11 percent, including the former Soviet Union);
together with Germany (6 percent) and the United Kingdom (5 percent), these five countries
account for 60 percent of historical emissions. However, if one examines flows today rather than
the stock of historical emissions, the picture is changing; China (30 percent) dominated
emissions in 2014, followed by the United States (15 percent), India (7 percent), Russia (5
percent), and Japan (4 percent). Germany is the largest emitter in the European Union (2.1
percent), with the EU28 collectively ranking third in global CO2 emissions, responsible for about
10 percent (Janssens-Maenhout et al. 2017). High national emissions reflect high carbon
intensity per capita (per-capita emissions in the US are 16.2 tonnes/yr in the US, 3.4 times the
global average), high population levels (per capita emissions in India, the third-leading emitter,
are about one-third the global average), or a mix of both factors (per-capita emissions in China
are about 60% more than the global average).


3
    One ppm CO2 is equivalent to about 7.8 Gt CO2.


                                                     7
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                                       Hsiang and Kopp



     Table 1: Historical and current emissions of carbon dioxide from fossil fuel combustion
         and cement production– Top 15 current emitters. Source: (Boden et al., 2017)
    Country             Cumulative       % of       Emissions      % of       Emissions
                         1751-2014      Global         2014       Global      per capita
                          (Gt CO2)                   (Gt CO2)                  (t CO2),
                                                                                 2014

    China                      174.7             12%              10.3            30%               7.5
    United States              375.9             26%               5.3            15%              16.2
    India                      41.7              3%                2.2             7%               1.7
    Russia / USSR              151.3             11%               1.7             5%              11.9
    Japan                      53.5              4%                1.2             4%               9.6
    Germany                    86.5              6%                0.7             2%               8.9
    Iran                       14.8              1%                0.6             2%               8.3
    Saudi Arabia               12.0              1%                0.6             2%              19.5
    South Korea                14.0              1%                0.6             2%              11.7
    Canada                     29.5              2%                0.5             2%              15.1
    Brazil                     12.9              1%                0.5             2%               2.6
    South Africa               18.4              1%                0.5             1%               9.1
    Mexico                     17.5              1%                0.5             1%               3.8
    Indonesia                  11.0              1%                0.5             1%               1.8
    United Kingdom             75.2              5%                0.4             1%               6.5

    World                     1433.5             100%             34.1            100%              4.7


These metrics do not include CO2 emissions from deforestation, which are significant: Pongratz
and Caldeira (2012) estimate that these accounted for about 230 gigatonnes of CO2 from 800-
1850 CE, and 425 gigatonnes of CO2 from 800-2006, compared to about 1175 gigatonnes of CO2
from fossil fuels over this latter time period (Boden, Marland, and Andres 2017). At present, the
ratio of fossil fuel to land use emissions is about 7.6 (Le Quéré et al. 2018).

Nor do these metrics include emissions of non-CO2 greenhouse gases and other climate-altering
pollutants. The climatic impact of an emission depends on both its radiative forcing of the
molecules emitted and their lifetime in the atmosphere. For example, methane survives for only
12 years on average in the atmosphere before breaking down into CO2 and water, whereas a
substantial fraction of emitted CO2 lasts for millennia. Thus, while methane has large radiative
impact per molecule per year, the integrated lifetime impact of a marginal molecule of methane
emissions is partially offset by its short lifetime. 4 Blanco et al. (2014) provide a discussion of
non-CO2 emissions.

4
 Methane, with an atmospheric concentration of about 1.8 ppm, currently exerts a forcing of about 0.5 W/m2;
nitrous oxide, at 0.3 ppm, exerts a forcing of about 0.2 W/m2, and fluorinated gases like chlorofluorocarbons and
hydrofluorocarbons, with concentrations less than 1 part per billion, exert forcing of about 0.3 W/m2.


                                                         8
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                        Hsiang and Kopp




Emissions of particulate matter and aerosol precursors (like sulfur dioxide) also influence the
radiative balance of the atmosphere. Both pollutants lead to the formation of aerosols – particles
that are solid or liquid, not gases, but which are small enough to remain aloft in the atmosphere
for substantial periods of time (days in the lower atmosphere; years in the stratosphere). Most
aerosols reflect incoming sunlight, leading to surface cooling (negative radiative forcing), but
some, notably black carbon, absorb solar energy and increase warming. Through their effects on
cloud physics, aerosol emissions have complex regional consequences for precipitation that are
distinct from the effects of GHGs (Rosenfeld et al. 2008). Because the spatial distribution and
net radiative effects of aerosols are difficult to monitor and change more quickly than gases, the
overall radiative impact of aerosols is highly uncertain and remains an important open question
in climate change science. The global average effective radiative forcing of aerosols is estimated
to be between -1.9 and -0.1 W/m2 (Boucher, Randall, and others 2013).

As one more level of complexity, coal combustion emits both CO2 and aerosol pollution, which
leads to a tradeoff of timescales: burning less coal reduces particulate matter and sulfur dioxide
emissions which is directly beneficial to human health, but also leads to a short-term increase in
warming due to the reduction in aerosol emissions, even though the long-term effect of reduced
CO2 emissions is a substantial reduction in warming (Wigley 2011). Similarly, efforts to target
reductions in particulate pollution from coal power plants without tackling CO2 emissions will
lead to climate warming (Westervelt et al. 2015).

Emissions scenarios

There are many climate modeling research programs around the world, each of which develops,
maintains, and run global climate models whose outputs are compared against one another. The
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) (Taylor, Stouffer, and Meehl 2012) is the
largest of these efforts, and plays a major role in informing the Assessment Reports of the IPCC.
To ensure that model outputs are comparable across groups, standardized emissions scenarios are
used as inputs to all models. The latest effort, CMIP Phase 5 (CMIP5), used a range of emission
scenarios known as the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) that exogenously
prescribe the flow of human-caused emissions over the coming decades. These RCPs, which
begin in 2005, are labeled by the overall radiative forcing (in W/m2) that occurs in 2100 in each
scenario. RCP 8.5 has the strongest forcing, with CO2 emissions nearly doubling from their
current levels by 2050 and continuing to rise thereafter; RCP 4.5 has a moderate forcing, with
CO2 emissions stabilizing at close to their current levels through the middle of the century and
declining thereafter, reaching about 40% of their current levels by 2080; and RCP 2.6 has the
weakest forcing, with CO2 emissions declining immediately, to less than a third of the current
levels by 2050, and becoming net-negative during the 2080s. In RCP 8.5, atmospheric CO2
concentration climbs to 541 ppm by 2050 and 936 ppm by 2100; in RCP 4.5, to 487 ppm by
2050 and 538 ppm by 2100; and in RCP 2.6, to 443 by 2050, declining to 421 ppm by 2100.
Below, when we discuss “high-”, “moderate-” and “low-” emissions scenarios, we are referring
to RCP 8.5, 4.5, and 2.6, respectively.




                                                 9
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                                   Hsiang and Kopp




      Table 2: Statements by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
              regarding the detection and attribution of global climate change
 First Assessment Report (1990)     “Unequivocal detection of the enhanced greenhouse
                                    effect from observations is not likely for a decade or
                                    more.”
 Second Assessment Report (1995) “The balance of evidence suggests a discernible human
                                    influence on global climate.”
 Third Assessment Report (2001)     “Most of the observed warming over the last 50 years is
                                    likely* to have been due to the increase in greenhouse
                                    gas concentration.”
 Fourth Assessment Report (2007) “Most of the observed increase in global average
                                    temperatures since the mid-20th century is very likely
                                    due to the observed increase in anthropogenic
                                    greenhouse gas concentrations.”
 Fifth Assessment Report (2013)     “It is extremely likely that human influence has been the
                                    dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-
                                    20th century.”
*The uncertainty language used by the IPCC is precisely defined: likely refers to an assessed probability of at
least 66%, very likely implies at least 90%, and extremely likely means at least 95%.


Observed and Projected Climate Changes in the Modern World

In this section, we briefly describe how historical changes in the climate are identified and
attributed to human activity, as well as climate changes that are projected to occur. Interested
readers should consult the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report by Stocker et al. (2013), USGCRP
(2017) and the readings cited below for additional details.

Detection and attribution of climate change

Over the last several decades, a core objective of climate science has been detecting changes in
the climate and determining whether these changes can be attributed to human activity. The
standard of detection refers to the empirical problem of determining whether there has been an
actual shift in the joint distribution of environmental variables that we refer to as the climate,
while the attribution standard refers to the inferential problem of assigning a cause to the
observed changes (Bindoff, Stott, and others 2013). Attribution studies generally simulate what
counterfactual climates would look like in the absence of human activity, altering the model
parameters that describe human inputs to the climate. Thus, for example, human emissions of
greenhouse gases and aerosols might be eliminated in the model. If it is not possible, or
sufficiently unlikely, that these human-free simulations can account for observed changes in the
climate, then scientists attribute these changes to human activity.

The scientific community is in broad and strong agreement that overall, human activity has
already substantially altered the global climate and that continued changes should be expected as
GHG emissions continue (Stocker et al. 2013; USGCRP 2017). The vast majority of actively



                                                       10
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                       Hsiang and Kopp




Figure 2: Average-annual global mean surface temperature (heavy black line), compared
to the distribution of climate model simulations exogenously “treated” with anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions (red) and “control” runs that only contain natural forcings (blue,
left panel only). Left panel: climate model distributions are from the Third Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project (CMIP3) published in 2007 and displayed until 2000, and CMIP5
published in 2013 and displayed until 2010. Right panel: all climate model projections from
CMIP5 in the moderate emissions scenario (RCP 4.5). Temperatures shown are relative to
the 1880-1900 average. Data sources: G. S. Jones, Stott, & Christidis, 2013; Morice,
Kennedy, Rayner, & Jones, 2012; Taylor, Stouffer, & Meehl, 2012.


publishing researchers now acknowledge the strength of the evidence implicating a human-
caused signal in climate change (Cook et al. 2016). The agreement in the scientific community
has grown stronger over the last quarter century, reflected in the IPCC’s increasingly strong
statements regarding the detection and attribution of global warming (Table 2). The present high
confidence that human activity is altering the climate has not always been clear in public
discourse, and recent research indicates that some of the public’s confusion regarding the
strength of scientific evidence appears to have been sown intentionally. For example, a recent
textual analysis of ExxonMobil documents from 1977-2014 indicates that internal documents
generally acknowledged that climate change is real and human caused while public-facing
documents did not (Supran and Oreskes 2017).

Figure 2 shows some of the most important evidence that supports the conclusion that human
emissions are causing global temperatures to rise. In the left panel, red bands indicate the range
of global mean surface temperature simulated in 90% of climate models that exogenously
impose observed human emissions. Blue bands indicate the analogous range for the same models
but in a “control” simulation where only natural forcings are imposed. Observed temperatures,
indicated by the black line, began to separate from the envelope of control simulations in the
1980’s and now lie far outside this range. In contrast, observed temperatures are fully consistent
with the range of temperatures simulated when human emissions are included. We note that this
consistency extends not just to global mean surface temperature, but also to changes in
stratospheric temperature and ocean heat content (not shown), as expected based on the basic
physics of climate change. Thus, it is extremely difficult to explain current temperatures in the
absence of human activity. The gradually increasing confidence of the scientific community can


                                                 11
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                       Hsiang and Kopp




Figure 3: Projected change in local average temperatures (left) and local average rainfall
(right) per 1°C of warming in global mean temperatures. Changes are differences in means
between 1986–2005 and 2081–2100 in CMIP5 simulations of RCP 4.5. From (Christensen,
Kanikicharla, and others 2013).


be understood by noting the envelope of model results published in association with the 2007
IPCC report (displayed ending in simulation year 2000) were less cleanly separated than those
published in association with the 2013 IPCC report (displayed ending in 2010).

It is now virtually certain (at least 99% probability) that the observed modern warming trend
exceeds the bounds of natural variability (Bindoff, Stott, and others 2013). Furthermore, humans
are likely (with at least 66 percent probability) responsible for 0.6°C-0.8°C of the observed 0.6°C
of warming over 1951-2010. Values greater than 0.6°C are possible for the anthropogenic
contribution because of the possibility that natural forcing and variability could otherwise impose
a slightly negative baseline trend (for example, as a result of volcanic eruptions), visible in the
control runs of Figure 2.

Temperature changes
Since the late nineteenth century, global-mean surface temperature has increased by about 1.0°C,
with the trend accelerating after 1980. Almost every location on the planet has exhibited an
upward temperature trend over this period (Wuebbles et al. 2017). Warming has also been
substantially faster over land than the ocean—between 1880-1900 and 1997-2017, the land has
warmed 1.4°C on average while the oceans warmed roughly 0.6°C (GISTEMP Team 2018).

As one would expect, given the array of factors affecting temperatures, the overall rise in
temperatures has not been smooth over time or homogenous across space. For example, warming
was dampened in the 1950s-1970s, most likely as a result of both aerosol emissions, which
reflected sunlight away from the planet (Maher, Gupta, and England 2014), and natural
variability. Since 1980, the most rapid warming has occurred in the far north, where the
replacement of highly reflective summer sea ice with dark, open ocean rapidly increases the
absorption of sunlight and local warming (Serreze and Barry 2011).

A heavily discussed period of slowed average warming over 1998-2013, the so-called ‘hiatus’,
now appears fully consistent with the natural variance of the climate system (Cahill, Rahmstorf,


                                                 12
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                           Hsiang and Kopp



and Parnell 2015), as can be readily seen in the overlay of simulated and observed temperature
time series in the right panel of Figure 2. Relative to the distribution of simulations for the first
decade of the 21st century, the observed values fall toward the low end of projections but never
leave the envelope of expected variations. However, in addition to natural variability, it is
thought that some model simulations warmed too quickly because the RCPs underrepresented
volcanic and human aerosol emissions after 2005 (Medhaug et al. 2017).

Based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s assessment of CMIP5 simulations,
projected global-mean surface temperature is likely to rise 0.9-2.3°C (1.6-4.1°F) above
preindustrial levels (defined as the 1850-1900 average) by 2080-2100 under a low-emissions
scenario, 1.7-3.3°C (3.1-5.9°F) under a moderate-emissions scenario (shown in Figure 2), and
3.2-5.4°C (5.8-9.7°F) under a high-emissions scenario (Collins, Knutti, and others 2013).

As in the past, warming will be more rapid over land, where most economic activity occurs,
compared to over the ocean. The only location on the surface that is projected by some models to
cool is a very small portion of the North Atlantic Ocean just south of Greenland, where changing
ocean circulation may induce cooling. Although warming will continue to occur fastest over the
Arctic, average summer temperature will diverge from the historical range soonest in low-
latitude regions, which experiences lower historical variance. The left panel of Figure 3
illustrates regional heterogeneities in the rate of warming (in °C) that are otherwise masked by
globally averaged summary statistics. The map depicts the average warming at each location
associated with a 1°C increase in global mean temperature, values greater than 1°C indicate rates
of warming faster than the global mean while values below 1°C indicate warming that is slower
than the global mean.

To help grasp the potentially transformative scale of these thermal changes, Figure 4 plots the
average summertime temperatures for the lower 48 states in the USA (top, adapted from Houser
et al 2015) and annual average temperature for 166 countries (bottom). Blue text indicates
historically observed temperatures, and red text indicates average projected mean temperatures
for 2080-2099 across models simulating a high-emissions scenario. This layout allows for
projected future temperatures to be matched to historical analogs. For examples, from the USA:
future summers in Vermont will be similar to historical summers in Maryland, summers in
Connecticut will be similar to past summers in Arizona, summer in New Jersey will be slightly
hotter than historical Louisiana summers, and future summers in Georgia and Florida will be
much hotter than anything previously experienced in the USA. Looking at annual temperatures
for entire countries, we see that future temperatures in Norway are projected to be similar to
historical temperatures in Germany, future Mexico will be slightly hotter than historical Iraq,
future Indonesia will be similar to historical Mali, and India and Thailand are projected to be
hotter than any country presently on Earth.

Precipitation changes

A warmer atmosphere is capable of holding more water vapor, leading to an increase in overall
average precipitation (rainfall and snowfall). Increasing precipitation in the mid-latitude
Northern Hemisphere has been observed since the 1950s. Heavy precipitation events in
particular have increased, most clearly in North America and Europe, where the most data is



                                                  13
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                Hsiang and Kopp




Figure 4: Average temperatures for political units observed during 1981-2010 (blue) and
projected for 2080-2099 in a high emission (RCP 8.5) scenario (red). Top panel:
summertime area-average temperatures for lower 48 states in the USA, figure adapted
from Houser et al. (2015). Bottom panel: annual population-weighted average
temperatures for entire countries, data from Burke et al. (2015). Markers are vertically
jittered.




                                                 14
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                                        Hsiang and Kopp



collected (Hartmann et al. 2013). Both of these changes are consistent with those expected on a
warming planet. However, because the atmospheric dynamics that govern precipitation involve
both large motions of air masses and processes that occur at scales below the spatial resolution of
many climate models, precipitation changes are considerably more challenging to model
numerically than temperature changes. This difficulty, combined with the array of changes in
temperature, wind, humidity and other factors that all affect when and where precipitation falls,
have rendered projections of precipitation changes more complex and more uncertain than
projections of temperature.

There is large heterogeneity in the sign of projected precipitation change, with many locations
getting wetter while many others get drier. Precipitation dynamics are strongly affected by
internal variability—such as the El Niño Southern Oscillation—and projections for specific
locations depend upon changes in large-scale patterns of atmospheric circulation (Collins,
Knutti, and others 2013). The right panel of Figure 3 illustrates average changes in local rainfall
for each 1°C increase in global mean temperature. Importantly, at many locations, there is a
large range of uncertainty for projected changes, with plausible projections allowing for no
change. Simple summary statements like “dry regions are likely become generally drier and wet
regions are likely to become generally wetter” hold well over the ocean, but are coarse
descriptions of the complex of precipitation changes that may occur over land (Greve et al.
2014). In the United States, the most robust projections are for a springtime drying of the
Southwest, summertime drying of the Northwest, and increase in winter and spring precipitation
in the Northeast, upper Midwest, and northern Great Plains (Houser et al. 2015).

Humidity changes

Specific humidity is the total moisture content of air. Relative humidity is the ratio of specific
humidity to a theoretical maximum moisture capacity, which rises exponentially as temperature
increases. Since the 1970s, global mean specific humidity has increased; however, there is little
evidence of an increase in global mean relative humidity and some evidence for a decline,
possibly reflecting faster warming of the land than of the oceans, which are the primary source of
atmospheric moisture (S. Sherwood and Fu 2014). Models that project that the largest increases
in temperature on land also tend to predict the largest decreases in relative humidity (Fischer and
Knutti 2013).

One reason that humidity is thought to be economically important is that if affects human health,
since higher humidity levels make it more difficult for the human body to cool itself in hot
conditions through sweating. Dangerously hot and humid conditions are projected to become
dramatically more likely in several regions, making it more difficult for humans to survive
unassisted for long periods outdoors in some regions (S. C. Sherwood and Huber 2010). For
example, in the southeastern United States, the population-weighted frequency of dangerously
hot and humid days5 are projected to rise from 8 per year on average in 1981-2010 to 17-28 days

5
  As defined by Houser et al., 2015, “dangerously hot and humid” days are characterized by wet-bulb temperatures
over 80°F. Wet-bulb temperatures are measured using a ventilated thermometer wrapped in a wet cloth, and are
strongly related to the ability of a sweating mammal to cool itself by evapotranspiration. Houser et al., 2015, note
that, by their definition, dangerously hot and humid days are “typical of the most humid parts of Texas and
Louisiana in the hottest summer month, and the most humid summer days in Washington and Chicago.”


                                                         15
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                       Hsiang and Kopp



per year over 2040-2059 in a moderate emissions scenario and to 40-70 days/year on average
over 2080-2099 in a high emissions scenario (Houser et al. 2015).

Tropical Cyclones

Tropical cyclones are the class of phenomena that includes tropical storms, typhoons, hurricanes,
and cyclones; the terms are distinguished by wind speed and the ocean basin where the storm
occurs. Tropical cyclones are driven by the temperature difference between the warm ocean
surface and cooler temperatures higher in the atmosphere. The warm ocean moistens overlying
air, which rises and cools, releasing energy and rain. Thus, climate change is thought to have
countervailing effects on storms: warming sea surface temperatures fuels storms but warming
temperatures higher in the atmosphere may suppress them (Knutson et al. 2010).

Tropical cyclone formation and storm trajectory depend on myriad additional factors, especially
wind patterns, which introduces additional complexity into projections of their future changes.
Furthermore, inconsistent historical data on storms in the open ocean prior to the satellite era
makes inferences difficult. However, there is evidence that the frequency and intensity of the
strongest storms in the Atlantic have been increasing since the 1970s, and some evidence that
humans contributed to this change (Walsh et al. 2016).

Efforts to model all of these factors together broadly agree that the frequency of intense tropical
cyclones (e.g., category 4 & 5 hurricanes), as well as the average intensity of their associated
rainfall, is projected to increase with warming (Kossin et al. 2017). The effect on total number of
storms remains less certain, though most studies suggest a stable or decreasing quantity of lower-
intensity storms. The effect of climate change on storm tracks, i.e. the paths that storms take
toward land, is uncertain and may offset or enhance the effect of increased storm intensity in
some regions.

Importantly, the spatial distribution of these changing risks are heterogeneous, due to the
multiple dynamics at play. For example, systematic changes in the spatial distribution of storm
tracks within an ocean basin may reallocate cyclone risk between populations even if the overall
frequency of storms does not change. Across ocean basins, models generally agree in projecting
substantial increases of storm intensity in the West Pacific, affecting East Asia and Oceania, with
some decreases in activity occurring in the Indian Ocean, affecting Southern Asia and East
Africa. Projecting changes in the North Atlantic, which affects Central and North America, has
been more challenging and where the greatest scientific uncertainty has persisted (Knutson et al.
2010; Christensen, Kanikicharla, and others 2013).

It is also thought that humans also affect the genesis and growth of tropical cyclones through the
regional effects of aerosol pollution. Aerosols aloft may cool local sea surface temperatures, by
reflecting sunlight before it reaches the sea surface, as well as heat higher levels in the
atmosphere, by absorbing sunlight when the particles are dark colored. Both of these effects
generally work to weaken storms and it is thought that storm activity in recent decades may have
been greater had greenhouse gas co-pollutants been absent (Walsh et al. 2016).




                                                 16
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                         Hsiang and Kopp




Figure 5: Areas projected to experience floods at least once every 100 years on average (1%
annual risk) in Miami, FL (left) and New York, NY (right), accounting for median
projected sea level rise and for projected changes in tropical cyclone intensity in a high
emission (RCP 8.5) scenario. From Hsiang, Kopp, Jina, Rising, et al. (2017).


Sea level rise

Global-mean sea-level rise is driven by two processes: an increase in the volume of water
already in the ocean, which occurs as the water warms and expands, and an increase in the mass
of water in the ocean, primarily from the melting of ice on land. Since 1900, global-mean sea
level has increased by about 18-21 cm, with the rate of rise since about 1990 being 2-2.5 times
faster than during the preceding nine decades. A substantial fraction of this rise is attributable to
human-caused climate change (Sweet et al. 2017). Regional sea-level changes can differ
substantively from this global trend, modulated by changes in currents and winds; changes in
Earth’s gravitational field, rotation, crust, and mantle that occur as land ice changes; and changes
in the height of land that result from compaction of sediments, plate tectonics, the ongoing
mantle response to historical land ice changes, and other factors (Kopp et al. 2015). Historic sea-
level rise has led to a detectable increase in the frequency of coastal flooding, in some cases by
more than an order of magnitude (Sweet and Park 2014).

Due to the slow response time of the oceans and ice sheets, sea-level rise is fairly insensitive to
alternative emissions scenarios for the first half of this century. Across studies, median
projections of future global-mean sea-level rise are 20-30 cm (8-12 in) during 2000-2050, with
less than a 5 percent chance of exceeding 50 cm (20 in) (for a review, see Horton et al. 2018).
After 2050, projections become more deeply uncertain, due to both uncertain human emissions
and the uncertain response of the polar ice sheets (Kopp, DeConto, et al. 2017). Median
projections for 2000-2100 range from 40-80 cm (16-32 in) for a low-emissions scenario and 70-


                                                 17
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                        Hsiang and Kopp



150 cm (28-59 in) for a high-emissions scenario. However, global-mean sea-level rise of as
much as 250 cm (8 ft) by 2100 cannot be ruled out. For reference, the last time global
temperatures were about as high as they currently are (about 125,000 years ago,) sea-levels were
6-9 meters (20-30 ft) higher than today. Permanent inundation from sea level rise will likely
claim some coastal assets as well as impose costs for assets that are protected through additional
investments. The resulting increase in the frequency of tide- and wave-driven flooding is
expected to render some low-lying island states uninhabitable (Storlazzi et al. 2018).

In addition to increasing average high-tide levels, a major economic consequence of sea level
rise results from its interaction with tropical cyclones and extratropical cyclones (e.g.,
nor’easters). In storm-prone locations, the highest sea levels occur from storm surges that occur
relatively infrequently but can impose major costs. Sea level rise adds roughly linearly to peak
storm surge height, increasing the extent of surge-induced flooding. Figure 5 illustrates the joint
effects of projected sea level rise and changing tropical cyclone activity on the flood risk of
Miami, FL and New York, NY, taken from our prior work with coauthors (Hsiang et al. 2017).
The extent of areas expected to flood once every 100 years (1% annual risk) increases
substantially after 2050 for Miami but much earlier in the century for many regions of New
York.

Droughts and Floods

By altering temperature and precipitation patterns, climate change alters the frequency and
intensity of extreme moisture conditions, such as droughts and floods. There is a limited but
increasing ability to attribute intensifying extreme floods and drought to human activity. For
example, Emanuel (2017) estimated that climate forcing by humans amplified the probability of
rainfall experienced by Texans during Hurricane Harvey six-fold.

Since 1950, the likelihood of drought has increased in the Mediterranean and West Africa and
decreased in central North America and northwestern Australia (Hartmann et al. 2013); again,
attribution of this trend to human-caused climate change is challenging (Bindoff, Stott, and
others 2013). Some measures of drought in the US have increased due to warming, which
increases evaporation and exhibits an anthropogenic signal (Wehner et al. 2017). In model
projections, the frequency of droughts tends to increase in dry regions (Collins, Knutti, and
others 2013), which are also projected to expand. Prolonged hot and dry periods are projected to
become substantially more frequent in many grassland areas with low agricultural productivity,
regions that today often depend on livestock production (Bell et al. 2018). In regions with more
vegetation, amplifying the oscillation between heavy rainfall and drought is projected to increase
the frequency of wildfires (Abatzoglou and Williams 2016), because vegetative fuel grows
rapidly during wet periods then becomes flammable during dry periods.

The observed increase in heavy precipitation suggests that climate change is contributing to
increasing rain-driven flood damages (Cisneros, Oki, and et al. 2014). Projected increases in
heavy precipitation and shorter-lived snowpack are likely to further increase the frequency of
inland flooding. In addition to changing rainfall patterns, rising sea levels amplify the frequency
of coastal flooding (Buchanan, Oppenheimer, and Kopp 2017). Changing patterns of flood risk
are of particular economic importance, as flooding is recognized as one of the costliest classes of
disaster globally (Swiss Re Institute 2018). However, in many cases the dominant drivers of


                                                 18
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                           Hsiang and Kopp



increased flood damages are related to the number of people and extent of development affected
by the flood, rather than the physical size of the flood.

Clouds

Understanding clouds is scientifically important, because they generate competing feedbacks in
the climate system. However, cloud physics are complex, and many important dynamics occur at
a spatial resolution finer than those used in most global climate models, generating substantial
uncertainty in the projected changes in cloud cover for many regions of the world.

On the one hand, clouds reflect visible light, so increases in cloud cover, particularly low-altitude
cloud cover, can increase the fraction of incoming sunlight that is reflected before it warms the
Earth’s surface. On the other hand, clouds absorb outgoing infrared radiation leaving the Earth’s
surface and thus contribute to the greenhouse effect, so increases in cloud cover can amplify
warming (Boucher, Randall, and others 2013).

To date, global-scale changes in cloudiness remain unclear. Looking forward, some analyses
suggest the potential for circulation changes leading to large-scale, non-linear reductions in low-
latitude cloudiness with warming that could substantially increase the sensitivity of temperature
to CO2 forcing (Caballero and Huber 2013).

One way in which clouds science may become important to economists is in the rapidly growing
research field of “geoengineering” or “climate engineering,” which considers various proposals
to intentionally alter the climate so as to counter-act some effects of greenhouse gas emissions
(Caldeira, Bala, and Cao 2013). The most widely proposed intervention is “solar radiation
management,” which involves increasing the reflectivity of the atmosphere in order to shade and
cool the surface. One proposed mechanism for increasing reflectivity is to spray aerosol
precursors into the upper atmosphere, mimicking the mechanism through which historical
volcanic eruptions have cooled the surface. Another proposal, with more localized and shorter
lasting effects, is “cloud brightening,” achieved by manipulating cloud-droplet size (and thus
optical properties) by spraying particles into lower portions of the atmosphere. A theoretically
appealing feature of cloud-brightening proposals is that cloud brightening might be used to
temporarily be used to cool a city or ecosystem during particularly damaging heat waves,
although the various economic costs and unintended effects of such policies remain poorly
studied (Proctor et al. 2018).

Ocean acidification

As CO2 concentration in the atmosphere increase, some of this CO2 will dissolve into ocean
water to form carbonic acid and increase ocean acidity. Currently, the ocean absorbs roughly
one-quarter of global CO2 emissions through this process.

The rate of acidification depends on local chemistry, temperature, circulation patterns and
freshwater inputs. For example, in the North Pacific, over the last three decades, surface ocean
acidity has already increased by about 12 percent. Globally, the current rate of acidification is
unparalleled in at least the last 55 million years, as reflected in a variety of chemical indicators



                                                  19
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                           Hsiang and Kopp



from ocean sediments (Hönisch et al. 2012). In a high-emissions scenario, global-mean surface
ocean acidity is projected to increase 100-150 percent (Jewett and Romanou 2017).

Ocean acidification is thought to substantially alter marine ecosystems, although the magnitude
of these effects is not well understood. The acidity of ocean waters is known to alter the ability
of organisms, such as clams or corals, to create the hard shells and reefs that they depend on for
survival, effects with largely unknown consequences for the various fish stocks and other marine
products consumed around the world

Ecosystems

Many ecosystem changes that can be directly related to climate change have been observed. In
many locations around the world, a broad suite of terrestrial organisms is migrating toward
higher altitudes and latitudes (Chen et al. 2011). Similarly, in the oceans, fish are migrating to
stay within their preferred water temperatures (Pinsky et al. 2013). Under moderate and high
emissions scenarios, many slow-moving terrestrial species like the coastal redwoods (Roberts
and Hamann 2016) may be unable to track the northward movement climate zones, roughly 0.1-
1.3 km per year (Loarie et al. 2009), quickly enough to stay within their thermal tolerances. In
many instances, the ability of species to migrate is further aggravated by fragmentation of
habitat. Overall, high-latitude ecosystems are likely to be transformed by invasions from lower
latitudes, and extinctions may be common at lower latitudes (Pörtner et al. 2014).

Coral reefs – home to more than a million species – are threatened by both high temperatures and
ocean acidification (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2007). Bleaching events associated with high
temperatures have become more frequent and extensive, with widespread events spanning the
tropics in 1998, 2010, and 2015-2016 (Hughes et al. 2017), and a majority of coral reefs around
the world are projected to be at risk of degradation even under a low-emissions scenario (Frieler
et al. 2013).

The relationships between climate change and ecosystem change can be difficult to untangle,
since climate is only one of many human-caused factors affecting ecosystems. For example,
land-use change, overexploitation, species introductions, nitrogen deposition, and water resource
development also play major roles and may exhibit trends that are correlated with climate change
(Chapin et al. 2000). Nonetheless, it is worth noting that although the causes of mass extinction
events in Earth’s geological history are complex and difficult to pin down, a growing body of
evidence suggests that a number of the largest mass extinctions coincided with large-scale
climate changes (for example, Payne and Clapham 2012).

Tipping elements and critical thresholds

Nonlinearities and feedbacks in the Earth systems give rise to the potential for multiple stable
states of different parts of the Earth system, with potentially rapid lock-in of a state shift once
critical thresholds are crossed. These parts of the Earth system are often called ‘tipping
elements,’ and the thresholds ‘tipping points’, though the ‘tipping point’ language has the
tendency to create confusion about the speed with which state shifts can occur. In popular
discourse and much of the economic analysis of climate change, changes associated with a



                                                  20
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                         Hsiang and Kopp



‘tipping point’ are described as occurring “rapidly”. This description is accurate, insofar as these
changes are rapid relative to other comparable drivers of similar changes in the Earth system. But
this description can be highly misleading in many economic contexts, as these shifts are
sometimes thought to play out over millennia. Below, we briefly summarize a few examples;
see Kopp, Shwom, et al. (2016) for a detailed review.

Tipping elements can exist in atmosphere/ocean circulation. For example, many of the climate
oscillations mentioned earlier, such as El Niño-Southern Oscillation, occur due to tipping
elements, and these patterns may undergo substantial shifts in frequency and amplitude in a
warmer climate. Large-scale patterns of ocean circulation, such as the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation – an important component of global ocean circulation that plays a major
role in setting temperature, precipitation, and sea level in the North Atlantic – are also potential
tipping elements. These atmosphere/ocean tipping elements are among those most likely to
undergo rapid shifts.

Tipping elements also occur in ice sheets. For example, positive feedbacks involving ocean-ice
sheet interactions might commit the Antarctic to sustained ice sheet loss that would eventually
raise global-mean sea level by multiple meters or tens of meters. Indeed, some evidence suggests
that multiple meters of sea level rise from the Antarctic may already be locked in, although
depending on the pace of regional warming these effects may manifest over multiple centuries.

Tipping elements can also exist in the carbon cycle and in ecosystems. For example, warming of
previously frozen soils (permafrost) is allowing microbes to decompose freshly unfrozen organic
material into CO2 and methane. These releases may be an important positive feedback on
warming, which could potentially amplify warming by several tenths of a degree in the 21st
century. Ecosystems are also well known to undergo rapid regime shifts; coral reefs, whose
bleaching is discussed above, are a notable example.

How Economists Can Help Climate Science

We close with a few thoughts on how economists can provide support to climate science.

Improving emissions forecasts

Forecasts for greenhouse gas emissions in the coming decades and centuries are a key ingredient
to physical simulations of climate change. Emissions clearly depend on global economic activity,
but there is not a one-to-one mapping of economic forecasts and the standardized RCP emissions
scenarios discussed earlier. Because global emissions are a single time series, there are many
possible future configurations of the global economy, technology and policy that could produce
each emissions trajectory.

The coordinated standardization exercise that produced the RCP scenarios also constructed a set
of five Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs), which represent standardized population
projections, forecasts of economic growth and convergence, and forecasts of technological
change in both the energy sector and adaptation technologies. SSPs can be loosely thought of as
potential “states of the world” that might be realized in the future and which no single country



                                                 21
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                       Hsiang and Kopp



can unilaterally change through policy. The narrative for SSP 1 is “Sustainability,” representing
a world with low barriers to both mitigation and adaptation; SSP 2 represents a “Middle of the
Road” scenario; SSP 3 is “Regional Rivalry,” representing a world with high barriers to both
mitigation and adaptation; SSP 4 is “Inequality,” representing a world with high barriers to
adaptation but low barriers to mitigation (due to slow economic growth); and SSP 5 is “Fossil-
fueled development,” representing a world with high barriers to mitigation but low barriers to
adaptation. Combinations of SSP pathways and remaining policy choices are thought to impose
constraints on global emission trajectories. For example, RCP 8.5 can be produced without a
carbon subsidy in SSP 5, while RCPs 4.5 and 2.6 can be produced only as policy scenarios with
carbon taxes in all SSPs.

The construction of these SSPs and the corresponding sets of emissions scenarios of represent
the output of a modeling program coordinated across numerous research groups (Moss et al.
2010). The energy/agriculture/economic/climate integrated assessment models used to construct
the scenarios are elaborate process models that have been assembled by interdisciplinary teams
of engineers and economic modelers, mostly from energy economics. At the heart of most
models are assumptions about exogenous population growth and about the rate and convergence
of technical change. Researchers using these models have addressed many important issues over
the years: for example, the tradeoffs among different technologies and their roles in meeting
different emissions targets (for example, Clarke et al. 2009).

However, because of the complexity of these models, many economists with expertise that
would be useful to these modeling exercises have remained unengaged with (or unaware of) this
enterprise. In our view, deepening engagements with economists in subfields outside of energy
economics, such as macroeconomics, development economics, and political economy, will help
strengthen and accelerate this research program (see also Barron 2018). Further, there should be
a stronger emphasis on using empirical results and hindcasting experiments to constrain the
behavior of these models (for example, Calvin et al. 2017).

Focusing climate research to support investigation of economic and social questions

Much of climate science research is focused on answering key research questions formulated by
physical scientists about the nature of the global climate system. These questions are
scientifically important and of substantial consequence, but in many cases key questions or
measurements about the climate system that are economically or socially important remain
unanswered. Climate scientists are often best suited to help answer these questions, but
economists must be involved in identifying these opportunities and focusing the research. We see
three general areas where potential gains from intellectual exchanges seem large.

First, empirically disentangling the economic consequences of climate change is a large research
enterprise discussed by Carleton and Hsiang (2016). Such analyses universally require some
“data engineering” to map physical observations appropriately onto social systems (Auffhammer
et al. 2013; Hsiang 2016). Several advances in this literature have arisen from methodological
innovations in how physical information from climate science has been summarized and
integrated into theoretical and econometric models. For example, Schlenker and Roberts (2009)
developed an approach for accounting for the accumulating effects of exposure to extreme heat;



                                                 22
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                         Hsiang and Kopp



Hsiang (2010) developed a method for reconstructing continuous human exposure to tropical
cyclones using standard, albeit limited, meteorological data; Hsiang, Meng & Cane (2011)
introduced a technique for identifying populations heavily impacted by the El Niño-Southern
Oscillation; and Proctor et al. (2018) developed an approach to isolate the optical effects of
overhead volcanic aerosols. These innovations required both insight into the physics of the
climate system coupled to insights from economists regarding the construction of economically-
meaningful measures. Continued empirical progress will require deepening engagement
between researchers in these two fields.

Second, global intercomparison programs for climate change models specify outputs that
modeling groups must record in order to participate, but these outputs have been geared towards
scientific questions and not the calculation of any economic outcome that results from climate
change. For example, the expected future correlation of drought events across the major
agricultural regions is likely to be important for future food prices, but statistics about such
correlated extremes are not commonly computed (Kopp, Easterling, et al. 2017). By supplying
the climate modeling community with information on what variables, patterns, and scales are of
key economic interest, economists can help the climate modeling community synthesize and
output their findings in new and useful ways.

Finally, economists can aid climate scientists in identifying research questions that would be the
most valuable to address from a socioeconomic perspective. For example, economists can help
distinguish between those economic impacts for which it is most valuable to improve climate
model resolution, and those for which is it more important to explore structural or parametric
uncertainties, even if at lower resolution. Economists can help distinguish between economic
outcomes for which it is more important to constrain long-term climate sensitivity and those for
which better characterization of short-term responses, natural variability, or spatial patterns is a
priority. Economists can also identify new climate observations that would contribute the
greatest value to improved risk-management strategies. In short, economists are well suited to
support climate scientists by valuing the different types of information that these scientists could
potentially provide to the world.




                                                 23
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                       Hsiang and Kopp



References

Abatzoglou, John T., and A. Park Williams. 2016. “Impact of Anthropogenic Climate Change on
       Wildfire across Western US Forests.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
       113 (42): 11770–75. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1607171113.
Allen, Myles R., David J. Frame, Chris Huntingford, Chris D. Jones, Jason A. Lowe, Malte
       Meinshausen, and Nicolai Meinshausen. 2009. “Warming Caused by Cumulative Carbon
       Emissions towards the Trillionth Tonne.” Nature 458 (7242): 1163–1166.
       https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08019.
Archer, David, Michael Eby, Victor Brovkin, Andy Ridgwell, Long Cao, Uwe Mikolajewicz,
       Ken Caldeira, et al. 2009. “Atmospheric Lifetime of Fossil Fuel Carbon Dioxide.”
       Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 37 (1): 117–34.
       https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.earth.031208.100206.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon M. Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam Sobel. 2013.
       “Using Weather Data and Climate Model Output in Economic Analyses of Climate
       Change.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 7 (2): 181–98.
       https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/ret016.
Barron, Alexander R. 2018. “Time to Refine Key Climate Policy Models.” Nature Climate
       Change 8 (5): 350–52. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0132-y.
Bell, K., S. Sum, J. Longmate, and S. Hsiang. 2018. “Empirically Identifying Factors of Natural
       Capital That Generate Economic Value in Pasture Systems.” Working paper.
Berger, A. 2012. “A Brief History of the Astronomical Theories of Paleoclimates.” In Climate
       Change, 107–129. Springer.
Bindoff, Nathaniel L., Peter A. Stott, and others. 2013. “Chapter 10: Detection and Attribution of
       Climate Change: From Global to Regional.” In Climate Change 2013: The Physical
       Science Basis, edited by Thomas F. Stocker, Dahe Qin, and others. Cambridge, UK:
       Cambridge University Press. http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/.
Blanco, Gabriel, Reyer Gerlagh, Sangwon Suh, John Barrett, Heleen C. de Coninck, CF Diaz
       Morejon, Ritu Mathur, et al. 2014. “Chapter 5: Drivers, Trends and Mitigation.” In
       Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change, edited by O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-
       Madruga, Y. Sonoka, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, et al., 351–411.
       Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Boden, T. A., G. Marland, and R. J. Andres. 2017. “Global, Regional, and National Fossil-Fuel
       CO2 Emissions (1751 - 2014) (V. 2017).” Oak Ridge, TN: Carbon Dioxide Information
       Analysis Center (CDIAC), Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL).
       http://dx.doi.org/10.3334/CDIAC/00001_V2017.
Boucher, Olivier, David Randall, and others. 2013. “Chapter 7: Clouds and Aerosols.” In
       Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, edited by T. F. Stocker, D. Qin, and
       others. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Buchanan, Maya K., Michael Oppenheimer, and Robert E. Kopp. 2017. “Amplification of Flood
       Frequencies with Local Sea Level Rise and Emerging Flood Regimes.” Environmental
       Research Letters 12: 064009. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa6cb3.
Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. 2015. “Global Non-Linear Effect of
       Temperature on Economic Production.” Nature 527 (7577): 235–39.
       https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15725.




                                                 24
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                     Hsiang and Kopp



Caballero, Rodrigo, and Matthew Huber. 2013. “State-Dependent Climate Sensitivity in Past
        Warm Climates and Its Implications for Future Climate Projections.” Proceedings of the
        National Academy of Sciences 110 (35): 14162–67.
        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1303365110.
Cahill, Niamh, Stefan Rahmstorf, and Andrew C. Parnell. 2015. “Change Points of Global
        Temperature.” Environmental Research Letters 10 (8): 084002.
        https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/084002.
Caldeira, Ken, Govindasamy Bala, and Long Cao. 2013. “The Science of Geoengineering.”
        Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 41 (1): 231–56.
        https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-earth-042711-105548.
Calvin, Katherine, Marshall Wise, Page Kyle, Leon Clarke, and Jae Edmonds. 2017. “A
        Hindcast Experiment Using the Gcam 3.0 Agriculture and Land-Use Module.” Climate
        Change Economics 08 (01): 1750005. https://doi.org/10.1142/S2010007817500051.
Carleton, Tamma A., and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2016. “Social and Economic Impacts of
        Climate.” Science 353 (6304): aad9837. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad9837.
Chapin, F. Stuart, Erika S. Zavaleta, Valerie T. Eviner, Rosamond L. Naylor, Peter M. Vitousek,
        Heather L. Reynolds, David U. Hooper, et al. 2000. “Consequences of Changing
        Biodiversity.” Special Features. Nature. May 11, 2000. https://doi.org/10.1038/35012241.
Chen, I.-Ching, Jane K. Hill, Ralf Ohlemüller, David B. Roy, and Chris D. Thomas. 2011.
        “Rapid Range Shifts of Species Associated with High Levels of Climate Warming.”
        Science 333 (6045): 1024–26. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1206432.
Christensen, Jens Hesselbjerg, Krishna Kumar Kanikicharla, and others. 2013. “Chapter 14:
        Climate Phenomena and Their Relevance for Future Regional Climate Change.” In
        Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, edited by Thomas F. Stocker, Dahe
        Qin, and others. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
        http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/.
Clarke, Leon, Jae Edmonds, Volker Krey, Richard Richels, Steven Rose, and Massimo Tavoni.
        2009. “International Climate Policy Architectures: Overview of the EMF 22 International
        Scenarios.” Energy Economics 31: S64–S81.
Clement, Amy, Katinka Bellomo, Lisa N. Murphy, Mark A. Cane, Thorsten Mauritsen, Gaby
        Rädel, and Bjorn Stevens. 2015. “The Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation without a Role
        for Ocean Circulation.” Science 350 (6258): 320–24.
        https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aab3980.
Collins, Matthew, Reto Knutti, and others. 2013. “Chapter 12: Long-Term Climate Change:
        Projections, Commitments and Irreversibility.” In Climate Change 2013: The Physical
        Science Basis, edited by Thomas F. Stocker, Dahe Qin, and others. Cambridge, UK:
        Cambridge University Press. http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/.
Cook, John, Naomi Oreskes, Peter T. Doran, William R. L. Anderegg, Bart Verheggen, Ed W.
        Maibach, J. Stuart Carlton, et al. 2016. “Consensus on Consensus: A Synthesis of
        Consensus Estimates on Human-Caused Global Warming.” Environmental Research
        Letters 11 (4): 048002. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/048002.
Cramer, B. S., K. G. Miller, P. J Barrett, and J. D. Wright. 2011. “Late Cretaceous–Neogene
        Trends in Deep Ocean Temperature and Continental Ice Volume: Reconciling Records of
        Benthic Foraminiferal Geochemistry (Δ18O and Mg/Ca) with Sea Level History.”
        Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 116 (C12).
        https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JC007255.



                                                 25
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                     Hsiang and Kopp



Easterling, D. R., K. E. Kunkel, J. R. Arnold, T. Knutson, A. N. LeGrande, L. R. Leung, R. S.
        Vose, D. E. Waliser, and M. F. Wehner. 2017. “Precipitation Change in the United
        States.” In Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume
        I, edited by D. J. Wuebbles, D. W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J. Dokken, B. C. Stewart,
        and T. K. Maycock, 207–30. Washington, DC, USA: U.S. Global Change Research
        Program. https://doi.org/10.7930/J0GB227J.
Edwards, R. J., and B. P. Horton. 2000. “Reconstructing Relative Sea-Level Change Using UK
        Salt-Marsh Foraminifera.” Marine Geology 169 (1–2): 41–56.
Emanuel, Kerry. 2017. “Assessing the Present and Future Probability of Hurricane Harvey’s
        Rainfall.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, November, 201716222.
        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1716222114.
Fischer, E. M., and R. Knutti. 2013. “Robust Projections of Combined Humidity and
        Temperature Extremes.” Nature Climate Change 3 (2): 126–30.
        https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1682.
Frieler, K., M. Meinshausen, A. Golly, M. Mengel, K. Lebek, S. D. Donner, and O. Hoegh-
        Guldberg. 2013. “Limiting Global Warming to 2 °C Is Unlikely to Save Most Coral
        Reefs.” Nature Climate Change 3 (2): 165–70. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1674.
GISTEMP Team. 2018. “GISS Surface Temperature Analysis (GISTEMP).” NASA Goddard
        Institute for Space Studies.
Greve, Peter, Boris Orlowsky, Brigitte Mueller, Justin Sheffield, Markus Reichstein, and Sonia I.
        Seneviratne. 2014. “Global Assessment of Trends in Wetting and Drying over Land.”
        Nature Geoscience 7 (10): 716–21. https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2247.
GSFC. 2018. “Global Mean Sea Level Trend from Integrated Multi-Mission Ocean Altimeters
        TOPEX/Poseidon, Jason-1, OSTM/Jason-2 Version 4.2.” California, USA: PO.DAAC.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.5067/GMSLM-TJ142.
Hansen, J., D. Johnson, A. Lacis, S. Lebedeff, P. Lee, D. Rind, and G. Russell. 1981. “Climate
        Impact of Increasing Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide.” Science 213 (4511): 957–66.
        https://doi.org/10.1126/science.213.4511.957.
Hartmann, Dennis L., Albert M. G. Klein Tank, Matilde Rusticucci, and (first) et al. 2013.
        “Chapter 2: Observations: Atmosphere and Surface.” In Climate Change 2013: The
        Physical Science Basis, edited by Thomas F. Stocker, Dahe Qin, and et al. Cambridge,
        UK: Cambridge University Press. http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/.
Hawkins, Ed, and Rowan Sutton. 2009. “The Potential to Narrow Uncertainty in Regional
        Climate Predictions.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 90 (8): 1095–
        1107.
Hay, Carling C., Eric Morrow, Robert E. Kopp, and Jerry X. Mitrovica. 2015. “Probabilistic
        Reanalysis of Twentieth-Century Sea-Level Rise.” Nature 517 (7535): 481–84.
        https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14093.
Hayhoe, K., J. Edmonds, R. E. Kopp, A. N. LeGrande, B. M. Sanderson, M. F. Wehner, and D.
        J. Wuebbles. 2017. “Climate Models, Scenarios, and Projections.” In Climate Science
        Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I, edited by D. J.
        Wuebbles, D. W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J. Dokken, B. C. Stewart, and T. K. Maycock,
        411–29. Washington, DC, USA: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
        https://doi.org/10.7930/J0GB227J.
Hegerl, G. C., F. W. Zwiers, P. Braconnot, N. P. Gillett, Y. Luo, J. A. Marengo Orsini, N.
        Nicholls, J. E. Penner, and P. A. Stott. 2007. “Understanding and Attributing Climate



                                                 26
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                    Hsiang and Kopp



        Change.” In Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
        Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
        Change, edited by S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K. B. Averyt,
        M. Tignor, and H. L. Miller. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., P. J. Mumby, A. J. Hooten, R. S. Steneck, P. Greenfield, E. Gomez, C. D.
        Harvell, et al. 2007. “Coral Reefs Under Rapid Climate Change and Ocean
        Acidification.” Science 318 (5857): 1737–42. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1152509.
Hönisch, Bärbel, Andy Ridgwell, Daniela N Schmidt, Ellen Thomas, Samantha J Gibbs, Appy
        Sluijs, Richard Zeebe, et al. 2012. “The Geological Record of Ocean Acidification.”
        Science 335 (6072): 1058–63. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1208277.
Horton, Benjamin P., Robert E. Kopp, Andra J. Garner, Carling C. Hay, Nicole S. Khan, Keven
        Roy, and Timothy A. Shaw. 2018. “Mapping Sea-Level Change in Time, Space and
        Probability” in rev.
Houser, Trevor, Solomon Hsiang, Robert Kopp, Kate Larsen, Michael Delgado, Amir Jina,
        Michael Mastrandrea, et al. 2015. Economic Risks of Climate Change: An American
        Prospectus. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hsiang, Solomon. 2016. “Climate Econometrics.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 8 (1):
        43–75. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-resource-100815-095343.
Hsiang, Solomon, Robert Kopp, Amir Jina, James Rising, Michael Delgado, Shashank Mohan,
        D. J. Rasmussen, et al. 2017. “Estimating Economic Damage from Climate Change in the
        United States.” Science 356 (6345): 1362–1369. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal4369.
Hsiang, Solomon M. 2010. “Temperatures and Cyclones Strongly Associated with Economic
        Production in the Caribbean and Central America.” Proceedings of the National Academy
        of Sciences 107 (35): 15367–72. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1009510107.
Hsiang, Solomon M., and Kyle C. Meng. 2015. “Tropical Economics.” American Economic
        Review 105 (5): 257–61. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20151030.
Hsiang, Solomon M., Kyle C. Meng, and Mark A. Cane. 2011. “Civil Conflicts Are Associated
        with the Global Climate.” Nature 476 (7361): 438–41.
        https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10311.
Hughes, Terry P., James T. Kerry, Mariana Álvarez-Noriega, Jorge G. Álvarez-Romero, Kristen
        D. Anderson, Andrew H. Baird, Russell C. Babcock, et al. 2017. “Global Warming and
        Recurrent Mass Bleaching of Corals.” Nature 543 (7645): 373–77.
        https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21707.
Hurrell, James W. 1995. “Decadal Trends in the North Atlantic Oscillation: Regional
        Temperatures and Precipitation.” Science 269 (5224): 676–79.
        https://doi.org/10.1126/science.269.5224.676.
Janssens-Maenhout, G., M. Crippa, D. Guizzardi, M. Muntean, E. Schaaf, J. G. J. Olivier, JAHW
        Peters, and K. M. Schure. 2017. Fossil CO2 and GHG Emissions of All World Countries.
        EUR 28766 EN. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
Jewett, L., and A. Romanou. 2017. “Ocean Acidification and Other Ocean Changes.” In Climate
        Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I, edited by D. J.
        Wuebbles, D. W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J. Dokken, B. C. Stewart, and T. K. Maycock,
        411–29. Washington, DC, USA: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
        https://doi.org/10.7930/J0GB227J.
Jiménez Cisneros, Blanca E., Taikan Oki, and others. 2014. “Chapter 3: Freshwater Resources.”
        In Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change, edited by Christopher Field,



                                                 27
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                     Hsiang and Kopp



        Vincente Barros, and others. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
        http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/.
Jones, Gareth S., Peter A. Stott, and Nikolaos Christidis. 2013. “Attribution of Observed
        Historical Near‒surface Temperature Variations to Anthropogenic and Natural Causes
        Using CMIP5 Simulations.” Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 118 (10):
        4001–24. https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50239.
Jones, P. D., K. R. Briffa, T. J. Osborn, J. M. Lough, T. D. van Ommen, B. M. Vinther, J.
        Luterbacher, et al. 2009. “High-Resolution Palaeoclimatology of the Last Millennium: A
        Review of Current Status and Future Prospects.” The Holocene 19 (1): 3–49.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0959683608098952.
Joos, F., R. Roth, J. S. Fuglestvedt, G. P. Peters, I. G. Enting, W. von Bloh, V. Brovkin, et al.
        2013. “Carbon Dioxide and Climate Impulse Response Functions for the Computation of
        Greenhouse Gas Metrics: A Multi-Model Analysis.” Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics
        13 (5): 2793–2825.
Keeling, Charles D., Stephen C. Piper, Robert B. Bacastow, Martin Wahlen, Timothy P. Whorf,
        Martin Heimann, and Harro A. Meijer. 2001. “Exchanges of Atmospheric CO2 and
        13CO2 with the Terrestrial Biosphere and Oceans from 1978 to 2000. I. Global Aspects,”
        June. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09v319r9.
Knutson, Thomas R., John L. McBride, Johnny Chan, Kerry Emanuel, Greg Holland, Chris
        Landsea, Isaac Held, James P. Kossin, A. K. Srivastava, and Masato Sugi. 2010.
        “Tropical Cyclones and Climate Change.” Nature Geoscience 3 (3): 157–63.
        https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo779.
Kopp, Robert E., Robert M. DeConto, Daniel A. Bader, Radley M. Horton, Carling C. Hay, Scott
        Kulp, Michael Oppenheimer, David Pollard, and Benjamin H. Strauss. 2017. “Evolving
        Understanding of Antarctic Ice-Sheet Physics and Ambiguity in Probabilistic Sea-Level
        Projections.” Earth’s Future 5: 1217–33. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017EF000663.
Kopp, Robert E., D. R. Easterling, T. Hall, K. Hayhoe, R. Horton, K. E. Kunkel, and A. N.
        LeGrande. 2017. “Potential Surprises – Compound Extremes and Tipping Elements.” In
        Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I, edited
        by D. J. Wuebbles, D. W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J. Dokken, B. C. Stewart, and T. K.
        Maycock, 411–29. Washington, DC, USA: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
        https://doi.org/10.7930/J0GB227J.
Kopp, Robert E., Carling C. Hay, Christopher M. Little, and Jerry X. Mitrovica. 2015.
        “Geographic Variability of Sea-Level Change.” Current Climate Change Reports 1 (3):
        192–204. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-015-0015-5.
Kopp, Robert E., Andrew C. Kemp, Klaus Bittermann, Benjamin P. Horton, Jeffrey P. Donnelly,
        W. Roland Gehrels, Carling C. Hay, Jerry X. Mitrovica, Eric D. Morrow, and Stefan
        Rahmstorf. 2016. “Temperature-Driven Global Sea-Level Variability in the Common
        Era.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 (11): E1434–41.
        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1517056113.
Kopp, Robert E., Rachael Shwom, Gernot Wagner, and Jiacan Yuan. 2016. “Tipping Elements
        and Climate-Economic Shocks: Pathways toward Integrated Assessment.” Earth’s Future
        4: 346–72. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016EF000362.
Kossin, J. P., T. Hall, T. Knutson, K. E. Kunkel, R. J. Trapp, D. E. Waliser, and M. F. Wehner.
        2017. “Extreme Storms.” In Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate
        Assessment, Volume I, edited by D. J. Wuebbles, D. W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J.



                                                 28
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                   Hsiang and Kopp



        Dokken, B. C. Stewart, and T. K. Maycock, 257–76. Washington, DC, USA: U.S. Global
        Change Research Program. https://doi.org/10.7930/J07S7KXX.
Lambeck, Kurt, Hélène Rouby, Anthony Purcell, Yiying Sun, and Malcolm Sambridge. 2014.
        “Sea Level and Global Ice Volumes from the Last Glacial Maximum to the Holocene.”
        Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, October, 201411762.
        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1411762111.
Le Quéré, Corinne, Robbie M. Andrew, Pierre Friedlingstein, Stephen Sitch, Julia Pongratz,
        Andrew C. Manning, Jan Ivar Korsbakken, et al. 2018. “Global Carbon Budget 2017.”
        Earth System Science Data 10 (1): 405–48. https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-10-405-2018.
Lisiecki, Lorraine E., and Maureen E. Raymo. 2005. “A Pliocene-Pleistocene Stack of 57
        Globally Distributed Benthic Δ18O Records.” Paleoceanography 20 (January): 17 PP.
        https://doi.org/200510.1029/2004PA001071.
Loarie, Scott R., Philip B. Duffy, Healy Hamilton, Gregory P. Asner, Christopher B. Field, and
        David D. Ackerly. 2009. “The Velocity of Climate Change.” Nature 462 (7276): 1052–
        55. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08649.
Lorenz, Edward N. 1963. “Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow.” Journal of the Atmospheric
        Sciences 20 (2): 130–41. https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-
        0469(1963)020<0130:DNF>2.0.CO;2.
Luthi, Dieter, Martine Le Floch, Bernhard Bereiter, Thomas Blunier, Jean-Marc Barnola, Urs
        Siegenthaler, Dominique Raynaud, et al. 2008. “High-Resolution Carbon Dioxide
        Concentration Record 650,000-800,000 Years before Present.” Nature 453 (7193): 379–
        82. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06949.
MacFarling Meure, C., D. Etheridge, C. Trudinger, P. Steele, R. Langenfelds, T. Van Ommen,
        A. Smith, and J. Elkins. 2006. “Law Dome CO2, CH4 and N2O Ice Core Records
        Extended to 2000 Years BP.” Geophysical Research Letters 33 (14).
        http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2006/2006GL026152.shtml.
Maher, Nicola, Alexander Sen Gupta, and Matthew H. England. 2014. “Drivers of Decadal
        Hiatus Periods in the 20th and 21st Centuries.” Geophysical Research Letters 41 (16):
        5978–86. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014GL060527.
Manabe, Syukuro, and Joseph Smagorinsky. 1965. “Simulated Climatology of a General
        Circulation Model with a Hydrological Cycle.” Mon. Wea. Rev, 769–798.
Manabe, Syukuro, and Robert F. Strickler. 1964. “Thermal Equilibrium of the Atmosphere with
        a Convective Adjustment.” Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 21 (4): 361–85.
        https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1964)021<0361:TEOTAW>2.0.CO;2.
Mantua, Nathan J., and Steven R. Hare. 2002. “The Pacific Decadal Oscillation.” Journal of
        Oceanography 58 (1): 35–44. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1015820616384.
Marcott, Shaun A., Jeremy D. Shakun, Peter U. Clark, and Alan C. Mix. 2013. “A
        Reconstruction of Regional and Global Temperature for the Past 11,300 Years.” Science
        339 (6124): 1198–1201. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1228026.
Marsicek, Jeremiah, Bryan N. Shuman, Patrick J. Bartlein, Sarah L. Shafer, and Simon Brewer.
        2018. “Reconciling Divergent Trends and Millennial Variations in Holocene
        Temperatures.” Nature 554 (7690): 92–96. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25464.
Medhaug, Iselin, Martin B. Stolpe, Erich M. Fischer, and Reto Knutti. 2017. “Reconciling
        Controversies about the ‘Global Warming Hiatus.’” Nature 545 (7652): 41–47.
        https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22315.




                                                 29
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                     Hsiang and Kopp



Meehl, Gerald A., Lisa Goddard, James Murphy, Ronald J. Stouffer, George Boer, Gokhan
       Danabasoglu, Keith Dixon, et al. 2009. “Decadal Prediction: Can It Be Skillful?” Bulletin
       of the American Meteorological Society 90 (10): 1467–86.
       https://doi.org/10.1175/2009BAMS2778.1.
Morice, Colin P., John J. Kennedy, Nick A. Rayner, and Phil D. Jones. 2012. “Quantifying
       Uncertainties in Global and Regional Temperature Change Using an Ensemble of
       Observational Estimates: The HadCRUT4 Data Set.” Journal of Geophysical Research:
       Atmospheres 117 (April): D08101. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JD017187.
Moss, Richard H., Jae A. Edmonds, Kathy A. Hibbard, Martin R. Manning, Steven K. Rose,
       Detlef P. van Vuuren, Timothy R. Carter, et al. 2010. “The next Generation of Scenarios
       for Climate Change Research and Assessment.” Nature 463 (7282): 747–56.
       https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08823.
Nordhaus, William D. 1977. “Economic Growth and Climate: The Carbon Dioxide Problem.”
       The American Economic Review 67 (1): 341–46.
Payne, Jonathan L., and Matthew E. Clapham. 2012. “End-Permian Mass Extinction in the
       Oceans: An Ancient Analog for the Twenty-First Century?” Annual Review of Earth and
       Planetary Sciences 40 (1): 89–111. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-earth-042711-
       105329.
Pinsky, Malin L., Boris Worm, Michael J. Fogarty, Jorge L. Sarmiento, and Simon A. Levin.
       2013. “Marine Taxa Track Local Climate Velocities.” Science 341 (6151): 1239–42.
       https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1239352.
Pongratz, Julia, and Ken Caldeira. 2012. “Attribution of Atmospheric CO2 and Temperature
       Increases to Regions: Importance of Preindustrial Land Use Change.” Environmental
       Research Letters 7 (3): 034001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/7/3/034001.
Pörtner, Hans-Otto, David M. Karl, Philip W. Boyd, William Cheung, Salvador E. Lluch-Cota,
       Yukihiro Nojiri, Daniela N. Schmidt, Peter O. Zavialov, Jürgen Alheit, and Javier
       Aristegui. 2014. “Chapter 6: Ocean Systems.” In Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
       Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
       Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
       Climate Change, 411–484. Cambridge University Press.
Proctor, Jonathan, Solomon Hsiang, Jennifer Burney, Marshall Burke, and Wolfram Schlenker.
       2018. “Estimating Global Agricultural Effects of Geoengineering Using Volcanic
       Eruptions.” Nature 560 (7719): 480–83. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0417-3.
Roberts, David R., and Andreas Hamann. 2016. “Climate Refugia and Migration Requirements
       in Complex Landscapes.” Ecography 39 (12): 1238–46.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.01998.
Rohde, Robert, Richard A. Muller, Robert Jacobsen, Elizabeth Muller, Saul Perlmutter, Arthur
       Rosenfeld, Jonathan Wurtele, Donald Groom, and Charlotte Wickham. 2014. “A New
       Estimate of the Average Earth Surface Land Temperature Spanning 1753 to 2011.”
       Geoinformatics & Geostatistics: An Overview 2013 (January).
       https://doi.org/10.4172/2327-4581.1000101.
Rosenfeld, Daniel, Ulrike Lohmann, Graciela B. Raga, Colin D. O’Dowd, Markku Kulmala,
       Sandro Fuzzi, Anni Reissell, and Meinrat O. Andreae. 2008. “Flood or Drought: How Do
       Aerosols Affect Precipitation?” Science 321 (5894): 1309–13.
       https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1160606.




                                                 30
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                     Hsiang and Kopp



Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate
       Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields Under Climate Change.” Proceedings of the
       National Academy of Sciences, August. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0906865106.
Serreze, Mark C., and Roger G. Barry. 2011. “Processes and Impacts of Arctic Amplification: A
       Research Synthesis.” Global and Planetary Change 77 (1): 85–96.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2011.03.004.
Sherwood, Steven C., and Matthew Huber. 2010. “An Adaptability Limit to Climate Change Due
       to Heat Stress.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (21): 9552–55.
       https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0913352107.
Sherwood, Steven, and Qiang Fu. 2014. “A Drier Future?” Science 343 (6172): 737–39.
       https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1247620.
Stocker, T. F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, and et al., eds. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical
       Science Basis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
       http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/.
Stocker, Thomas F., Dahe Qin, Lisa Alexander, Simon K. Allen, Nathaniel L. Bindoff, F. M.
       Bréon, and et al. 2013. “Technical Summary.” In Climate Change 2013: The Physical
       Science Basis, edited by T. F. Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, and et al.
       Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/.
Storlazzi, Curt D., Stephen B. Gingerich, Ap van Dongeren, Olivia M. Cheriton, Peter W.
       Swarzenski, Ellen Quataert, Clifford I. Voss, et al. 2018. “Most Atolls Will Be
       Uninhabitable by the Mid-21st Century Because of Sea-Level Rise Exacerbating Wave-
       Driven Flooding.” Science Advances 4 (4): eaap9741.
       https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aap9741.
Supran, Geoffrey, and Naomi Oreskes. 2017. “Assessing ExxonMobil’s Climate Change
       Communications (1977–2014).” Environmental Research Letters 12 (8): 084019.
       https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa815f.
Sweet, William V., R. Horton, R. E. Kopp, A. N. LeGrande, and A. Romanou. 2017. “Sea Level
       Rise.” In Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume
       I, edited by D. J. Wuebbles, D. W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J. Dokken, B. C. Stewart,
       and T. K. Maycock, 333–63. Washington, DC, USA: U.S. Global Change Research
       Program. https://doi.org/10.7930/J0VM49F2.
Sweet, William V., and Joseph Park. 2014. “From the Extreme to the Mean: Acceleration and
       Tipping Points of Coastal Inundation from Sea Level Rise.” Earth’s Future 2 (12):
       2014EF000272. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014EF000272.
Swiss Re Institute. 2018. “Sigma 2/2017: Natural Catastrophes and Man-Made Disasters in
       2016: A Year of Widespread Damages.” http://www.swissre.com/sigma/2_2017.html.
Taylor, Karl E., Ronald J. Stouffer, and Gerald A. Meehl. 2012. “An Overview of CMIP5 and
       the Experiment Design.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93 (4): 485–98.
       https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-11-00094.1.
Trouet, V., J. D. Scourse, and C. C. Raible. 2012. “North Atlantic Storminess and Atlantic
       Meridional Overturning Circulation during the Last Millennium: Reconciling
       Contradictory Proxy Records of NAO Variability.” Global and Planetary Change 84:
       48–55.
Trouet, Valerie, Grant L. Harley, and Marta Domínguez-Delmás. 2016. “Shipwreck Rates
       Reveal Caribbean Tropical Cyclone Response to Past Radiative Forcing.” Proceedings of




                                                 31
An Economist’s Guide to Climate Change Science                                   Hsiang and Kopp



       the National Academy of Sciences 113 (12): 3169–74.
       https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1519566113.
USGCRP. 2017. Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume
       I. Edited by Donald J. Wuebbles, D. W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J. Dokken, B. C.
       Stewart, and T. K. Maycock. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
Walsh, Kevin J. E., John L. McBride, Philip J. Klotzbach, Sethurathinam Balachandran, Suzana
       J. Camargo, Greg Holland, Thomas R. Knutson, et al. 2016. “Tropical Cyclones and
       Climate Change.” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 7 (1): 65–89.
       https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.371.
Weart, Spencer R. 2018. “The Discovery of Global Warming - A History.” 2018.
       https://history.aip.org/climate/index.htm.
Wehner, M. F., J. R. Arnold, T. Knutson, K. E. Kunkel, and A. N. Legrande. 2017. “Droughts,
       Floods, and Wildfires.” In Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate
       Assessment, Volume I, edited by D. J. Wuebbles, D. W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J.
       Dokken, B. C. Stewart, and T. K. Maycock, 231–56. Washington, DC, USA: U.S. Global
       Change Research Program. https://doi.org/10.7930/J0CJ8BNN.
Westervelt, D. M., L. W. Horowitz, V. Naik, J.-C. Golaz, and D. L. Mauzerall. 2015. “Radiative
       Forcing and Climate Response to Projected 21st Century Aerosol Decreases.”
       Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 15 (22): 12681–703. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-15-
       12681-2015.
Wigley, T. M. L. 2011. “Coal to Gas: The Influence of Methane Leakage.” Climatic Change 108
       (3): 601. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0217-3.
Wood, A. W., L. R. Leung, V. Sridhar, and D. P. Lettenmaier. 2004. “Hydrologic Implications of
       Dynamical and Statistical Approaches to Downscaling Climate Model Outputs.” Climatic
       Change 62 (1–3): 189–216. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:CLIM.0000013685.99609.9e.
Wuebbles, D. J., D. R. Easterling, K. Hayhoe, T. Knutson, R. E. Kopp, J. P. Kossin, K. E.
       Kunkel, et al. 2017. “Our Globally Changing Climate.” In Climate Science Special
       Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I, edited by D. J. Wuebbles, D. W.
       Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J. Dokken, B. C. Stewart, and T. K. Maycock, 333–63.
       Washington, DC, USA: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
       https://doi.org/10.7930/J0VM49F2.




                                                 32
