                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MINORITY REPRESENTATION IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT

                                          Brian Beach
                                         Daniel B. Jones
                                          Tate Twinam
                                         Randall Walsh

                                      Working Paper 25192
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25192


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2018, Revised September 2019




We are grateful for helpful comments from Pat Bayer, Justin de Benedictis-Kessner, Morgane
Laouenan, William Mathews, Rachel Meltzer, Chris Mothorpe, Allison Shertzer, and Carly
Urban. Thanks also to seminar participants at Clemson University, Florida State University,
George Washington University, Montana State University, Oberlin College, Oklahoma State
University, the University of Hawaii, the University of Tennessee, and the University of South
Carolina as well as conference participants at the Association for Public Policy Analysis and
Management Fall Research conference, American Real Estate and Urban Economics Annual
Meeting, Public Choice Annual Meeting, the Urban Economics Association Meeting, and the
Local Political Economy Conference at George Washington University. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Brian Beach, Daniel B. Jones, Tate Twinam, and Randall Walsh. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Minority Representation in Local Government
Brian Beach, Daniel B. Jones, Tate Twinam, and Randall Walsh
NBER Working Paper No. 25192
October 2018, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D72,H7,J15,R3

                                         ABSTRACT

Does minority representation in a legislative body differentially impact outcomes for minorities?
To examine this question, we study close elections for California city council seats between white
and nonwhite candidates. We find that nonwhite candidates generate differential gains in housing
prices in majority nonwhite neighborhoods. This result, which is not explained by correlations
between candidate race and political affiliation or neighborhood racial composition and income,
suggests that increased representation can reduce racial disparities. Our results strengthen with
increased city-level segregation and councilmember pivotality. Regarding mechanisms, we
observe changes in business patterns and policing behavior, which may help explain our results.


Brian Beach                                     Tate Twinam
Department of Economics                         Tyler Hall 250
Vanderbilt University                           300 James Blair Drive
VU Station B, Box #351819                       College of William & Mary
2301 Vanderbilt Place                           Williamsburg, VA 23187
Nashville, TN 37235                             tatwinam@wm.edu
and NBER
brian.beach@vanderbilt.edu                      Randall Walsh
                                                Department of Economics
Daniel B. Jones                                 University of Pittsburgh
Graduate School of Public &                     4901 WW Posvar Hall 230
International Affairs                           S. Bouquet St. Pittsburgh,
University of Pittsburgh                        PA 15260
230 S Bouquet St                                and NBER
Pittsburgh, PA 15260                            walshr@pitt.edu
dbj10@pitt.edu
“The principal difficulty lies, and the greatest care should be employed in constituting this
Representative Assembly. It should be in miniature, an exact portrait of the people at large. It
should think, feel, reason, and act like them.” — John Adams, 1776

1. Introduction
The Voting Rights Act (VRA) of 1965 is one of the most important pieces of legislation in U.S.
history. Its passage returned the franchise to millions of southern blacks, helped reduce racial
disparities in public spending and the provision of public goods (Cascio & Washington, 2013),
and reduced the black-white wage gap (Aneja & Avenancio-Leon, 2019). Later amendments to
the VRA and related court decisions have pushed not only for greater ballot access but also for
greater representation of minorities in elected office (Grofman et al., 1992). Implicit in these efforts
was the notion that representation at both the electoral and legislative stages of the political process
is necessary to adequately serve the needs of minority citizens. This focus on the importance of
descriptive representation remains salient today as a lack of minority representation in local
governments is pointed to as a driver of racial disparities in outcomes as varied as housing1,
economic development2, and policing.3 The issue of descriptive representation is also intrinsically
tied to current debates around partisan gerrymandering, as reductions in partisan gerrymandering
are likely to reduce the number of majority-minority districts.
        Despite its central importance in policy debates, whether the election of minority
candidates will convey more effective representation for minority groups – beyond that which was
achieved through the grant of franchise – remains an open question. Theory is split on the matter.
Spatial competition/median voter models (Hotelling, 1929; Downs, 1957) and models that focus
on appeals to swing groups (e.g., Dixit & Londregan, 1996) suggest that the election of a group
member per se should not affect policy outcomes. Conversely, “citizen-candidate” models, where
politicians are motivated to implement their preferred policies (Osborne & Slivinski, 1996; Besley
& Coate, 1997), as well as models where candidates are incentivized to induce core constituencies
to vote (Glaeser et al., 2005), suggest that electing minority representatives could lead to different
policy outcomes.




1
  https://www.citylab.com/equity/2018/07/when-blacks-joined-city-government-zoning-decisions-changed/564056/
2
  https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/anaheim-city-council-vote-latino-district-at-large-california
3
  https://www.demos.org/publication/problem-african-american-underrepresentation-city-councils


                                                                                                           2
         We are thus left with an empirical question. Unfortunately, there is limited systematic
evidence on whether minority representation differentially affects minority outcomes.4 We
endeavor to close this gap by studying close elections between white and nonwhite candidates
running for city council in California between the years 2005 and 2011. We adopt a regression
discontinuity approach that exploits narrow victories as a source of identifying variation. We pair
this election data with comprehensive housing transaction microdata. This approach allows us to
identify the extent to which the election of a nonwhite city councilmember generates a differential
change in housing prices in majority nonwhite neighborhoods, which we take as a proxy for
investment in highly localized amenities, city services, and/or economic development.
         Our focus on housing markets follows the long tradition of using house prices as a
sufficient statistic for valuing public and private investments. Seminal examples of this approach
include: Oates, 1969 (tax policy); Black, 1999 (school quality); Linden & Rockoff, 2008 (crime);
Chay & Greenstone, 2005 (environmental quality); and Turner et al., 2014 (land use regulation).
Housing prices are also unique in their ability to offer a deep measure of welfare that can be
tabulated by neighborhood racial composition for a broad set of cities. Neighborhood level data is
important since many of the goods and services provided by city governments are localized and
impact only certain areas of the city. Examples include zoning policy, road improvements, public
transit, parks, crime, and economic development projects.5
         Relative to examining the spatial dimensions of these policies directly, which in many
cases is simply not possible, housing prices serve as an “index number” allowing us to assess
changes in well-being that arise from a broad mix of policies. This distinction is particularly
important given the potential for interactions between different types of policies. For example,
Albouy et al. (2018) show that proximity to a park increases house prices when the park is safe but
decreases prices when the park is unsafe. Thus, overall impacts may not be identifiable through
the analysis of a set of uni-dimensional policy changes. Finally, housing prices are also unique in
that they reflect expectations about the future stream of amenities (Bishop & Murphy 2011, 2018).6


4
  Needless to say, there is highly relevant work, which we review in Section 2.
5
  Note that elected school boards (rather than city councils) determine local school policy and spending.
6
  Bishop & Murphy (2011, 2018) provide theoretical and empirical support for the importance of incorporating
homebuyers’ forward-looking expectations of amenities. This allows for the possibility that our results are driven by
changes in expectations about the spatial allocation of local goods and services. Consistent with this idea, we do find
evidence that the effects occur relatively quickly. However, we also see little evidence of mean reversion, which
suggests that those initial expectations were likely correct.


                                                                                                                     3
In sum, there are a host of channels through which minority representation may differentially affect
minority neighborhoods and housing prices offer a unique proxy for assessing these changes.
        Using this approach, we find that, relative to the election of a white candidate, the election
of a nonwhite candidate reduces pre-existing gaps in housing prices across minority and non-
minority neighborhoods. This result is not driven by correlations between candidate race and
political affiliation or between racial composition and neighborhood income. Moreover, price
impacts are particularly pronounced when the election causes the council to flip from majority
white to majority nonwhite. Consistent with the assumption that our results are driven by a spatial
reallocation of services to minority neighborhoods, these effects are stronger in more heavily
segregated cities, where there is more scope for such reallocation.
        Our findings complement work on the Voting Rights Act by Cascio & Washington (2013)
and Aneja & Avenancio-Leon (2019) who find that expanding black voting rights changed the
behavior of elected politicians in ways that benefited black residents. Our analysis highlights the
fact that increasing minority representation in elected office can be another important tool for
addressing racial disparities. In this sense, our work is also closely related to work by Logan
(2018), which shows that the election of black politicians during the Reconstruction era affected
overall tax and land policy while also helping to decrease the black-white literacy gap. In total, our
results suggest that today, well more than a century since Reconstruction and the adoption of the
14th Amendment and five decades after the passage of the Voting Rights Act, descriptive
representation has important implications for the wellbeing of minority citizens.


2. Related Work
There is a large literature in economics and political science examining whether personal
characteristics of elected officials (race, gender, partisan affiliation, etc.) affect policymaking.7
Most relevant for our work is the literature examining the impacts of electing ethnic or racial
minority-group politicians. Hopkins & McCabe (2012) thoroughly review research examining the
impacts of electing a black mayor and also provide new causal estimates on the matter. They
conclude that “across a range of measures of taxing, spending, and hiring, we find few differences


7
  Outside of race, previous empirical research has considered the impacts of partisan affiliation (e.g., Ferreira &
Gyourko, 2009; de Benedictis-Kessner & Warshaw, 2016; de Benedictis-Kessner & Warshaw, 2018), gender (e.g.,
Ferreira & Gyourko, 2014), and professional experience (e.g., Beach & Jones, 2016) on policy outcomes at the local
level, yielding mixed results.


                                                                                                                 4
between black mayors and their white counterparts,” a finding that is broadly consistent with the
prior work that they review.
        A major limitation of this early work is its inability to speak to intra-city variation in policy
– either by citizen minority status or neighborhood. Three notable exceptions are Logan’s (2018)
analysis of black political leaders in the reconstruction era, which considers tax and land policy as
well as the black-white literacy gap, Nye et al.’s (2014) analysis of black mayors elected in large
cities, and Pande’s (2003) analysis of the impacts of quotas for members of underrepresented
castes in Indian state legislatures.
        Nye et al. (2014) is perhaps most relevant to our work in that they consider modern and
local elections in the US, although they focus only on large cities. They find that the election of a
black mayor is associated with improved black labor market outcomes, but their study cannot
distinguish the impact of candidate race from candidate party or effects based on race from those
based on income. Both issues are essential for understanding whether a causal link between
minority representation and minority outcomes exists. In our data, we directly test and reject both
possibilities. Further, our larger sample of elections and cities provides greater scope to leverage
a regression discontinuity framework that allows for causal inference.
        Finally, two other related papers are Beach & Jones (2017) and Sances & You (2017).
Beach & Jones (2017) study the impact of council diversity on overall levels of public good
provision; however, they (as well as the broader literature on the impact of diversity on
policymaking) are generally silent on the effect of minority representatives on outcomes for
minority groups. Sances & You (2017) document a relationship between the share of a city’s
population that is black and the use of fines as revenue, but also find that this relationship
diminishes with the increased black representation on the city council. However, their findings are
largely descriptive, and the authors caution against interpreting them as causal.
        A larger body of work highlights the central role that race and ethnicity play in local politics
and public good provision more generally, and reinforces support for the mechanisms that we
argue drive our results. For instance, Hajnal & Trounstine (2014a) show that in local elections
voters are substantially divided in their candidate choices along racial lines, more so than along
other dimensions (e.g., class). The division they document is particularly strong when candidates
are from different racial or ethnic groups, suggesting demand for descriptive representation. Two
other papers strengthen the potential link between local service provision and representation. In



                                                                                                       5
survey data, Hajnal & Trounstine (2014b) document large racial disparities in satisfaction with
local public good provision, with black residents reporting lower satisfaction than white
respondents, while Marschall & Ruhil (2007) document that black respondents’ satisfaction is
higher in cities with a black mayor, even controlling – to the extent possible – for objective
measures of service provision. This last result reinforces that part of the distributional effect of
minority representation may come through micro-level changes, e.g., more attention to street
cleaning in certain neighborhoods, that are difficult to detect even with rich data on cities’ spending
and other activities. These micro-level changes may come about through improved channels of
communication between minority residents and their representatives in the council (Mansbridge,
1999). Indeed, in the context of the US House of Representatives, Banducci et al. (2004) document
that black survey respondents are more likely to report having contacted their representative
recently when their representative is black. Thus, at the local level, one may posit a chain of
causality wherein minority representation leads to improved communication between minority
communities and local officials, and this, in turn, helps address gaps in public good and service
provision in those communities.


3. Conceptual Framework
We begin by outlining a simple conceptual framework to more precisely capture the link between
minority representation, neighborhood- or group-specific investment, and housing prices.
       In general, policies can differentially benefit one group relative to another either through
direct impacts on individuals (e.g., policing, cultural events, differential hiring) or indirectly by
targeting the neighborhoods in which group members are concentrated (e.g., business district
development, infrastructure investment, or zoning). As we discuss below, while there are a few
dimensions along which we can measure the differentiation embodied in such policies directly, it
is generally not possible to acquire systematic data on city-level policies that are disaggregated
along these two dimensions. Thus, to develop a broad measure of the impact of descriptive
representation, we mainly focus on spatial differentiation in housing prices as proxies for how
different groups value the public goods provided by local government. To provide context for our
empirical analysis, we begin by characterizing the link between policies that differentially affect
members of one group and housing prices, as measured at the neighborhood-level.




                                                                                                     6
         Consider a newly elected councilmember in city ! who is interested in directing benefits
towards a particular subgroup of her electorate (#$%&'($) = + ∈ -).8 One approach would be a
“group-targeting” strategy that directs resources to policies which differentially benefit individuals
of subgroup k, regardless of the individual’s neighborhood choice. This type of investment will
give rise to a set of city-level group-specific public good levels, {! 0 |+ ∈ - }. A second
“neighborhood-targeting” approach would direct city resources to specific neighborhoods
(456&ℎ%('ℎ((8 = 9 ∈ :) where individuals of subgroup + are congregated. This policy will give
rise to neighborhood-specific public good levels ;! < =9 ∈ :>. The potential for this strategy to
differentially benefit members of a specific group is increasing in the proportion of neighborhood
j that is comprised of group k. Thus, a councilmember’s ability to use a neighborhood targeting
approach would be expected to increase with segregation levels.
         We posit a simple housing market model. First, given that the cities we evaluate are
typically small relative to their housing markets, basic market dynamics are embedded in a small
open city model. Abstracting from search frictions and assuming for simplicity that any surplus
goes to the seller, the price level for house ℎ in city neighborhood j will be determined so as to
equate the marginal buyer’s indirect utility in said house to that of a type-specific outside option,
?@ 0 , whose level is exogenous to changes in the public goods provided in neighborhood j’s city.
Assuming that the marginal buyer is from group k, house price AB is implicitly defined by:


                           ?CDE0 − AB , ! 0 , !< , H <0 I + KEB = ?@ 0                                      (1)


where DE0 represents the marginal buyer’s income, H <0 represents the value of non-public good
related characteristics of neighborhood j to subgroup k, KEB is an idiosyncratic taste shock that
buyer i has for house h and ?@ 0 represents the value (in terms of indirect utility) of the outside
option.9



8
  In the simple model presented here, we abstract from budgeting issues. The council could direct public goods towards
a subgroup either by reallocating resources from a fixed budget or by increasing totally expenditures. The channels
delineated in our model will operate in either case. However, it is worth noting that California cities are relatively
constrained in their ability to generate new revenue because of Proposition 13.
9
  For further exposition on this basic modeling approach see Polinsky and Shavel (1976), Rosen (1974) and Sieg et.al.
(2002). For simplicity, we have ignored property taxes, though it would be straightforward to incorporate taxes into
the model.


                                                                                                                    7
        Consider first the impact of policies that directly benefit members of group k, ! 0 . Given
the open city assumption, impacts will be limited to homes where the marginal buyer is a member
of the targeted group. Given equation (1), at these homes the marginal buyer’s offer price will
                          LM          Q P
increase according to LONP =           R
                                            . Thus, at the margin, the change in transaction prices for houses
                                       QS

purchased by individuals of group k will exactly measure individual willingness to pay for
increases in the group-specific public good. And, to reiterate, when the marginal buyer is not a
member of the targeted group and therefore does not value the increased public good level we
would expect no change in price.10 While non-marginal changes do not allow for as simple an
interpretation, the general implications are similar. This basic analysis underpins the large extant
literature that utilizes housing prices as a proxy for valuing changes in public goods.
        One key complication in our context is that we do not observe the group membership of
individual home purchasers. However, if as is often the case, neighborhoods are segregated by
group-type then neighborhood-level price changes will capture the benefits associated with group-
specific policies.
        The comparative statics for neighborhood targeted policies are similar, except now the
marginal household is characterized by neighborhood location instead of group type and equation
                   LMN        Q T
                               R
(1) implies that          =         . Of course, this style of policy can only be effective if neighborhoods
                   LO T       QS

are segregated by type. Thus, in both cases we expect to more clearly identify the potential impact
of descriptive representation in more segregated cities. The effectiveness of group-level policies
is independent of segregation levels, but our ability to measure their impact relies on the presence
of segregated neighborhoods. Conversely, we can measure the impact of neighborhood-level
policies regardless of segregation levels, but their functionality in delivering group-specific
benefits relies on the presence of segregated neighborhoods.
        The above framework illustrates the link between group or place-based policies, changes
in housing prices and changes in welfare. However, it is natural to wonder whether it is appropriate
to associate increased housing prices with increased welfare in cases where neighborhoods are
comprised mainly of renters. For renter households, at least some portion of the benefit from


10
   This result follows directly from the open city assumption, see Polinsky & Shavel (1976). To the extent that
increasing public goods for one group requires decreasing public goods for another group, for instance due to budget
constraints, we would expect to see a decline in prices for homes where the marginal buyer is outside of the targeted
group.


                                                                                                                   8
increases in public goods will accrue to the owner in the form of higher rents. Along similar lines,
one might worry that, if a councilmember uses a neighborhood-targeting policy, she may spur a
gentrification movement that displaces members of her subgroup. Both channels are likely
operating to some degree in our study area and bear consideration. Nonetheless, it seems unlikely
that they would be dispositive either in terms of politician behavior (i.e. leading minority
politicians to abandon policies that differentially benefit minority citizens) or in terms of actual
benefits (i.e. leading to the complete leakage of potential benefits). Further, we observe no change
in the volume of housing transactions or rate of evictions following the election of a nonwhite
councilmember, as discussed below. Our results are also not sensitive to the share of rental units
in the neighborhood. These findings provide additional support for our interpretation that increases
in house prices in nonwhite neighborhoods reflect increased well-being for the residents of those
neighborhoods.


4. Empirical Context
For our analysis of descriptive representation, we adopt an empirical approach that leverages
narrowly decided elections between white and nonwhite candidates to obtain plausibly exogenous
variation in minority representation on a city council. In our core model, we examine whether
changes in minority representation generate differential housing market responses across minority
and non-minority neighborhoods.
       We focus our analysis on city council elections in California. California is particularly apt
for our study because it contains many municipalities and is quite diverse – assuring that we
observe both a large number of close elections between white and nonwhite candidates and
substantial variation in neighborhood composition. An additional benefit of this context is that
California state law serves to limit variation in the structure of municipal governments, thus
providing for comparisons across councils without substantial accompanying variation in
institutional features. For instance, 88% of city councils contain exactly five councilmembers, the
legislated minimum. Councilmembers serve staggered four-year terms, with 92% of cities electing
members through “at-large” elections. Moreover, 93% of cities use a “council-manager”
governance structure meaning that the council dictates the policy and the mayor – who for 98% of
cities is simply selected by the council from amongst its own members – oversees carrying out
said policy.



                                                                                                  9
       So far, the discussion has been quite general about the nature of the public goods being
provided and/or reallocated; however, it is worth considering what kinds of public goods are
actually controlled by cities and subject to the influence of councilmembers. As mentioned earlier,
elected school boards, rather than city councils, control local school policy. Proposition 13 also
imposes substantial restrictions on property tax growth. These tax restrictions often require new
spending to be offset by reductions elsewhere.
       Councils supervise the administration of many local goods and services, and services
directly provided by cities vary. Data from the California State Controller’s Office provides an
overview. The vast majority of cities in our sample (89%) provide their own community
development planning and manage their own parks and recreation services (88%). Over 70%
directly manage their own police forces. Around half manage firefighting, street lighting, and
water and sewage provision, while around a quarter provide their own emergency medical services
and libraries. Most do not directly provide solid waste disposal or public transit, either contracting
out for these services or working with a larger municipality or special-purpose district (such as
BART). Even if a city does not directly provide certain services, councilmembers may still have
substantial influence over the behavior of private companies with which they contract or the
regional agencies with whom they have cooperative agreements.
       Local governments also regulate and control land use. California state law requires that
each jurisdiction adopt a comprehensive plan for its development; this plan encompasses a
jurisdictions’ policies regarding “the location of housing, business, industry, roads, parks, and
other land uses, protection of the public from noise and other environmental hazards, and
conservation of natural resources” (GOPR, 2001). In California, city councils are responsible for
approving and modifying zoning ordinances, which have considerable power to affect patterns of
local economic development at the neighborhood level. By controlling the distribution of land
uses, these ordinances can strongly influence patterns of exposure to industrial activity and
pollution, traffic congestion, employment opportunities, commercial amenities, and even street
crime. They can also affect the location of new housing development, at both the small scale
(backyard accessory dwelling units) and the larger scale (high-rise multifamily housing), which
can directly and indirectly affect housing values.
       A few examples from recent city council elections in California further illustrate these
linkages. In 2016, Juan Carillo ran for council in Palmdale, California. A major focus of his



                                                                                                   10
campaign was the stark difference between his east side neighborhood, where the vast majority of
the city’s Hispanic citizens live, and the rest of the city. Carillo highlighted issues such as
unhealthy chain restaurants and inferior parks. Upon winning election with 52% of the vote,
Carillo introduced legislation to give individual council members responsibility for appointing
planning commissioners.11 Policing and treatment of immigrants was also a focus in many
campaigns. For example, in 2008, Olga Diaz became the first self-identified Latino councilmember
in Escondido, California. Despite the city’s large Hispanic population, it had gained a reputation
as a “city without pity” for undocumented immigrants (Jenkins, 2008). City council had previously
passed an ordinance targeting landlords who rented to undocumented immigrants, and the police
department established traffic checkpoints targeting unlicensed drivers (many of whom were
undocumented). After Diaz’s election, the previous 3-2 majority that generally favored anti-
immigrant policies was broken, and the council shifted its focus towards economic development,
local revitalization, and quality-of-life issues (Florido, 2009). As a final example, Sacramento
NAACP president Betty Williams is currently running for the Sacramento City Council. Her
platform focuses on strengthening the city’s Community Police Review Commission and targeting
newly available tax revenues to job training and minority business startups.12
          These three examples provide anecdotal evidence regarding some of the channels through
which candidates and council-members can pursue policies, both formal and informal, which
differentially affect minority and non-minority groups and neighborhoods. In the analysis that
follows, we pursue a more systematic assessment of these linkages.


5. Data
Our empirical analysis draws on four broad sources of data: election outcomes, candidate
characteristics, house transactions, and neighborhood characteristics. This section describes each
of these data sources in turn.


          5.1 Election Outcomes and Candidate Characteristics




11
     See Constante (2018).
12
     See Kumamoto and Smith (2019).


                                                                                               11
Our source for election outcomes is the California Election Data Archive (CEDA). This archive
reports the number of votes each candidate received for every local government election in
California between 1994 and 2014. CEDA also lists the number of council seats that were
available, which makes it possible to identify the candidates that narrowly won and narrowly lost
the election.
        In addition to the relevant outcome variables, CEDA also lists the candidate’s full name
and occupation. CEDA does not list the candidate’s race or ethnicity. Further, California state law
requires city council elections to be non-partisan, so political party does not appear on the ballot
or in CEDA. Thus, we draw on this name and occupation information to supplement CEDA with
data on candidate ethnicity and partisan affiliation.
        For minority status, we rely on Beach & Jones (2017), who construct a dataset identifying
the race/ethnicity (and gender) for 4,226 of the 5,177 councilmembers and candidates who either
served on a city council between 2005 and 2011 or ran for city council during this time period and
lost narrowly. We refer readers to that paper for a detailed description of the data construction
process. In short, the process entailed finding photographs of candidates online, then asking
Amazon Mechanical Turk workers to code their assessment of the race the candidate based on the
photo and name, with 10 workers coding each photo.13
        In order to identify individual candidate’s partisan affiliations, we link our candidate
sample to California voter registration data files, which contain the universe of registered voters
in California and their partisan affiliation (if registered with a party). We use an iterative series of
matches based on last name, first name (or first initial), and city (or county), as well as some
manual matching. Our matching is conservative in that we favor missing observations over false
matches. Ultimately, we are able to match 81% of the candidates in our sample. As a result, we
can identify the partisan affiliation of two competing candidates in 61% of our sample elections.

        5.2 Neighborhood Characteristics




13
   Recently, Sumner et al. (2019) assessed the accuracy of data collected through Mechanical Turk. They used similar
methods to collect data on current local governments from throughout the US and compared the resulting data to an
accepted benchmark dataset. They found that data collected through Mechanical Turk is “highly accurate”. Beach &
Jones (2017) drew on additional sources to validate their data collection as well.


                                                                                                                12
We draw on Census block group-level data from the 2000 Decennial Census to measure within-
city neighborhood characteristics. Thus, when we refer to “neighborhoods”, we are referring to
Census block groups. We use 2000 Census data, as opposed to – for instance – 2010 American
Community Survey data, to ensure that our neighborhood controls are not endogenous to election
outcomes.
           These data provide, for every block group, 100% counts of: population, population in urban
areas, population in rural areas, males, females, people over the age 18, people over the age 65,
households, households with various family structures (single male, single female, married with
children, etc.), total housing units, vacant housing units, renter-occupied housing units, and owner-
occupied housing units. The data also provide 100% counts by block group for the following race
groups: non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, non-Hispanic Asian/Pacific Islander, non-
Hispanic Native American, Hispanic, and other. We convert these counts into shares. Population
density is constructed by dividing the population of the block group by its land area. We also
construct a measure of diversity of the block group, which we use as a control; specifically, we
use the race shares and construct the standard fractionalization index for each block group.14
           We identify block groups as majority white if the block group’s white population share is
greater than 0.5. Conversely, majority nonwhite block groups are those with a white population
share less than 0.5.15 While this distinction is the basis for our core analysis, we consider a set of
alternative definitions for nonwhite neighborhoods in a series of robustness checks.


           5.3 Housing Prices/Characteristics


We obtain information on housing prices from transaction-level data provided by DataQuick
Information Systems under a license agreement. This dataset includes the universe of single-family
home sales in California between 2005 and 2011. The transaction records are also matched with
assessor data to get the following housing characteristics: bedrooms, bathrooms, stories, square



14
     Fractionalization is a standard index for measuring diversity and is calculated as: U'VWX6(4VY6ZVX6(4[\,]^^^ = 1 −
                      ]
∑aC#ℎV'5[\,]^^^,a I where #ℎV'5[\,]^^^,a is the share of the population in block group bg during the year 2000 that
is of ethnicity e.
15
   We exclude the small share of the population that identifies as multiracial from this calculation. More precisely, a
majority nonwhite neighborhood is a block group where [(sum of single-race nonwhite population)/(sum of single-
race population)]>0.5. Results are essentially unchanged if we instead include multi-racial counts.


                                                                                                                   13
footage, and year built. We trim the top and bottom 1% of observations (in terms of price) to
eliminate homes transferred for the nominal amount of $1 and homes valued in excess of $2.8
million.
         To account for variation in price levels across local housing markets and over time, we
follow Sieg et al. (2002) and estimate year-by-quarter price indices for each of the 18 commuting
zones (CZ) in our dataset. We then use these estimated price indices to adjust the observed nominal
prices for inflation. Specifically, we regress the log of the transaction price on year-by-quarter-CZ
fixed effects, as well as a vector of housing characteristics (e.g., number of bedrooms, and others
noted above) and neighborhood characteristics (all of the block group-level shares described in the
previous subsection, population density, and ethnic fractionalization). The year-quarter-CZ fixed
effects are taken as the log of the price index for the local housing market at a given point in time.
We then divide nominal prices by the appropriate year-by-quarter CZ-level price index to construct
what we refer to throughout as the adjusted housing price. We use the log of this adjusted price as
our main outcome variable.


         5.4 Summary Statistics


To assess the impact of increased minority representation, which is measured as the addition of a
nonwhite member to a city council, we employ a regression discontinuity (RD) design. The goal
of the RD approach is to generate quasi-random assignment to treatment (election of a nonwhite
councilmember) or counterfactual (election of a white councilmember). Specifically, we restrict
our sample to housing transactions in cities associated with an election that met the following
conditions: (1) of the two marginal candidates (the last-place winner and first-place loser16), one
is white and the other is nonwhite, and (2) the election was within an optimally selected bandwidth.
In our main analysis, we include elections decided by 5.88 percentage points or less. This optimal
bandwidth was chosen following Calonico et al. (2014). See section 5.2 for more details and a
discussion of sensitivity analysis.




16
  City councils typically fill multiple seats through at large elections. For instance, a city council may have three seats
to fill, with five candidates competing. In such an election, the relevant candidates from our perspective are the third
place and fourth place candidates, or the last-place winner and the first-place loser.


                                                                                                                       14
       Table 1 provides basic summary statistics comparing cities in our estimation sample
(Column 2) to all cities in California (Column 1). Panel A focuses on city-level demographic
information. Cities in our estimation sample are slightly larger (75,665 vs. 56,939) and more
diverse (white share of 42% vs. 56%) than cities in California as a whole. Panel B examines council
characteristics and shows that the council sizes in our sample are roughly the same as the average
California city council and seats on the council are determined in a similar way (through at-large
rather than district-based elections). The final two rows of Panel B draw on additional data from
Beach & Jones (2017) on the ethnicity of the other councilmembers that would serve with the
winner of the close election. Here we see that the average council in our estimation sample is 66%
white and 25% are entirely white. Thus, we can generally interpret the election of a nonwhite
candidate as leading to an increase in nonwhite representation on the council.
       A few additional summary statistics warrant attention. First, among the 1,986 elections in
our sample where the ethnicity of both marginal candidates could be identified, both marginal
candidates were white 45% of the time, both marginal candidates were nonwhite 21% of the time,
and the remaining 34% of elections contained one white and one nonwhite marginal candidate.
Thus, white vs. nonwhite elections are not particularly rare. Further, among all white vs. nonwhite
elections, the nonwhite candidate is most often Hispanic (58% of all marginal white vs. nonwhite
elections). The next largest shares are Asian/Pacific Islander (19%) and Black (16%). As we
discuss later, we run race-specific regressions to rule out the possibility that our results are solely
driven by Hispanic candidates.
       Finally, given our focus on differences in prices between majority white and majority
nonwhite neighborhoods, we begin by establishing the existence of baseline differences in prices
across these two types of neighborhoods. Column 1 of Table 2 reports results from a bivariate
regression of adjusted log price on an indicator for whether the house is in a majority nonwhite
neighborhood. These results indicate that house prices are lower, on average, in majority nonwhite
neighborhoods. Moving from Column 1 to Column 5, we gradually incorporate additional controls
(including city fixed effects, as many of our main specifications will include fixed effects at that
level). We see that much (but not all) of the gap across neighborhoods can be explained by
observable house and neighborhood characteristics. In Column 5, our richest specification, we still
observe a significant gap in prices between houses in white and nonwhite neighborhoods; houses
in nonwhite neighborhoods sell for roughly 5.5 percent less than houses in majority white



                                                                                                    15
neighborhoods. Thus, in assessing the differential impact of candidate ethnicity on house prices in
nonwhite neighborhoods, we are essentially testing whether minority representation affects this
pre-existing gap in house prices across neighborhood types.


                                           Table 1: Summary statistics
                                                               (1)                   (2)
                                                            All cities        Cities with close
                                                                              wht. vs. nonwht.
                                                                                  elections
                                        Panel A: City-level Demographics
                   Total population                       56,939.67              72,665.14
                                                         (185,534.5)            (125,242.2)
                   Asian/Pac. Isl. share                     0.09                   0.15
                                                            (0.11)                 (0.15)
                   Black share                               0.04                   0.05
                                                            (0.06)                 (0.06)
                   Hispanic share:                           0.30                   0.37
                                                            (0.25)                 (0.23)
                   White share:                              0.56                   0.42
                                                            (0.26)                 (0.21)
                   Other share:                              0.00                   0.00
                                                            (0.00)                 (0.00)
                   Ethnic fractionalization                  0.44                   0.54
                                                            (0.17)                 (0.13)

                                           Panel B: Council Characteristics

                   Council size                               5.32                  5.38
                                                             (0.97)                (0.91)
                   District-based elect.                      0.09                  0.07
                                                             (0.29)                (0.26)
                   Rest-of-council white share                                      0.66
                                                                                   (0.28)
                   Rest-of-council is all white                                     0.25
                                                                                   (0.42)

                    Observations                             458                   201
Standard deviations in parentheses. Population and ethnicity shares come from the 2000 census. Observations in
Column 1 correspond to cities while the observations in Column 2 correspond to the number of relevant elections that
take place in our sample period.




                                                                                                                16
       Table 2: Baseline price differences for houses in majority nonwhite neighborhoods
                                          DV is ln(Adjusted house price)
                                 (1)               (2)            (3)                  (4)               (5)
    Maj. nonwhite            -0.286***         -0.385***         -0.277***         -0.170***         -0.055***
    neighborhood               (0.040)          (0.041)           (0.030)           (0.017)            (0.012)

    City FEs                                       X                 X                 X                 X
    House chars.                                                     X                 X                 X
    Neigh. income                                                                      X                 X
    Other neigh. chars.                                                                                  X

  Observations                   2,876,011        2,876,011           2,876,011          2,875,933    2,875,933
  R-squared                        0.040            0.575               0.670              0.683         0.696
All specifications include the full sample of housing transactions. House characteristics: # bathrooms, # bedrooms, #
stories, sq. footage, age at sale; Neighborhood income: Median household income, % below poverty level, % on public
assistance; Other neighborhood characteristics: pop. density, share pop. urban, share pop. male, share pop. over 18,
share pop. over 65, total pop., share households by household structure (married with children, married without
children, etc.), share vacant housing, share renter occupied housing, share owner occupied housing.
                               Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




6     Main Analysis
Our main empirical approach is a panel-based regression discontinuity design, similar to Cellini et
al. (2010). We begin by expositing our analytical design – building up from a basic cross-sectional
RD model.

          6.1 Empirical Approach


We identify the causal impact of electing a minority council member using local linear regressions
estimated on a sample of close elections between white and non-white candidates. More formally,
we limit our sample to elections that fall within a narrow bandwidth of an equal vote share
outcome. We define “nonwhite margin of victory” as the difference between the nonwhite
candidate’s vote share and the white candidate’s vote share. Thus, a positive margin of victory
indicates that the nonwhite candidate won the election, and a negative margin of victory indicates
that the white candidate was the winner; margins close to zero indicate a close election.




                                                                                                                 17
        We take individual housing transactions as our unit of observation. Since councilmembers
serve staggered four-year terms, the composition of the council is only stable for two years.
Accordingly, in a simple cross-sectional model, analysis would be restricted to transactions
occurring during the two-year “council term” following a relevant election – yielding the following
empirical specification:


      ln ())Bde   =    ∝ + gh i[k(4lℎ6X5 l64#de ] + g] nV'&64 (o p6WX('qde
                         + gr i[k(4lℎ6X5 l64#de ] ∗ nV'&64 (o p6WX('qde                    (2)
                                            + KBde


where ln ())Bde is the adjusted log price of house h in city c during council term t.
i[k(4lℎ6X5 l64#de ] is an indicator variable equal to one if the nonwhite candidate wins, which
we fully interact with the nonwhite candidate’s “margin of victory.” The coefficient gh therefore
identifies the effect of a nonwhite candidate winning conditional on the margin of victory being
zero. Thus, under the assumption that winners of close elections are essentially random (an
assumption that is particularly likely to hold in low-information and low-turnout elections such as
city council races), gh identifies the causal impact of electing a nonwhite candidate.
        While equation (2) can identify the impact of increased minority representation on housing
values overall, our main interest is in understanding whether an increase in representation
differentially affects housing values in minority neighborhoods. To address this question, we
modify equation (2) by fully interacting all of the relevant variables (nonwhite win, margin of
victory, the interaction of nonwhite win and margin) with an indicator variable set equal to one if
the house is located in a majority nonwhite neighborhood. The modified specification is then:


ln ())Bde   =       ∝ + gh i[kt l64#de ] + g] nV'&64de + gr i[kt l64#de ] ∗ nV'&64de
                   + gu i[kt l64#de ] ∗ i[kt k56&ℎB ] + gv nV'&64de ∗ i[kt k56&ℎ.B ]     (3)
                +gx i[kt l64#de ] ∗ nV'&64de ∗ i[kt k56&ℎ.B ] + gy i[kt k56&ℎ.B ] + KBde


where i[kt k56&ℎB ] is an indicator for whether the neighborhood (Census block group) is
majority nonwhite. Now, gh identifies the causal impact of a nonwhite victory on house prices in
majority white neighborhoods and gu identifies the differential effect of a nonwhite victory on
nonwhite neighborhoods. As our main goal in this study is to test whether increased nonwhite



                                                                                                 18
representation generates differential benefits for majority nonwhite neighborhoods, gu will be the
primary coefficient of interest.
         While equation (3) adequately identifies the differential effect that is the main target of our
analysis, stronger identification and more precise estimates can be gained by incorporating the
basic logic of equation (3) into a panel data strategy. As such, the results presented throughout this
paper use a panel-based parallel to Equations 2 and 3, which we describe next. We do note,
however, that estimates from the simpler cross-sectional approach are consistent with our main
results. We report those estimates in Section 2 of the Appendix.
         In the panel model, we restrict the sample to the two-year council terms immediately
preceding and following a relevant election.17 To reflect the level of treatment, our main
specifications include election fixed effects. For cities with only one relevant election during the
sample period, election fixed effects are equivalent to city fixed effects. For a city with more than
one relevant election, each election is treated as a separate panel, with a different fixed effect. In
other words, our data in this approach is configured as a set of four-year panels centered around
specific elections, with two years of pre-election observations and two years of post-election
observations. The presence of pre- and post- observations, as well as the inclusion of election-level
fixed effects, allow us to evaluate the change in house prices in cities where the nonwhite candidate
won relative to changes in house prices in cities where the nonwhite candidate lost. This analysis
contrasts with the cross-sectional approach, which simply compares post-election transactions in
cities that elected a nonwhite candidate to post-election transactions in cities that elected a white
candidate.
         The panel analog to equation (2) is as follows:


ln ())Bade   =   ∝ + gh i[k(4lℎ6X5 l64#ad ] + g] nV'&64ad + gr i[k(4lℎ6X5 l64#ad ] ∗ nV'&64ad
                         + gu i[k(4lℎ6X5 l64#ad ] ∗ i[A(#Xade ] + gv nV'&64ad ∗ i[A(#Xade ]         (4)
                  +gx i[k(4lℎ6X5 l64#ad ] ∗ nV'&64ad ∗ i[A(#Xade ] + gy i[A(#Xade ] + zad + KBade



Equation (4) is similar to equation (2) in that it does not yet allow for differential effects by
neighborhood type. We take the adjusted house price for house h in city c, sold within two years
(before or after) of election e, as our outcome. On the right-hand side, we include the same


17
  Again, “council term” refers to the two-year period between elections in which there are no changes in the
composition of the council.


                                                                                                          19
“Nonwhite wins”, “margin of victory”, and interaction variables, but these are now defined with
respect to the election e (and city c). We then fully interact each of those variables with a new
indicator variable, i[A(#Xade ], which is equal to one if the housing transaction occurs in the two
years after election e and zero otherwise. We also include election fixed effects, zad .18
         Given that our primary focus is testing whether candidate ethnicity has different effects on
different types of neighborhoods, we actually estimate a modified version of equation (4). The
modified equation, which parallels equation (3), interacts all “treatment” variables (nonwhite
winner, margin, post, and all interactions of these) with an indicator variable equal to one if a
neighborhood is majority nonwhite and zero otherwise. Of primary interest are the coefficients on
“Nonwhite wins” X “Post”, which identifies the effect of a nonwhite winner on housing values in
white neighborhoods, and “Nonwhite wins” X “Post” X “Nonwhite neighborhood”, which
identifies the differential effect of a nonwhite winner on housing values in nonwhite
neighborhoods. As in the discussion above, the latter will be of primary interest.
     Finally, we include controls for housing characteristics, neighborhood characteristics, year-
month dummies, and city-specific linear time trends.19


         6.2 Bandwidth Selection


Several authors have proposed methods to identify the optimal bandwidth in a local linear RD
approach (Calonico et al., 2014; Imbens & Kalyanaraman, 2012). These methods attempt to
balance the benefits of a narrower bandwidth (estimates drawn from observations that are very
close to the cutoff, increasing confidence in identifying a casual effect) with the benefits of a wider
bandwidth (more observations, lending more power). These methods would be well-suited to
identifying a bandwidth if one outcome was associated with each election, as would be the case –
for instance – when testing whether a narrow victory for politician i in election t impacts that


18
   Note that in practice the “Nonwhite wins”, “margin”, and “Nonwhite wins * Margin” variables are absorbed by the
election fixed effects and are therefore not identified. We present them as part of equation (4) for illustrative purposes
only.
19
   Specifically, we control for the following housing characteristics: num. of bedrooms, num. of bathrooms, num. of
stories, square footage, age of the house; the following neighborhood characteristics, all at the block group level:
population density, share pop. urban, race shares, gender shares, young and elderly population shares, shares of
households by household composition (single, married, married with children, etc.), vacant housing share, renter
occupied share, owner occupied share, and ethnic fractionalization, median household income, share below poverty
line, and share on public assistance. As we will show, results are generally robust to the exclusion of these controls.


                                                                                                                      20
politician’s vote share in election t+1. However, our setting involves a large number of housing
transaction observations associated with each narrow victory. Using typical bandwidth selection
procedures on our full sample would yield an artificially small bandwidth, as there are many
observations close to the cutoff, but many of them belong to the same set of cities/elections.
        Instead, to identify an appropriate bandwidth, we collapse our observations to the election
level. For each relevant election, we take the average of log adjusted housing prices in the two
years following the election. This yields a single observation per election. We then use the
Calonico et al. (2014) bandwidth selection procedure, which suggests that the optimal bandwidth
in our setting is 5.88 percentage points. Thus, in our main specification we include all marginal
elections between a white and nonwhite candidate, conditional on the election being decided by
5.88 percentage points or less. Ideally, the Calonico et al. bandwidth selection procedure is used
for each specification, but given our data and approach, that is impractical. We instead take a
bandwidth of 5.88 percentage points for our analysis and demonstrate the robustness of our results
to a variety of alternative bandwidths.20


        6.3 Assessing the Validity of our Regression Discontinuity Design


The key assumption underlying basic RD designs is the continuity of both correlate densities and
outcome probabilities across the treatment threshold. As we discuss at length in Appendix 1 and
summarize here, our data conform to these requirements. Turning first to continuity of outcome
probabilities, a particular concern in our close election context is that nonwhite candidates may
have a distinct electoral advantage (or disadvantage), which would undermine our assumption that
the outcome of a close election is as good as random.21 In Appendix Figure A1, we follow McCrary
(2008) and plot a discontinuous density function around the cutoff (nonwhite margin=0). That
figure demonstrates that the density just to the left of the cutoff is statistically indistinguishable
from the density just to the right of the cutoff, which helps alleviate concerns about a systematic
advantage for nonwhite candidate in close elections. Next, turning to continuity of correlate


20
   Appendix Figure A7 documents the number of unique elections and the number of unique housing transactions that
occur within each bandwidth.
21
   While Caughey & Sekhon (2011) and Grimmer et al., (2011) have questioned the “randomness” near the cutoff
when applying regression discontinuity designs to elections, Vogl (2014) documents concerns specifically in the
context of race and city politics among southern US states.


                                                                                                             21
densities, in Appendix Figures A2, A3, and A4, we assess the identifying assumption that other
observable characteristics behave smoothly around the cutoff. Here we see that for a wide variety
of city, candidate, and housing characteristics, there are no discontinuities across the threshold.
There is one important exception (seen in Appendix Figure A3 panels c and d): we find that the
likelihood that the winning candidate is a Democrat jumps dramatically at the cutoff. In other
words, consistent with correlations between partisan affiliation and ethnicity in the general
population, we find that nonwhite candidates are more likely to be a registered Democrat (and less
likely to be a registered Republican). While this finding is not surprising, it may mean that our
results are in fact driven by partisan differences. We address this concern directly below by
restricting the sample to close elections where both marginal candidates are of the same party and
demonstrating that this restriction does not meaningfully change our results.



       6.4 Main Results


Panel A of Table 3 identifies the causal impact of electing a non-white city council member on
city-wide property values – based on the specification presented in equation (4). Panel B of the
table incorporates the full set of non-white neighborhood interactions. All of these specifications
restrict the sample to the optimal bandwidth (5.88 percentage points) and include election-level
fixed effects. As we move from Column 1 to Column 4, we include increasingly larger sets of
controls. Column 1 simply takes the adjusted log house price as the outcome with no controls for
house or neighborhood characteristics. Column 2 adds controls for housing characteristics and
Column 3 adds controls for neighborhood characteristics. Finally, Column 4 adds city-specific
time trends. Column 4 is both our richest and most preferred specification.
       We find no evidence that the election of a nonwhite councilmember affects average
housing values at a city-wide level (results reported in Panel A). This is true regardless of which
specification is used. In our preferred specification (Column 4), a nonwhite candidate’s victory is
estimated to increase housing values by 0.7 percent.
       In contrast, our main results - presented in Panel B - show that this average effect masks
clear distributional effects. Across all specifications, we find a significant positive coefficient on
“Nonwhite win X Post X Majority nonwhite neighborhood”, which indicates that the election of a



                                                                                                   22
nonwhite candidate (rather than a white candidate) leads to differential increases in housing values
in nonwhite neighborhoods. Given the antecedent gap in housing prices across white and non-
white neighborhoods, this result can be seen as helping to reverse these pre-existing differentials.
In our preferred specification (Column 4), we find that the election of a nonwhite candidate leads
to housing values in majority white neighborhoods that are 6.4 percent lower than those that would
obtain if a white candidate had won. We observe a corresponding differentially positive effect in
majority nonwhite neighborhoods. Overall, the effect on nonwhite neighborhoods is 11 percent
more positive than the effect on white neighborhoods.

           Table 3: Panel RD estimates of councilmember ethnicity on housing values
                                                (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)
     Panel A: Overall effects
     Nonwht. win X Post                        0.038             0.035              0.035              0.007
                                              (0.044)           (0.042)            (0.041)            (0.027)

     Panel B: Differential effects by neighborhood type
     Nonwht. win X Post                     -0.058               -0.066             -0.068           -0.064**
                                           (0.046)              (0.046)            (0.045)            (0.030)
     Nonwht. win X Post                    0.147**             0.153***           0.156***            0.111**
       X Nonwht. Neigh.                    (0.061)              (0.056)            (0.056)            (0.045)

                       Linear combination to recover full effect on Nonwhite Neighborhoods
     (NW win X Post) +                        0.089*            0.087*             0.088*              0.046
       (NW win X Post X                       (0.050)           (0.047)            (0.048)            (0.035)
       NW. Neighborhood)
     Level of FEs                            Election           Election          Election           Election
     House controls                                                X                 X                  X
     Neighborhood controls                                                           X                  X
     Linear city time trends                                                                            X

     Observations                              602,977           602,977            602,977           602,977
The outcome variable is an adjusted log house price. All specifications are restricted to elections between white and
nonwhite candidates, decided by a margin of 5.88 percentage points or less. Table displays coefficients capturing
causal impact of nonwhite candidate victory and suppresses other coefficients (e.g., nonwhite margin of victory).
House controls: num. of bedrooms, num. of bathrooms, num. of stories, square footage, age of the house.
Neighborhood controls, all at the block group level: population density, share pop. urban, race shares, gender shares,
young and elderly population shares, shares of households by household composition (single, married, married with
children, etc.), vacant housing share, renter occupied share, owner occupied share, and ethnic fractionalization, median
household income, share below poverty line, and share on public assistance.
                             Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                    23
         This finding is our main result: the election of a nonwhite candidate has a significantly
different effect on outcomes in majority nonwhite neighborhoods than on white neighborhoods,
indicating distributional consequences of increased descriptive representation.
         Near the bottom of Table 3 we compute the linear combination of “Nonwht. win X Post”
+ “Nonwht. win X Post X Nonwht. Neigh.”. This statistic allows us to assess whether houses in
majority nonwhite neighborhoods experienced a statistically significant overall increase in value
when a nonwhite candidate won. Here we find a net price increase of 4.6 percent when a nonwhite
(rather than white) candidate is elected, although this absolute effect is less precisely estimated.22
We emphasize that these results reflect the differential effect of a nonwhite candidate winning
relative to the effect of a white candidate winning. They could be driven by the impact of nonwhite
candidates, the impact of counterfactual white candidates, or some combination of the two.


         6.5 Robustness of Main Results


In Figure 1 we present a series of robustness checks surrounding our main result. For the sake of
comparison, Panel A of the figure depicts our main coefficient estimates, corresponding to the
estimates reported in Column 4 of Table 3; the white bar represents the impact of a nonwhite
candidate victory in majority white neighborhoods (the “Post X Nonwht. win” coefficient); the
shaded bar represents the differential impact of a nonwhite victory in majority nonwhite
neighborhoods (the “Post X Nonwht. win X Nonwht. Neigh.” coefficient).
         As our first robustness check we address the concern that our results may be driven by
differences in partisan preferences. As noted earlier, there is a correlation between a candidate’s
ethnicity and a candidate’s partisan preferences, with nonwhite candidates being more likely to be
registered Democrats. In our data, of the nonwhite candidates involved in white versus nonwhite
elections, 70% are registered as Democrats, 20% are registered as Republicans, and 10% are
registered as some other party (or indicated no party preference). Among the white candidates,
38% are Democrats, 48% are Republicans, and 14% are other/no preference. To determine if our
main result is driven by partisan preferences, Panel B presents results excluding all elections where


22
  We note that a small majority of neighborhoods in our estimation sample are majority nonwhite (54% vs. 46%).
This helps explain why there is no average effect of nonwhite representation on housing prices (Panel A) even though
the positive level effect on nonwhite neighborhoods (+0.046) is smaller in magnitude than the negative level effect in
white neighborhoods (-0.064).


                                                                                                                  24
one of the two marginal candidates is a Republican and the other is a Democrat. If our main result
were driven by the fact that white vs. nonwhite elections often imply Republican vs. Democrat
elections, then, when excluding such elections, we should expect something closer to a null result.
Instead, results are very similar to our main results, though the standard errors are larger due to the
reduced sample size.




                                  Figure 1: Robustness of panel RD results
                                    Panel B:                                                           Panel E:
                                  Drop Dem. vs.             Panel C:            Panel D:             Drop councils
                  Panel A:           Repub.                Drop three         Drop district-            with >7
                 Main result        Elections             largest cities     based elections           members
     0.25
      0.2
     0.15
      0.1
     0.05
        0
     -0.05
      -0.1
     -0.15
      -0.2
                                 Nonwht. win            Nonwht. win X Nonwht. Nbd.
Note: This figure depicts results from five distinct regressions, with each pair of bars representing the relevant
coefficient estimates from a single regression. Panel A simply reports our main result (from Table 3, Panel B, Column
4) for the sake of comparison with the rest of the figure. Note that the figure depicts coefficients from the “Post X
Nonwht. win” and “Post X Nonwht. win X Nonwht. BG” coefficients. 90% confidence intervals around estimates are
also depicted in the figure. See notes of Table 3 for a full list of controls included in these regressions.


             The remainder of Figure 1 reports additional sensitivity tests. Panel C drops the three
largest cities in our sample; 23 Panel D drops cities with district-based elections; Panel E drops the
small number of cities with large (>7 members) councils. Across all three panels, results are very
similar to the main result. The exclusion of district-based elections is perhaps the most noteworthy

23
  In a related test, we have also repeatedly estimated our main model, one time for each city in our model, where in
each estimation, we exclude exactly one city. This is aimed at ensuring that our results are not largely driven by
patterns in a single city, and indeed we get very similar results across all of these estimates. These results are available
upon request.


                                                                                                                        25
of these three results. One might be concerned that nonwhite candidates are more likely to be
elected in district-based elections, and so our results could simply reflect the fact that
councilmembers generate benefits for their own districts, which happen to match their ethnicity.
Panel D shows that our main results are not driven by district elections.

                                                    Panel, CI 90                                                                     Updated:
         Figure 2: Effect of a nonwhite candidate victory, across multiple bandwidths                                                aug 2019
                                                 (a) Overall effect of nonwhite winner
                                      0.25
                                       0.2
                                      0.15
                                       0.1
                                      0.05
                                        0
                                     -0.05
                                      -0.1
                                     -0.15
                                             0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.12
                                                                 Bandwidth

             (b) Effect of nonwhite winner on majority white           (c) Differential effect of nonwhite winner on majority
                              neighborhoods                                           nonwhite neighborhoods
      0.25                                                           0.25
       0.2                                                            0.2
      0.15                                                           0.15
       0.1                                                            0.1
      0.05                                                           0.05
        0                                                              0
     -0.05                                                          -0.05
      -0.1                                                           -0.1
     -0.15                                                          -0.15
             0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.12              0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.12
                                 Bandwidth                                                      Bandwidth
Note: Panel (a) of the figure depicts the result of the panel RD approach, which does not allow for heterogeneity in
the treatment effect across neighborhood types. The specification follows Column 4, Panel A, Table 3 but within a
different bandwidth. Panels (b) and (c) of the figure depicts the result of the panel RD approach which does allow for
heterogeneity in the treatment effect across neighborhood types (Column 4, Panel B, Table 3). In all panels, the dotted
lines represent the 90% confidence intervals.


         Next, we evaluate the impact of bandwidth selection. Figure 2 shows that our general
conclusions are not sensitive to our choice of bandwidth. The figure graphically depicts estimates
from a series of specifications, re-estimating our main specifications with different bandwidths.
Panel (a) reports the primary coefficient of interest from the simpler specification that does not
allow for differential effects across neighborhood types, corresponding to Panel A in Table 3.
Panels (b) and (c) report the two main coefficients from the specification that does allow for
differential effects, corresponding to Panel B in Table 3. We re-estimate these models for



                                                                                                                                26
bandwidths ranging from 3 percentage points to 12 percentage points (roughly half and double our
preferred bandwidth), in 0.5 percentage point increments. The bandwidth being used is reported
along the horizontal axis of the figure. The corresponding y-axis value at each point (solid dark
line) reports the coefficient estimate with confidence intervals (dotted grey lines). We consistently
find that the election of a nonwhite candidate helps reduce the pre-existing gap in house prices
between majority white and majority nonwhite neighborhoods (Panel (c)), albeit with reduced
precision for especially narrow bandwidths. Likewise, at all bandwidths housing values in majority
white neighborhoods are lower than they would have been if a white candidate had been elected
(Panel (b)).
        Table 4 reports additional robustness and placebo tests. Here we show that the main results
are robust to including city fixed effects (Column 1) or neighborhood-by-election fixed effects
(Column 2), instead of the election fixed effects used elsewhere. Columns 3 and 4 present results
considering different definitions of nonwhite neighborhood. Column 3 defines a neighborhood as
“high nonwhite” if it is above the city’s median nonwhite share, rather than simply above 50%,
while Column 4 uses the continuous measure of nonwhite share in the neighborhood in lieu of the
“majority nonwhite” dummy. Both models yield results consistent with our main result.
       Column 5 reports results from a specification that excludes controls for, or interactions
with, the nonwhite candidate’s margin of victory. This difference-in-differences approach
identifies the impact of a nonwhite winner based on all observations 5.88 percentage points to the
right and left of the cutoff. This model contrasts with our main specification, which fits a line
through margin of victory in order to identify the effect at the cutoff. Results are similar, although
the magnitude of the effects are attenuated: a nonwhite candidate has essentially no effect on
majority white neighborhoods and a 5.7 percent differentially positive effect in majority nonwhite
neighborhoods. This finding is noteworthy, in part because the magnitude from our main
regression discontinuity estimates (Table 3) may be viewed as large. Those estimates, however,
are drawn from the gap in housing prices at a margin of victory of zero, based on gaps between
the endpoints of fitted lines on either side of the cutoff. Therefore, while the regression
discontinuity approach provides clean identification on the direction of the results, the simpler
difference-in-differences approach reported here may provide a more accurate sense of the
magnitude of the effect.




                                                                                                   27
                                           Table 4: Sensitivity and placebo tests
                                Alternative Fixed Effects    Alternative definitions of      No Margin           Placebo Tests
                                                                 nonwhite neigh.             of Victory
                                                                                            Interactions
                                   (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)             (7)
         Outcome variable: Log adjusted      Log adjusted   Log adjusted    Log adjusted    Log adjusted   Log adjusted        Log
                              price             price          price           price           price          price         predicted
                                                                                                                              price
                 Time period:                Two years before and after relevant election                  Four years      Two years
                                                                                                             before        before and
                                                                                                            relevant      after relevant
                                                                                                            election         election
Nonwht. win X Post              -0.062**        -0.036         -0.025        -0.166***        -0.007         -0.010           0.004
                                 (0.030)        (0.027)        (0.026)        (0.059)         (0.020)        (0.034)         (0.027)
Nonwht. win X Post              0.113***       0.074**                                        0.057**         0.011          -0.009
  X Maj. Nonwht. Neigh.          (0.043)        (0.034)                                       (0.024)        (0.042)         (0.047)
Nonwht. win X Post                                             0.067*
  X High Nonwht. Neigh.                                        (0.035)
Nonwht. win X Post                                                           0.288***
  X Nonwht. share                                                             (0.101)

Level of FEs                       City      Neighborhood     Election        Election        Election       Election       Election
                                              X Election
House controls                      X             X               X              X               X              X              X
Neighborhood controls               X             X               X              X               X              X              X
Linear city time trends             X             X               X              X               X              X              X


Observations                     602,977       602,977        602,977         602,977         602,977        484,234        602,977
    All specifications are restricted to elections between white and nonwhite candidates, decided by a margin of 5.88
    percentage points or less. Table displays coefficients capturing causal impact of nonwhite candidate victory and
    suppresses other coefficients (e.g., nonwhite margin of victory). See notes of Table 3 for full set of controls. In Column
    5, we omit interactions with and controls for the nonwhite candidate’s margin of victory, but (like other specifications)
    restricts the sample to within the 5.88 percentage point bandwidth. “High Nonwht. Neigh.” (Column 3) is a dummy
    equal to 1 if the neighborhood is higher than the within-city median of neighborhood nonwhite share. “Nonwht. share”
    (Column 4) is a continuous variable equal to nonwhite share within the neighborhood. In the placebo test reported in
    Column 6, the sample period is four years before a relevant election, and so “Post” is equal to one in the two years
    preceding the relevant election. In the placebo test reported in Column 7, the outcome variable is the log of the
    “predicted price” – which is predicted based on observable characteristics of the house (bedrooms, bathrooms, etc.),
    neighborhood demographic characteristics, and city fixed effects.
                                 Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



               Columns 6 and 7 present two placebo tests. In Column 6 we back our panel up by two
    years, taking the two-year period preceding the relevant election as the “treatment” period. The
    test reveals no effect, which alleviates concerns about pre-trends. Next, we ask whether our results
    could be explained by systematic changes in the composition of houses that sell following the
    election of a white (nonwhite) candidate. Here, we construct a “predicted” housing price, based



                                                                                                                               28
only on observable characteristics of the house, and take that as an outcome variable. We find no
evidence of composition effects.24
         In Section 4 of our appendix, we discuss and report an analysis where we separately
consider the impacts of Black, Asian, and Hispanic candidates. For the sake of statistical power,
our main analysis focuses on the impact of nonwhite candidates on white and nonwhite
neighborhoods. While nearly 50% of neighborhoods in California are majority nonwhite, the
numbers of neighborhoods that are majority Hispanic, Black, or Asian/Pacific Islander are much
smaller, which limits our ability to consider the impacts of a nonwhite candidate’s victory on more
specific neighborhood types. Nevertheless, the appendix presents results for each ethnic group.
Though less precise, the results broadly reveal that group-specific effects are consistent with our
main results. They also reveal that – especially for Black and Hispanic candidates – specific types
of nonwhite candidates tend to have an impact on all types of nonwhite neighborhoods, which
helps justify our more parsimonious focus on just nonwhite vs. white neighborhoods. These results
also help alleviate concerns that our results are driven by electing residents of one specific
neighborhood rather than the race of the candidate.


7    Mechanisms


We next present analysis that explores the mechanisms underlying our main results. We begin by
unpacking the basic housing price results in terms of pivotality, income, ownership and segregation
levels. We then consider specific policies and outcomes that may drive our housing market results.


7.1 Pivotality


We begin with the role of pivotality and how the election of a nonwhite candidate interacts with
the ethnic composition of the other councilmembers. To explore this issue, we re-estimate our
main specification on four mutually exclusive subsamples based on the pre-existing composition
of the rest of the council: (1) councils where the nonwhite candidate would become the first



24
   In a related set of tests, Appendix Table A3 reports results of specifications aimed at assessing whether there is
any change in sales volume when a nonwhite candidate narrowly wins; we find no such evidence overall or when
allowing for differential effects in majority nonwhite neighborhoods.


                                                                                                                        29
nonwhite member on the council; (2) councils where the nonwhite candidate would not be the first
nonwhite member, but the council would remain majority white even with the election of the
nonwhite candidate; (3) councils where the nonwhite candidate is “pivotal” – his or her election
would shift the council from majority white to majority nonwhite; and (4) councils where there
would be a nonwhite majority regardless of whether the nonwhite candidate is elected.


   Figure 3: Heterogeneity in impact of nonwhite victory by composition of rest of council
                           Panel A:         Panel B: Heterogeneity by rest-of-council council composition.
                          Main result,     Winner is or       Winner is or    Winner is or
                          restricted to   would be: First    would be: Not would be: Pivotal
                       sample with fully    nonwhite      first nonwhite, not  nonwhite        Pre-existing
                       identified council   member.              pivotal.      member.         nonwht. maj.
                0.4

                0.3

                0.2

                0.1

                  0

                -0.1

                -0.2

                -0.3

                                          Nonwht. win      Nonwht. win X Nonwht. Nbd.

This figure depicts results from five distinct regressions, with each pair of bars representing the relevant coefficient
estimates from a single regression. Panel A simply reports our main result (from Table 3, Panel B, Column 4) for the
sake of comparison with the rest of the figure. Each pair of results in Panel B corresponds to a different sample
restrictions. Note that the figure depicts coefficients from the “Post X Nonwht. win” and “Post X Nonwht. win X
Nonwht. BG” coefficients. 90% confidence intervals around estimates are also depicted in the figure. See notes of
Table 3 for a full list of controls included in these regressions.

These results are presented graphically in Panel B of Figure 3. Again, Panel A of the figure depicts
our main coefficient estimates; the white bar represents the impact of a nonwhite candidate victory
in majority white neighborhoods (the “Post X Nonwht. win” coefficient); the shaded bar represents
the differential impact of a nonwhite victory in majority nonwhite neighborhoods (the “Post X
Nonwht. win X Nonwht. Neigh.” coefficient). The results show that the election of a nonwhite
candidate has little impact when the nonwhite candidate is the first nonwhite member on the
council or when there is already a nonwhite majority on the council. Conversely, we observe strong
impacts of nonwhite wins in cases where the nonwhite candidate is pivotal. There is also a strong
impact of increased nonwhite representation when the nonwhite candidate is non-pivotal, but is


                                                                                                                    30
also not the first nonwhite member of council – suggesting the impact of descriptive representation
may hinge on the presence of a certain critical mass.


7.2 Income, ownership and segregation


         We consider several additional dimensions of heterogeneity in our treatment effects, to
both shed light on mechanisms and to rule out alternative explanations for our results. First, given
correlations between neighborhood income levels and minority share, it is possible that our results
are the result of distributional shifts in policy attention to or away from wealthy or less wealthy
neighborhoods, rather than shifts to or from higher minority share and lower minority share
neighborhoods. While we control for neighborhood-level income characteristics (median income,
percent below the poverty line, and percent on public assistance) in all of our main specifications,
we did not allow for interactions between winning councilmember ethnicity and these
characteristics. To test whether income correlations explain our results, we split our sample into
“high median income” neighborhoods and “low median income” neighborhoods. We define a
neighborhood as “high median income” if the median income is above the sample median of
median income across all neighborhoods; when this is not true, a neighborhood is defined as “low
median income”. Notably, in both subsamples, the pattern of results is qualitatively similar to our
main results (see Panel B of Figure 4). This suggests that our main results are not driven by
distributional shifts towards lower income neighborhoods rather than distributional shifts towards
neighborhoods with a higher share of nonwhite residents. In Panel C, we test whether results differ
in areas with a high versus low share of renters, again defining “high” and “low” relative to the
sample median of neighborhood renter share, and again find that results are similar across the two
subsamples.25
         Panel D considers a different dimension. Here, we assess how a city’s level of segregation
interacts with our results. As discussed above, an important potential mechanism for explaining



25
   Related to the two tests discussed here: one concern is that increased housing prices in majority nonwhite
neighborhoods are evidence of gentrification, which may represent a negative outcome for nonwhite residents. While
we cannot fully rule out this possibility, we test whether the election of a nonwhite candidate is associated with any
change in the count or rate of evictions at the neighborhood level. We find no evidence of a change in evictions, either
overall or in nonwhite neighborhoods in particular (See Appendix Table A10). This finding, paired with the similar
effects observed across high and low income neighborhoods, point away from a gentrification explanation for our
results.


                                                                                                                    31
our results is the possibility that a nonwhite candidate wins and directs resources and services
towards nonwhite neighborhoods. This channel is likely most effective in segregated cities where
there are obvious nonwhite neighborhoods to direct resources towards. Similarly, the impact of
policies directed towards nonwhite individuals should have the largest measurable impacts in more
segregated neighborhood. The results in Panel D are consistent with these conjectures. Splitting
the sample into cities that are high or low on a city-level dissimilarity index (which measures
segregation),26 we see that our results are largely driven by more segregated cities.


        Figure 4: Heterogeneity in impact of nonwhite victory by neighborhood or city
                                       characteristics
                                      Panel B:                                                Panel D:
                  Panel A:   Median household income in            Panel C:            City-level dissimilarity
                 Main Result           nbd.                   Share renters in nbd.            index
                                  Low          High           Low            High       Low             High
          0.35
           0.3
          0.25
           0.2
          0.15
           0.1
          0.05
             0
         -0.05
          -0.1
         -0.15
          -0.2
                                        Nonwht. win       Nonwht. win X Nonwht. Nbd.

This figure depicts results from nine distinct regressions, with each pair of bars representing the relevant coefficient
estimates from a single regression. Panel A simply reports our main result (from Table 3, Panel B, Column 4) for the
sake of comparison with the rest of the figure. Each pair of results in Panels B through D correspond to a different
sample restriction. Note that the figure depicts coefficients from the “Post X Nonwht. win” and “Post X Nonwht. win
X Nonwht. BG” coefficients. 90% confidence intervals around estimates are also depicted in the figure. See notes of
Table 3 for a full list of controls included in these regressions.



7.3 Changes in policies/outcomes that underpin our main results




26
 We use the typical two-group dissimilarity index as our measure of diversity, with the two groups in question being
white and nonwhite.


                                                                                                                    32
As noted above, we use housing prices as a proxy for changes in policy and spending patterns that
differentially affect minority and non-minority individuals for two reasons. First, from a theoretical
perspective they are an appropriate “index” number for aggregating across the broad range of
policies/outcomes that can be influenced by city councils. Second, the paucity of data relating to
these policies/outcomes that is systematically available and disaggregated to the neighborhood
level limits what we can measure directly. There are, however, some noted exceptions to this
second point which we now consider.
           First, in our discussion of specific candidate examples, concern about inequities in
neighborhood-level patterns of economic development was a recurring theme. Once elected, city
council members play an important role mediating between constituent business owners and the
city’s various regulatory and permitting agencies. Thus, both directly and via city policy, there is
scope for council members to affect the spatial patterns of business activity. To assess this channel,
we draw on the Census Bureau’s ZIP Code Business Patterns data. These data report the number
of business establishments by ZIP code on an annual basis. In Column 1 of Panel A in Table 5 we
report the effect of a nonwhite candidate’s victory on the log of business establishments throughout
a city, which is not significantly different than zero. However, turning to Panel B, where we allow
for a differential effect in majority nonwhite ZIP codes, we observe a pattern consistent with our
housing price results. Relative to the election of a white candidate, the election of a nonwhite
candidate differentially increases the number of business establishments in majority nonwhite
areas and decreases the number in majority white areas.
           Of course, the concerns raised by candidates about economic development focused not
only on levels of activity, but on types of activities as well. While data here is limited, we can test
for exposure to polluting businesses using data from the Environmental Protection Agency’s Toxic
Release Inventory (TRI) program. The TRI records the presence of business facilities that release
toxic chemicals into the environment and, in general, can be a good proxy for locally undesirable
land uses.27 We collapse the data to a count of TRI facilities at the Census tract-by-year level and
test whether the election of a nonwhite candidate impacts the overall presence or local distribution
of TRI facilities. Specifically, we take as our outcome variable an indicator for whether a TRI
facility is operating within each tract-year pairing. Column 2 of Table 5 reports these results. We



27
     See Shertzer et al. (2018)


                                                                                                    33
observe no significant effects either on average or by neighborhood type, suggesting that the
increase in business activity observed in Column 1 was not associated with an increase in
environmental threats faced by local residents.


         Table 5: Effects of councilmember ethnicity on local economic development
                                                                  (1)                   (2)
                                    Outcome variable:     Log of number of     Any TRI facility in
                                                          establishments in           tract?
                                                                 ZIP            (=1, 0 otherwise)
             Panel A: Overall effects
             Nonwht. win X Post                                 0.006                 0.001
                                                               (0.009)               (0.009)

             Panel B: Differential effects by neighborhood (tract) type
             Nonwht. win X Post                               -0.038*                 0.002
                                                              (0.021)                (0.018)
             Nonwht. win X Post                              0.078**                  0.000
               X Maj. nonwht. area                            (0.032)                (0.024)

             Geographic area                                    ZIP                Census tract
             Level of FEs                                     Election              Election
             ZIP controls                                        X
             Tract controls                                                             X

               Observations                                          1,541                  10,857
All specifications are restricted to elections between white and nonwhite candidates, decided by a margin of 5.88
percentage points or less. Table displays coefficients capturing causal impact of nonwhite candidate victory and
suppresses other coefficients (e.g., nonwhite margin of victory).
                             Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

        Policing was also a common focus of minority candidates. Because each municipality
typically has its own police force, there is scope for city council members to impact outcomes –
both by setting formal policy and through informal oversight. To assess impact on this dimension,
we draw on data from the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Uniform Crime Report. The data
report arrests aggregated to the city-by-year level, so we are unable to test for differential effects
by neighborhood. The data do, however, report arrests separately by race group, which we take
advantage of to test for differential effects by minority status. These results appear in Table 6.
        In Column 1, we take the log of arrests per capita as our outcome variable and find no
evidence of a change in overall arrest rates. Columns 2 and 3 take nonwhite and white arrest rates
as outcomes, respectively. The results are imprecisely estimated, but the direction of the
coefficients suggest a decrease in nonwhite arrests and an increase in white arrests. To allow for a



                                                                                                              34
direct test of differential (by minority status) effects, in Column 4, we take as an outcome the share
of total arrests where the arrested individual is nonwhite. Here, we find that election of a non-white
council member is associated with a statistically significant (p-value = .054) reduction in the
minority share of overall arrests. Thus, despite the lack of change in overall arrest rates, it appears
that the election of a nonwhite council member leads the composition of arrests to shift away from
nonwhite residents.



               Table 6: Effects of councilmember ethnicity on policing and crime
                                      (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
            Outcome variable:    Log of Arrests   Log of Nonwhite      Log of White      Nonwhite share
                                  per Capita        Arrest Rate         Arrest Rate         of arrests
                                                     (Nonwhite        (White arrests /     (Nonwhite
                                                      arrests /        White pop.)        arrests / All
                                                   Nonwhite pop.)                            arrests)
        Nonwht. win X                 -0.010            -0.042             0.054             -0.016*
         Post                        (0.048)           (0.052)            (0.054)            (0.008)

        Observations                      589                589                  589          589
All specifications are restricted to elections between white and nonwhite candidates, decided by a margin of 5.88
percentage points or less. Table displays coefficients capturing causal impact of nonwhite candidate victory and
suppresses other coefficients (e.g., nonwhite margin of victory).
                             Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


        We also have access to data on a broad range of city-wide budget statistics. While rich in
terms of spending and revenue categories, these statistics cannot generally be disaggregated in a
way that allows us to test for differential impacts by neighborhood (or, as with policing, minority
status). Nonetheless, in Appendix Table A7 we present results across a range of fiscal outcomes:
expenditures, revenues, spending on public goods, safety, transportation, etc. Across each of the
eight categories considered, the estimated effect of electing a nonwhite candidate is never
statistically significant. These null results are of interest for several reasons. First, they demonstrate
consistency with the larger literature on candidate identity and policymaking at the local level,
which has largely shown that candidate identity does not observably influence jurisdiction-wide
policy outcomes. Second, these results act as a placebo test, suggesting that the election of minority
council members is not correlated with some other broad re-alignment in local government.
Finally, they suggest that to the extent that changes in fiscal policy underlie our results, it must be




                                                                                                              35
through non-white candidates shifting spending away from white neighborhoods/residents and
towards nonwhite neighborhoods/residents.28


8    Conclusion


In this paper, we use data from California to study the impact of minority representation in local
government on outcomes for minority individuals and the neighborhoods in which they live. Our
basic empirical strategy is two-fold. First, we utilize fine-scale spatial variation in the evolution
of housing prices across minority and non-minority neighborhoods as a sufficient statistic for the
value of government policies to the residents of said neighborhoods. Second, we leverage the
outcomes of close elections between minority and non-minority candidates as a source of quasi-
random variation in treatment. We find that, relative to the election of a white candidate, election
of a non-white candidate serves to offset pre-existing gaps between minority and white
neighborhoods. Consistent with the assumptions underlying our basic hedonic approach, we find
that the largest effects occur in more segregated cities. Further, and in contrast to previous work
in this area, we can rule out important alternative explanations for our main conclusion including
correlations between the race of candidates and their partisan affiliations, and the racial and income
composition of neighborhoods.
        Additional analysis points to how these distributional shifts occur. We find that the impact
of an additional nonwhite candidate depends on the pre-existing composition of the council that
he or she enters. We observe the strongest effects when the nonwhite candidate is “pivotal,”
flipping the council to majority nonwhite; but, notably, we also find strong results for candidates
who are not the first nonwhite council-member but are also not “pivotal.” In contrast, the first
nonwhite candidate on council has no observable impact on housing prices, nor does a minority
candidate entering a council that is already majority nonwhite. This result suggests that in the
absence of a majority, a sub-majority critical mass of minority council-members can have a marked
impact on outcomes. In terms of specific channels of impact, we find that the election of a nonwhite




28
  In addition to aggregate revenue and spending categories, In Table A8 we explore the impact of electing a minority
council member on propensity to adopt revisions to city planning documents and in Table A9 we examine impacts on
aggregate building permit activity. In both cases, we find no evidence of any impact on these city-level measures.


                                                                                                                36
candidate increases business activity in majority nonwhite neighborhoods and leads to shifts in
arrest patterns away from nonwhite residents.


References
Albouy, D., Christensen, P., & Sarmiento-Barbieri, I. (2018). Unlocking amenities: Estimating
      public-good complementarity. National Bureau of Economic Research, No. w25107.
Ananat, E. O. (2011). The wrong side (s) of the tracks: The causal effects of racial segregation on
      urban poverty and inequality. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2), 34-
      66.
Ananat, E. O., & Washington, E. (2009). Segregation and Black political efficacy. Journal of
      Public Economics, 93(5-6), 807-822.
Aneja, A. P., & Avenancio-Leon, C. F. (2019). The effect of political power on labor market
       inequality: Evidence from the 1965 Voting Rights Act. Working Paper.
Banducci, S. A., Donovan, T., & Karp, J. A. (2004). Minority representation, empowerment, and
      participation. Journal of Politics, 66(2), 534-556.
Beach, B., & Jones, D. B. (2016). Business as usual: Politicians with business experience,
       government finances, and policy outcomes. Journal of Economic Behavior &
       Organization, 131, 292-307.
Beach, B., & Jones, D. B. (2017). Gridlock: Ethnic diversity in government and the provision of
       public goods. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(1), 112-136.
Besley, T. & Coate, S. (1997). An economic model of representative democracy. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 112(1):85-114
Bishop, K. C., & Murphy, A. D. (2011). Estimating the willingness to pay to avoid violent crime:
       A dynamic approach. American Economic Review, 101(3), 625-29.
Bishop, K. C., & Murphy, A. D. (2018). Valuing time-varying attributes using the hedonic model:
       When is a dynamic approach necessary? Review of Economics and Statistics.
Black, S. E. (1999). Do better schools matter? Parental valuation of elementary
      education. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 577-599.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., & Titiunik, R. (2014). Robust nonparametric confidence intervals
       for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82(6), 2295-2326.
Cascio, E. U., & Washington, E. (2013). Valuing the vote: The redistribution of voting rights and
       state funds following the voting rights act of 1965. Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 129(1), 379-433.
Caughey, D., & Sekhon, J. S. (2011). Elections and the regression discontinuity design: Lessons
      from close US house races, 1942–2008. Political Analysis, 19(4), 385-408.
Cellini, S. R., Ferreira, F., & Rothstein, J. (2010). The value of school facility investments:
        Evidence from a dynamic regression discontinuity design. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 125(1), 215-261.


                                                                                                37
Chay, K. Y., & Greenstone, M. (2005). Does air quality matter? Evidence from the housing
      market. Journal of Political Economy, 113(2), 376-424.
Constante, A. (2018) California’s Latinos and Asian Americans target city councils with district
      elections. NBC News https://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/california-s-latinos-
      asian-americans-target-city-councils-district-elections-n879376 accessed 8/2/19.
de Benedictis-Kessner, J., & Warshaw, C. (2016). Mayoral partisanship and municipal fiscal
      policy. Journal of Politics, 78(4), 1124-1138.
de Benedictis-Kessner, J., & Warshaw, C. (2018). Politics in forgotten governments: the partisan
      composition of county legislatures and county fiscal policies. Journal of Politics,
      Forthcoming.
Dixit, A., & Londregan, J. (1996). The determinants of success of special interests in redistributive
        politics. Journal of Politics, 58(4), 1132-1155.
Downs, A. (1957). An economic theory of political action in a democracy. Journal of Political
      Economy, 65(2), 135-150.
Ferreira, F., & Gyourko, J. (2009). Do political parties matter? Evidence from US cities. Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 124(1), 399-422.
Ferreira, F., & Gyourko, J. (2014). Does gender matter for political leadership? The case of US
        mayors. Journal of Public Economics, 112, 24-39.
Florido, A. (2009). How One Vote Changed Escondido's Immigration Equation. Voice of San
       Diego.
Glaeser, E. L., Ponzetto, G. A., & Shapiro, J. M. (2005). Strategic extremism: Why Republicans
       and Democrats divide on religious values. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4), 1283-
       1330.
Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, State of California (GOPR). (2001). A Citizen’s
      Guide to Planning
Grimmer, J., Hersh, E., Feinstein, B., & Carpenter, D. (2011). Are close elections
     random? Working Paper.
Grofman, B., Handley, L., & Niemi, R. G. (1992). Minority representation and the quest for voting
      equality. Cambridge University Press.
Grose, C. R. (2005). Disentangling constituency and legislator effects in legislative representation:
       Black legislators or black districts? Social Science Quarterly, 86(2), 427-443.
Hajnal, Z., & Trounstine, J. (2014a). What underlies urban politics? Race, class, ideology,
       partisanship, and the urban vote. Urban Affairs Review, 50(1), 63-99.
Hajnal, Z., & Trounstine, J. (2014b). Identifying and understanding perceived inequities in local
       politics. Political Research Quarterly, 67(1), 56-70.
Hopkins, D. J., & McCabe, K. T. (2012). After it’s too late: estimating the policy impacts of black
      mayoralties in US Cities. American Politics Research, 40(4), 665-700.
Hotelling, H. (1929). Stability in competition, The Economic Journal, 39(153), 41-57.



                                                                                                  38
Imbens, G., & Kalyanaraman, K. (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression
      discontinuity estimator. Review of Economic Studies, 79(3), 933-959.
Jenkins, L. (2008). A Chance to Make History in Escondido. San Diego Union-Tribune.
Kumamoto, A. & Smith, D. (2019) Sacramento NAACP president running for City Council, says
     she wants promises kept to Meadowview. The Sacramento Bee.
La Ferrara, E., & Mele, A. (2006). Racial segregation and public school expenditure. Working
       Paper.
Lau, A. (2008). Diaz Prevails to Become 1st Latino Councilmember. San Diego Union-Tribune.
Linden, L., & Rockoff, J. E. (2008). Estimates of the impact of crime risk on property values from
       Megan’s laws. American Economic Review, 98(3), 1103.
Logan, T. D. (2018). Do black politicians matter? National Bureau of Economic Research, No.
       w24190.
McCoy, M. (2004). 9 Council Candidates Debate Traffic, Housing. The Press Democrat (Santa
     Rosa, CA).
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design:
      A density test. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 698-714.
Mahadevan, M. (2019). The price of power: Costs of political corruption in Indian electricity.
      Working Paper
Mansbridge, J. (1999). Should blacks represent blacks and women represent women? A
      contingent" yes". Journal of Politics, 61(3), 628-657.
Marschall, M. J., & Ruhil, A. V. (2007). Substantive symbols: The attitudinal dimension of black
      political incorporation in local government. American Journal of Political Science, 51(1),
      17-33.
Nye, J. V., Rainer, I., & Stratmann, T. (2014). Do black mayors improve black relative to white
       employment outcomes? Evidence from large US cities. Journal of Law, Economics, &
       Organization, 31(2), 383-430.
Oates, W. E. (1969). The effects of property taxes and local public spending on property values:
       An empirical study of tax capitalization and the Tiebout hypothesis. Journal of Political
       Economy, 77(6), 957-971.
Osborne, M. J., & Slivinski, A. (1996). A model of political competition with citizen-
      candidates. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 65-96.
Pande, R. (2003). Can mandated political representation increase policy influence for
      disadvantaged minorities? Theory and evidence from India. American Economic
      Review, 93(4), 1132-1151.
Pierce, L. (2018). Lee Pierce Candidate Statement District 2. City of Santa Rosa.
       https://srcity.org/160/Lee-Pierce-Candidate-Statement-District-. Accessed 12 July 2019.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Shavell, S. (1976). Amenities and property values in a model of an
       urban area. Journal of Public Economics, 5.1-2: 119-129.



                                                                                               39
Rose, T. (2004). Challenger Unsettles Clayton Race – Council Incumbents Forced to Defend Spots
       Against Call for New Ideas. Contra Costa Times (Walnut Creek, CA).
Rosen, S. (1974). Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in pure competition.
       Journal of Political Economy, 82 (1): 34-55.
Sances, M. W., & You, H. Y. (2017). Who pays for government? Descriptive representation and
       exploitative revenue sources. Journal of Politics, 79(3), 1090-1094.
Shertzer, A., Twinam, T., and Walsh, R.P. (2018) Zoning and the economic geography of cities.
       Journal of Urban Economics 105: 20-39.
Sieg, H., Smith, V.K., Banzhaf, H.S., and Walsh, R. (2002) Interjurisdictional housing prices in
       locational equilibrium. Journal of Urban Economics 52(1): 131-153.
Sumner, J. L., Farris, E. M., & Holman, M. R. (2019). Crowdsourcing reliable local data. Political
      Analysis, forthcoming.
Trounstine, J. (2016). Segregation and inequality in public goods. American Journal of Political
       Science, 60(3), 709-725.
Turner, M. A., Haughwout, A., & Van Der Klaauw, W. (2014). Land use regulation and
       welfare. Econometrica, 82(4), 1341-1403.
Vogl, T. S. (2014). Race and the politics of close elections. Journal of Public Economics, 109,
       101-113.
Washington, E. (2012). Do majority-black districts limit blacks’ representation? The case of the
      1990 redistricting. Journal of Law and Economics, 55(2), 251-274.
Yut, S. (1995). Using candidate race to define minority-preferred candidates under Section 2 of
       the Voting Rights Act. University of Chicago Legal Forum, (Vol. 1995, No. 1, p. 22).




                                                                                                40
  Online Appendix for “Minority Representation in Local Government” by Brian Beach,
                    Daniel Jones, Tate Twinam, and Randall Walsh



1. Assessing the validity of our regression discontinuity design

Figure A1 examines whether, in close elections, nonwhite candidates have a distinct advantage or
disadvantage. If true, then we should be hesitant to interpret the outcome of a close election as
random. The results of Figure A1 suggest that, near the cutoff value, the number of nonwhite
winners is statistically indistinguishable from the number of white winners. This suggests that
neither group has a distinct advantage/disadvantage.

                                     Figure A1: McCrary density plot
                       10
                       8
                       6
                       4
                       2
                       0




                            -.6       -.4         -.2           0            .2        .4
                                                Nonwhite Margin of Victory

Note: The figure depicts the distribution of relevant elections around the cutoff that determines whether a white or
nonwhite candidate wins. The x-axis measures the nonwhite candidate’s margin of victory (nonwhite candidate vote
share minus white candidate vote share).

        Figures A2, A3, and A4 examine whether other city-level characteristics (A2), candidate
characteristics (A3), and housing characteristics (A4) are balanced at the cutoff. The only variable
where we can reject equality at the cutoff is partisan affiliation: nonwhite candidates are more
likely to be registered Democrats (and less likely to be registered Republicans). This finding
undermines about ability to disentangle whether our results are being driven by race or by partisan
affiliation. However, in a robustness check, we can help shut down this channel by restricting
attention to close elections where both marginal candidates belong to the same party. When we do
that, we find very similar results, suggesting that our results are being driven by race rather than
partisan affiliation.

                         Appendix Figure A2: Covariate balance tests: City characteristics
                                                                        (a) City population                              (b) White share of city pop.
                                                         296852




                                                                                                                                                      0.63
                                                         224999




                                                                                                                White share, city pop.
                                                                                                                                                      0.52
              City population
                                                         153146




                                                                                                                                                      0.41
                                                         81294




                                                                                                                                                      0.29
                                                         9441




                                                                                                                                                      0.18
                                                                  -.2       -.1          0            .1   .2                                                -.2   -.1          0            .1   .2
                                                                             Nonwhite margin of victory                                                             Nonwhite margin of victory


                                                            (c) City exp. in year (t-1)                                                                  (d) City rev. in year (t-1)
                                                                                                                                                      3317
              Total expenditures per capita (year t-1)




                                                                                                                Total revenue per capita (year t-1)
                                                         3079




                                                                                                                                                      2745
                                                         2557




                                                                                                                                                      2173
                                                         2035




                                                                                                                                                      1601
                                                         1513




                                                                                                                                                      1029
                                                         991




                                                                  -.2       -.1          0            .1   .2                                                -.2   -.1          0            .1   .2
                                                                             Nonwhite margin of victory                                                             Nonwhite margin of victory
                  Appendix Figure A3: Covariate balance tests: Candidate characteristics
                               (a) Female winner                                                                                        (b) Winner’s first term
                  0.6




                                                                                                                                 0.8
                  0.5




                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                           Winner's first term
Female winner
                  0.3




                                                                                                                                 0.4
                  0.1




                                                                                                                                 0.2
                  0.0




                                                                                                                                 0.0
                        -.2       -.1           0                                        .1           .2                               -.2        -.1          0            .1   .2
                                   Nonwhite margin of victory                                                                                      Nonwhite margin of victory


                              (c) Democrat winner                                                                                       (d) Republican winner
                  1.0




                                                                                                                                 0.8
                  0.8




                                                                                                                                 0.6
Democrat winner




                                                                                                           Mean of repub
                  0.6




                                                                                                                                 0.4
                  0.4




                                                                                                                                 0.2
                  0.2




                                                                                                                                 0.0




                        -.2       -.1           0                                        .1           .2                               -.2        -.1          0            .1   .2
                                   Nonwhite margin of victory                                                                                      Nonwhite margin of victory

                                                                                              (e) Turnout
                                                                            0.52
                                               Turnout (as share of pop.)
                                                                            0.41
                                                                            0.29
                                                                            0.18
                                                                            0.07




                                                                                   -.2        -.1           0                                .1           .2
                                                                                               Nonwhite margin of victory
                           Appendix Figure A4: Covariate balance tests: Housing characteristics
                                                                                    (a) Square footage




                                                                       2030
                                                                       1846
                                                      Square footage
                                                                       1663
                                                                       1480
                                                                       1296


                                                                              -.2         -.1          0                            .1           .2
                                                                                           Nonwhite margin of victory

                                      (b) # of bathrooms                                                                           (c) # of bedrooms


                                                                                                                       3.6
                          2.4




                                                                                                                       3.4
                          2.2
         # of bathrooms




                                                                                                       # of bedrooms
                                                                                                                       3.1
                          2.0




                                                                                                                       2.9
                          1.8
                          1.6




                                                                                                                       2.7




                                -.2      -.1          0                              .1           .2                         -.2         -.1          0            .1   .2
                                          Nonwhite margin of victory                                                                      Nonwhite margin of victory




2. Cross-sectional RD results

       2.1 Main results


Table A1 presents the results of our cross-sectional regression discontinuity approach, with
Columns 1 and 2 estimating equations (1) and (2) respectively within a 5.88 percentage point
bandwidth around the cutoff. For parsimony, we only report the coefficients that identify the causal
impact of a nonwhite victory on housing prices and suppress additional coefficients (e.g., margin
of victory). Column 1 reveals that housing prices increase by an imprecisely estimated 1.9 percent
in cities where the nonwhite candidate was elected. However, this estimate masks substantial
heterogeneity. Turning to Column 2 – where we allow for differential effects by neighborhood
type – we see that, relative to cities where a white candidate narrowly wins, the election of a
nonwhite candidate is associated with a 6.7 percentage point reduction in housing values in
majority white neighborhoods (based on the “Nonwht. winner” coefficient). Conversely, nonwhite
winners have a significantly positive differential effect on housing values in majority nonwhite
neighborhoods (based on the “Nonwht. winner X Maj. Nonwht. Neigh.” coefficient). Moreover,
this is a positive effect on houses in nonwhite neighborhoods overall: the linear combination of
the two coefficients suggests that nonwhite neighborhood housing values are roughly 6.7 percent
higher after a nonwhite candidate wins.


   Table A1: Cross-sectional RD estimates of councilmember ethnicity on housing values
                                                        (1)           (2)
            Nonwhite winner                            0.019       -0.067*
                                                      (0.023)      (0.037)

                 Nonwhite winner X                                                          0.134***
                   Nonwhite Neighborhood                                                     (0.048)

                 Linear combination to recover full effect on Nonwhite Neighborhood
                 Nonwhite winner + (Nonwhite                              0.067**
                    winner X Nonwhite Neighborhood)                        (0.027)

                 Observations                                              308,360           308,360
The outcome variable is an adjusted log house price, with house characteristics, neighborhood characteristics, and city
trends controlled for by residualizing those characteristics out in the full sample, as described in text. All specifications
are restricted to elections between white and nonwhite candidates that were decided within a 5.88 percentage point
margin. Table displays coefficient capturing causal impact of nonwhite candidate victory and suppresses other
coefficients (e.g., nonwhite margin of victory). Observations correspond to housing transactions that take place up to
two years after the relevant election takes place. “Nonwhite Neighborhood” is a dummy equal to 1 if the neighborhood
is at least 50% nonwhite.
                             Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


         Figure A5 presents the same pattern of results graphically. Each panel is a binned
scatterplot, where we plot average housing values (within bins in nonwhite margin) and fit two
lines through the resulting averages (one for negative nonwhite margins, implying that the
nonwhite candidate lost, and one for positive nonwhite margins, implying that the nonwhite
candidate won). Panel (a) includes all data in our estimation sample and, as with the regression
analysis, reveals no clear change in overall housing values as we move from narrow nonwhite
losses to narrow nonwhite wins. Panel (b) restricts the estimation sample to majority white
neighborhoods. Here, average housing values are lower just to the right of the cutoff, providing
additional evidence of the negative effect of a nonwhite candidate on housing values in white
neighborhoods. Similarly, Panel (c), which restricts the estimation sample to majority nonwhite
neighborhoods, suggests a positive effect of nonwhite victory on housing values.1

                                                      Figure A5: Effect of a nonwhite candidate victory on housing prices, cross-sectional
                                                                                         comparison (
                                                                                                                                        (a) Overall effect of nonwhite winner



                                                                                                                              0.12
                                                                                    Mean of residuals of adjusted log price
                                                                                                                              0.08
                                                                                                                              0.04
                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                              -0.04
                                                                                                                              -0.08
                                                                                                                              -0.12




                                                                                                                                      -.05                      0                                                             .05
                                                                                                                                              Nonwhite candidate's margin of victory


                                                       (b) Effect of nonwhite winner on majority white                                                                                                    (c) Effect of nonwhite winner on majority nonwhite
                                                                        neighborhoods                                                                                                                                       neighborhoods
                                              0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.12
    Mean of residuals of adjusted log price




                                                                                                                                                                Mean of residuals of adjusted log price
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.08
                                              0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.04
                                              -0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.04
                                              -0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.08
                                              -0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.12




                                                         -.05                       0                                                                .05
                                                                  Nonwhite candidate's margin of victory                                                                                                          -.05                     0                      .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nonwhite candidate's margin of victory


As in our cross-sectional regression analysis, the samples in these figures are restricted to cities where there was an
election between a white candidate and nonwhite candidate, and to housing transactions that occur within two years
following the relevant election. Panel (b) further restricts the sample to majority white neighborhoods, while Panel (c)
restricts the sample to majority nonwhite neighborhoods. The y-axis variable is the residual variation remaining in the
log adjusted housing price after controlling for housing characteristics, neighborhood characteristics, and city-specific
time trends. Each point on the figure captures the average outcome within a small range of the x-axis variable. When
nonwhite candidate’s margin of victory > 0, the nonwhite candidate has won.




1
  Note that Panel (c) is not directly comparable to the “Nonwhite winner X Nonwhite. Neighborhood” coefficient from
Table A1, Column 2. That coefficient captures the differential effect of a nonwhite win on nonwhite neighborhoods
(relative to the effect on white neighborhoods). The Figure captures the overall effect of a nonwhite win on nonwhite
neighborhoods. Figure 3(c) is therefore comparable to the linear combination “Nonwhite winner” + “Nonwhite winner
X Nonwhite Neighborhood” reported at the bottom of Table A1.
       Like the panel-based regression discontinuity results that follow, the cross-sectional RD
results are robust to adopting wider and narrower bandwidths. The basic pattern of results are also
quite similar if we collapse the data down to block group-level averages, and assess the data at the
block group-level, rather than the housing unit level. These results are available upon request.



3. Additional panel RD results
       Table A2 collapses our data to the neighborhood (block group)-by-council term level. That
is, rather than one observation per housing transaction, we have two observations per treated block
group, one in the pre-election period and one in the post-election period. We do so to demonstrate
that our results, and the precision of our estimates, are not artifacts of taking housing transactions
as the unit of observation. Specifically, we take the averages of adjusted log prices and all of our
controls at the neighborhood-by-pre/post period level. We then run our basic RD specification on
the collapsed dataset, with average prices as the outcome and average housing and neighborhood
characteristics as controls. The RD-relevant variables remain the same as in our main
specifications, as those variables are constant within a city. Column 2 differs from Column 1 in
that there we weight each observation by the number of transactions that occurred within that
neighborhood-time period pairing. This is for comparison with the main results, which are
implicitly weighted by the number of transactions. Finally, one key difference between these
specifications and our main specification in the text, beyond the level of aggregation, is that – with
only two periods – we cannot include city-specific trends in these specifications. These
specifications are, therefore, most directly comparable to Column 3 of Table 3. In Columns 1 and
2 we confirm our main finding: there is a positive differential effect on housing prices in majority
nonwhite neighborhoods. The magnitude of the results differ across the two specifications. The
estimates in Column 2, not surprisingly, are very close to those reported in Column 3, Table 3 in
the main text. Column 1 differs, as each block group receives equal weight. There, the positive
differential effect on nonwhite neighborhoods is smaller, but there is no negative effect on white
neighborhoods. Thus, the overall effect on nonwhite neighborhoods is similar to and in fact
somewhat larger than in Column 2.
       Table A3 takes number of transactions as the outcome variable to help rule out that our
results are picking up some underlying neighborhood turnover.
                          Table A2: Panel-based RD, aggregated to block-level
                                                                              (1)                (2)
                 Nonwhite winner                                             0.004             -0.067
                                                                            (0.042)           (0.044)
                 Nonwhite winner X                                          0.093*           0.153***
                   Nonwhite Neighborhood                                    (0.049)           (0.056)

                      Linear combination to recover full effect on Nonwhite Neighborhood
                 Nonwhite winner + (Nonwhite                         0.097**         0.086*
                   winner X Nonwhite Neighborhood)

                 Outcome                                                   Nbd-by-time period level
                                                                         average of adjusted log house
                                                                                     price
                 Add’l controls                                           Neighborhood-averages of
                                                                            housing characteristics,
                                                                         neighborhood characteristics
                 Weighting by # of transactions?                             No                Yes

                  Observations                                                18,374           18,374
The outcome variable is an adjusted log house price, with house characteristics, neighborhood characteristics, and city
trends controlled for by residualizing those characteristics out in the full sample, as described in text. All specifications
are restricted to elections between white and nonwhite candidates that were decided within a 5.88 percentage point
margin. Table displays coefficient capturing causal impact of nonwhite candidate victory and suppresses other
coefficients (e.g., nonwhite margin of victory). Observations correspond to housing transactions that take place up to
two years after the relevant election takes place. “Nonwhite Neighborhood” is a dummy equal to 1 if the neighborhood
is at least 50% nonwhite.
                             Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
         Appendix Table A3: Impact on residential property transaction sales volume
                                                       (1)                (2)               (3)
                                                  Sales volume      Sales volume      Any sales (=1 if
                                                                    per 1,000 pop.        yes, 0
                                                                                        otherwise)
                          Mean of dep. var.:           1.68              3.40              0.59
             Panel A: Overall effects
             Nonwht. win X Post                       -0.055             0.042             -0.005
                                                     (0.192)            (0.386)           (0.025)

             Panel B: Differential effects by neighborhood type
             Nonwht. win X Post                      -0.054              -0.071            -0.022
                                                    (0.201)             (0.388)           (0.024)
             Nonwht. win X Post                       0.028               0.258             0.032
               X Nonwht. Neigh.                     (0.226)             (0.417)           (0.027)

             Level of FEs                            Election          Election          Election
             Neighborhood controls                      X                 X                 X


              Observations                            370,259             370,130           370,259
The sample consists of neighborhood-by-month level counts of residential property transactions. The outcome variable
in Column 1 is the number of transaction. In Column 2, the outcome variable is the number of transactions per 1,000
in the neighborhood population. In Column 3, the outcome variable is an indicator variable equal to one if any
transactions occurred in that neighborhood-month combination. All specifications are restricted to elections between
white and nonwhite candidates, decided by a margin of 5.88 percentage points or less. Table displays coefficients
capturing causal impact of nonwhite candidate victory and suppresses other coefficients (e.g., nonwhite margin of
victory).
                            Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




4. Race/Ethnicity-Specific Results

This section reports race/ethnic-group specific effects. Figure A6 documents the simplest
departure from our main analysis. There, we assess how Black, Hispanic, and East Asian/Pac.
Islander differentially impact majority nonwhite neighborhoods. The far-left panel reproduces our
main result for the sake of comparison. In the remaining panels, we report coefficients from a
slightly modified specification. Specifically, we replace the “Nonwhite winner” indicator with a
vector of dummy variables indicating that a Black candidate won, a Hispanic candidate won, or an
East Asian/Pac. Islander candidate won. Otherwise, the specification is identical. In particular, the
sample is still restricted to narrow elections between White and Nonwhite candidates, so each of
the resulting coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of a Black candidate (or Hispanic, or
Asian) winning relative to a White candidate. As in our main analysis, we plot the impacts of each
of these types of candidates on housing transactions in majority White neighborhoods (“[group]
win”, represented by the White bar) and the differential impacts of each type of candidate on
majority nonwhite neighborhoods (“[group] win X Nonwht. BG”, gray bar).


  Figure A6: Estimated impacts of winners from specific race/ethnic groups on White and
                                nonwhite neighborhoods
                 Any nonwhite
                 winner (Main                                                       Asian/Pac. Isl.
                    result)             Black winner         Hispanic winner           Winner
      0.35
       0.3
      0.25
       0.2
      0.15
       0.1
      0.05
         0
     -0.05
      -0.1
     -0.15
                               [group] win        [group] win X Nonwht. Nbd.
Figure notes: This figure reports coefficients from two regressions. The far-left panel (“Any nonwhite
winner”) reproduces our main result for the sake of comparison. The remaining three panels (“Black
winner”, etc.) report results from a specification that modifies our main specification. We replace the
“Nonwhite win” indicator with a vector of indicator variables equal to one if a Black candidate, Hispanic
candidate, or Asian/Pac. Islander candidate won, respectively. As in the main specification, we are restricted
to a sample of elections between White and nonwhite candidates, so the omitted comparison category are
the cases where the White candidate won. 90% CIs depicted.


        Notably, the impact of Hispanic candidate victories are very similar to our main result.
This makes sense since Hispanic candidates represent the largest share of nonwhite candidates in
our sample. We also find, however, that Black candidates have a clear positive differential impact
on nonwhite neighborhoods, despite the much smaller number of Black candidates in our sample.
The point estimate for the effect of black candidates on white neighborhoods is also positive, unlike
our main result, but the confidence interval is extremely large. Finally, the estimated impacts of
Asian/Pacific Islander candidates are sufficiently imprecise that we hesitate to attempt to interpret
them. This too is not surprising; the share of East Asian/Pacific Islander candidates is also quite
small. In short, this figure suggests that there is clear evidence that our main result – nonwhite
candidates have a differentially positive impact on nonwhite neighborhoods – is driven both by
Black and Hispanic candidates, despite the fact that Hispanic candidates represent the largest share
of nonwhite candidates in our main analysis.
         It is also worth considering how different types of candidates differentially impact
neighborhoods heavily populated by residents from their own race/ethnic group. Tables A4-A6
aim to do just that. Table A4 restricts the sample to elections between White candidates and
Hispanic candidates, while A5 and A6 make similar restrictions for White vs Black and White vs
Asian elections, respectively. In these tables, rather than interacting “[group] winner” with a
dummy indicating that a housing transaction takes place in a majority nonwhite neighborhood, we
interact the “[group] winner” dummy with various measures that capture more specific race/ethnic
group composition within the neighborhood. For instance, in Column 1 of Table A4, we interact
“Hispanic winner” with a continuous measure of the share of the population in the relevant
neighborhood that is Hispanic. In Column 2 we interact “Hispanic winner” with a dummy
indicating that Hispanics are the modal group within the relevant neighborhood.2 We do the same
for Black and Asian in Columns 1 and 2 of Tables A5 and A6. For all three tables, Columns 3 and
4 test how candidates impact neighborhoods that represent their own group, but also how they
impact other neighborhoods where some other nonwhite group has a large presence. Specifically,
Column 3 extends the specification from Column 1. Rather than only interacting “[group] winner”
with “[group] share of population in the neighborhood”, we also include interact “[group] winner”
with “other nonwhite groups’ share of population in the neighborhood”. For example, in Table A4,
“Hispanic winner” is interacted with “Hispanic share” and “share of the population that is
nonwhite and Non-Hispanic”. Column 4 extends the specification from Column 2, including
dummies indicating whether the modal group in the neighborhood is Hispanic, Asian, or Black,
regardless of the race of the candidate.




2
  Note that we use a dummy indicating which group is modal, rather than which group is in the majority. This is for
two reasons: (1) when we based our analysis around whether a neighborhood was majority nonwhite, by definition a
majority had to either be majority white or nonwhite, so the comparison group was clear. A neighborhood that is not
majority Hispanic does not necessarily imply that some other group represents more than 50% of the population.
Defining neighborhoods based on the modal group on the other hand allows for mutually exclusive categories; a
neighborhood where Hispanic is not the modal group is modal in some other group. (2) The share of neighborhoods
that are majority Hispanic, Black, or Asian is extremely small. For instance, less than 1% of observations in our sample
are in majority Black neighborhoods. The less restrictive “modal” requirement increases the number of neighborhoods
that we can identify differential effects from.
       Results in all three tables are imprecisely estimated, which – for the reasons described at
the beginning of this appendix – is not surprising. For instance, as noted in Table A5, once we
focus only on elections between Black and White candidates, we are identifying effects from just
32 unique elections. Similarly, there are not many neighborhoods where the modal group is
Hispanic, Black, or Asian (especially for the latter two groups), which motivates the increased
emphasis on the continuous population share in these tables. Despite the loss in precision, the
results of the three tables broadly reveal that group-specific effects are consistent with our main
results. They also reveal that – especially for Black and Hispanic candidates – nonwhite candidates
from particular groups tend to have an impact on all types of nonwhite neighborhoods. This helps
to justify our simpler focus on just nonwhite vs. white neighborhoods in the main analysis.
                          Table A4: Restricting to White vs Hispanic elections
                                                  (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
   VARIABLES                                  Adjusted Log       Adjusted Log       Adjusted Log       Adjusted Log
                                                 Price              Price              Price              Price

   Hisp. Win X Post                                -0.004             0.012             -0.094             0.003
                                                  (0.055)            (0.035)           (0.077)            (0.040)
   Hisp. Win X Post X Share Hisp.                   0.076                                0.136
                                                  (0.117)                              (0.123)
   Hisp. Win X Post                                                   0.030                                0.039
      X (Modal Neigh. Group = Hisp.)                                 (0.050)                              (0.054)
   Hisp. Win X Post                                                                    0.363**
      X Share other nonwht.                                                            (0.141)
   Hisp. Win X Post                                                                                        0.061
      X (Modal Neigh. Group = Asian)                                                                      (0.057)
   Hisp. Win X Post                                                                                      0.752***
      X (Modal Neigh. Group = Black)                                                                      (0.178)

    Observations                                                              364,700
    Unique elections                                                             117
General notes: The outcome variable is an adjusted log house price, with house characteristics, neighborhood
characteristics, and city trends controlled for by residualizing those characteristics out in the full sample, as described
in text. All specifications are restricted to elections decided by a margin of 5.88 percentage points or less. Table
displays coefficients capturing causal impact of nonwhite candidate victory and suppresses other coefficients (e.g.,
nonwhite margin of victory).
Table-specific notes: All specification restricted to elections between White and Hispanic candidates. “Share Hisp.”
captures the share of the local neighborhood population that is Hispanic for a given a housing transaction. “Share other
nonwht.” captures the share of the local neighborhood population that is nonwhite and non-Hispanic. “Modal Neigh.
Group = X” equals one if the largest group in the local neighborhood is X.
                              Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                           Table A5: Restricting to White vs Black elections
                                                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
   VARIABLES                                Adjusted Log      Adjusted Log      Adjusted Log      Adjusted Log
                                               Price             Price             Price             Price

   Black Win X Post                             0.036             0.087             -0.107            0.055
                                               (0.070)           (0.069)           (0.094)           (0.063)
   Black Win X Post X Share Black               0.173                                0.807
                                               (0.547)                             (0.743)
   Black Win X Post                                               0.049                               0.058
      X (Modal Neigh. Group = Black)                             (0.033)                             (0.281)
   Black Win X Post                                                                 0.210
      X Share other nonwht.                                                        (0.255)
   Black Win X Post                                                                                 0.224***
      X (Modal Neigh. Group = Hisp.)                                                                 (0.064)
   Black Win X Post                                                                                   0.028
      X (Modal Neigh. Group = Asian)                                                                 (0.065)

    Observations                                                            140,341
    Unique elections                                                           32
General notes: See Table A4 notes. Table-specific notes: All specification restricted to elections between Black and
Hispanic candidates. “Share Black” captures the share of the local neighborhood population that is Black for a given
a housing transaction. “Share other nonwht.” captures the share of the local neighborhood population that is nonwhite
and non-Black. “Modal Neigh. Group = X” equals one if the largest group in the local neighborhood is X.
                            Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                           Table A6: Restricting to White vs Asian elections
                                                (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
   VARIABLES                                Adjusted Log       Adjusted Log      Adjusted Log      Adjusted Log
                                               Price              Price             Price             Price

   Asian Win X Post                            -0.080*             -0.043            0.036             -0.010
                                               (0.040)            (0.029)           (0.111)           (0.039)
   Asian Win X Post X Share Asian              0.308**                               0.225
                                               (0.127)                              (0.171)
   Asian Win X Post                                              0.170***                             0.138**
     X (Modal Neigh. Group = Asian)                               (0.051)                             (0.065)
   Asian Win X Post                                                                  -0.311
     X Share other nonwht.                                                          (0.229)
   Asian Win X Post                                                                                    -0.095
     X (Modal Neigh. Group = Hisp.)                                                                   (0.095)
   Asian Win X Post                                                                                   omitted
     X (Modal Neigh. Group = Black)                                                                      (-)

    Observations                                                              66,645
    Unique elections                                                            38
General notes: See Table A4 notes. Table-specific notes: All specification restricted to elections between White and
East Asian/Pacific Islander candidates. “Share Asian” captures the share of the local neighborhood population that is
Asian for a given a housing transaction. “Share other nonwht.” captures the share of the local neighborhood population
that is nonwhite and non-Asian. “Modal Neigh. Group = X” equals one if the largest group in the local neighborhood
is X. Note that in Column 4 “Asian Win X Post X Modal Neigh. Group =Black” is omitted. There are no observations
of neighborhoods where the modal group is Black within the set of observations the restricted to (narrow elections,
etc.).
                             Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
5. Evidence from outside of the housing market
This section considers the impact of increased nonwhite representation on a variety of non-housing
outcomes. The main text reports results that consider a broader set of non-housing outcomes that
could reasonably be expected to reflect underlying council activities/policies. In this appendix, we
turn to direct measures of city government activity and policy. All results reported in this section
employ the panel-based regression discontinuity design used elsewhere in the paper, with all
specifications estimated with a bandwidth of 5.88 for consistency with our main results. Unless
otherwise noted, the outcomes in this section are measured on an annual basis.


5.1 Evidence on city policy


We next report results on outcomes that directly reveal actions taken by the city government. These
data are measured only at a city-wide level, and so we are unable to test for differential targeting
of policies towards particular groups or areas within the city. Nevertheless, the results do offer
some further insight on how minority councilmembers may affect policy.
         Table A7 assesses whether the election of a nonwhite candidate impacts a city’s
expenditures or revenues. We draw on data from California Cities’ Annual Financial Transaction
Reports. All outcomes are real dollar amounts (taking 2010 as a base year), measured on a per
capita basis, and logged. The table shows that the election of a nonwhite council member has no
identifiable impact on overall expenditure or revenue, nor on specific categories of expenditures
(general government administration, salaries, public goods3, public safety, transportation, or
community development).
         Table A8 tests whether the election of a nonwhite candidate leads a city to adopt new
ordinances through updates to their General Plans, which dictate cities’ policies on issues like land
use, housing, noise, etc. These results, which draw on data from California’s Annual Planning
Survey give no clear indication that the election of a nonwhite councilperson generates a change
on this front. Next, in Appendix Table A9 we draw on building permits data to tests whether the



3
  “Public goods” is measured as the combination of spending on public safety, transportation, community
development, health, culture, and leisure. The measure therefore includes a large bulk of cities’ total expenditures,
excluding debt servicing and internal costs (government salaries, etc.).
election of a nonwhite candidate impacts the number (or valuation) of building permits for
residential properties and find no clear change.4




             Table A7: Effect of councilmember ethnicity on city financial activity
                               (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)
                Outcome       Total      Total Revenue General Gov’t      Salaries &
                variable: Expenditures                  Expenditures        Wages
         Nonwhite             0.003          -0.069         -0.170           -0.032
         winner              (0.043)        (0.045)        (0.105)          (0.037)
                               (5)             (6)            (7)              (8)
         Outcome          Public goods Public safety Transportation Community
         variable:        Expenditures Expenditures Expenditures Development
                                                                         Expenditures
         Nonwhite             0.007          -0.018         -0.042           -0.036
         winner              (0.049)        (0.029)        (0.087)          (0.118)
         Observations                                636
“Nonwhite winner” in the table refers to the interaction between the nonwhite winner indicator and the “post-election”
indicator. That is, the reported coefficients identify the differential effect of a nonwhite winner after the election
(relative to outcomes in the same city before the election). All specifications use the optimally selected bandwidth.
                             Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                Appendix Table A8: Likelihood of adopting a revision to City Plans
                                        (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)
           Outcome variable: Planning change: Planning change: Planning change: Planning change:
                                Any (=1 if so, 0        Land use            Circulation           Housing
                                  otherwise)
          Nonwhite winner            -0.041               0.004                 -0.024             -0.047
                                    (0.119)              (0.082)               (0.083)            (0.111)
                                       (5)                  (6)                   (7)                (8)
          Outcome variable: Planning change: Planning change: Planning change: Planning change:
                                  Open space          Conservation              Safety             Noise
          Nonwhite winner             0.040               0.024                  0.025              0.032
                                    (0.071)              (0.069)               (0.067)            (0.074)
          Observations                                                741
“Nonwhite winner” in the table refers to the interaction between the nonwhite winner indicator and the “post-election”
indicator. That is, the reported coefficients identify the differential effect of a nonwhite winner after the election
(relative to outcomes in the same city before the election). All specifications use the optimally selected bandwidth.
                             Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


4
  We have also tested whether the election of a nonwhite candidate impacts the number of building permits approved
for non-residential buildings and find no effect there either. In both cases, we are limited to city-level counts of permits.
Thus, as is suggested by our business patterns data, we may well be missing changes in the spatial distributions of
permit activity.
                Appendix Table A9: Impact on residential building permit activity
                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)
         Outcome variable:      Single Family          Multi Family        Single Family       Multi Family
                                Unit Building         Unit Building      Permit Valuation Permit Valuation
                               Permits (per 10k     Permits (per 10k         per capita          per capita
                                    in pop)               in pop)
          Nonwhite winner            7.524                 5.326              211.154              90.682
                                   (12.828)              (6.667)             (229.426)           (124.428)
          Observations                                                634
“Nonwhite winner” in the table refers to the interaction between the nonwhite winner indicator and the “post-election”
indicator. That is, the reported coefficients identify the differential effect of a nonwhite winner after the election
(relative to outcomes in the same city before the election). All specifications use the optimally selected bandwidth.
                             Robust standard errors (clustered at city-level) in parentheses
                                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
6. Other tables/figures



Figure A7: Number of housing transactions and elections within a variety of bandwidths of
                              nonwhite margin of victory
                                     1,200,000                                                                          300
                                     1,100,000                                                                          275
                                     1,000,000                                                                          250
                                      900,000                                                                           225
              Housing transactions




                                      800,000                                                                           200
                                      700,000                                                                           175




                                                                                                                              Elections
                                      600,000                                                                           150
                                      500,000                                                                           125
                                      400,000                                                                           100
                                      300,000                                                                           75
                                      200,000                                                                           50
                                      100,000                                                                           25
                                            0                                                                           0
                                                 0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06   0.07 0.08    0.09     0.1   0.11   0.12
                                                                             Bandwidth

                                                   Number of housing transactions            Number of elections

Note: The figure plots the number of housing transactions (solid black line, left vertical axis) and the number of unique
elections (dotted gray line, right vertical axis) within each bandwidth between 0.03 and 0.12.

Table A10: Impact of Non White Win on Evictions

                                                                        (1)               (2)                (3)                  (4)
 VARIABLES                                                         Eviction Rate     Eviction Rate       Any Eviction         Any Eviction

 Nonwht. win X Post                                                    -0.001             -0.001            0.044                           0.057
                                                                      (0.002)            (0.003)           (0.043)                        (0.057)
 Nonwht. win X Post X Nonwht. Neigh.                                                       0.001                                           -0.020
                                                                                         (0.003)                                          (0.050)

 Observations                                                         23,086             23,086             23,087                        23,087
                                                 Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered at city-level)
                                                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
