                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INEQUALITY IN THE JOINT DISTRIBUTION OF CONSUMPTION AND TIME
                                    USE

                                         Jeehoon Han
                                        Bruce D. Meyer
                                       James X. Sullivan

                                      Working Paper 25199
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25199


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2018




Earlier versions of the paper were titled “Economic Well-Being and Time Use.” We would like to
thank Grace Finley, Lorenz Kueng and Daniel Reck for helpful comments, Erik Hurst and Justin
Wolfers for helpful discussions on an earlier version of this paper, and Janna Johnson, Nikolas
Mittag, and Kevin Rinz for excellent research assistance. We also thank the Russell Sage, Alfred
P. Sloan, and Charles Koch Foundations for their support, and seminar participants at George
Washington University, the University of Notre Dame, and the Society of Labor Economists
Annual Meeting for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jeehoon Han, Bruce D. Meyer, and James X. Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inequality in the Joint Distribution of Consumption and Time Use
Jeehoon Han, Bruce D. Meyer, and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 25199
October 2018
JEL No. D63,I3,J22

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines inequality in both leisure and consumption over the past four decades using
time use surveys stretching from 1975 to 2016. We show that individual and family
characteristics, especially when including work hours, explain most of the long run variation in
leisure. We then use these characteristics to predict the distribution of leisure in the Consumer
Expenditure Survey, a survey that also provides detailed information on consumption. The
advantage of this approach is that it gives us measures of consumption and leisure at the family
level within a single data source. We find that leisure time is highest for families at the bottom of
the consumption distribution, and typically declines monotonically as consumption rises.
However, the consumption-leisure gradient is small. We find noticeable differences across family
types, with the gradient being largest for single parent families and single individuals and
smallest for families with a head age 65 or older. Overall, these results indicate that including
both leisure and consumption, as opposed to just consumption, in a measure of economic well-
being will result in less inequality. However, because the consumption-leisure gradient is not very
steep, the dampening effect of leisure on overall inequality is small.

Jeehoon Han                                       James X. Sullivan
University of Chicago                             Department of Economics
1155 E 60th Street                                3108 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
Chicago, Illi 60637                               University of Notre Dame
United States                                     Notre Dame, IN 46556
jeehoon@uchicago.edu                              James.X.Sullivan.197@nd.edu

Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

         There is a growing national debate in the U.S. on trends in the distribution of
economic well-being. This debate and most analyses of economic well-being rely almost
exclusively on wage or income data. The official measure of poverty in the U.S. is based
on pre-tax money income, and much of the discussion of economic inequality in the U.S.
concentrates on income inequality. Income is an important indicator of economic well-
being as it reflects the resources available for consumption. Though measures of income
are readily available from many data sources, recent studies have emphasized that
consumption is a better measure of well-being than income, and a growing number of
studies have examined trends in economic well-being using consumption.1
         Economic well-being, however, depends on the consumption of not just goods
and services, but also the consumption of time. Time spent in leisure activities has risen
in recent decades as has leisure inequality (Robinson and Godbey, 1999; Aguiar and
Hurst, 2007; Ramey, 2007). Leisure has increased more for low-educated individuals
than for the high educated, particularly between 1965 and 1975, suggesting that changes
in leisure might counterbalance other changes economic inequality (Aguiar and Hurst,
2007). However, it is not clear if the amount of leisure, or its growth over time, is greatest
for families with low consumption (in which case inequality of consumption would
overstate the dispersion of economic well-being) or families with high consumption (in
which case inequality of consumption would understate overall dispersion in economic
well-being).
         Understanding the joint distribution of consumption and leisure is particularly
important when analyzing trends in well-being over time given major policy initiatives
that are explicitly designed, in part, to reduce leisure time, such as welfare reform
(Moffitt 2006) or, more recently, efforts to expand work requirements for other federal
programs such as SNAP and Medicaid.2



1
  See Cutler and Katz 1991; Slesnick 2001; Krueger and Perri 2006; Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura
2006; Fisher et al. (2015); Aguiar and Bils (2015); Meyer and Sullivan (2003, 2008, 2011, 2017).
2
  There is also a view that leisure is not necessarily a good thing from a social perspective and that able-
bodied non-aged adults should be encouraged to work. See Haskins (2006),
https://www.heritage.org/press/heritage-expert-urges-broader-work-requirements-welfare-system, and
Council of Economic Advisers (2018).


                                                       1
           This paper provides a more comprehensive picture of inequality in economic
well-being in the U.S. and how this inequality has changed over time by combining
information on consumption and leisure for the same families. The primary impediment
to conducting this more comprehensive analysis is that measures of leisure and
consumption are not typically available in the same data source. We overcome this
impediment by imputing leisure time in the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE). Using
time diaries spanning four decades, we estimate the relationship between leisure and
other observable characteristics that are also available in the CE, including individual
level characteristics such as the work hours, age, education, and marital status, and family
level characteristics including family size and composition. We then use these estimates
to predict the distribution of leisure for each adult in the CE. We show that these
characteristics, especially when including work hours, explain most of the long run
variation in leisure.
           An important aspect of estimating the leisure distribution is that time use diaries
capture leisure time for a single day, while we would like to have an accurate prediction
of leisure over a long period. Ideally, the time interval for leisure would be the same as
the time interval for consumption. Because the reference period for our consumption
measures is a quarter, we use data on daily leisure to predict leisure over a longer period.
Specifically, we model leisure as having permanent and transitory components, where the
permanent component is average leisure over a long period while the transitory
component reflects day-to-day variation around this long-run average. This approach is
comparable to the way researchers have frequently modeled income (e.g. Friedman
1957). We find that our prediction equations capture the vast majority of the long-term
differences in leisure across individuals.
           Using this approach, we predict leisure for all adults in the CE for years when
information from time use surveys is available between 1972-1973 and 2016. Having a
measure of leisure for all adults in the CE has the added advantage that we can aggregate
leisure up to the family level. Time use surveys typically only provide leisure time
information for a single individual in the family. Thus, past work on time use has
examined individuals, even though 84 percent of people live in families. 3 Individuals in

3
    Based on author’s calculations for our main CE sample of adults in 2016.


                                                      2
families typically share resources including time, but often do not consume the same
amount of leisure. It is often optimal to specialize instead of share equally, and
complicated forms of compensation can and do occur within the family. In such a
situation, looking at inequality in individual leisure provides an inaccurate view of the
distribution of well-being.
       We find modest increases in family level leisure between 1975 and 2016, with
much of the rise occurring between 1985 and 2003. The rise in real consumption is much
more pronounced than the rise in leisure. Between 1972-1973 and 2016, average family
consumption grew by 75 percent, while leisure grew by 2 percent. Looking at the
univariate distributions of leisure and consumption, we show that at the family level,
consumption is considerably more dispersed than leisure. In 2016 a family at the 90th
percentile of the consumption distribution consumed 3.4 times more than a family at the
10th percentile, while a family at the 90th percentile of leisure spent about a third more
time on leisure than a family at the 10th percentile.
       Our results also show only a modest rise in consumption and leisure inequality
over the past four decades. The 90/10 ratio for consumption rose by only 2 percent
between 1972-1973 and 2016, although it rose (by 7 percent) between 1972-1973 and
2003, but then fell between 2003 and 2016. The 90/10 ratio for leisure rose by only 3
percent over the past four decades, but leisure inequality fell between 1972-1973 and
1985, and then rose between 1985 and 2016. We see a greater rise in inequality for
narrower measures of leisure.
       Looking at leisure and consumption together for the same families, we find a
weak negative relationship that differs across family types and over time. Leisure time is
highest for families at the bottom of the consumption distribution, and typically declines
monotonically as consumption rises. However, the consumption-leisure gradient is
small—in 2016, families in the bottom consumption decile spent only 1 more hour (about
1 percent) per adult per week in leisure than families in the ninth decile, and leisure in the
top consumption decile was about the same as that for the bottom decile. We also find
that non-market time is negatively correlated with consumption, and the magnitude of
this negative relationship is much larger in absolute value than that between leisure and
consumption.



                                              3
         We find noticeable differences in the leisure-consumption gradient across family
types, with the gradient typically being largest for single parent families and single
individuals and smallest for families with a head age 65 or older. Overall, these results
suggest that accounting for both leisure and consumption, as opposed to just
consumption, in a measure of economic well-being will result in less measured
inequality. However, because the consumption-leisure gradient is not very steep, the
dampening effect of leisure on overall inequality is likely to be small. The bivariate
relationship between consumption and leisure has changed somewhat over time. The
negative relationship peaked in the period around the Great Recession, but then fell so
that the leisure-consumption gradient was flatter in 2016 than in 1972-1973. In the period
surrounding welfare reform, the bivariate relationship weakened for single parent
families, while it moved in the opposite direction for all other family types. This pattern
is consistent with welfare reform’s emphasis on market work by those with the fewest
resources.


II. Data


Time Use Surveys
         Our analyses rely on time use data from nationally representative surveys
spanning 41 years: the 1975-1976 Time Use in Economics and Social Accounts; the 1985
Americans’ Use of Time; and the 2003-2016 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS).4 All
are diary surveys that collect detailed information on how individuals allocate their time
for a single day.5 The 1975-1976 survey includes limited information on the time use of
the spouse for married individuals, but we do not include these spouses in our sample.6

4
  For time use surveys prior to 2003, we use the American Heritage Time Use Study, a harmonized version
of these data (Fisher and Gershuny, 2015). For 2003-2016, we access ATUS data though IPUMS
(https://www.ipums.org/timeuse.shtml). Time use data are also available from the 1965–1966 America’s
Use of Time and the 1992-1994 National Time Use Survey. However, the years we employ are more
comparable over time and to the CE. For example, the CE was not administered in the mid-1960s and the
1992-1994 National Time Use Survey does not include information on marital status, which is important
for predicting leisure.
5
  Many more activity categories are available in the ATUS than in the earlier time use surveys. We follow
the aggregate categories defined by the American Heritage Time Use Study (AHTUS), which are
constructed to be consistent across years (Fisher and Gershuny, 2015).
6
  This survey also interviews individuals repeatedly, but due to high attrition rates we restrict our sample to
first interviews for each individual.


                                                       4
Each of the time use samples is nationally representative of individuals 18 and over with
some minor exceptions.7 All analyses reported below are weighted using survey weights.
These weights are adjusted so that each day of the week and each survey year is
represented equally. We also adjust these weights to hold the demographic composition
of the sample constant. Specifically, we first combine the surveys in 1975, 1985, 2003,
and 2016, and divide the sample into 27 demographic cells defined by three variables:
age (18-39, 40-64, 65 or above), education (H.S. dropout, H.S. degree or some college,
College degree or above), and family type (elderly person, non-elderly married person
with/without child, non-elderly unmarried person with/without child). We define these
cells broadly enough to ensure that there are no empty cells in any of the survey years.
We then use the percent of population in each of the 27 demographic cells as our fixed
demographic weights when calculating results.
        We impose a few restrictions on the observations included to construct our
analysis samples. First, the 1985 survey only includes individuals 18 and older, so we
exclude individuals under 18 from the other surveys. We are also primarily interested in
the time use of adults, so we would likely make this restriction in any case. Second, we
exclude observations that have missing values for some of the key observable
characteristics used to predict leisure. As shown in Appendix Table 1, this restriction
drops less than 5 percent of the sample in all years except in 1985 where 5.5 percent are
dropped. Finally, we drop observations with low-quality diaries, which includes those
that have 8 or more missing hours in a day and those that have no or just 1 basic activity
(i.e. eating, sleeping, personal care, and travel/sports/exercise), and those that report less
than 7 different activities in total.8 This restriction typically excludes less than 2% of the
sample. See Appendix Table 1 for additional information on how these restrictions affect
our analysis sample in each year.




7
  The 1975 survey excludes individuals living on military bases. The 1985 sample is representative of
adults living in households with at least one telephone. See Appendix Table 1 for more details on the
samples.
8
  We apply this definition of low-quality diaries for the ATUS surveys (2003-2016), but for 1975 and 1985,
we use the designation of low-quality diaries from Fisher and Gershuny (2015), which is similar.


                                                    5
The Consumer Expenditure Survey
         Our consumption data come from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE), which
is the most comprehensive source of consumption data in the U.S. We use the Interview
component of the CE for the years closest to those for which we have time use data:
1972-1973, 1985, and 2003-2016. Expenditure data are reported at the level of the
consumer unit, which is defined as either a group of individuals who are related by blood
or marriage, a single or financially independent individual, or two or more persons who
share resources.9 After an initial interview that does not provide publicly available data,
consumer units are interviewed on a quarterly basis for up to four quarters, but we treat
each quarterly survey as a separate observation.10 We conduct analyses using CE data at
both the individual and family level. As in the time use data, we restrict our sample to
individuals 18 and older.11 All analyses reported below are weighted using survey
weights.


Comparing Demographic Characteristics across Surveys
         In the analyses that follow, we will predict leisure out of sample (in the CE) using
the estimated relationship between observable characteristics and leisure in the time use
data. The set of characteristics that we use are strongly related to leisure and are defined
similarly in both the CE and the time use surveys. Table 1 compares the means of these
demographic characteristics for individuals 18 and older in both data sources for four
years: 1975 (1972/73 in the CE), 1985, 2003, and 2016. The characteristics of the time
use samples are very similar to those of the CE, but there are notable exceptions. The age,
gender, education, and marital status distributions in the CE samples match fairly well
with those for the time use samples in most years, although there are some differences in
age and education across surveys in 1985. Some of the alignment across data sources
results from the fact that the sample weights are constructed in both the time use surveys
and the CE to match Census data for certain characteristics, although the characteristics



9
  Individuals are considered to be sharing resources if expenses are not independent for at least two of the
three major expense categories: housing, food, and other living expenses.
10
   The 1972-1973 CE provides data on annualized expenditures collected from quarterly interviews.
11
   These individual level data are available in the member files of the CE.


                                                      6
that are matched to the Census has changed over time in the time use surveys.12 One
noticeable difference is that the time use samples have more young children beginning
with the 2003 survey, while the reverse was true in earlier years. Differences in the
sampling frames and response rates may explain these differences. Our 1975-1976 time
use survey is for a sample of respondents to in-person interviews, while the 1985 sample
includes those who responded to a mail survey, and the 2003-2016 surveys includes those
who completed a phone interview. A study of the 2004 ATUS (Abraham, Maitland, and
Bianchi, 2006) shows that the response rates for those with a college degree were much
higher (above 60 percent) than those with a high school degree or less (below 50
percent), which is consistent with the slightly greater educational attainment we see in the
ATUS surveys as compared to the CE.13
        As we show below, for the purposes of predicted leisure time, time spent working
is considerably more important than individual or family demographic characteristics.
Both the CE and the time use surveys provide information on usual hours worked in
weeks that an individual works.14 We also construct a measure of weekly hours worked
in the CE that is not conditioned on work that in principle has the same expectation as
(seven times) the hours of work in the interview day variable that is available in the time
use data. To construct a measure of unconditional hours worked per week in the CE we
multiply usual hours by reported weeks worked in the 12 months prior to the survey
divided by 52.14. In the time use data, weeks worked is not available, but a measure of
unconditional hours worked per week can be constructed by multiplying hours worked in
the interview day by 7.
        Measures of usual hours worked in weeks that the individual works match up well
across data sources both in level and in trend, although average hours in the CE typically

12
   For the 1975 time use survey, the weights adjust the sample to match the Census estimates for age, sex,
education, and urbanicity. For 1985, the weights adjust the sample to match the Census estimates for the
proportion of full-time working males and females. The ATUS weight (2003-2016) adjusts the sample to
match the CPS estimates for age (5-year groups), gender, race-ethnicity (Hispanic or Non-Hispanic),
household composition (with children or without children), and education (high school or less or more than
high school).
13
   The ATUS sample weights are constructed to match the Census estimates for two education groups (high
school or less or more than high school), so when you collapse our ATUS education estimates in Table 1
into these two groups, the means align more closely with the CE.
14
   Hours worked information in the CE and time use samples is reported for a typical week when working,
except in the 1985 time use survey where hours are reported for the previous week, regardless of work
status.


                                                    7
exceed those in the time use surveys by between 1 and 2.5 hours per week. The mean for
unconditional hours worked in the time use sample (which is based on reported hours
worked in the interview day) is greater than that for the CE samples (which is based on
usual hours and weeks worked).


III. Theoretical Framework and the Measurement of Leisure and Consumption


Measuring Well-Being
       There is a surprising dearth of work on how to incorporate measures of time use
and consumption into a measure of well-being. Nordhaus (2009) is perhaps the most
useful source. He begins by arguing that much of economic welfare depends on
nonmarket activity and that time is plausibly the most important nonmarket input and
perhaps the most important nonmarket output. He models individual utility for person i at
time t as a function of market and nonmarket consumption, and time spent in market
work, non-market work and leisure, or


                     1                ,     ,        ,          ,       ,


where C denotes consumption, B the state of technology, h hours, while m denotes
market time, n nonmarket time, and l leisure time. He notes that this formulation deviates
from the usual one in the time use literature because it allows a process value or intrinsic
value of time. Nordhaus models individuals as maximizing (1) subject to an income
constraint, a nonmarket production function and a time constraint. He takes income and
nonmarket production to be proportional to hours in their respective activities. Even after
simplifying the constraints in this way and linearizing U, he concludes that any attempt at
measurement “is doomed to fail for lack of critical data.” In particular, we do not
observe nonmarket consumption and do not have estimates of the marginal rates of
substitution between time and market consumption, which are needed to determine prices
to value the different inputs to utility. Furthermore, Nordhaus addresses an even simpler




                                                8
case than the present one--that of estimating mean well-being whereas we would seek to
estimate the distribution of well-being.
       Having indicated the impossibility of an entirely satisfactory approach, we should
emphasize that the usual approach in the inequality literature is to entirely ignore leisure
despite its importance. This past approach typically models utility as a function of a
single argument, either income or consumption. Often in other settings such as labor
supply estimation a second argument of utility is included and called leisure, but it is in
fact nonmarket time. We do not presume to estimate a version of (1), but rather provide
an initial exploration of the first-order characteristics of the consumption and time use
distributions. Specifically, we will consider the univariate and bivariate distributions of
    and      as well as several alternative measures that incorporate     and      .
        An alternative approach to measuring well-being focuses on the market wage—
this is the so called full income approach. If one considers the leisure/work first order
condition, then the last hour of work must have an after-tax payoff equal to the leisure
given up (though in the Nordhaus framework it is the net value which only pins down the
difference in value between market time and leisure). Unfortunately, individual wages are
not a close approximation to family well-being. Only half of adults have a wage, and
taxes and private and government transfers make well-being very different from the wage
even for those for whom a wage is observed. The process from wages to family material
well-being depends on many processes including family formation, fertility, labor supply,
and disability. In addition, we need to account for intertemporal behavior by a family
through saving and borrowing, and flows of resources from outside, in particular transfers
from family, friends, and the government. These processes will differ across families and
over time. If we ignore these features we miss that wages are endogenously dependent
on them and that changes in wages may be counteracted by them. In other words, the
distribution of wages is very far from the distribution of well-being.


Defining Leisure
       While a growing literature examines leisure in the U.S., there is little consensus
on exactly how to define leisure (for example see Biddle and Hamermesh 1990; Aguiar
and Hurst 2007, 2009, 2013; and Ramey 2007). Ambiguity arises because some



                                              9
activities, such as gardening, can be viewed as either time in nonmarket production or
leisure. In addition, other activities such as sleeping provide utility while at the same
time serving as intermediate inputs that may increase productivity. Furthermore, for our
analyses that combine both consumption and leisure, issues of double counting arise
because some expenditures are made in order to increase leisure time such as spending on
domestic service and babysitting. Our main measure of consumption, well-measured
consumption (defined below), does not include these spending categories that are
potentially intermediate products.
        One way to think of leisure is as those activities where time and expenditures are
complements (or at least not substitutes). For example, one spends money to play sports,
and although a walk in the park may be free, one would not pay someone else to take that
walk for them.
        For the analyses presented below, our base definition of leisure includes activities
where time and expenditures are complements such as “entertainment/social
activities/relaxing” and “active recreation,” as well as time spent sleeping, eating, and on
personal care that can be thought of as intermediate inputs but also provide direct utility.
Finally, we include some activities that may be categorized as both leisure and home
production such as gardening.
        A second standard that also points to our base leisure definition is based on
hedonic psychology or emotions research. The measure of leisure includes activities that
survey respondents have reported as relatively enjoyable. To demonstrate this, in Table 2
we report the time use categories from Robinson and Godbey (1999), ranking them by
how enjoyable survey respondents reported each activity to be.15 For comparison, we also
construct rankings of affect measures of happiness and meaning using data from the
ATUS Well-Being Module from 2010, 2012, and 2013, aligning the ATUS activities so
they are comparable to those reported from Robinson and Godbey (1999).16 Specifically,


15
  Robinson and Godbey (1999) use data from the 1985 Time Use Survey.
16
  We construct our affect measures of happiness and meaning using response from two questions in the
ATUS Well-Being Module asked in reference to specific activities: 1) “From 0 to 6, where a 0 means you
were not happy at all and a 6 means you were very happy, how happy did you feel during this time?” and 2)
“From 0 to 6, how meaningful did you consider what you were doing? 0 means it was not meaningful at all
to you and a 6 means it was very meaningful to you.” For each respondent, these questions were asked in
reference to three randomly chosen activities.


                                                   10
using the ATUS data we regress the reported affect measure on activity indicators and
individual fixed effects for individuals age 18 and older, and then use the coefficients on
the activity indicators to rank the activities.
         In general, there is a fair amount of consistency across these rankings. The top
rated activities as reported in Robinson and Godbey (1999) typically also rank high
according to both of the affect measures. Two exceptions are time spent at bars or
lounges and time spent watching movies, which are not ranked as high based on how
meaningful the activity is. Our measure of leisure includes all activities ranked higher
than market work in the enjoyment index constructed by Robinson and Godbey (1999)
with a few minor exceptions. For example, work breaks and lunch breaks are ranked
higher than market work, but we include these activities in market work rather than
leisure. Also, we exclude civic and religious activities from leisure to be consistent with
the previous literature.
         Our measure of leisure is also similar to “Leisure Measure 2” defined in Aguiar
and Hurst (2007), although we do not include pet care in our measure and we do include
certain components of childcare such as playing with kids, reading/talking with kids, and
supervise/help with homework.17 We examine the extent to which our main findings are
sensitive to how leisure is defined, considering both narrower and wider definitions. We
consider a narrower definitions that excludes time spent eating, sleeping, and in personal
care. We also consider two broader measures: one that adds time spent in childcare18 and
non-market time, which includes all activities except market work.


Definitions of Consumption
         The CE collects information on expenditures for a large number of spending
categories. To convert reported expenditures in the CE into a measure of consumption,
we make a number of adjustments. First, we convert vehicle spending to a service flow


17
   Other differences arise because we split some categories that Aguiar and Hurst (2007) classify as leisure
into leisure and non-leisure. For example, Aguiar and Hurst (2007) include all time spent on telephone calls
as leisure, while we include only calls from friends and neighbors as leisure. Relative to overall leisure
these differences are quite small.
18
   Ramey (2007) argues that childcare should not be included in leisure. Others have noted that childcare
has a large and positive income elasticity, which is in stark contrast to both leisure and home production
that have negative income elasticities (Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney, 2008).


                                                    11
equivalent. Instead of including the full purchase price of a vehicle, we calculate a flow
that reflects the value that a consumer receives from owning a car during the period that
is a function of a depreciation rate and the current market value of the vehicle. To
determine the current market value of each car owned, we use detailed information on
vehicles (including make, model, year, age, and other characteristics). This approach
accounts for features and quality improvements through what purchasers are willing to
pay. See the Data Appendix for more details on how we calculate vehicle service flows.
        Second, to convert housing expenditures to housing consumption for
homeowners, we substitute the reported rental equivalent of the home for the sum of
mortgage interest payments, property tax payments, spending on insurance, and
maintenance and repairs. Finally, to arrive at our measure of total consumption, we
exclude spending that is better interpreted as an investment such as spending on
education and health care, and outlays for retirement including pensions and social
security.19 We exclude out of pocket medical expenses because high out of pocket
expenses may reflect substantial need or lack of good insurance rather than greater well-
being (more details on our measures of consumption are in the Data Appendix).
        Recent research has shown that some components of consumption reported in the
CE compare quite favorably to national accounts, both in levels and in changes over time,
while other components do not compare well and are deteriorating in quality (Meyer and
Sullivan, 2017; Bee, Meyer, and Sullivan, 2015). Incorporating this information, we
construct a measure of consumption that is based on its well-measured components
including food at home, rent plus utilities, gasoline and motor oil, the rental value of
owner-occupied housing, and the rental value of owned vehicles. As shown in Bee,
Meyer, and Sullivan (2015), the first four of these components have reporting ratios (CE
total compared to National Income and Product Account total) that are high and constant
or that decline slowly over time. Although there is not a direct comparison to national
accounts for the rental value of owned vehicles, there is evidence that vehicle ownership
is reported well in the CE from direct comparisons for new purchases and comparisons of
vehicle counts to registrations (Bee, Meyer, and Sullivan 2015).


19
  We also exclude spending on charitable contributions and spending on cash gifts to non-family members.
This category is very small relative to total consumption.


                                                  12
        There are two key requirements for well-measured consumption to serve as an
accurate proxy for total consumption: the well-measured components should have a total
consumption elasticity of one and their prices should not change over time relative to
those of all items consumed. Meyer and Sullivan (2017) present evidence in support of
these requirements. They show that well-measured consumption is close to a constant
share of total consumption and has aggregate price changes similar to those of the total
consumption bundle. For our main analyses, we rely on “well-measured consumption”.
However, our results are qualitatively unchanged when we use a measure of total
consumption.

Family Level Measures of Leisure and Consumption
        The time use surveys provide information on time spent in leisure at the
individual level. This allows us to predict leisure at the individual level in the CE as
explained in the following section. For our analysis of leisure and consumption, we focus
on these measures at the family level for two reasons. First, the leisure time of
individuals is not likely to be independent of the leisure time of other individuals in the
same family. There may be complementarities across family members or specialization.
For example, one family member may engage in market work while another does only
non-market work, and compensation across family members can occur in ways that are
difficult to observe. Second, we will examine leisure and consumption for the same
observation, and our consumption data are only available at the family level. We
calculate family level leisure or non-market time as the sum of all leisure or non-market
time for adults in the family divided by the number of adults in the family. We express
leisure (and non-market time) on a per adult basis because, unlike consumption, there are
not likely to be economies of scale in leisure. We base family level leisure off of the
leisure time of only the adults in the family because there is limited time use information
on children. Focusing on adults also makes sense because children are engaged mostly in
schooling and leisure.20 Our measures of consumption are equivalence scale adjusted
using a scale that follows NAS recommendations (Citro and Michael 1995): (A +
0.7K)0.7, where A is the number of adults in the family and K is the number of children.

20
 There is some information on the time use patterns of children in the 1993 time use survey and in recent
ATUS surveys.


                                                    13
This adjustment allows for economies of scale in consumption, and for differences in
consumption for children and adults.


IV. Combining Consumption and Time Use Data


        In order to obtain a more comprehensive measure of economic well-being we
combine consumption data with information on leisure or non-market time. We closely
approximate leisure by estimating the relationship in the time use data between leisure
and other observable characteristics that are also available in the CE. We then use these
estimates to predict leisure for each family in the CE based on these observable
characteristics.
        The key methodological issue we face in combining consumption and time use
data is determining the best way to predict time use. We observe leisure for one day but
we would like to have an accurate prediction of leisure over a long period of time that
corresponds to the time interval for consumption, such as a quarter or a year. Therefore,
we model leisure as having permanent and transitory components, where the permanent
component is average leisure over a long period while the transitory component reflects
day-to-day variation around this long-run average. This approach is comparable to the
way that researchers have frequently modeled income. To understand this approach,
consider the equation


                                              ∗        ∗
                                          2                        ,


        ∗                                                                ∗
where       is average weekly leisure over a calendar quarter,               is average weekly hours
worked over the same period and               is a vector of covariates such as age and education.
What we observe in the time use data, however, is leisure in a single day,                  , which has
                                      ∗                                                 ∗
both a permanent component,               , and a transitory component       , so               , where
   reflects day-to-day variation around the long-run average as well as measurement
                          ∗
error. Substituting for       in (2) gives us


                                                   ∗
                                  3                                      .


                                                       14
OLS estimation of (3) will provide consistent estimates of β and γ if the conditional mean
                               ∗
of     and    are zero given        and           . The univariate distribution of leisure in a day
incorporating the variation in the residuals would overstate the dispersion of average
leisure over a long period as long as the variance in               is nonzero (and    and       are not
strongly negatively correlated). However, we are primarily interested in how leisure co-
varies with consumption. Thus, we want to estimate


                               ∗|         ∗                  ∗                |
                        4            ,        ,                                   ,


                                                  ∗
which is consistently estimated as                           using the parameter estimates from (3) if
E[ |         0. This conditional mean zero assumption is just the typical assumption that
what is left out of our leisure prediction equation does not vary systematically with
consumption.
        Alternatively, we might assume that leisure for person i is the same each day,
which amounts to assuming that            ≡ 0. In this case, predicted leisure will capture the
co-variation of leisure with consumption if E[ |                    0. In this case, one can also
                                                                                         ∗
estimate the full univariate distribution of long-run leisure conditional on                 ,   using
quantile regressions. However, as we show below, evidence from panel data on time use
suggests that most of the variation in reported leisure in a single day is day-to-day
variation.
        Our mean prediction approach will allow us to estimate the distribution of long
run leisure as long as most of the dispersion in a day’s measured leisure (               ) is
measurement error or variation within the quarter ( ). On the other hand, if there is little
measurement error, and most of the variation in daily leisure across individuals reflects
long-term differences across individuals ( ∗ ), then the mean prediction would
significantly understate dispersion. We can examine the relative magnitude of within
person variation and across person variation using a panel that has multiple days with
time use data for an individual. Although most of the time use surveys we use are for a
single cross-section, the 1975-1976 time use survey interviews individuals for up to four




                                                        15
waves. The panel structure of the 1975-76 survey can be represented by the following
slight modification of equation (3):


                                            ∗
                              3′                                   ,
where t ranges from 1 to 4, since we have up to four responses for the same individual—
these responses are at least three months apart.
       We decompose the variation in reported leisure in a Table 3 by estimating a
random effects version of (3’). The top panel reports the results for all those observations
available in the first two periods, while the bottom panel reports the results for those
individuals who responded in all four periods. The results for three different leisure
definitions are given. We start in column (1) with the variance in seven times reported
leisure in a single day (to approximate weekly leisure). We then decompose this variance
into the part explained by our prediction equation (column (2)) and the two parts of the
error variance, the permanent part captured by       (column (3)) and the transitory part
captured by      (column (4)). For completeness we report the total error variance in
column (5).
       The key summary statistic, the fraction of the variance in long-term leisure
explained by our prediction equation is reported in column (6). For our base leisure
measure 82 percent of the variance is explained by our prediction equation. For the
narrower definition that excludes eating, sleeping and personal care, the share is lower
but at least 62 percent in the two samples. The broader definition has a slightly higher
explained share, 86 percent for the shorter (but larger) panel and 83 percent for the longer
panel. Thus, our prediction equation explains the vast majority of the variation in leisure
across individuals, especially when broader measures of leisure are considered. This
decomposition table also shows why our prediction equation performs so well despite the
predictions showing much less dispersion than reported leisure in day (as we will see
below). Note that the share of the total variance in reported leisure that is transitory (or
measurement error) reported in column (7) is always at least 60 percent. Thus, most of
the variation in leisure reported in a day is effectively noise.




                                                16
         A variant of our mean prediction approach would be to use hours worked in the
day rather than usual hours worked in a week as the key predictor. If we used hours
worked in the day, then equation (3) could be written as


                            5


               ∗
where                 is hours worked in the survey day and      is its deviation from usual
hours. Note that      and       will have a strong negative correlation—if you work more
than usual in a given day you will enjoy less leisure in that day. The correlation between
   and          will be positive (because beta is negative), biasing the estimate of   toward
zero, but the correlation between       and    will be the reverse. Thus, an estimate of β
from (5) will not necessarily be attenuated. Given this unknown bias, we use usual hours
worked rather than hours worked in the day in our specifications we report below.
         Our estimates in the time use data build on equation (3), adding a time dimension
indicated by the subscript t, while we indicate the time use data with the superscript T.
We allow the coefficients on all of the variables to vary with the survey year. Thus, we
estimate the parameters of the equation


                                           ∗
                            6                                      .


Taking the estimates from (6) we predict leisure in the CE as


                                                ∗
                                    7                       ,


where superscript C denotes that the variable is measured in the consumption data.
         The demographic characteristics included in our specifications are those that are
likely to be correlated with leisure and that are defined similarly in both the time use and
consumption data. The individual characteristics (Z) include indicator variables for
gender, marital status and age and education categories. The most important predictor is
H*, a measure of the hours an individual spends working per week—either a measure of



                                               17
hours worked in a week when the individual works, or an unconditional measure of hours
worked. These measures are the hours worked variables presented in Table 1. The family
characteristics in Z include the number of children under 18 in the family, the number of
adults in the family, and the number of children under 5. All specifications also include
controls for the interview day of the week and interview month.


Estimates from the Time Use Samples
         Table 4 reports the coefficient estimates from two different specifications: a
simplified version of equation (6) where no hours measure is included (i.e. β = 0,
columns 1-4) and estimates of equation (6) that controls for usual hours worked (columns
5-8). The R2 for the specification without an hours worked variable is 0.23. The R2 rises
to 0.35 when one controls for usual hours worked per week. When separate regressions
are estimated for each year, the resulting R2s are very similar across years.21 These R2s
are the fraction of the total variation in reported daily leisure that is explained by our
prediction equation. The dependent variable in these specifications, leisure hours per
week, is constructed from reported leisure in a specific day. As discussed above, the
concept of leisure that we hope to closely approximate for a family is leisure averaged
over a long time period, say a quarter or a year. One day’s reported leisure will have
more variation than that over a longer time period because of measurement error and
because of daily variation. Without panel data for all surveys, we cannot calculate the
fraction of the long-term variation in leisure that we can explain for all years. However,
the evidence in Table 3 discussed above indicates that for the 1975-76 survey 82 percent
of the variation across individuals in long-term leisure is explained by our equation.
         We report the coefficients for the interaction terms of each of the year dummies
with observable individual and family characteristics. Although not reported, each
regression also includes interview month dummies and interactions of year with
interview day of week. The estimates are qualitatively similar year by year with those 45-
54 typically having the least leisure, those 65+ having the most, men having substantially


21
  We also estimated a version of equation (5) where work is measured as hours in the day rather than usual
hours. For this specification the R2 is much higher (0.57), because reported hours in a day can explain a
substantial fraction of the variation in reported daily leisure. As we discussed above, however, coefficient
estimates from this specification are likely to be biased.


                                                     18
more leisure (conditional on work) and college grads having quite a bit less leisure than
the base group of high school graduates. The more children under 18 and the more
children under 5 living in the family, the less leisure adults in the family consume. The
magnitudes of the coefficients on the hours an individual works (columns 5-8) are similar
across years. These estimates suggest that leisure falls by about 0.48-0.54 hours for each
additional hour worked. These estimates are only slightly larger than estimates from
Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2013) that indicate that about half of the foregone
market work hours during the Great Recession were shifted into leisure.
        Before predicting leisure in the CE, we compare the distributions of the actual
reported value of leisure in a day to the predicted value of leisure in a day using our main
approach (using the estimates from columns 5-8 in Table 4). The means for actual and
predicted leisure for individuals in the time use data are the same by definition, but as
shown in Table 5, the dispersion in predicted leisure is considerably lower than the
dispersion in reported daily leisure. In 2016, for example, the 90/10 ratio for actual
leisure in a day is 1.91, while this ratio is 1.44 for predicted leisure. This tighter
distribution is consistent with the idea that we are aiming to predict the distribution of
average leisure over a longer period rather than the distribution of daily leisure.


Predicting Leisure in the CE
        Using the estimates from equation (6) (those reported in columns 5-8 of Table 4)
we estimate predicted leisure for all adults in the CE. For the years from 1972-1973 to
2016, we report in Figure 1 and Table 5 the means for actual leisure for individuals in the
time use data as well as the means for predicted leisure for individuals in the CE. For
Figure 1, we interpolate to fill in the pattern between years when the time use data are
available. These results show that the pattern for mean predicted leisure in the CE follows
very closely the pattern for the time use data, although the mean for predicted leisure in
the CE is slightly lower ranging from 0.3 hours lower in the early 1970s to 1 hour lower
in 2016. This difference in mean predicted leisure across surveys is consistent with the
differences in usual hours worked. For example, in 2016 average usual hours worked in
the CE was 1.2 hours more than in the ATUS (Table 1). Multiplying this by the
coefficient on usual hours in Table 4 (-0.54), we get a difference in predicted leisure of



                                               19
0.65, which is 68 percent of the difference in predicted leisure in 2016 reported in Figure
1 and the first row of Table 5.
        Table 5 also shows that the full distribution of predicted leisure in the CE aligns
fairly closely with the full distribution of predicted leisure in the time use data, although
leisure is somewhat less dispersed in the CE than in the time use data. In 2016, for
example, the 90/10 ratio for predicted leisure in the time use data is 1.47, while for
individual-level leisure in the CE, the ratio is 1.39.


V. Consumption and Leisure Trends in the CE


        From the measures of predicted leisure at the individual level in the CE, we can
calculate a family level measure of leisure as described above. The remainder of the
paper examines these family level measures of leisure and consumption within the CE
samples, using our measures of leisure and consumption. Family level leisure is
expressed per adult in the family while consumption is equivalence scale adjusted using
the NAS recommended equivalence scale as explained in Section III.
        Figure 1 reports mean family level predicted leisure in the CE from 1972-1973 to
2016. The patterns for family leisure mirror those for individual leisure, although there
are small differences. The reason for this difference is that the family level measure is
weighted by family size, rather than number of adults.
        Figure 2 reports changes in mean predicted leisure and consumption at the family
level since the early 1970s. We report three measures of leisure, nonmarket time, and
well-measured consumption in real terms, using a bias-corrected CPI-U-RS deflator, as
explained in the Data Appendix. These family level observations are person weighted and
we hold the demographic composition of the sample fixed as explained in Section II. As
before, we interpolate between years when leisure data are not available. Family level
leisure rose modestly over the past four decades. Between 1972-1973 and 2016, average
family leisure increased by 2.0 hours (1.8 percent) per adult per week, with much of the
rise occurring between 1985 and 2012. Between 1972-1973 and 1985, family leisure time
remained flat. Average time spent in leisure grew by 1.7 hours (1.5 percent) between
1985 and 2016. The patterns between the early 1970s and 2003 are consistent with earlier



                                              20
studies of changes in leisure (Robinson and Godbey, 1999; Aguiar and Hurst, 2007;
Ramey, 2007), and the modest increase in leisure between 2003 and 2010 is similar to
findings from Aguiar, Hurst and Karabarbounis (2013). The results in Figure 2 extend
these earlier studies by reporting leisure at the family level and showing that there is little
evidence that leisure continues to rise after 2012. In fact, average leisure declines by 1.8
hours (1.6 percent) between 2012 and 2016.
        The pattern is quite similar when childcare is added to leisure, but we see a more
noticeable rise in leisure over time when eating, sleeping, and personal care are excluded.
Between 1972-1973 and 2016, this narrower definition of leisure rose by 8.5 percent.
Unlike leisure, non-market time, which includes both leisure and home production,
declined over the past 4 decades, except for a brief period around the Great Recession
when it rose. In analyses not reported here, we find that this decline was driven by a
decline in non-market time for women. For men, non-market time rose between 1985 and
2016.
        The rise in real consumption was much more pronounced than the rise in leisure.
Between 1972-1973 and 2016 average consumption grew by 75 percent. The rise was
less pronounced after 2003. Consumption fell sharply during the Great Recession and
then bounced back a bit, but average real consumption in 2016 was less than 1 percent
higher in 2016 than it was at its previous peak in 2008.
        Although there are noticeable differences in time spent in leisure across
demographic groups, the trends in leisure are quite similar. In Figure 3a we report
average predicted leisure at the family level by educational attainment of the head. These
results show a clear negative relationship between educational attainment and leisure. In
2016, for example, those without a high school degree consumed about 8.3 hours (7.5
percent) more leisure per adult per week than those with a college degree. All education
groups saw a modest increase in leisure since 1985. These differences are similar to those
reported in earlier studies focusing on individuals (Aguiar and Hurst, 2007; Ramey, 2007;
Aguiar, Hurst and Karabarbounis, 2013). Consumption also increased noticeably for all
groups (Figure 3b), but the rise was much more pronounced for those with a college
degree than for other educational groups.




                                              21
       We also see different levels but similar trends in leisure across family types. In
Figure 4a we present average predicted leisure at the family level for five mutually
exclusive and exhaustive groups defined by the age and marital status of the head and the
presence of children. Family heads age 65 and over consume more leisure than any other
group. In 2016, this group consumed, on average, 13 hours (11 percent) more leisure per
adult per week than the next highest group, single individuals. That leisure was flat
between 1972-1973 and 1985 for the full sample masks differences by family type, with
leisure falling for families with a head over 65 and rising for other family types. Between
1985 and 2016, leisure rose more for families with a head over 65 and for single
individuals than for other family types. All family types experienced a significant rise in
consumption over the past 4 decades, but the rise differs across these groups (Figure 4b).
For example, between 1972-1973 and 2016, average consumption rose by 91 percent for
families with a head age 65 and over, while it rose by 61 percent for single individuals.
       In Table 6 we report several different measures of inequality including the 90/10,
50/10, 90/50 ratios and other measures of dispersion for consumption, our three different
measures of leisure, and non-market time for the CE samples. There are some noticeable
differences in the dispersion of these measures. In particular, leisure inequality is small in
comparison to consumption inequality. A family at the 90th percentile of the consumption
distribution in 2016 consumes 3.4 times that of a family at the 10th percentile. In the case
of predicted leisure, a family at the 90th percentile consumes only about 1.3 times the
leisure of a family at the 10th percentile. While dispersion is larger for narrower
definitions of leisure, even when time spent eating, sleeping, and personal care are
excluded from leisure, the 90/10 ratio (1.93 in 2016) is much lower than that for
consumption.
       We have seen a very modest increase in leisure and consumption inequality over
the past 40 years. Between 1972-1973 and 2016, the 90/10 ratio for consumption rose by
about 2 percent, with the increase concentrated in the top part of the distribution. The
90/10 ratio for leisure grew by only 3 percent over roughly this same period, and this rise
is evident in both the top and bottom halves of the leisure distribution. The pattern for
inequality in nonmarket time is quite similar to that of leisure. However, we see a more
noticeable rise in inequality for narrower measures of leisure. The 90/10 ratio for leisure



                                              22
excluding eating, sleeping, and personal care rose by 17 percent between 1972-1973 and
2016, and the rise is evident in both the top and bottom halves of the distribution.


VI. Bivariate Analyses of Consumption and Leisure


       The key advantage of having measures of both leisure and consumption in the
same data source is that we can examine changes in these important components of well-
being for the same families. We are interested in knowing first what the association
between consumption and leisure is at each point in time, and second how that
association has changed over time. At a point in time, it is not clear if the amount of
leisure is greatest for families with low consumption (in which case inequality of
consumption would overstate the dispersion of economic well-being) or families with
high consumption (in which case inequality of consumption would understate overall
dispersion in economic well-being). There has also been a substantial increase in
consumption and a modest increase in leisure over the past four decades, though it is not
clear if the growth in leisure over time has been greatest for families with low
consumption (in which case the modest rise in consumption inequality that we document
in Table 6 would overstate the increase in the dispersion of economic well-being) or
families with high consumption (in which case the rise in inequality of consumption
would understate the change in the overall dispersion in economic well-being).


The Bivariate Relationship at a Point in Time
       To examine the joint distribution of consumption and leisure we estimate average
family leisure time by decile of the consumption distribution (Table 7). We also estimate
the correlation between consumption and leisure and calculate the slope from a bivariate
regression of leisure (or nonmarket time) on the percentile of the consumption
distribution for families in the CE (Table 8). Finally, we report the locally-weighted,
regression smoothed (LOWESS) bivariate relationship between mean leisure and the
percentile of the consumption distribution (Figure 5). Most of these results show a clear
gradient between consumption and leisure with low consumption families consuming
more leisure time than high consumption families. In Table 7, we see that leisure declines



                                             23
monotonically with consumption except at the very top deciles.22 Although leisure
typically declines with consumption, the differences are small. In 2016, families in the
bottom consumption decile spent only 1 more hour (about 1 percent) per adult per week
in leisure than families in the ninth decile, and leisure in the top consumption decile was
about the same as that for the bottom decile
         The negative relationship is also evident in the correlations between leisure and
consumption (Table 8), indicating the substitution between consumption goods and
leisure time. The slope coefficients in Panel A of Table 8 are negative and statistically
significant for all years except 2016. In 2010, for example, a family 10 percentiles higher
in the consumption distribution had on average 0.38 hours per week less leisure. Finally,
the negative relationship between leisure and consumption is also evident in Figure 5,
where the downward sloping plot indicates that in each year leisure declined almost
monotonically as consumption rose, although leisure rose with consumption in the top
parts of the distribution in 1972-1973 and 2016. Overall, these results suggest that
including both leisure and consumption, as opposed to just consumption, in a measure of
economic well-being will result in less measured inequality. However, because the
consumption-leisure gradient is not very steep, the dampening effect of leisure on overall
inequality is small.
         The bivariate relationship between consumption and leisure differs considerably
across demographic groups, as is evident in Panels B through F of Table 8. The negative
relationship between the two well-being measures is strongest for single parent families
and for single individuals, and the relationship is weakest for families with a head age 65
and over.
         We also examine the bivariate relationship between consumption and two other
measures of leisure. These results, which are reported in Table 9, indicate that the
negative relationship between consumption and leisure is less evident, particularly in

22
   We calculate bootstrapped standard errors of mean predicted leisure by consumption decile in Table 7,
by drawing with replacement bootstrap samples independently from the Time Use and CE data in each
year. The size of each bootstrap sample is equal to the size of the original sample for each survey and year.
For each bootstrap sample, we first estimate the relationship between leisure and observable characteristics
in the time use sample, then use these estimates to predict leisure per adult for each family in the CE
sample, then estimate the consumption decile for each family, and finally calculate the mean predicted
leisure by consumption decile. We repeat this procedure for two hundred bootstrap samples to obtain the
standard errors. The standard errors of the coefficients in Tables 8-11 are calculated in a similar way.


                                                     24
more recent years, when eating, sleeping, and personal care are not included in leisure.
For this narrower measure, the estimate of the slope is negative and significant in 1972-
1973, 1985 and 2010, but is small and insignificant in 2003 and then turns positive by
2016. For broader measures of leisure, the negative relationship between leisure and
consumption is much stronger. For example, when childcare is included in leisure the
slope coefficients are negative and significant for all years, indicating considerable
substitution between consumption and time spent in childcare.
       The negative relationship is even stronger for broader measures of time use. In
Table 8 we also consider the bivariate relationship between consumption and non-market
time, which includes both leisure and home production. This measure of time is observed
directly in the CE, so we do not need to predict it using data from the time use survey.
Non-market time is negatively correlated with consumption in all years, and the
magnitude of this negative relationship is much larger in absolute value than that between
leisure and consumption and is statistically significant. The slope coefficient indicates
that in 2016, a family 10 percentiles higher in the consumption distribution had on
average 0.82 hours per week less non-market time.


Changes in the Bivariate Relationship Over Time
       We are also interested in how the bivariate relationship between consumption and
leisure has changed over time. In Tables 7 through 10, we examine the bivariate
relationship between consumption and leisure for various years over the past four
decades. As shown in Table 7, between 1972-1973 and 2016 average leisure time
increased for all consumption deciles, but the rise was more noticeable for families at the
top of the consumption distribution than for those at the bottom. During this period,
leisure time grew by 1.2 percent for those in the bottom consumption decile, while it
grew by 1.9 percent for those in the top consumption decile. The flattening of this
bivariate relationship over time is also evident in the correlation and slope estimates
reported in Table 8. For the full sample, the estimate of the magnitude of the gradient is
between -2.1 and -2.9 for the years from 1972-1973 through 2003. By 2016, however,
this gradient had become small and not statistically significant.




                                             25
       Although leisure time increased for all consumption deciles over the entire period,
the patterns differ for some subperiods (Table 7). Average leisure rose through 2010 for
all consumption deciles, but this rise was more noticeable at the bottom than at the top so
the negative relationship between leisure and consumption appears to be greatest at a
time when annual unemployment had reached its peak. Leisure then fell between 2010
and 2016 for nearly all consumption deciles. Consequently, the estimates of the slope
coefficients (Table 8) are largest in 2010 and the smallest in 2016. The rise in leisure we
see in 2010, is likely due, in large part, to a decline in work; both reduced employment
and reduced hours among those working. For our sample of adults in the CE,
employment rates fell by 6 percent between 2007 and 2010, while hours conditional on
working fell by 3 percent. Rising leisure that results from involuntary unemployment is
likely to have different implications for economic well-being than when leisure rises for
other reasons.
       Changes over time for a measure of leisure that includes childcare are similar to
those for overall leisure (Table 9). We again see that the estimates of the slope
coefficients are largest in 2010 and smallest in 2016. For the narrower measure of leisure
that excludes eating, sleeping, and childcare, we also see a more pronounced negative
relationship between leisure and consumption in earlier years than in 2016, when this
relationship is positive. The bivariate relationship between consumption and non-market
time follows a similar pattern as that between consumption and leisure. For the full
sample, the estimate of the slope declined in absolute value from -10.6 in 1972-1973 to
-8.2 in 2016 (Table 8).
       We see sharp differences across family types in the changes over time in the
bivariate relationship between consumption and leisure (Panels B through F of Table 8).
For families with a head age 65 and over and single mother families, the slope estimates
fell in absolute value between 1972-1973 and 2016, while for the other groups, the slope
rose in absolute value. In all groups except the elderly we again see that the negative
relationship was strongest in 2010. That the bivariate relationship was not stronger for the
elderly in 2010 is consistent with the fact that the elderly have less attachment to the
labor market. Between 1985 and 2003, the period that surrounds welfare reform, the
bivariate relationship weakened both in terms of correlation and slope for single parent



                                             26
families. For other family types, the bivariate relationship moved in the opposite
direction. This pattern is consistent with welfare reform’s emphasis on market work by
those with the fewest resources.
       We also explore whether the bivariate relationship between consumption and
leisure differs across two age subgroups defined to evenly split the sample: families with
a head age 48 and younger and families with a head older than 48 (Table 10). While
consumption is negatively related to leisure in all years for both age groups, the patterns
of the negative relationship are somewhat different between them. In particular, for the
younger families, the negative relationship between consumption and leisure was
stronger in 2016 than it was in 1972-1973, but the reverse is true for older families. For
both groups, the negative relationship is strongest in 2010, the period immediately
following the Great Recession. However, this peak in 2010 is more noticeable for the
families with younger heads, indicating that the recession had a larger impact on this
bivariate relationship for this group. As was the case for the full sample, the negative
relationship between nonmarket time and consumption is stronger than that for leisure
and consumption.
       Overall, these changes indicate that while a measure of inequality that
incorporates both consumption and leisure may be less pronounced than inequality based
on consumption alone, the distribution of leisure had somewhat more of an equalizing
effect in the past than it does now.


Robustness
       Through a series of alternative specifications, we examine how sensitive our
results are to changes in how we predict leisure and measure consumption. One potential
concern with our approach to constructing measures of leisure at the family level by
predicting leisure for each adult in the family separately is that the leisure time of
individuals is not likely to be independent of the leisure time of other individuals in the
same family. There may be complementarities across family members or specialization.
For example, one family member may engage in market work while another does only
non-market work, and compensation across family members can occur in ways that are
difficult to observe. Consequently, adults within a family do not consume the same



                                              27
amount of leisure. This concern is particularly relevant for married couples. Ideally, when
predicting leisure for an individual we would control for the characteristics of the other
members of the family, including their work hours, but this information is not available
for all adults in the family. For the ATUS surveys from 2003-2016, however, we do
observe information about the characteristics of the spouse for respondents who are
married. For these years, we re-estimated equation (6), including in Zi, the characteristics
of the spouse such as age, education, and usual hours worked. We find that including
these spouse characteristics has very little effect on our main findings (results not
reported). In fact they have little effect on our measures of predicted leisure even for
subgoups such as married parents or those who are married but do not have children.
        We also verified that our key findings do not change noticeably when we use
hours in a day as opposed to usual hours to predict leisure. Finally, we looked at whether
our results change noticeably when we use total consumption instead of well-measured
consumption. We find that the bivariate relationship between leisure and total
consumption, and the change in this relationship over time, is very similar to that for
leisure and well-measured consumption, although the negative relationship is somewhat
stronger with total consumption.
        Finally, we estimate the relationship between predicted leisure and income rather
than consumption using 2003-2016 ATUS data. For these years, we have time use data
and family income information available from the same survey, so we do not need data
from the CE here.23 For this analysis, we consider the bivariate relationship between
predicted individual level leisure and family income, calculating predicted leisure the
same as before, as describe in Section IV.
        We find that the negative relationship between leisure and income is considerably
more pronounced than that between leisure and consumption. This result likely reflects
the fact that income, more so than consumption, is directly related to the number of hours
worked, resulting in a negative relationship between leisure and income. The magnitude
of the negative relationship is largest in 2010, consistent with the pattern in the
relationship between leisure and consumption. Looking across demographic groups, we


23
  In the ATUS, the dollar value of family income is not available. Rather, family income is reported for 16
different income ranges. We use the midpoint of the reported range for each family as their income.


                                                    28
again see that the bivariate relationship is largest (in absolute value) for single individuals
and smallest for those with a head over 65.


VII. Conclusions


        Economic well-being depends on the consumption of not just goods and services,
but also the consumption of leisure time. To characterize more accurately changes in the
distribution of well-being in the U.S., we examine measures of leisure and consumption
for the same families. We present a methodology for predicting the full distribution of
leisure from information on observable characteristics. We show that these
characteristics, especially when including work hours, explain most of the long run
variation in leisure.
        In general, we find that the rise in consumption over the past four decades is much
more pronounced than the rise in leisure. Between 1972-1973 and 2016 average family
consumption grew by 75 percent, while leisure grew by 2 percent. We also find that
consumption is considerably more dispersed than leisure. Consumption and leisure
inequality have increased very modestly over the past four decades.
        Looking at leisure and consumption together for the same families reveals some
interesting facts about the bivariate relationship. In particular, we find a clear, negative
relationship between consumption and leisure, but the relationship is fairly weak. In
2016, families in the bottom consumption decile spent only 1 more hour (about 1 percent)
per adult per week in leisure than families in the ninth decile, and leisure in the top
consumption decile was about the same as that for the bottom decile. We find noticeable
differences in the leisure-consumption gradient across family types, with the gradient
being largest for single parent families and single individuals and smallest for families
with a head age 65 or older. The bivariate relationship between consumption and leisure
has changed somewhat over time. The negative relationship peaked in the period around
the Great Recession, but then fell so that the leisure-consumption gradient was flatter in
2016 than in 1972-1973. Between 1985 and 2003, the period that surrounds welfare
reform, the bivariate relationship weakened both in terms of correlation and slope for
single parent families. For other family types, the bivariate relationship moved in the



                                              29
opposite direction. This pattern is consistent with welfare reform’s emphasis on market
work by those with the fewest resources.
       These results contribute to a growing national debate in the U.S. on trends in the
distribution of economic well-being. Previous work has documented rising leisure
inequality and rising consumption inequality for some periods. That the rise in leisure has
been most pronounced for those without a high school degree has suggested that perhaps
the dispersion in economic well-being, and its rise over time, is lower than is implied by
inequality in consumption alone. Our results indicate that accounting for both leisure and
consumption, as opposed to just consumption, when measuring economic well-being
implies less inequality. However, because the consumption-leisure gradient is shallow,
the dampening effect of leisure on overall inequality is small.




                                             30
                                      References

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2007): “Measuring Trends in Leisure ” Quarterly Journal
      of Economics 969-1006.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2008): “Deconstructing Lifecycle Expenditure ” Working
      Paper.
Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst (2009). “The Increase in Leisure Inequality,” 1965–2005.
      Washington, DC: AEI Press.
Aguiar, Mark, Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis (2013): “Time Use During the
      Great Recession,” American Economic Review, 103(5): 1664–1696.
Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura. 2007. “What Really happened to Consumption
      Inequality in the United States?” in Hard to Measure Goods and Services: Essays in
      Honor of Zvi Grilichers.
Autor, David H, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. “Trends in U.S. Wage
        Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists,” Review of Economics and Statistics
        90(2), May 2008, 300-323.
Biddle, Jeff and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 1990. “Sleep and the Allocation of Time,”
      Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, No. 5, Part 1 (Oct.), pp. 922-943.
Berndt, Ernst R. 2006. “The Boskin Commission Report After a Decade: After-life or
        Requiem?” International Productivity Monitor 12: 61-73.
Boskin, Michael et al. 1996. “Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living”
        Final Report to the Senate Finance Committee.
Burtless, Gary. 1999. “Squeezed for Time: American Inequality and the Shortage of
        Leisure” Brookings Review, Fall, 18-22.
Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach,
      eds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Council of Economic Advisers. 2018. Expanding Work Requirements in Non-Cash
      Welfare Programs, July.
Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
      Disadvantaged.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1-74.
Fisher, Kimberly and Jonathan Gershuny 2015. American Heritage Time Use Study,
        release 7 (July 2015). Oxford: Centre for Time Use Research.
Friedman, Milton. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton University
        Press.
Gordon, Robert J. 2006. “The Boskin Commission Report: A Retrospective One Decade
        Later,” NBER Working Paper No. 12311.
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney (2008). “Symposia: Investment in
        Children: Parental Education and Parental Time with Children.” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 22 (3): 23–46.
Haskins, Ron. 2006. “Work over Welfare: The Inside Story of the 1996 Welfare Reform
        Law.” Brookings Institution.
Johnson, David S., Stephen B. Reed and Kenneth J. Stewart. 2006. “Price Measurement
        in the United States: a Decade After the Boskin Report” Monthly Labor Review:
        10-19.
Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri. 2006. "Does Income Inequality lead to Consumption
      Inequality? Evidence and Theory" Review of Economic Studies 73, pp. 163-193.


                                          31
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2017. “Consumption and Income Inequality in
     the U.S. Since the 1960s,” Working Paper, December 2009 (revised August 2017).
     NBER Working Paper No. 23655.
     . 2012. “Winning the War: Poverty from the Great Society to the Great Recession”.
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2012, 133-200.
     . 2011. “Viewpoint: Further Results on Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor
       Using Income and Consumption.” Canadian Journal of Economics 44(1): 52-87.
     . 2009b. “Five Decades of Consumption and Income Poverty.” NBER Working
     Paper # 14827.
     . 2008. "Changes in Consumption, Income, and Well-Being of Single Mother
     Headed Families," American Economic Review, December.
     . 2003. “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption.”
     Journal of Human Resources, 38:S, 1180-1220.
Moffitt, Robert. 2006. "Welfare work Requirements with Paternalistic Government
     Preferences," Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, vol. 116(515), pp. F441-
     F458, November.
Nordhaus, William. 2009. “Measuring Real Income with Leisure and Household
     Production.” in Measuring the Subjective Well-Being of Nations: National
     Accounts of Time Use and Well-Being, Allen B. Krueger ed. University of Chicago
     Press, p. 125-144.
Ramey, Valerie A. 2007. “How Much Has Leisure Really Increased Since 1965?”
Robinson, John, and Geoffrey Godbey, Time for Life (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
     State University Press, 1999).
Schor, Juliet, The Overworked American: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure (New
     York, NY: Basic Books, 1992).
Slesnick, Daniel T. 2001. Consumption and Social Welfare. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press.
Stewart, Kenneth J. and Stephen B. Reed. 1999. “Consumer Price Index Research Series
       Using Current Methods, 1978-98” Monthly Labor Review, June, pp. 29-38.




                                          32
Data Appendix

A. Measuring Consumption and Spending in the CE

As discussed in Section 3, the main measure of consumption presented in this paper is
well-measured consumption, but we also consider how our results change when we use a
measure of total consumption. In this appendix section, we describe total consumption,
provide details on how some of the subcomponents of consumption are calculated, and
highlight how some components have changed over time.

Total Consumption: Consumption includes all spending in our measure of total
expenditures less spending on out of pocket health care expenses, education, and
payments to retirement accounts, pension plans, and social security. In addition, housing
and vehicle expenditures are converted to service flows. For homeowners we subtract
spending on mortgage interest, property taxes, maintenance, repairs, insurance, and other
expenses, and add the reported rental equivalent of the home. For vehicle owners we
subtract spending on recent purchases of new and used vehicles as well vehicle finance
charges. We then added the service flow value of all vehicles owned by the family, as
described below.

A.1.   Estimating Vehicle Service Flows

Our measure of consumption replaces the purchase price of vehicles and vehicle
maintenance costs with the service flow value from owned vehicles. Our improved
measure of vehicle service flows follows the approach we used in Meyer and Sullivan
(2012,b). Previous studies have imputed flows based only on recent spending on vehicles
and descriptive characteristics of the family (Cutler and Katz 1991), recent spending on
vehicles, vehicle age, and descriptive characteristics of the family (Meyer and Sullivan
2003, 2004), or reported purchase prices and vehicle age (Slesnick 1993). Our approach
provides two important improvements upon previous work. First, in addition to vehicle
age, our approach uses detailed information for each vehicle (such as make, model, year,
automatic transmission, and other characteristics) to determine the market price. Second,
we estimate depreciation rates by comparing the reported purchase prices for similar
vehicles of different ages. We use the detailed expenditure data for owned vehicles from
the 1980-2016 CE.

We determine a current market price for each of the 1.6 million vehicles in the data from
1980-2016 in one of three ways. First, for vehicles that were purchased within twelve
months of the interview and that have a reported purchase price (the estimation sample),
we take the current market price to be the reported purchase price. This estimation
sample accounts for about 14 percent of all vehicles in the 1980-2016 surveys. Second,
for vehicles that were purchased more than twelve months prior to the interview and that
have a reported purchase price (about 15 percent of all vehicles), we specify the current
market price as a function of the reported purchase price and an estimated depreciation
rate as explained below.




                                            33
For the remaining 71 percent of vehicles, we impute a current market price because the
purchase price is not reported. Using the estimation sample, we regress the log real
purchase price on a cubic in vehicle age, vehicle characteristics, family characteristics,
and make-model-year fixed effects.24 The vehicle characteristics include indicators for
whether the vehicle has automatic transmission, power brakes, power steering, air
conditioning, a diesel engine, a sunroof, four-wheel drive, or is turbo charged. Family
characteristics include log real expenditures (excluding vehicles and health), family size,
region, and the age and education of the family head. Coefficient estimates from this
regression are then used to calculate a predicted log real purchase price for the ith vehicle
( xi ̂ ). The predicted current market value for each vehicle without a reported purchase
price is then equal to ˆ * exp(xi ˆ ) , where ̂ is the coefficient on exp(xi ˆ) in a regression
of yi on exp(xi ˆ) without a constant term.25

To estimate a depreciation rate for vehicles, we compare prices across vehicles of
different age, but with the same make, model, and year. In particular, from the estimation
sample we construct a subsample of vehicles that are in a make-model-year cell with at
least two vehicles that are not the same age. Using this sample, we regress the log real
purchase price of the vehicle on vehicle age and make-model-year fixed effects.26 From
the coefficient on vehicle age (β), we calculate the depreciation rate (δ): δ = 1 – EXP(β).
The service flow is then the product of this depreciation rate and the current market price.
If the vehicle has a reported purchase price but was not purchased within 12 months of
the interview we calculate the service flow as: (real reported purchase price)*δ(1- δ)t,
where t is the number of years since the car was purchased.

Although the 1972-1973 CE data files include an inventory of vehicles owned, we do not
use these data to calculate service flows from vehicles for several reasons. First, we do
not observe the year the car was manufactured, only whether it was manufactured before
or after 1967. Second, we do not observe the model for vehicles manufactured during or
before 1967, and for those manufactured after 1967 we only observe a broadly defined
model group: subcompact domestic, compact domestic, etc. Thus, rather than using the
vehicle inventory data, we impute service flows for owned automobiles using data on
reported spending on new and used automobile purchases during the survey year and the
reported number of automobiles owned during the year. Specifically, for a sample with

24
  76 percent of the vehicles without a reported purchase price can be matched to at least one vehicle in the
estimation sample with the same make, model, and year, and 69 percent of the remaining 24 percent do not
have a match because they are not a car, truck, or van so make and model are not observed. Starting in
2006, vehicles can be matched on make, but not model, because the CE stopped providing information on
vehicle model after 2005. For those vehicles without a reported purchase price that do not have the same
make, model, and year as at least one vehicle in the estimation sample, but do have the same make and year
as a vehicle in the estimation sample, a separate regression is estimated that includes make-year fixed
effects instead of make-model-year fixed effects.
25
     This adjustment is made because   exp(xi ˆ) will tend to underestimate yi.
26
  The distribution of service flows does not differ noticeably when alternative specifications for
depreciation are estimated. For example, specifications that allow the depreciation rate to vary by age of
the vehicle (by including a cubic in vehicle age in the regression) yield similar results.


                                                        34
positive spending on automobiles, we regress annual spending for new and used
automobiles on a quadratic in total (non-automobile) spending and observable
characteristics of the family including family income, family size, and the age, sex, and
education of the family head. Parameter estimates from these regressions are used to
predict spending on new and used car purchases for all families that own automobiles.
We calculate the service flow from automobiles as the product of predicted automobile
spending, the number of owned automobiles and a depreciation rate. This approach will
understate total automobile flows for some families because the number of automobiles is
topcoded at 2. This approach will overstate vehicle flows for families that dispose of an
automobile during the survey year if this automobile is included in the total count of
automobiles owned. This approach will also overstate vehicle flows for families that
have owned their vehicles for an extended time, because we are predicting the value
based on recent automobile purchases. Note that unlike our approach for 1985 and 2003-
2016, we calculate service flows only for automobiles, not for other vehicles such as
trucks, motorcycles, campers, etc., because we do not have reliable information on the
total number of each of these types of vehicles owned.

We validate our procedure for predicting the current market value of vehicles for those
observations where we do not have a purchase price by comparing the predicted values to
published values in National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA) guides. For a
given year of the CE we take a random sample of 100 vehicles for which a purchase price
was not observed. We then find the average retail price of the vehicle reported in the
NADA Official Used Car Guide, using observable vehicle characteristics including make,
model, year, number of cylinders, and number of doors. In cases where a unique match is
not found in the NADA guide (for example, there might be multiple sub-models listed in
the NADA guide), we use the midpoint of the range of prices for the vehicles that match
the description of the vehicle from the CE. For the sample of vehicles randomly drawn
from the 2000 CE, the correlation between our imputed price and the 2000 NADA price
was 0.88. Similarly, for a sample of 100 cars with a reported purchase price, the
correlation between the reported price and the NADA price was 0.91.

A.2.   Estimating a Rental Equivalent for Families Living in Government or
       Subsidized Housing

We impute a rental equivalent for families in the CE living in government or subsidized
housing using reported information on their living unit including the number of rooms,
bedrooms and bathrooms, and the presence of appliances such as a microwave, disposal,
refrigerator, washer, and dryer. Specifically, for renters who are not in public or
subsidized housing we estimate quantile regressions for log rent using the CE housing
characteristics mentioned above as well as a number of geographic identifiers including
state, region, urbanicity, and SMSA status, as well as interactions of a nonlinear time
trend with appliances (to account for changes over time in their price and quality). We
then use the estimated coefficients to predict the 40th percentile of rent for the sample of
families that do not report full rent because they reside in public or subsidized housing.
We use the 40th percentile because public housing tends to be of lower quality than
private housing in dimensions we do not directly observe. Evidence from the PSID
indicates that the average reported rental equivalent of public or subsidized housing is


                                             35
just under the predicted 40th percentile for these units using parameters estimated from
those outside public or subsidized housing.

A.3.       Comparability over Time

We make two minor adjustments to the measure of total expenditures provided in the CE
to maintain a comparable definition of expenditures across our sample period. First, we
add in insurance payments and retirement contributions for the 1972-1973 surveys
because these categories were not treated as expenditures in these years. This adjustment
does not affect consumption measures because these categories are excluded from
consumption. Second, the wording for the question regarding spending on food at home
in surveys conducted between 1982 and 1987 differed from other years. Several studies
have noted that this wording change resulted in a decrease in reported spending on food
at home (Battistin 2003; Browning et al. 2003). To correct for the effect of this change in
the questionnaire, for the year 1985 we multiply spending on food at home by an
adjustment factor which is equal to the ratio of average spending on food at home from
1988 through 1990 to average spending on food at home from 1984 through 1987. These
adjustment factors, which we estimate separately for different family types, range from
1.12 to 1.30. Starting with the second quarter of 2007, the question on food away from
home changed from a query about usual monthly spending to usual weekly spending.
This change resulted in a noticeable increase in reported food away spending. We
estimate the effect of the question change by regressing food away spending on a new
question indicator, controlling for interview month and reference month (respondents
report spending for the previous three months) for survey years 2005 through 2007.
Based on these estimates we adjust spending on food away down by 55 percent for the
most recent years. This adjustment does not affect our well-measured consumption
measure because this measure excludes food away. Reported food away spending is a
small fraction of total spending, accounting for about 5 percent of total spending for all
consumer units in 2015.27

The values for certain spending components are top coded in the public use files, and the
threshold values for the top code changes over time. For example, the top code threshold
for the monthly rental equivalent value of an owned home increased from $1,000 in 1988
to $1,500 in 1989. Over longer periods the real values of the top code thresholds have
typically risen. For example, the value of the rental equivalent threshold in 2014 ($3,200)
is 17% greater in real terms than the value of this threshold in 1980 ($1,000).

A.4.       Imputing missing values in the 1972-1973 CE

For the 1972-1973 CE, we impute values for some of the key variables in our analysis in
cases where these values are missing or there is incomplete information. In the 1972-
1973 survey, we do not observe a continuous measure of hours worked for each adult.
Rather, we observe whether the adult works and whether he or she works full-time or
part-time. From this information, we impute a continuous measure of usual hours
worked for adults that work. Using data from the 1980 CE, we regress usual hours

27
     https://www.bls.gov/cex/tables.htm#avgexp.


                                                  36
worked per week on an indicator for whether the person works full-time and controls for
age and education for a sample of adults who work. We then use the estimates from this
regression to predict usual hours worked for adult workers in the 1972-1973 survey using
their reported information on full-time status, age, and education.

Education and marital status are also missing for adults who are neither the head of the
family nor the spouse of the head in the 1972-1973 CE (about 15 percent of adults for
these years). For these adults with missing education and marital status we assign the
mean value of these variables from the 1980 CE. Specifically, we calculate mean
education and marital status for individuals that are neither a head or spouse in the 1980
CE by relationship to the head and by education of the head. We then assign the
appropriate mean to adults in the 1972-1973 CE who have missing values for these
variables.

B. A Bias-Corrected CPI

Bias in the most frequently used price index, the CPI-U, is well-documented (Boskin et
al. 1996; Berndt 2006; Gordon 2006; Johnson, Reed, and Stewart 2006). This bias can be
very substantial for changes over long time periods. The BLS has implemented several
methodological improvements in calculating the CPI-U over the past 25 years. Although
the BLS does not update the CPI-U retroactively, it does provide a consistent research
series (CPI-U-RS) that incorporates many of the changes.28 However, a consensus view
among economists is that the CPI-U-RS does not make sufficient adjustment for the
biases in the CPI-U. Between 1972 and 2005 the CPI-U grew on average between 0.4
and 0.5 percentage points per year faster than the CPI-U-RS, with essentially all of this
difference occurring before 1998. A reasonable estimate of the bias in the CPI-U over
this period is much larger–about 1.3 percentage points per year between 1978 and 1995.

Given that the CPI-U-RS does not fully correct for bias in reported price changes, the
results for consumption we report are indexed using an adjusted CPI-U-RS that subtracts
0.8 percentage points from the growth in the CPI-U-RS index each year. We base this
adjustment on Berndt (2006) and Gordon (2006) who argue that even with recent
alterations to the CPI-U methodology that make it and the CPI-U-RS essentially the same
for recent years, a bias of 0.8 percentage points per year remains. Because the CPI-U-RS
provides a consistent series only back until 1978, we subtract the full 1.1 percentage
points from changes in CPI-U inflation for earlier years. See Meyer and Sullivan (2012)
for more details.




28
  The CPI-U-RS does not incorporate all of the methodological improvements to the CPI-U. See Stewart
and Reed (1999) for more details.


                                                 37
Table 1: Mean Demographic Characteristics, Time Use and Consumer Expenditure Surveys, 1975‐2016
                                                   1975                               1985                        2003                         2016
                                          Time Use         CE                Time Use         CE         Time Use         CE          Time Use         CE
                                              (1)          (2)                   (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)             (7)          (8)
Age 18‐24                                   0.164        0.194                 0.179        0.160          0.127        0.127           0.116        0.111
                                           (0.010)      (0.002)               (0.008)      (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.001)         (0.003)      (0.001)
Age 25‐44                                   0.367        0.357                 0.414        0.417          0.390        0.390           0.344        0.345
                                           (0.013)      (0.002)               (0.010)      (0.002)        (0.004)      (0.002)         (0.005)      (0.002)
Age 45‐54                                   0.145        0.163                 0.127        0.129          0.189        0.191           0.172        0.176
                                           (0.009)      (0.002)               (0.007)      (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.002)         (0.004)      (0.002)
Age 55‐64                                   0.140        0.136                 0.133        0.131          0.130        0.131           0.170        0.171
                                           (0.009)      (0.002)               (0.007)      (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.001)         (0.004)      (0.002)
Age 65+                                     0.184        0.149                 0.146        0.162          0.164        0.161           0.198        0.198
                                           (0.010)      (0.002)               (0.007)      (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.002)         (0.004)      (0.002)
Male                                        0.486        0.471                 0.462        0.477          0.475        0.475           0.478        0.476
                                           (0.013)      (0.003)               (0.010)      (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.002)         (0.005)      (0.002)
Less than HS                                0.395        0.386                 0.267        0.264          0.152        0.168           0.108        0.124
                                           (0.013)      (0.002)               (0.009)      (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.002)         (0.003)      (0.002)
HS Degree                                   0.364        0.340                 0.395        0.328          0.325        0.295           0.292        0.273
                                           (0.013)      (0.002)               (0.010)      (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.002)         (0.005)      (0.002)
Some College                                0.129        0.153                 0.178        0.217          0.263        0.293           0.262        0.294
                                           (0.009)      (0.001)               (0.008)      (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.002)         (0.004)      (0.002)
College Grad                                0.113        0.121                 0.160        0.192          0.259        0.244           0.338        0.308
                                           (0.008)      (0.001)               (0.007)      (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.002)         (0.005)      (0.002)
Married                                     0.630        0.692                 0.635        0.617          0.583        0.579           0.549        0.552
                                           (0.013)      (0.002)               (0.010)      (0.002)        (0.004)      (0.002)         (0.005)      (0.002)
Number of children under 18                 0.999        1.145                 0.643        0.774          0.738        0.740           0.660        0.686
                                           (0.037)      (0.008)               (0.019)      (0.006)        (0.008)      (0.005)         (0.011)      (0.005)
Number of adults in family                  1.958        2.351                 2.244        2.289          2.211        2.217           2.224        2.254
                                           (0.020)      (0.005)               (0.019)      (0.005)        (0.007)      (0.004)         (0.010)      (0.005)
Number of children under 5                  0.128        0.193                 0.144        0.170          0.204        0.157           0.182        0.137
                                           (0.011)      (0.002)               (0.009)      (0.002)        (0.004)      (0.001)         (0.005)      (0.002)
Usual hours worked per week when working 23.497         25.077                25.358       27.077         26.490       27.562          25.577       26.780
                                           (0.576)      (0.099)               (0.427)      (0.102)        (0.160)      (0.083)         (0.224)      (0.095)
Unconditional usual hours worked per week               20.755                             23.812                      24.916                       24.336
                                                        (0.096)                            (0.103)                     (0.084)                      (0.097)
Hours worked on interview day*7            25.482                             27.377                      26.724                       26.205
                                           (0.833)                            (0.623)                     (0.238)                      (0.331)
N                                           1,469       38,903                 2,557       39,241         18,724       59,834           9,604       47,250
Notes: The odd numbered columns report data from the 1975‐1976 Time Use in Economics and Social Accounts; the 1985 Americans’ Use of Time; and the 2003 and
2016 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The even numbered columns report data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE). The unit of observation is an
individual and samples include those 18 and older. Results are weighted using survey weights. Weights from the time use survey are adjusted so that each day and
each survey year is represented equally. In the 1970s, the time use data are from 1975 while the CE data are from 1972‐1973. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses.
Table 2: Time Use Activities Ranked by Enjoyment or Affect Measure
                                    1985       2010, 2012‐2013                                            1985        2010, 2012‐2013
Activities (Robinson and                                             Activities (Robinson and Godbey,
                                Enjoyment     Happy      Meaning                                        Enjoyment    Happy      Meaning
Godbey, 1999)                                                        1999)
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)                                             (1)        (2)          (3)
  Sex                                 1         N/A          N/A     Working                                  29         38           28
  Playing sports                      2          12            9     Second job                               32         36           24
  Fishing                             3          13            8     Cooking                                  33         21           28
  Art, Music                          4           1            7     Shopping                                 33         44           47
                                                                                       d
  Bar, lounges                        5           5           17     Working at home                          33
  Playing with kids                   6           2            1     Child care                               36         19           15
                      a
  Hugging and Kissing                 6                              Helping adults                           36         16           16
  Talking/reading to kids             8           3            2     Work commute                             38         31           44
  Church                              9          10            4     Dressing                                 39         N/A         N/A
  Movies                              9           8           30     Classes                                  40         33            3
  Sleeping                            9         N/A          N/A     Pet care                                 40         20           18
  Walking                            12          14           19     Errands                                  41         35           35
  Reading                            12          25           32     Housework                                42         30           23
  Visiting                           14           4           14     Grocery shopping                         43         29           36
                                                                                    e
  Work break                         14          43           26     Home repair                              43
  Meals out                          14          17           27     Homework                                 45         46           12
  Talking with family                17          18           13     Ironing                                  46         40           42
                                                                                  f
  Lunch break                        18          32           39     Paying bills                             46
                                                                               g
  TV                                 19          28           43     Yardwork                                 47
  Reading paper                      19         N/A          N/A     Cleaning house                           48         34           31
                   b
  Meals at home                      19                              Cleaning dishes                          48         37           46
                                                                             h
  Knitting, sewing                   22          11           11     Laundry                                  50
  Recreational trip                  23          22           34     Doctor, dentist                          51         39           25
  Hobbies                            24           6           20     Child health                             51         45           37
  Baby care                          25           9            5     Car repair shop                          53         41           38
  Civic activities                   25          47           45     Job Search                              N/A         42           10
             c
  Exercising                         25                              Travel related to child care            N/A         15           22
  Gardening                          28          24           21     Relaxing, thinking, doing nothing       N/A         26           33
  Homework help                      29          23            6     Computer                                N/A         27           40
  Bathing                            29         N/A          N/A     Playing games                           N/A          7           41
Notes: Rankings in column 1 are based on results in Robinson and Godbey (1999) and use their categories. Rankings in columns 2 and 3 use
comparable ATUS categories (with exceptions noted below) and are based on a regression of the affect measure on activity indicators and
individual fixed effects using the ATUS Well‐Being (WB) Module from 2010, 2012‐2013. The sample is restricted to individuals aged 18 or
older. Estimates are weighted using Well‐Being Module adjusted annual activity weights. a included in ATUS category "Visit", b included in
ATUS category "Meals out", c included in ATUS category "Playing sports", d included in ATUS category "Work", e included in ATUS category
"Housework", f included in ATUS category "Errands", g included in ATUS category "Cleaning house", h included in ATUS category "Ironing".
Table 3: Variance Decomposition using Panel Data on Leisure in a Day
                                 Variance of     Variance of                                        Explained Transitory
                                                               Variance     Variance   Variance
       Leisure Measure          Leisure in Day    Predicted                                           Share        Share
                                                                 of εi        of uit   of εi + uit
                                      *7            Leisure                                        (2)/[(2)+(3)]  (4)/(1)
                                      (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)          (7)
Panel A. Sample includes Individual present in the first two waves
  Leisure less ESP                  535.4            104.6       63.9        369.2       433.1         0.62         0.69
  Leisure                           748.0            247.8       52.8        450.9       503.7         0.82         0.60
  Leisure plus Child Care           732.7            233.4       38.8        463.2       502.0         0.86         0.63
  Number of Individuals                                                    1,038
  Number of Observations                                                   2,076
Panel B. Sample includes Individuals present in all four waves
  Leisure less ESP                  540.1            103.7       53.2        385.1       438.3         0.66         0.71
  Leisure                           768.3            244.0       52.6        477.0       529.7         0.82         0.62
  Leisure plus Child Care           762.4            235.7       48.9        481.2       530.1         0.83         0.63
  Number of Individuals                                                     774
  Number of Observations                                                   3,096
Notes: Data are from the 1975‐1975 Time Use Survey. Estimates are from a random‐effects version of equation (2') where
we include the demographic characteristics listed in Table 4, usual hours worked, and indicators for day of week and survey
wave.
Table 4: OLS Estimates from Regressions of Leisure Hours in a Day*7 on Demographic Characteristics, Time Use Surveys, 1975‐2016
Measure of Work Hours                                        None                                Usual hours worked per week
Interaction with                           1975        1985        2003       2016         1975         1985       2003       2016
                                            (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)
Age 25‐44                                 ‐3.122      ‐4.720      ‐4.814     ‐5.604        0.187        0.345     ‐0.358     ‐0.776
                                         (2.485)     (2.179)     (1.183)    (1.904)      (2.413)      (2.109)    (1.078)    (1.849)
Age 45‐54                                 ‐3.799      ‐5.458      ‐4.954     ‐4.266       ‐1.435       ‐0.882     ‐1.271     ‐0.072
                                         (2.739)     (2.747)     (1.230)    (2.071)      (2.633)      (2.635)    (1.119)    (1.966)
Age 55‐64                                  2.810       3.242       1.680      0.816       2.032         1.372      0.346      1.065
                                         (2.738)     (2.558)     (1.309)    (2.080)      (2.626)      (2.395)    (1.172)    (1.955)
Age 65+                                  20.309      14.679      16.554     14.401       10.780         6.071      5.602      5.087
                                         (3.115)     (2.806)     (1.240)    (2.007)      (2.991)      (2.528)    (1.182)    (1.946)
Male                                       0.218       1.314       1.923      2.663       8.336         6.990      7.032      7.952
                                         (1.490)     (1.328)     (0.518)    (0.833)     (1.535)       (1.317)    (0.498)    (0.784)
Less than HS                               0.634      ‐0.099       5.801      4.342       ‐1.093       ‐2.157      2.362      1.281
                                         (1.963)     (1.890)     (0.836)    (1.382)      (1.878)      (1.793)    (0.751)    (1.235)
Some College                               0.588      ‐1.036      ‐2.566     ‐2.529       ‐1.200       ‐1.477     ‐2.266     ‐1.374
                                         (2.253)     (2.030)     (0.687)    (1.109)      (2.135)      (1.820)    (0.628)    (1.028)
College Grad                              ‐4.361      ‐1.408      ‐5.479     ‐4.763       ‐1.978       ‐1.025     ‐3.203     ‐1.249
                                         (2.077)     (1.658)     (0.635)    (0.947)     (1.965)       (1.554)    (0.580)    (0.879)
Married                                   ‐3.630      ‐3.545      ‐3.292     ‐4.570      ‐3.550        ‐2.720     ‐2.594     ‐3.437
                                         (1.809)     (1.605)     (0.617)    (0.985)     (1.708)       (1.506)    (0.551)    (0.899)
Number of children under 18               ‐1.756      0.112       ‐2.339     ‐2.661      ‐1.979        ‐0.654     ‐2.673     ‐2.911
                                         (0.618)     (0.791)     (0.296)    (0.515)     (0.575)       (0.744)    (0.274)    (0.440)
Number of adults in family                1.064       1.482       ‐0.177    ‐1.044         0.098        1.097     ‐0.429     ‐1.118
                                         (1.084)     (0.783)     (0.385)    (0.548)      (1.109)      (0.777)    (0.350)    (0.505)
Number of children under 5                 1.640      ‐3.165      ‐0.219     ‐0.642        0.645       ‐3.451     ‐1.232     ‐1.171
                                         (1.572)     (1.612)     (0.537)    (0.846)      (1.541)      (1.615)    (0.494)    (0.772)
Usual hours worked per week                                                               ‐0.482       ‐0.499     ‐0.537     ‐0.543
                                                                                         (0.039)      (0.034)    (0.014)    (0.021)
N                                                                          169,137                                         169,137
R‐squared                                                                     0.227                                           0.350
Notes: Estimates are from regressions of hours spent in leisure activities per week on demographic characteristics for three
different specifications: one that does not include work hours, one that includes the hours worked on the interview day, and one
that includes the usual hours worked per week. Each column reports coefficients on the interactions of year with observable
characteristics. In addition to the covariates listed above, each regression includes interview month, year, day of week, and the
interaction between year and day of week. Each of the three specifications is estimated for years 1975, 1985, and 2003‐2016, but
we report the interaction effects for a subset of these years above. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Table 5: Distribution of Actual Leisure in a Day*7 and Predicted Leisure per Week, Time Use and CE Survey
                                 1972‐1973 / 1975                     1985                         2003                         2016
Data Source                     Time Use           CE          Time Use           CE         Time Use          CE         Time Use          CE
                           Actual                         Actual                         Actual                      Actual
                          Leisure in  Predicted Leisure  Leisure in  Predicted Leisure Leisure in Predicted Leisure Leisure in Predicted Leisure
Measure of Leisure         Day *7                         Day *7                        Day *7                       Day *7
Mean                        111.7     111.7      111.4     112.6      112.6     111.9    114.6     114.6     113.9    115.0     115.0     114.0
Percentiles
   10th Percentile           78.8       92.2      97.8      79.9       94.8      99.1     78.8      93.9      97.9     79.3      93.7      97.3
   20th Percentile           87.5       96.1     100.5      88.7       98.6     101.8     88.1      98.5     101.7     88.7      98.9     101.7
   30th Percentile           93.9      100.6     102.8      95.0      102.7     103.9     96.1     103.0     104.3     96.3     104.0     104.6
   40th Percentile          100.9      105.3     105.4     102.1      107.7     106.5    103.3     108.0     107.3    103.3     108.8     107.6
   50th Percentile          108.5      110.7     108.1     108.5      112.8     108.9    111.4     114.1     110.8    111.9     114.6     111.4
   60th Percentile          116.3      114.7     111.4     118.8      116.5     112.4    121.9     119.5     114.7    122.5     119.6     115.6
   70th Percentile          127.8      121.0     117.2     128.1      120.1     119.0    132.9     124.5     122.3    133.6     124.6     122.6
   80th Percentile          138.6      126.4     122.6     139.6      124.4     124.4    143.5     129.2     129.0    144.7     129.8     129.3
   90th Percentile          150.5      132.8     131.3     150.3      132.3     129.2    156.7     136.8     134.9    156.9     137.7     135.1
Ratios
   90/10 Ratio               1.91       1.44      1.34      1.88       1.40      1.30     1.99      1.46      1.38     1.98      1.47      1.39
   90/50 Ratio               1.39       1.20      1.21      1.38       1.17      1.19     1.41      1.20      1.22     1.40      1.20      1.21
   50/10 Ratio               1.38       1.20      1.11      1.36       1.19      1.10     1.41      1.22      1.13     1.41      1.22      1.14
Notes: Observations are at the individual level and are weighted using fixed demographic weights. Leisure is predicted using usual hours and is measured in
hours per week. In the 1970s, the time use data are from 1975 while the CE data are from 1972‐1973.
Table 6: Inequality in Consumption, Predicted Leisure, and Non‐Market Time, CE, 1972‐
2016
                         1972‐73, 1975        1985               2003            2016
                               (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
                                                    Consumption
90/10 Ratio                   3.30             3.25              3.52             3.35
90/50 Ratio                   1.72             1.70              1.85             1.81
50/10 Ratio                   1.92             1.91              1.90             1.85
Variance of Log               0.27             0.27              0.28             0.26
                                                  Predicted Leisure
90/10 Ratio                   1.30             1.27              1.32             1.33
90‐10 Difference             29.81            27.28             32.53            33.43
90/50 Ratio                   1.18             1.16              1.19             1.20
90‐50 Difference             20.23            17.73             21.48            21.86
50/10 Ratio                   1.10             1.09              1.11             1.12
50‐10 Difference              9.58             9.55             11.05            11.57
Variance of Log               0.01             0.01              0.01             0.01
                                             Predicted Leisure less ESP
90/10 Ratio                   1.65             1.61              1.84             1.93
90‐10 Difference             18.65            18.57             26.02            27.03
90/50 Ratio                   1.32             1.32              1.46             1.48
90‐50 Difference             11.56            11.91             17.87            18.31
50/10 Ratio                   1.25             1.22              1.26             1.30
50‐10 Difference              7.09             6.66              8.14             8.72
Variance of Log               0.03             0.03              0.05             0.06
                                         Predicted Leisure plus Child Care
90/10 Ratio                   1.29             1.25              1.28             1.29
90‐10 Difference             29.17            25.55             29.59            30.36
90/50 Ratio                   1.17             1.15              1.17             1.18
90‐50 Difference             19.09            16.54             19.86            20.46
50/10 Ratio                   1.10             1.09              1.09             1.10
50‐10 Difference             10.08             9.02              9.73             9.90
Variance of Log               0.01             0.01              0.01             0.01
                                                 Non‐Market Time
90/10 Ratio                   1.34             1.34              1.35             1.35
90‐10 Difference             42.63            42.35             43.21            43.88
90/50 Ratio                   1.15             1.17              1.17             1.17
90‐50 Difference             21.40            24.39             24.93            24.93
50/10 Ratio                   1.17             1.14              1.15             1.15
50‐10 Difference             21.23            17.95             18.28            18.95
Variance of Log               0.01             0.01              0.01             0.01
Note: Leisure is predicted using usual hours. ESP: eating, sleeping, and personal care.
Observations are at the family level and are person weighted. Family level leisure and non‐
market time are per adult and consumption is adjusted for family size using the NAS‐
recommended equivalent scale. Annual consumption measures are expressed using the
biased corrected CPI‐U‐RS as explained in the data appendix.
Table 7: Mean Predicted Leisure by Decile of Consumption, CE, 1972‐2016
                                     Predicted Leisure                    Percentage Change
                                                                           2016/     2016/
                1972‐73      1985        2003        2010        2016
                                                                          1972‐73     2003
Consumption Decile
 First             113.3     113.6       115.3      118.0        114.7       1.19% ‐0.51%
                  (1.20)     (1.19)      (0.54)     (0.67)       (0.89)
 Second            111.8     113.0       114.2      116.1        113.9       1.89% ‐0.24%
                  (1.08)     (0.98)      (0.50)     (0.60)       (0.68)
 Third             111.8     112.4       114.5      115.6        113.5       1.55% ‐0.82%
                  (1.00)     (0.86)      (0.46)     (0.56)       (0.67)
 Fourth            111.3     112.1       114.1      114.7        113.4       1.91% ‐0.60%
                  (0.90)     (0.78)      (0.47)     (0.54)       (0.61)
 Fifth             111.1     111.9       113.6      114.3        113.1       1.81% ‐0.44%
                  (0.93)     (0.75)      (0.42)     (0.54)       (0.58)
 Sixth             111.6     111.6       113.4      114.3        112.9       1.22% ‐0.40%
                  (0.91)     (0.76)      (0.41)     (0.53)       (0.56)
 Seventh           110.8     111.8       113.1      113.9        113.2       2.15%  0.10%
                  (0.96)     (0.85)      (0.42)     (0.54)       (0.53)
 Eighth            110.8     111.2       112.4      113.8        113.9       2.75%  1.27%
                  (0.91)     (0.80)      (0.38)     (0.51)       (0.53)
 Ninth             111.4     110.8       112.6      113.9        113.5       1.91%  0.82%
                  (0.98)     (0.85)      (0.39)     (0.52)       (0.53)
 Tenth             112.8     111.4       113.2      113.4        114.9       1.89%  1.59%
                  (1.07)     (0.90)      (0.42)     (0.54)       (0.50)
N                 19,497    20,783       32,319     28,406      25,420
Notes: We report mean family leisure per adult. Leisure is predicted using usual hours.
Observations are person weighted. Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.
Table 8: Bivariate Relationship between Consumption and Predicted Leisure or Non‐Market Time,
CE, 1972‐2016
                                        1972‐73        1985        2003         2010        2016
Panel A. Full Sample
   Predicted Leisure
       Correlation                         0.007      ‐0.060      ‐0.049       ‐0.083       0.019
                                          (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.02)
       Slope                              ‐2.069      ‐2.872      ‐2.606       ‐3.773       0.428
                                          (1.13)      (1.27)      (0.45)       (0.56)      (0.59)
   Non‐market Time
       Correlation                        ‐0.161      ‐0.188      ‐0.129       ‐0.179      ‐0.127
                                          (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)
       Slope                             ‐10.641     ‐13.830      ‐9.621      ‐11.965      ‐8.222
                                          (0.43)      (0.47)      (0.38)       (0.37)      (0.45)
N                                         19,497      20,783     32,319        28,406      25,420
Panel B. Single Parent
   Predicted Leisure
       Correlation                        ‐0.180      ‐0.270      ‐0.167       ‐0.305      ‐0.092
                                          (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.04)       (0.03)      (0.04)
       Slope                              ‐5.480      ‐9.440      ‐7.044      ‐11.005      ‐4.704
                                          (1.94)      (1.89)      (0.84)       (0.98)      (1.02)
   Non‐market Time
       Correlation                        ‐0.378      ‐0.416      ‐0.249       ‐0.351      ‐0.272
                                          (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.03)
       Slope                             ‐23.952     ‐28.410     ‐19.023      ‐23.648     ‐19.182
                                          (1.92)      (1.65)      (1.21)       (1.27)      (1.40)
Panel C. Married Parent
   Predicted Leisure
       Correlation                         0.030      ‐0.093      ‐0.202       ‐0.216      ‐0.109
                                          (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.04)
       Slope                               0.599      ‐2.229      ‐5.412       ‐7.159      ‐3.407
                                          (1.45)      (1.44)      (0.55)       (0.71)      (0.83)
   Non‐market Time
       Correlation                        ‐0.108      ‐0.225      ‐0.209       ‐0.254      ‐0.250
                                          (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.02)
       Slope                              ‐5.192     ‐11.587      ‐9.792      ‐13.958     ‐12.321
                                          (0.67)      (0.86)      (0.73)       (0.78)      (0.91)
Panel D. Single Individuals
   Predicted Leisure
       Correlation                        ‐0.146      ‐0.176      ‐0.274       ‐0.317      ‐0.260
                                          (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.03)
       Slope                              ‐5.271      ‐6.016     ‐10.480      ‐12.253     ‐10.511
                                          (1.27)      (1.50)      (0.67)       (0.85)      (0.86)
   Non‐market Time
       Correlation                        ‐0.253      ‐0.304      ‐0.292       ‐0.337      ‐0.313
                                          (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.02)
       Slope                             ‐16.455     ‐22.586     ‐21.421      ‐23.164     ‐21.690
                                          (1.04)      (0.68)      (0.62)       (0.64)      (0.77)
Panel E. Married without Children
   Predicted Leisure
       Correlation                        ‐0.085      ‐0.177      ‐0.237       ‐0.284      ‐0.180
                                          (0.06)      (0.04)      (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.03)
       Slope                              ‐3.684      ‐5.273      ‐7.650       ‐9.586      ‐7.028
                                          (1.06)      (1.11)      (0.61)       (0.76)      (0.74)
   Non‐market Time
       Correlation                        ‐0.158      ‐0.185      ‐0.176       ‐0.249      ‐0.202
                                          (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.03)
       Slope                             ‐10.900     ‐11.084      ‐9.604      ‐14.188     ‐14.088
                                          (0.85)      (1.06)      (1.03)       (0.90)      (1.05)
Panel F. Head 65 and Over
   Predicted Leisure
       Correlation                        ‐0.022      ‐0.033      ‐0.047       ‐0.020      ‐0.014
                                          (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.03)
       Slope                              ‐2.366      ‐1.149      ‐2.677       ‐1.816      ‐1.669
                                          (0.99)      (1.28)      (0.53)       (0.65)      (0.64)
   Non‐market Time
       Correlation                        ‐0.060      ‐0.084      ‐0.033       ‐0.053      ‐0.036
                                          (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.02)      (0.02)
       Slope                              ‐3.939      ‐3.277      ‐2.680       ‐3.044      ‐2.633
                                          (0.56)      (0.65)      (0.57)       (0.56)      (0.62)
Note: This table reports correlation coefficients between predicted leisure or non‐market time and
consumption percentile, and the slope coefficient from the bivariate regression of predicted leisure
or non‐market time on consumption percentile. Consumption percentiles are defined over the entire
sample in both the full sample and subsample analyses. Observations are at the family level and are
person weighted. Family level leisure and non‐market time are per adult and consumption is
adjusted for family size using the NAS‐recommended equivalent scale. Bootstrapped standard errors
are in parentheses.
Table 9: Bivariate Relationship between Consumption and Leisure less ESP or Leisure
plus Child Care, CE, 1972‐2016
                            1972‐73       1985      2003         2010         2016
Panel A. Leisure less ESP
   Predicted Leisure
       Correlation           ‐0.027     ‐0.060     0.000        ‐0.045        0.080
                             (0.05)      (0.05)    (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.02)
       Slope                 ‐2.043     ‐2.432     ‐0.419       ‐1.206        2.658
                             (0.97)      (1.23)    (0.41)       (0.53)       (0.55)
Panel B. Leisure plus Child Care
   Predicted Leisure
       Correlation           ‐0.044     ‐0.117     ‐0.105       ‐0.135       ‐0.034
                             (0.04)      (0.04)    (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.02)
       Slope                 ‐4.077     ‐4.650     ‐5.029       ‐6.064       ‐1.955
                             (1.17)      (1.28)    (0.45)       (0.54)       (0.63)

N                           19,497     20,783       32,319      28,406       25,420
Note: This table reports correlation coefficients between predicted leisure or non‐
market time and consumption percentile, and the slope coefficient from the bivariate
regression of predicted leisure or non‐market time on consumption percentile.
Consumption percentiles are defined over the entire sample in both the full sample
and subsample analyses. Observations are at the family level and are person weighted.
Family level leisure and non‐market time are per adult and consumption is adjusted for
family size using the NAS‐recommended equivalent scale. The number of observations
(N) applies to both panels.
Table 10: Bivariate Relationship between Consumption and Predicted Leisure or Non‐
                               1972‐73        1985       2003         2010         2016
Panel A. Head Age<=48
    Predicted Leisure
       Correlation              ‐0.052       ‐0.169     ‐0.196       ‐0.281       ‐0.130
                                (0.06)       (0.05)     (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.03)
       Slope                    ‐1.019       ‐5.334     ‐6.956      ‐10.061       ‐4.915
                                (1.43)       (1.37)     (0.55)       (0.74)       (0.77)
    Non‐market Time
       Correlation              ‐0.316       ‐0.348     ‐0.294       ‐0.364       ‐0.324
                                (0.02)       (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.02)
       Slope                   ‐13.303      ‐21.246    ‐17.578      ‐21.893      ‐18.513
                                (0.55)       (0.51)     (0.49)       (0.45)       (0.60)
N                               9,831        11,825     16,755       13,191       14,724
Panel B. Head Age >48
    Predicted Leisure
       Correlation              ‐0.091       ‐0.133     ‐0.103       ‐0.123       ‐0.051
                                (0.04)       (0.04)     (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)
       Slope                    ‐7.510       ‐6.234     ‐7.472       ‐7.519       ‐4.436
                                (1.16)       (1.50)     (0.54)       (0.66)       (0.66)
    Non‐market Time
       Correlation              ‐0.155       ‐0.180     ‐0.112       ‐0.164       ‐0.127
                                (0.03)       (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)
       Slope                   ‐12.016      ‐12.040    ‐10.572      ‐12.397       ‐9.867
                                (0.55)       (0.74)     (0.59)       (0.56)       (0.60)
N                               9,666        8,958      15,564       15,215       10,696
Note: This table reports correlation coefficients between predicted leisure or non‐market
time and consumption percentile, and the slope coefficient from the bivariate regression
of predicted leisure or non‐market time on consumption percentile. Consumption
percentiles are defined over the entire sample in both the full sample and subsample
analyses. Observations are at the family level and are person weighted. Family level
leisure and non‐market time are per adult and consumption is adjusted for family size
using the NAS‐recommended equivalent scale.
Table 11: Bivariate Relationship between Income and Predicted Leisure or Non‐Market Time, TU,
2003‐2016
                                                   2003             2010              2016
Panel A. Full Sample
    Predicted Leisure
        Correlation                               ‐0.196           ‐0.201            ‐0.142
                                                  (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.02)
        Slope                                    ‐13.673          ‐16.345           ‐12.886
                                                  (0.67)           (0.87)            (0.94)
    Non‐market Time
        Correlation                               ‐0.239           ‐0.229            ‐0.211
                                                  (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.02)
        Slope                                    ‐21.729          ‐23.968           ‐22.506
                                                  (0.73)           (0.94)            (1.01)
N                                                 16,506           11,411             9,604
Panel B. Single Parent
    Predicted Leisure
        Correlation                               ‐0.111           ‐0.069             0.064
                                                  (0.03)           (0.03)            (0.05)
        Slope                                     ‐9.615          ‐10.332            ‐5.583
                                                  (1.24)           (1.66)            (1.92)
    Non‐market Time
        Correlation                               ‐0.179           ‐0.119            ‐0.053
                                                  (0.03)           (0.04)            (0.05)
        Slope                                    ‐20.737          ‐20.652           ‐17.464
                                                  (1.69)           (2.23)            (2.53)
Panel C. Married Parent
    Predicted Leisure
        Correlation                               ‐0.189           ‐0.211            ‐0.120
                                                  (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)
        Slope                                     ‐9.935          ‐11.203            ‐7.094
                                                  (0.97)           (1.11)            (1.21)
    Non‐market Time
        Correlation                               ‐0.189           ‐0.213            ‐0.176
                                                  (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)
        Slope                                    ‐16.949          ‐18.417           ‐16.400
                                                  (1.30)           (1.48)            (1.73)
Panel D. Single Individuals
    Predicted Leisure
        Correlation                               ‐0.292           ‐0.253            ‐0.196
                                                  (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)
        Slope                                    ‐16.967          ‐20.007           ‐18.351
                                                  (0.89)           (1.18)            (1.27)
    Non‐market Time
        Correlation                               ‐0.313           ‐0.283            ‐0.210
                                                  (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)
        Slope                                    ‐25.915          ‐31.392           ‐30.261
                                                  (1.16)           (1.38)            (1.50)
Panel E. Married without Children
    Predicted Leisure
        Correlation                               ‐0.262           ‐0.214            ‐0.241
                                                  (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)
        Slope                                    ‐13.178          ‐14.520           ‐14.433
                                                  (1.20)           (1.70)            (1.62)
    Non‐market Time
        Correlation                               ‐0.236           ‐0.194            ‐0.270
                                                  (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)
        Slope                                    ‐19.226          ‐19.887           ‐25.085
                                                  (1.56)           (2.32)            (2.28)
Panel F. Head 65 and Over
    Predicted Leisure
        Correlation                               ‐0.106           ‐0.172            ‐0.151
                                                  (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)
        Slope                                     ‐5.908           ‐7.892            ‐5.988
                                                  (0.90)           (1.24)            (1.19)
    Non‐market Time
        Correlation                               ‐0.085           ‐0.175            ‐0.182
                                                  (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)
        Slope                                     ‐6.731           ‐9.960           ‐10.720
                                                  (1.11)           (1.56)            (1.41)
Note: This table reports correlation coefficients between predicted leisure or non‐market time
and income percentile, and the slope coefficient from the bivariate regression of predicted
leisure or non‐market time on income percentile. See notes to Table 8 for more details.
Appendix Table1: Description of Time Use Surveys
                                                                                                                                                                    Excluding
                                                                                                                                                                                     Excluding
                                                                                                                                                 Excluding         observations
                                                                                                                              Pre‐restriction                                      observations
      Survey         Period Covered                                Sample Restrictions/Details                                                  observations     with missing key
                                                                                                                               sample size                                        with low‐quality
                                                                                                                                                with age<18        demographic
                                                                                                                                                                                       diaries
                                                                                                                                                                  characteristics

                                       This longitudinal survey consists of five waves. The diaries in the initial wave was
American's Use of                      collected in face‐to‐face interviews whereas the follow‐up surveys were collected
Time: Time Use in       Fall 1975 ‐    in phone interviews. The data collects information from both the main respondent
                                                                                                                                  1,511             1,507              1,488             1,469
  Economic and        Summer 1976      and the spouse if a spouse was present. The AHTUS version of the data contains
 Social Accounts                       diaries only for main respondents. We only use diaries from the initial wave in our
                                       analysis.

                                       This survey collected diaries from three samples, with different data collection
                                       methods: the mail‐back, face‐to‐face interview, and phone interview samples. The
American's Use of
                          1985         original sequence files of the telephone and personal interview samples have               3,339             2,765              2,613             2,557
  Time Project
                                       corrupted and been lost, and the AHTUS data contains the mail‐back household
                                       sample only.

                                       The ATUS sample is selected from a random sample of households that have
 American Time                         completed their final CPS interview. A civilian household member age 15 or older is
                          2003                                                                                                   20,720            19,759             19,018            18,724
  Use Survey                           randomly selected to respond to the survey by telephone. Half of the diaries were
                                       collected on weekend days, and half on week days

                          2004                                                                                                   13,973            13,318             13,134            12,971
                          2005                                                                                                   13,038            12,419             12,108            11,947
                          2006                                                                                                   12,943            12,200             11,828            11,687
                          2007                                                                                                   12,248            11,606             11,302            11,158
                          2008                                                                                                   12,723            12,108             11,698            11,539
                          2009                                                                                                   13,133            12,568             12,088            11,906
                          2010                                                                                                   13,260            12,679             12,148            11,915
                          2011                                                                                                   12,479            11,978             11,549            11,309
                          2012                                                                                                   12,443            11,975             11,534            11,333
                          2013                                                                                                   11,385            10,953             10,566            10,383
                          2014                                                                                                   11,592            11,189             10,801            10,650
                          2015                                                                                                   10,905            10,549             10,152             9,985
                          2016                                                                                                   10,493            10,125              9,727             9,604
    Consumer                            Sample size reported here reflects individuals covered in the survey. Some analysis
   Expenditure          1972‐2016       is performed at the consumer unit level.                                                                     816,736          816,734           816,734
      Survey
Notes: Unless otherwise indicated, all surveys are nationally representative. Before analysis is performed, all samples are restricted to include only those respondents who are at least 18 years of
age. Additionally, respondents with missing values for age, number of children, gender, marital status, education, interview day, usual hours worked in a week, hours worked on interview day, and
number of children under five years of age are excluded.
                                                Figure 1: Mean Predicted Leisure, CE and Time Use Surveys,
                                                                       1975‐2016
                            120
           Hours per week




                            116



                            112                                                                        Time Use (Individual)
                                                                                                       CE (Individual)
                                                                                                       CE (Family)
                            108
                                  1972
                                         1975




                                                         1985




                                                                                                 2003
                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                 2005
                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                 2007
                                                                                                 2008
                                                                                                 2009
                                                                                                 2010
                                                                                                 2011
                                                                                                 2012
                                                                                                 2013
                                                                                                 2014
                                                                                                 2015
                                                                                                 2016
Note: We report mean individual or per adult (family) leisure. Leisure is predicted using usual hours. Estimates are for the years
1972‐1973 (CE), 1975 (Time Use), 1985, and 2003‐2016. We interpolate estimates for the other years. Observations are person
weighted.
                                       Figure 2: Changes in Mean Family Level Consumption and Predicted
                                                             Leisure, CE, 1972‐2016                    15%




                                                                                                               (Leisure and Non‐market time)
                           100%                  Consumption
 Percent Change Since 1972/73




                                                                                                                 Percent Change Since 1975
                                                 Predicted Leisure
                                80%              Predicted Leisure less ESP                              10%
                                                 Predicted Leisure + Child Care
        (Consumption)



                                60%              Non‐market Time
                                                                                                         5%
                                40%

                                20%
                                                                                                         0%
                                 0%
                                       1972




                                                        1985




                                                                                  2003



                                                                                          2010


                                                                                                  2016
                                ‐20%                                                                     ‐5%


Note: Leisure is predicted using usual hours. ESP: eating, sleeping, and personal care. Observations
are at the family level and are person weighted. Leisure and time use estimates are reported for
years when time use data are available to generate estimates for the prediction equation. We
interpolate for missing years. Changes in consumption are adjusted for inflation using the biased
corrected CPI‐U‐RS as explained in the Data Appendix. Family level leisure and non‐market time are
per adult and consumption is adjusted for family size using the NAS‐recommended equivalent scale.
                                                     Figure 3a: Mean Family Level Predicted Leisure
                                        125               by Education of Head, CE, 1972‐2016

                                        120
                       Hours per week




                                        115

                                        110                                               Less than HS
                                                                                          HS Degree
                                        105                                               Some College
                                                                                          College Grad
                                        100
                                              1972              1985                      2003        2010   2016

                                              Figure 3b: Consumption by Education of Head, CE, 1972‐2016

                                   100%
                                                             Less than HS
  Percent Change Since 1972‐1973




                                        80%                  HS Degree
                                                             Some College
                                        60%                  College Grad


                                        40%


                                        20%


                                        0%
                                              1972              1985                      2003        2010   2016

Note: Groups are defined based on the educational attainment of the head of the
consumer unit. Leisure is predicted using usual hours. Observations are at the family
level and are person weighted. Family level leisure is per adult and consumption is
adjusted for family size using the NAS‐recommended equivalent scale. Changes in
consumption are expressed in real terms using the biased corrected CPI‐U‐RS as
explained in the Data Appendix. See notes to Figure 2 for more details.
                                                                Figure 4a: Predicted Mean Family Leisure
                                                                  by Family Type, CE Survey, 1972‐2016
                                                   135

                                                   130

                                                   125
                                  Hours per week




                                                   120

                                                   115

                                                   110                                              Single Parent
                                                                                                    Married Parent
                                                   105                                              Single Individuals
                                                                                                    Married w/o Children
                                                   100                                              Head 65 and Over
                                                         1972            1985                     2003       2010      2016

                                                            Figure 4b: Consumption by Family Type, CE Survey,
                                                                              1972‐2016
                                     100%
 Percent Change Since 1972‐1973




                                             80%                   Single Parent
                                                                   Married Parent
                                                                   Single Individuals
                                             60%                   Married w/o Children
                                                                   Head 65 and Over
                                             40%

                                             20%

                                                   0%
                                                         1972            1985                     2003      2010     2016
Note: Leisure is predicted using usual hours. Observations are at the family level and
are person weighted. Family level leisure is per adult and consumption is adjusted for
family size using the NAS‐recommended equivalent scale. Changes in consumption are
expressed in real terms using the biased corrected CPI‐U‐RS as explained in the Data
Appendix. The five family types are mutually exclusive and exhaustive. See notes to
Figure 2 for more details.
Figure 5




Note: Predicted Leisure is smoothed using LOWESS (locally weighted
scatterplot smoothing) regression of predicted leisure on consumption
percentiles. Observations are at the family level and are person
weighted. Family level leisure is per adult and consumption is adjusted
for family size using the NAS‐recommended equivalent scale.
