NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A PORTRAIT OF U.S. FACTORYLESS GOODS PRODUCERS
Fariha Kamal
Working Paper 25193
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25193

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018

I thank Emek Basker, Teresa Fort, Brent Moulton, John Murphy, and seminar participants at the
Census Bureau Economic Research seminar for valuable comments, and Nikolas Zolas for
generously sharing data on firm ownership of intellectual property. I thank James Boohaker for
outstanding research assistance. Jim Fetzer and William Wisinewski provided timely disclosure
assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Fariha Kamal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

A Portrait of U.S. Factoryless Goods Producers
Fariha Kamal
NBER Working Paper No. 25193
October 2018
JEL No. F2,F23,L23,L6,M11,O32,O51
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the U.S. Census Bureau’s most recent data collection efforts to classify
business entities that engage in an extreme form of production fragmentation called “factoryless”
goods production. “Factoryless” goods-producing entities outsource physical transformation
activities while retaining ownership of the intellectual property and control of sales to customers.
Responses to a special inquiry on the incidence of purchases of contract manufacturing services
in combination with data on production inputs and outputs, intellectual property, and international
trade is used to identify and document characteristics of “factoryless” firms in the U.S. economy.

Fariha Kamal
U.S. Bureau of the Census
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, D.C 20233
fariha.kamal@census.gov

1. Introduction
Goods production is increasingly vertically disintegrated (Johnson and Noguera, 2012). An
extreme form of fragmentation of the goods production process entails outsourcing the processing
and manufacturing activities while retaining ownership of the intellectual property and controlling
sales to customers, giving rise to the so-called “factoryless” goods producers (FGPs). Firms may
choose to outsource the physical transformation process both within and across firm as well as
national borders. Firm organization decisions that give rise to complex, global production chains have
been linked to the simultaneous ascent of China as the world’s factory and the decline in U.S.
manufacturing (Feenstra and Wei, 2010; Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013; Pierce and Schott, 2016).
The fragmented nature of economic activity has reshaped the global production landscape and
subsequently poses challenges for producing meaningful national statistics.
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) mandated U.S. statistical agencies to classify
FGPs within the existing data collection system to better reflect the changes in modern production
arrangements. 2 The Census Bureau’s efforts to isolate goods producers that do not perform physical
transformation of goods led to data collection, through a special inquiry, on the purchase of contract
manufacturing services (CMS). Purchase of CMS indicates if an establishment outsources part or all
of its production transformation activities to another establishment either under common ownership
or at arm’s length, within or outside the United States. However, post-collection interviews with
responding establishments revealed inconsistencies in how respondents understood the CMS
purchase question as intended (Murphy, 2015). OMB concluded that the special inquiry failed “to
yield responses that provide accurate and reliable identification and classification of FGPs” at the
establishment level and resulted in the latest recommendation to further evaluate “the feasibility of

2

See the first federal register notice, issued on May 12, 2010, 75 FR 26856-26869, for more details.

2

developing methods for the consistent identification and classification of Factoryless Goods
Producers that are accurate and reliable” (80 FR 46479-46484). 3
This paper explores the feasibility of identifying FGP firms. Recognizing that establishment
responses to purchase of CMS alone may yield unreliable classification of FGPs, this paper augments
establishment responses (in the 2012 Economic Census) with firm responses to purchase of CMS (in
the 2012 Company Organization Survey) and information on firms’ manufacturing activities
(measured as employment in the manufacturing sector). 4 Although OMB’s Economic Classification
Policy Committee (ECPC) recommends measuring FGPs at the establishment level, a number of
characteristics essential to identifying FGPs have historically not been collected at the establishment
level. Research and design activities at the establishment level is collected on a yes/no basis and only
for the wholesale sector, but real measures are available at the firm level in all sectors. Merchandise
imports (more likely associated with FGP firms when production is not only outsourced but also
offshored) are available at the firm level only. Moreover, company headquarters, which possess
comprehensive knowledge of the firm’s operations, may be better suited to respond to the special
inquiry intended to measure FGP activity.
The focus on identifying “factoryless” activity as a firm level concept is further motivated by
the view of the firm as the central-decision maker that controls and coordinates the key economic
activities of design, production, and sales, with each of its establishments specializing in a given
activity. This view accords well with the empirical reality of within-firm reallocations as well as the
general importance of firms in shaping a range of economic outcomes. Fort, Pierce, and Schott (2018)

See http://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/federal_register_notices/fedregister.html for a comprehensive list of
federal register notices pertaining to the North American Industrial Classification System.
4 Murphy (2015) reports results from the 2012 Economic Census. Responding firms to the special inquiry in the 2012
Company Organization Survey were not interviewed as extensively as responding establishments to the special inquiry in
the 2012 Economic Census.
3

3

document that plant exits at incumbent firms accounted for three-quarters of the total decline in U.S.
manufacturing between 1977 and 2012. A small number of “superstar” firms are responsible for the
growing concentration of employment and output in U.S. industries (Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson,
and Van Reenen, 2017) and even comparative advantage of a country (Freund and Pierola, 2015).
The classification of FGP firms in the existing data collection system faces two main
challenges. First, goods-producing firms that outsource all production transformation activities are
currently classified outside the manufacturing sector with other services-producing firms. Second,
goods-producing firms that outsource only a part of the production transformation process are
currently classified in the manufacturing sector with all other goods-producing firms. An instructive
comparison of FGPs to other goods-producers requires distinguishing the extent of “factoryless”
production arrangements among manufacturing firms. The special inquiry on purchase of CMS was
sent to both manufacturing and non-manufacturing establishments in an effort to identify all possible
goods-producers in the economy separately from services-producing firms.
This paper begins by identifying three types of goods-producers distinct from firms that
provide services: FGP firms that outsource all production activities and do not have any domestic
manufacturing activity; Hybrid Manufacturers that outsource some production activities but also own
domestic manufacturing plants; Traditional Manufacturers that do not outsource any production and
perform all production-related activities at own domestic plants; and distinct from goods-producers
are Service Providers that do not undertake any manufacturing activity – neither outsources nor owns
any domestic manufacturing plants. 5

5 I thank John Murphy for suggesting the terminology for the distinct firm types. Traditional Manufactures include both
integrated manufacturers and firms that provide CMS. Hybrid and Traditional Manufacturers represent firms with primary
activity in the manufacturing sector (NAICS 31-33). Service Providers represent firms with primary activities outside the
manufacturing sector.

4

The paper then performs two sets of comparisons - FGP firms to Service Providers and
Hybrid Manufacturers to Traditional Manufacturers - of characteristics guided by the conceptual
definition of “factoryless” production. The ECPC’s definition of FGPs states that the FGP
“outsources all transformation steps that traditionally have been considered manufacturing, but
undertakes all of the entrepreneurial steps and arranges for all required capital, labor, and material
inputs required to make a good” (OMB, 2010). The conceptual definition of “factoryless” production
can then be summarized along three main attributes: ownership of intellectual property, ownership
and control of finished products, and outsourcing transformation activities (Doherty, 2015). The
characteristics studied, therefore, include ownership of intellectual property (measured as research and
development expenditures, number of patents, number of trademarks), ownership and sales of
finished goods (measured as revenue), incidence of borderless production arrangements (measured as
imports), incidence of “headquarter” activity encompassing strategic or organizational planning and
decision-making activities (measured as employment in NAICS 54 and 55). These variables capture
features hypothesized to be more prevalent at firms that outsource production. This approach, thus,
combines two distinct strategies for identifying FGP’s - self-identification by companies and their
establishments on statistical surveys and implementation of a profiling method based on conceptual
definitions.
The comparison of employment mix across sectors, ownership of intellectual property, and
foreign imports between FGPs and Service Providers yields correlations consistent with the
conceptual definition of “factoryless” production. I find that FGP firms tend to have higher shares of
workers engaged in the provision of “headquarter” services, greater ownership of intellectual property,
and higher propensities to import from abroad than Service Providers. FGPs tend to be smaller and
younger than Service Providers. I also find that Hybrid Manufacturers tend to have higher shares of
non-production workers, lower shares of production workers, greater ownership of intellectual
5

property, and higher propensities to import from abroad than Traditional Manufacturers. Hybrid
Manufacturers tend to be larger than and similarly aged as Traditional Manufacturers.
The analyses in this paper offer three main insights to guide identification of FGP firms within
existing data collection systems. First, disagreements in responses to purchase of CMS between
respondents in the Economic Census and the Company Organization Survey provide an instructive
set of cases to select for cognitive interviews to help inform the feasibility of identifying FGPs at the
establishment or firm level. Second, combining responses to the special inquiry with firm level
information on ownership of intellectual property, imports, and employment mix across sectors yields
a picture consistent with the conceptual definition of “factoryless” production arrangements.
Comparison of FGPs with Service Providers highlights differences in characteristics between two
distinct entities currently classified outside the manufacturing sector. Comparison of Hybrid
Manufacturers with Traditional Manufacturers highlights differences in characteristics between goodsproducers that outsource some production and those that perform all production and are currently
classified together in the manufacturing sector. The results suggest a profiling method based not only
on responses to special inquiries but one that also harnesses existing sources of data, hence, reducing
respondent burden. Third, the meaningful correlations uncovered in this paper between variables
identified based on conceptual definitions and outsourcing status indicate a possible path towards
developing a model-based approach to identify FGP firms.
This paper relates closely to a set of studies examining responses to the special inquiry on
purchase of CMS to characterize the extent and nature of FGP activity in the U.S. economy. Kamal,
Moulton, and Ribarsky (2015) evaluate data collection efforts on enterprises’ purchase of CMS by the
Census Bureau on the 2011 Company Organization Survey and the Bureau of Economic Analysis on
the 2009 Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad. The authors find that CMS purchasing
firms tend to be larger and older. Bernard and Fort (2013), using the 2002 and 2007 Census of
6

Wholesale Trade, find that firms with manufacturing activity that also have a FGP establishment in
the wholesale sector are significantly larger compared to firms with a FGP establishment in the
wholesale sector and wholesale activity only. Bernard and Fort (2015), using the 2007 Census of
Wholesale Trade, document that FGP firms tend to be larger but younger than traditional wholesalers.
Tracing employment back in time, they also document that FGPs include former manufacturing firms,
new firms born as FGPs, and other firms that became FGPs. Bayard, Byrne, and Smith (2015) identify
FGP firms engaged in semiconductor production in the 2007 Economic Census using external
company directories and document that FGP firms are larger than non-FGP firms. Previous studies
characterizing “factoryless” production arrangements have relied on a single source of data, or on data
for a narrowly focused sector, and applied varying definitions of “factoryless” status, making it difficult
to compare and draw inferences for the whole economy. This paper implements a consistent
definition of “factoryless” status across all sectors and draws from multiple data sources to provide a
comprehensive picture of FGP firms as distinct from other goods- and services-producing firms in
the U.S. economy.
Developing reliable methods to classify FGP firms accurately in U.S. data not only fulfills the
Census Bureau’s mandate to implement OMB’s recommendation but also provides the foundation to
conduct careful analyses of the economic consequences of extreme production fragmentation.
“Factoryless” goods production divorces research and design from physical production. This has
potentially significant implications for occupational structures, innovation, and international trade.
Papers studying the impact of offshoring, an arrangement where goods production is located abroad,
offer partial glimpses on the economic consequences along these dimensions. 6 Offshoring is
associated with higher relative wages and demand for skilled labor in the home country, consistent

Fort (2017), using the 2007 Census of Manufactures, documents that domestic outsourcing is more prevalent than
offshoring but offshoring firms are almost twice as large.
6

7

with the concentration of design and R&D activities in the home country, while lower skilled
production activities shift abroad (Bernard, Fort, Smeets, and Warzynski, 2017; Hummels, Jørgensen,
Munch, and Xiang, 2014; Mion and Zhu, 2013). Offshoring is also associated with increases in product
development and R&D expenditures (Bernard et al, 2017). Vertical specialization, an outcome under
extreme production fragmentation, changes the composition of international trade as it entails
increases in imported intermediate inputs to produce goods for export (Hummels, Ishii, and Yi, 2001).
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data sources used to identify
outsourcing of the physical transformation process and firm level inputs, output, ownership of
intellectual property and imports. Section 3 identifies FGP firms currently classified outside the
manufacturing sector and systematically documents the extent and characteristics of these firms in
relation to Service Providers. Section 4 identifies Hybrid Manufacturers, manufacturing firms who
outsource a part of the production process, and systematically documents the extent and
characteristics of these firms in relation to Traditional Manufacturers. The final section concludes
with discussion for future work.
2. Data
There does not exist a single data source that contains the ideal set of information to identify
FGPs. Therefore, I utilize a host of confidential microdata sourced from the Census Bureau for the
most recent year, 2012, of comprehensive data collection efforts. Responses to the special inquiry
about purchase of CMS in the Economic Census and the Company Organization Survey are used as

8

a first step towards identifying FGP firms. 7, 8 Establishment responses in the Economic Census are
aggregated at the firm level to enable comparison to responses in the Company Organization Survey.
The Economic Census, conducted in years ending in 2 and 7, cover the universe of private,
non-farm establishments active in the economy. The annual Company Organization Survey is
designed chiefly to maintain the Business Register. The Business Register is a current list of business
establishments in the U.S. and used as a survey frame to conduct the Economic Census every five
years. The Company Organization Survey covers all multi-unit companies with 250 or more employees
and a selection of smaller companies. Smaller companies are only selected when administrative records
indicate that the company may be undergoing organizational change and is expanding (adding
establishments) or shrinking (dropping establishments).
The responses to the special inquiry are further combined with additional firm level variables.
Employment by sector, number of establishments under common ownership, and payroll are
aggregated to the firm level using the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The LBD contains
information on employment, payroll, ownership, sector, and geography of the universe of
establishments operating in the U.S. private, non-farm sector with at least one employee (Jarmin and
Miranda, 2002). Firm age is equivalent to the age of its oldest establishment. The LBD also provides
total revenue for the firm (Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Kulick, and Miranda, 2017). 9
Firm level imports is sourced from the Longitudinal Firm Trade Transactions Database
(LFTTD) that links the universe of individual customs transaction records to the firms that carry out

In the context of this study, the Economic Census refers to the Census of Manufactures, Census of Wholesale Trade,
and Census of Services. Establishments in every six-digit industry within manufacturing (NAICS 31-32), wholesale
(NAICS 42), and Professional Scientific, and Technical Services (NAICS 54) and establishments in Corporate, Subsidiary,
and Regional Managing Offices (NAICS 551114) were legally required to respond to the special inquiry on the use of
CMS.
8 The Bureau of Economic Analysis also included a question about CMS on the BE-120 (Benchmark Survey of
Transactions in Selected Services and Intellectual Property with Foreign Persons) and BE-10 (Benchmark Survey of U.S.
Direct Investment Abroad) surveys. These data are not used in this paper.
9 See http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/c13492/appendix.pdf for details on construction of firm level revenue.
7

9

these transactions (Bernard, Jensen, and Schott, 2009). 10 Information on firm ownership of intellectual
property – patents, trademarks, and R&D expenditures - is obtained from Dinlersoz, Goldschlag,
Myers, and Zolas (forthcoming). The authors combine survey data on research and design
expenditures sourced from the Business R&D and Innovation Survey (BRDIS) with administrative
data sourced from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office on number of granted patents and
trademarks. The statistics on R&D expenditures used in this paper only include firms surveyed in the
BRDIS. 11 U.S. multinational firms and U.S. affiliates of foreign multinational firms are identified using
the mandatory surveys - U.S. Direct Investment Abroad (USDIA) and Foreign Direct Investment in
the United States (FDIUS) - conducted by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. 12

2.1 Special Inquiry on Contract Manufacturing Services
The purchase of CMS identifies whether an establishment or firm outsources the fabrication
of products. Appendix tables A1 and A2 display excerpts of the specific question about purchase of
CMS from the Economic Census and Company Organization Survey, respectively. 13 The Economic
Census and Company Organization Survey ask whether the establishment and firm, respectively,
purchase CMS. The Economic Census also asks for the costs incurred to purchase these services while
the Company Organization Survey asks for the CMS cost as a percent of all expenses. The Company
Organization Survey further asks whether the company purchased these services inside or outside the
U.S. and whether own affiliates abroad provided CMS.

LFFTD contains the universe of import transactions valued over $2,000.
Patent and trademark data are available for all firms in the LBD but R&D data is only available for firms sampled in the
BRDIS. The BRDIS sample constitutes of firms that are known to have some R&D activity.
12 The Center for Economic Studies, in a joint project with the Bureau of Economic Analysis, has linked the 2012 USDIA
and FDIUS to the Census Bureau’s Business Register. The resulting crosswalks identify multinational firms in the LBD.
13 The Company Organization Survey and the Census of Manufactures also ask about providing CMS. The focus of this
paper is CMS purchasers, not CMS providers.
10
11

10

A firm purchases CMS if at least one of its establishment in the Economic Census responded
yes or it responded yes in the Company Organization Survey. An establishment in the Economic
Census is identified as purchasing CMS if it answers affirmatively to the question of purchasing CMS
or if it reports a non-zero value for either costs incurred to purchase CMS or sales generated from
products whose purchases were reported as CMS costs. A firm in the Company Organization Survey
purchases CMS if it answers affirmatively to the question of purchasing CMS, or it provides a nonzero percent of the cost of sales from expenses for CMS, or it answers affirmatively to using a third
party contractor either inside or outside the United States. A firm does not purchase CMS if all its
establishments respond no to purchasing CMS in the Economic Census or it responded no in the
Company Organization Survey.
The choice to utilize responses in the Economic Census aggregated at the firm level in addition
to firm level responses to the Company Organization Survey ensures the broadest coverage of likely
FGP firms. The unweighted response rates for purchasing CMS is 61.4 percent for the Census of
Wholesale Trade, 57.7 percent for the Census of Manufacture, and 47.9 percent for the Census of
Services (Murphy, 2015). Over 95 percent of firms provided a response (yes or no) to purchasing CMS
in the Company Organization Survey. 14 There is a high degree of disagreement in responses across
the two data sources. Table A3 shows the distribution of firms by their response status
(yes/no/missing) to purchasing CMS in the Economic Census and the Company Organization Survey.
The total number of firms represent the analysis sample of FGP and other goods and servicesproducing firms considered in this study. About 40 percent of firms that provided a non-missing
response in both datasets disagreed in their responses. Most of the disagreements are due to firms that

The Economic Census and Company Organization Survey data from the special inquiry are not adjusted for nonresponse.
14

11

respond no to purchasing CMS in the Company Organization Survey but one of their establishments
responded yes to purchasing CMS in the Economic Census. 15
I apply a broad and restricted definition of CMS purchase status to balance between the goal
to comprehensively identify outsourcing firms in the economy and account for the high incidence of
disagreement in firm responses to purchase of CMS across the two data sources. Under the broad
definition, an outsourcing firm responds yes to purchasing CMS in either data source. 16 Under the
restricted definition, an outsourcing firm responds yes to purchasing CMS in both data sources. Firms
that do not outsource are similarly categorized except the firm responds no to purchasing CMS. Thus,
firms under the restricted definition are necessarily a subset of firms under the broad definition.
Analyses in the paper only includes firms that can be classified as purchasing or not purchasing CMS.
Respondents that did not provide a response and respondents that did not receive the special inquiry
are excluded. An assumption maintained in the discussion of descriptive results in this paper is that
non-respondents are not systematically different from respondents.
Under the broad definition, the analyses sample contains 16,500 FGPs and 112,000 Service
Providers; and 11,000 Hybrid Manufacturers and 10,000 Traditional Manufacturers. Under the
restricted definition, the analyses sample contains 400 FGP and 1,300 Service Providers; and 750

The high incidence of disagreement might be driven by differences in survey questionnaires. The Company Organization
Survey specifies use of “company’s patents, trade secrets, or proprietary technology” in purchase of CMS while the
Economic Census does not (see tables A1 and A2). The 2017 Economic Census asks establishments if it determined “the
design or specifications for any of the products that were manufactured on its behalf”. For example, see
https://bhs.econ.census.gov/ombpdfs/export/MC-32312_mu.pdf (accessed September 30, 2018). An assessment of
responses to the newly designed questions offers a potentially fruitful avenue for evaluating the disagreements.
16 Under the broad definition, a firm purchases CMS if it meets any of the following four criteria (i) responds yes to
purchasing CMS in the Company Organization Survey but one of its establishments responded no in the Economic
Census; (ii) responds no to purchasing CMS in the Company Organization Survey but one of its establishments responded
yes in the Economic Census; (iii) missing response in Company Organization Survey but one of its establishments
responded yes in the Economic Census; or (iv) missing response in Economic Census but responded yes to purchasing
CMS in the Company Organization Survey.
15

12

Hybrid Manufacturers and 400 Traditional Manufacturers. 17 The identified firms are not nationally
representative but they provide the opportunity to assess the potential scope and challenges associated
with the task of measuring “factoryless” activities in the existing data collection system.
For ease of exposition, each section discusses results based on the broad definition unless
statistics differ markedly between the broad and restricted definitions.

3. “Factoryless” activity outside the Manufacturing Sector
The goal in this section is to identify FGPs among firms that are currently classified outside
manufacturing sector. A FGP is defined as a firm that purchases CMS and does not have any
manufacturing employment. However, this definition does not explicitly capture performance of
design activities, a key FGP characteristic. Nonetheless, in contrast to prior studies, it offers the
advantage of enabling consistent classification of FGP firms in both the wholesale and services
sectors. For example, Bernard and Fort (2015) define a FGP firm as having at least one establishment
in the wholesale sector that performs design/engineering/R&D activity, purchases CMS, and has no
manufacturing establishments. This definition cannot be applied to the services sector where
comparable measures of design/engineering/R&D activities at the establishment level do not exist.
To test whether this definition is capable of capturing FGPs as suggested by the conceptual definition
of “factoryless” production arrangements, I compare the sectoral employment distribution, ownership
of intellectual property, and foreign imports at identified FGPs with those at identified Service
Providers.

The final analyses samples only include firms for which we are able to obtain information on basic characteristics from
the LBD. Over 90 percent of identified firms were linked to the LBD. Firm counts are rounded to comply with Census
Bureau rules on disclosure avoidance.

17

13

3.1 Employment Shares
The conceptual definition of FGPs – entities that outsource all transformation activities and
retain control of research and design and final sales to customers – suggests three implications for the
employment mix at a FGP firm. First, the FGP firm should have little to no manufacturing
employment. Second, FGP firms should be more active than Service Providers in the wholesale sector
that encompasses delivery, warehousing, order fulfillment, and logistics. Third, services employment
at a FGP firm should be relatively concentrated in “headquarter” services, which includes R&D
personnel. The focus on FGP firms currently classified outside the manufacturing sector already
excludes manufacturing activity and, thus, by construction is concentrated in the wholesale and
services sectors. We should then expect to observe FGP firms with relatively higher shares of
employment in wholesale and services than Service Providers.
Table 1 presents the average shares of employment in wholesale, services, and all other sectors
at FGP and service-providing firms. 18 Employment in the services sector is further decomposed into
employment in professional, scientific, and technical services (NAICS 54) and management of
companies and enterprises (NAICS 55). Employment in NAICS 54 includes workers providing
scientific research and development services. Based on the definition of FGP activities, we would
expect FGP firms to specialize in providing “headquarter” services.
FGP firms, on average, have most of their employment in wholesale and the remaining almost
evenly divided between services and other sectors of the economy. FGP firms with employment in
the services sector have the majority of their workers engaged in provision of “headquarter” services.
Service Providers, in contrast, have most of their employment housed in other sectors of the economy
and only a third of their services workers are engaged in the provision of “headquarter” services. Using

“Other” sectors include retail, agriculture, transportation, warehousing, and utilities, construction, and public
administration but exclude manufacturing.
18

14

the restricted definition, Service Providers display higher shares of employment in wholesale and
“headquarter” services, although these shares do not reach the levels of FGP firms.

3.2 Innovative Activity
A key feature of FGPs is control of the research and design processes, so we expect to observe
higher shares of employment in R&D activities as found in Table 1. We also expect FGP firms to own
intellectual property defined here as R&D expenditures, ownership of granted patents, and
trademarks. Table 2 presents average values of the ownership of intellectual property. FGP firms have
substantially higher average values of R&D expenditures and counts of granted patents and
trademarks than Service Providers.
The differences in average innovative outcomes between FGPs and Service Providers are
magnified when we use the restricted definition. For instance, FGP firms display almost seventy times
more R&D expenditures than Service Providers under the restricted definition. This difference is only
about four times under the broad definition. The patterns in ownership of intellectual property in this
table display that FGPs have a higher likelihood of controlling the research and design process than
Service Providers.

3.3 Importing Activity
FGP firms may use factories located in foreign countries to manufacture the goods they
control. This implies that FGP firms are likely to import the foreign-produced goods back to the U.S.
for domestic sale or further processing. Table 3 shows that, indeed, FGP firms are more likely to be
importers relative to Service Providers. The vast majority of FGP firms engage in importing while less
than half of Service Providers import. Average import values are also larger at FGP firms.
15

Table 3 also provides the average share of firm imports sourced from low-wage countries.
Lower-income countries are more likely to be low-wage countries (Bernard, Jensen, and Schott, 2006).
If lower labor costs motivate FGP firms to use foreign factories, we would expect to see higher shares
of imports from low-wage countries at FGP firms. Imports from low-income countries are a very
small share of total firm imports (less than 1 percent) at both FGP and service-providing firms.
However, the average share of imports from low-wage countries is about twice as high at FGP firms.
Finally, imports as a share of firm revenue is more than three times higher at FGP firms. Together,
these results suggest that FGP firms are more likely to utilize borderless-production arrangements
than Service Providers.
A striking 80 percent of global trade takes place in production networks administered by
multinational firms (UNCTAD, 2013). We may expect that FGPs are more likely to also be
multinational firms than Service Providers. For example, Kamal et al (2015) document that over half
of the firms that purchase CMS outside the U.S. do so from their affiliates. Using the USDIA and
FDIUS linked to the Business Register and using the broad definition only, FGP firms that are
currently classified outside the manufacturing sector account for 3 percent of all multinational firms
operating in the U.S.; 5 percent of all U.S. multinational parent firms; and 3 percent of all U.S. affiliates
of foreign parent firms. These shares are considerably higher for Service Providers. Service Providers
account for 14 percent of all multinational firms operating in the U.S.; 25 percent of all U.S.
multinational parent firms; and 10 percent of all U.S. affiliates of foreign parent firms. These statistics,
although not meant to be nationally representative, suggest a more nuanced relationship between
multinational status and “factoryless” activity of firms outside the manufacturing sector.

16

3.4 Firm Characteristics
The descriptive analyses in the previous sections establish meaningful correlations between
the definition of FGP firms and observable outcomes implied by “factoryless” activity. FGPs are
associated with higher concentration of employment in “headquarter” services, greater ownership of
intellectual property, and higher import shares than Service Providers. This section presents
characteristics - revenue, employment, revenue per worker, payroll, payroll per worker, number of
establishments, and age - of an average FGP classified outside the manufacturing sector and an average
Service Provider.
Table 4 shows that FGP firms earn lower average revenue than Service Providers. FGP firms
also employ almost three times fewer workers, have smaller payroll, and own fewer establishments
than Service Providers. These findings are in contrast to Bernard and Fort (2015) who find that FGP
firms tend to be larger than traditional wholesalers using the Census of Wholesale only. However,
there is no obvious prediction for firm size and “factoryless” status. Outside the manufacturing sector,
FGP firms may employ fewer workers at fewer numbers of establishments than Service Providers, if
non-production activities focused on managing production transformation tasks require fewer
workers and physical facilities. FGP firms may display lower sales if they are more likely than Service
Providers to locate production and sales abroad.
Prior research has found a close and generally positive relationship between firm size and
productivity (Haltiwanger, Lane, and Spletzer, 1999). This may lead us to expect that smaller FGP
firms are less productive than the larger Service Providers. However, Table 4 shows that FGP firms
display higher average revenue and payroll per worker (the difference is more pronounced using the
broad definition of FGP firms). Finally, FGP firms tend to be younger, a finding consistent with that
in Bernard and Fort (2015), by an average of five to six years.
17

4. “Factoryless” activity in the Manufacturing Sector
The goal in this section is to separately identify goods-producers that outsource a part of the
production process (Hybrid Manufacturers) and goods-producers that do not outsource any
production (Traditional Manufacturers), both currently classified in the manufacturing sector.
Although the ECPC’s conceptual definition of FGPs precludes any production transformation
activities, existing evidence shows the growing prevalence of outsourcing by firms with manufacturing
activity (Bayard et al, 2015). The authors find that, only 30 percent of firms with some manufacturing
activity in the U.S. engaged in “factoryless” manufacturing in 2002 but by 2012 this share had increased
to half. Thus, an additional challenge faced by the statistical system is to distinguish between the extent
of “factoryless” activities at a firm. A Hybrid Manufacturer is defined as purchasing CMS and having
employment in the manufacturing sector. A Traditional Manufacturer is defined as not purchasing
CMS and having employment in the manufacturing sector. The goal, as in Section 3, is to compare
Hybrid Manufacturers and Traditional Manufacturers along dimensions suggested by the conceptual
definition of “factoryless” production and test whether the implied correlations exist for Hybrid
Manufacturers that outsource only a part of the production process. The broad and restricted
definitions used are as described in Section 2.1.

4.1 Employment Shares
The focus on Hybrid Manufacturers currently classified within the manufacturing sector
implies that these firms will have a larger share of their employment in the manufacturing sector. Table
5 confirms that the average share of manufacturing employment at both types of goods-producing
firms is over 80 percent. The table presents the share of production and non-production workers in
lieu of comparing the share of employment in “headquarter” services at Hybrid and Traditional
manufacturing firms. We expect Hybrid Manufacturers to have fewer production workers than
18

Traditional Manufacturers since part of production at Hybrid manufacturing firms is outsourced.
Concurrently, we expect Hybrid Manufacturers’ to have more non-production workers than
Traditional Manufacturers. Table 5 shows that, in comparison to Traditional Manufacturers, the
average share of production workers is lower at Hybrid manufacturing firms while the average share
of non-production workers is higher.

4.2 Innovative Activity
Table 6 presents average R&D expenditures and ownership of intellectual property for Hybrid
and Traditional manufacturing firms. Hybrid Manufacturers have higher average R&D expenditures
than Traditional Manufacturers. Hybrid Manufacturers’ also have higher numbers of patents and
trademarks than Traditional Manufacturers. These patterns suggest that even Hybrid Manufacturers
that outsource only a part of the production transformation process display patterns in ownership of
intellectual property that are consistent with the conceptual definition of “factoryless” production.

4.3 Importing Activity
Average trade characteristics displayed in Table 7 yield three sets of correlations that are
consistent with the idea that Hybrid Manufacturers may use foreign factories to manufacture goods
more intensively than Traditional Manufacturers. First, both types of manufacturers are almost equally
likely to import (under the broad definition) but imports make up 23 percent of total revenue at Hybrid
compared to 19 percent at Traditional manufacturing firms. Under the restricted definition, 92 percent
of Hybrid Manufacturers and 72 percent of Traditional Manufacturers firms import and the share of
imports in total revenue is 30 and 12 percent, respectively. Together, these statistics suggest that
Hybrid Manufacturers are more likely to import than Traditional Manufacturers. Second, average
import values are almost three times larger at Hybrid manufacturing firms. Finally, Hybrid
19

Manufacturers’ have higher shares of imports from low-wage countries than Traditional
Manufacturers.
Since multinational firms mediate a large share of world trade, we may expect there to be a
correlation between propensity to engage in “factoryless” production and multinational status of a
firm. Using the USDIA and FDIUS linked to the Business Register and the broad definition only,
Hybrid Manufacturers account for 8 percent of all multinational firms operating in the U.S.; 22 percent
of all U.S. multinational parent firms; and 3 percent of all U.S. affiliates of foreign parent firms. These
shares are lower for Traditional Manufacturers. Traditional Manufacturers account for 7 percent of all
multinational firms operating in the U.S.; 14 percent of all U.S. multinational parent firms; and 5
percent of all U.S. affiliates of foreign parent firms. These preliminary share statistics suggest that
Hybrid Manufacturers are more likely to be multinational firms than Traditional Manufacturers.

4.4 Firm Characteristics
The descriptive analyses in the previous sections demonstrate that “factoryless” activity in the
manufacturing sector is associated with lower shares of production workers, higher shares of nonproduction workers, greater ownership of intellectual property, and higher import shares. Thus,
meaningful correlations between “factoryless” status and observable outcomes implied by ECPC’s
conceptual definition also hold for firms that outsource only a part of production. This section
presents characteristics - revenue, employment, revenue per worker, payroll, payroll per worker,
number of establishments, and age - of an average Hybrid Manufacturer and an average Traditional
Manufacturer.
Table 8 shows that Hybrid Manufacturers are larger than Traditional Manufacturers in terms
of average revenue, employment and payroll. However, Hybrid Manufacturers own fewer numbers of
establishments consistent with the idea that firms require fewer physical plants when part of the
20

production is outsourced. Hybrid Manufacturers have higher average payroll per worker (under both
definitions) and higher average revenue per worker (under the restricted definition only). Both types
of manufacturers display similar ages, averaging over twenty-four years.

6. Conclusion
The rise of complex production arrangements in recent decades demands the need for
statistical agencies to better reflect these activities in economic statistics. This paper evaluates 2012
data collection efforts by the U.S. Census Bureau to identify “factoryless” goods producers that
outsource physical transformation activities while retaining control of designing and marketing a
product. All establishments in the manufacturing and wholesale sectors and a select set of
establishments in the services sector were legally required to respond to a special inquiry that captures
a key element of this extreme form of production fragmentation – decision to outsource the physical
transformation activities to other domestic firms or offshored to foreign firms and/or own affiliates.
Headquarter locations of a select set of large firms across a broad range of sectors were also required
to respond to the special inquiry. The goal of this study is to evaluate the feasibility of identifying
“factoryless” activity at the firm level in a departure from official guidelines that has mandated
identification of FGP establishments. The firm as the focal unit of analysis is motivated not only by
the availability of key data elements required to identify “factoryless” status but also its role as the
central decision-making unit that ultimately controls the activities at individual establishments. In this
study, FGP firms that have no manufacturing employment are separately analyzed from firms
providing services and other goods-producers that may or may not outsource some part of the
production process.
The paper starts by documenting a high degree of disagreement in establishment and firm
responses to self-identifying as an outsourcer, thereby highlighting challenges in relying on survey
21

responses alone for classification of FGPs. Characteristics implied by the definition of “factoryless”
production arrangements are then explored to reveal meaningful correlations between “factoryless”
status and variables identified based on conceptual definitions: employment mix, innovation, and
importing activities. These correlations are presented separately for firms currently classified outside
the manufacturing sector from firms currently classified in the manufacturing sector. The
unconditional correlations merit further study building towards developing a model-based algorithm
to identify FGPs. A model-based approach would capture salient features of “factoryless” production
using existing data sources and reducing sole reliance on survey responses.
There are three practical dimensions along which the identification exercise may be
augmented. First, outsourcing status of a firm identified using only the Economic Census requires that
one establishment of the firm reports purchasing CMS. I utilize responses to the economic value of
activities related to the purchase of CMS to create a binary CMS purchase status indicator. However,
this categorization does not explicitly consider the intensity of outsourcing activities. The intensity of
activities could indicate how prevalent outsourcing is for FGP firms and suggest thresholds to assign
likelihoods of being a FGP firm. This may be more relevant for Hybrid Manufacturers that outsource
only a part of production. Second, more than one establishment of a multi-unit firm may have received
the special inquiry on purchase of CMS. The firm is assigned a positive CMS purchase status if at least
one establishment responds in the affirmative. However, when multiple establishments respond,
analyzing the share that say yes versus no may allow an alternative method of classification, for
instance, assigning the firm a positive CMS purchases status if majority of its establishments outsource
production. Third, the Bureau of Economic Analysis added questions about purchase of CMS in two
of their mandatory surveys. One of these surveys, the 2009 USDIA, was separately analyzed in Kamal
et al (2015), but was not linked to Census data. Linking the BEA surveys to Census data used in this
22

study would permit further validation of responses by the same firm and a focus on FGP firms that
are also multinationals.
Concerted efforts to collect data on outsourcing activities at the firm level could further
complement the above extensions. Sole reliance on surveys of multinational firms and the Company
Organization Survey (intended primarily to update the Census Bureau’s Business Register and
accordingly surveys a select set of firms) limits our ability to systematically measure production
fragmentation in the U.S. economy. I offer three other potential sources of data collection
opportunities at the firm level to augment our discussions of how best to measure “factoryless”
production. First, the Annual Business Survey, covering non-farm businesses with paid employees,
may offer a more comprehensive coverage of firms in the U.S. economy. 19 Cognitive testing results
from the 2017 Economic Census special inquiry could inform candidate questions. Second, the
Services Annual Survey may also offer an additional survey instrument to collect relevant information
on firm’s foreign outsourcing activities. 20 The survey currently collects data on firms’ exports of
services only. Including questions related to services imports could shed light on purchases of foreign
manufacturing services. Finally, including questions on customs forms would provide the ability to
distinguish between products of a firm that are directly manufactured from those that are processed
abroad. Leveraging existing data sources and evaluating the advantages and challenges associated with
new data collection opportunities, together, paves a path forward to gaining a deeper understanding
of and the ability to measure “factoryless” goods production arrangements in the U.S. economy.

The Annual Business Survey is the successor of the Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs (Foster and Norman, 2017).
See https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/sas/technical-documentation/methodology.html (accessed September
30, 2018).
19
20

23

References
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review 103(6): 21212168.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2017. “The
Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms,” NBER Working Paper 23396.
Bayard, Kimberly, David Byrne, and Dominic Smith. 2015. “The Scope of U.S. Factoryless
Manufacturing,” in Susan Houseman and Michael Mandel (eds.), Measuring Globalization: Better Trade
Statistics for Better Trade Policy, Volume 2, 81-120.
Bernard, Andrew A., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. 2006. “Survival of the Best Fit: Exposure
to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing Plants,” Journal of
International Economics 68: 219-237.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. 2009. “Importers, Exporters, and
Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. That Trade Goods,” in Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford
Jensen, and Mark J. Roberts (eds.), Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, NBER series on
Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 68. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 513–552.
Bernard, Andrew B., and Teresa C. Fort. 2013. “Factoryless Goods Producers in the U.S.,” NBER
Working Paper 19396.
Bernard, Andrew B., and Teresa C. Fort. 2015. “Factoryless Goods Producing Firms,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 105(5): 518-23.
Bernard, Andrew B., Teresa C. Fort, Valerie Smeets, and Frederic Warzynski. 2017. “Offshoring and
Reorganization,” mimeo.
Dinlersoz, Emin, Nathan Goldschlag, Amanda Myers, and Nikolas Zolas. Forthcoming. “The
Anatomy of Trademarking by Firms in the United States,” in Carol Corrado, Javier Miranda, Jonathan
Haskel, and Daniel Sichel (eds.) Measuring and Accounting for Innovation in the 21st Century.
Doherty, Maureen. 2015. “Reflecting Factoryless Goods Production in the U.S. Statistical System,” in
Susan Houseman and Michael Mandel (eds.), Measuring Globalization: Better Trade Statistics for Better Trade
Policy, Volume 2, 13-43.
Feenstra, Robert, C., and Shang-Jin Wei. 2010. “Introduction to ‘China’s Growing Role in World
Trade’, ” in Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei (eds.) China’s Growing Role in World Trade, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1-31.
Fort, Teresa C. 2017. “Technology and Production Fragmentation: Domestic versus Foreign
Sourcing,” Review of Economic Studies, 84(2): 650-687.
24

Fort, Teresa, Justin Pierce, and Peter K. Schott. 2018. “New Perspectives on the Decline of U.S.
Manufacturing Employment,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(2), 47-72.
Foster, Lucia, and Patrice Norman. 2017. “The Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs,” Journal of Economic
and Social Measurement 3(4): 199-224.
Freund, Caroline, and Martha Denisse Pierola. 2015. “Export Superstars,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 97(5), 1023-1032.
Haltiwanger, John, Julia Lane, and James Spletzer. 1999. “Productivity Differences Across Employers:
The Roles of Employer Size, Age, and Human Capital,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
94-98.
Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, Robert Kulick, and Javier Miranda. 2017. “High Growth Young
Firms: Contribution to Job, Output, and Productivity Growth,” in John Haltiwanger, Erika Hurst,
Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar (eds.), Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and
Challenges, 11-62.
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization
in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 54(1), 75–96.
Hummels, David, Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang. 2014. “The Wage Effects of
Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data,” American Economic Review, 104(6),
1597–1629.
Jarmin, Ron S., and Javier Miranda. 2002. “The Longitudinal Business Database,” Center for
Economic Studies Discussion Paper No. CES-WP-02-17. Suitland, MD: U.S. Census Bureau, Center
for Economic Studies.
Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012. “Accounting for Intermediates: Production
Sharing and Trade in Value Added,” Journal of International Economics, 86, 224-236.
Kamal, Fariha, Brent Moulton, and Jennifer Ribarsky, 2015. “Measuring ‘Factoryless’ Manufacturing:
Evidence from U.S. Surveys,” in Susan Houseman and Michael Mandel (eds.), Measuring Globalization:
Better Trade Statistics for Better Trade Policy, Volume 2, 151-194.
Mion, Giordano, and Linke Zhu. 2013. “Import Competition from and Offshoring to China: A Curse
or Blessing for Firms?” Journal of International Economics, 89, 202–215.
Murphy, John. 2015. “Identifying Factoryless Goods Producers (FGPs) – Efforts to Date,”
https://unstats.un.org/unsd/class/intercop/tsg/16-05/ac315-9.PDF (accessed January 27, 2018).
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 2010. “Economic Classification Policy Committee
Recommendation for Classification of Outsourcing in North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS) Revisions for 2012,”
https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/fr2010/ECPC_Recommendation_for_Classification_of_
25

Outsourcing.pdf (accessed February 14, 2018).
Pierce, Justin, and Peter K. Schott. 2016. “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing
Employment,” American Economic Review, 106(7), 1632-1662.
UNCTAD. 2013. World Investment Report.
http://unctad.org/en/pages/PressRelease.aspx?OriginalVersionID=113 (accessed December 15,
2016).
http://unctad.org/en/PublicationChapters/wir2013ch4_en.pdf (accessed December 15, 2016).

26

Table 1. Firm employment shares of goods-producers outside the manufacturing sector, 2012
Wholesale
Services
All
% Share in Headquarter Services
Broad Definition
FGP
0.92
0.04
63%
Service Provider
0.16
0.40
35%
Restricted Definition
FGP
0.75
0.16
80%
Service Provider
0.46
0.26
65%

Other
0.03
0.45
0.09
0.28

Notes: This table displays firms’ average share of sectoral employment. FGP: firms that purchase CMS and do not have manufacturing
employment; Service Provider: firms that do not purchase CMS and do not have manufacturing employment. See text for “broad” and “restricted”
definitions. “Headquarter Services” refers to employment in NAICS 54 (Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services) and NAICS 55
(Management of Companies and Enterprises). “Other” refers to employment in retail, agriculture, transportation, warehousing and utilities,
construction, and public administration.

Table 2. Innovative activity by goods-producers outside the manufacturing sector, 2012
R&D Spending
Number of Patents
Number of Trademarks
Broad Definition
FGP
3,039
0.32
0.30
Service Provider
862
0.09
0.12
Restricted Definition
FGP
13,630
1.43
2.20
Service Provider
198
0.19
0.13

Notes: This table displays firms’ average R&D expenditures, ownership of the number of granted patents and trademarks. FGP:
firms that purchase CMS and do not have manufacturing employment; Service Provider: firms that do not purchase CMS and
do not have manufacturing employment. See text for “broad” and “restricted” definitions. R&D spending based only on firms
surveyed in the Business R&D and Innovation Survey. R&D spending in 1,000 USD.

27

Table 3. Importing activity by goods-producers outside the manufacturing sector, 2012
Imports
Importer Share
All
Low-Income Country % Share
Broad Definition
FGP
0.59
10,150
0.47%
Service Provider
0.19
9,078
0.29%
Restricted Definition
FGP
0.84
33,430
0.78%
Service Provider
0.42
23,600
0.32%

Imports/Revenue
0.46
0.14
0.26
0.08

Notes: This table displays firms’ average importing characteristics. FGP: firms that purchase CMS and do not have manufacturing employment;
Service Provider: firms that do not purchase CMS and do not have manufacturing employment. See text for “broad” and “restricted” definitions.
Importer share is the fraction of firms that report positive imports. Imports/Revenue is the ratio of imports to total firm revenue. Low-income
countries defined using United Nations’ country classification. Imports in 1,000 USD.

Table 4. Firm characteristics of goods-producers outside the manufacturing sector, 2012
Revenue
Employment Revenue per Worker
Payroll
Broad Definition
FGP
31,290
102
564
6,026
Service Provider
48,760
284
240
14,000
Restricted Definition
FGP
147,000
404
568
28,920
Service Provider
292,700
1,320
404
55,780

Payroll per Worker Number of Establishments

Age

65
51

3
9

14
22

78
49

9
44

20
25

Notes: This table displays average firm characteristics. FGP: firms that purchase CMS and do not have manufacturing employment; Service Provider: firms that do not purchase CMS
and do not have manufacturing employment. See text for “broad” and “restricted” definitions. Revenue and payroll in 1,000 USD.

28

Table 5. Firm employment shares of goods-producers in the manufacturing sector, 2012
Wholesale
Services
Manufacturing
All
Share Production Workers Share Non-Production Workers
Broad Definition
Hybrid Manufacturer
0.03
0.03
0.94
66%
34%
Traditional Manufacturer
0.06
0.06
0.88
71%
29%
Restricted Definition
Hybrid Manufacturer
0.09
0.11
0.80
63%
37%
Traditional Manufacturer
0.11
0.07
0.82
69%
31%

Notes: This table displays firms’ average share of sectoral employment. Hybrid Manufacturer: firms that purchase CMS and have manufacturing employment; Traditional
Manufacturer: firms that do not purchase CMS and have manufacturing employment. See text for “broad” and “restricted” definitions.

Table 6. Innovative activity by goods-producers in the manufacturing sector, 2012
R&D Spending
Number of Patents
Broad Definition
Hybrid Manufacturer
23,270
0.45
Traditional Manufacturer
2,969
0.33
Restricted Definition
Hybrid Manufacturer
48,890
1.34
Traditional Manufacturer
2,410
0.45

Number of Trademarks
2.69
0.53
11.4
0.36

Notes: This table displays firms’ average R&D expenditures, ownership of the number of granted patents and trademarks. Hybrid Manufacturer: firms
that purchase CMS and have manufacturing employment; Traditional Manufacturer: firms that do not purchase CMS and have manufacturing
employment. See text for “broad” and “restricted” definitions. R&D spending based only on firms surveyed in the Business R&D and Innovation
Survey. R&D spending in 1,000 USD.

29

Table 7. Importing activity by goods-producers in the manufacturing sector, 2012
Imports
Importer Share
All
Low-Income Country % Share
Broad Definition
Hybrid Manufacturer
0.63
104,900
0.14
Traditional Manufacturer
0.64
47,440
0.11
Restricted Definition
Hybrid Manufacturer
0.92
188,000
0.32
Traditional Manufacturer
0.72
73,050
0.30

Imports/Revenue
0.23
0.19
0.30
0.12

Notes: This table displays firms’ average importing characteristics. Hybrid Manufacturer: firms that purchase CMS and have manufacturing
employment; Traditional Manufacturer: firms that do not purchase CMS and have manufacturing employment. See text for “broad” and
“restricted” definitions. Importer share is the fraction of firms that report positive imports. Imports/Revenue is the ratio of imports to total firm
revenue. Low-income countries defined using United Nations’ country classification. Imports in 1,000 USD.

Table 8. Firm characteristics of goods-producers in the manufacturing sector, 2012
Revenue Employment Revenue per Worker Payroll
Broad Definition
Hybrid Manufacturer
363,400
831
257
60,190
Traditional Manufacturer
194,000
515
299
26,060
Restricted Definition
Hybrid Manufacturer
978,200
1,744
427
153,600
Traditional Manufacturer
567,900
1,052
366
53,020

Payroll per Worker Number of Establishments

Age

56
50

11
12

24
27

67
51

16
28

29
29

Notes: This table displays average firm characteristics. Hybrid Manufacturer: firms that purchase CMS and have manufacturing employment; Traditional Manufacturer: firms that do not
purchase CMS and have manufacturing employment. See text for “broad” and “restricted” definitions. Revenue and payroll in 1,000 USD.

30

Appendix
Table A1. CMS special inquiry, Economic Census, 2012

Table A2. CMS special inquiry, Company Organization Survey, 2012

31

Table A3. Firm responses to CMS purchase in Economic Census and Company Organization Survey, 2012
Company Organization Survey
Yes
No
Missing
Not in Company Organization Survey
Economic Census
Yes
1,200
1,900
150
23,000
No
80
1,700
100
9,600
Missing
950
27,000
Not in Economic Census
800
83,000
-

Notes: This table displays the number of firms (both with and without manufacturing employment) that have been identified as purchasing
CMS, not purchasing CMS, or missing a response in the Economic Census and Company Organization Survey. Firm counts are rounded to
comply with Census Bureau rules on disclosure avoidance and may not sum to totals.

32

