NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUE OF WORKING CONDITIONS IN THE UNITED STATES AND IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE STRUCTURE OF WAGES
Nicole Maestas
Kathleen J. Mullen
David Powell
Till von Wachter
Jeffrey B. Wenger
Working Paper 25204
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25204

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018
We are grateful for funding from the Sloan Foundation (grants G-2013-10-21, G-2016-7226, and
G-2017-9694) and the Social Security Administration (grants UM15-03 and UM16-08), which
supported this research. We thank Melody Harvey for sterling research assistance. We also
received numerous helpful comments from Courtney Coile, Barry Hirsch, Michael Hurd, Larry
Katz, John Pencavel, Daniel Prinz, Sita Slavov, Pascal St. Amour, Bob Willis, and Joachim
Winter, as well as from numerous participants at seminars and conferences, including SSA,
MRRC, APPAM, RAND, University of Illinois Champagne-Urbana, NBER Summer Institute,
Stanford University, Institute of Fiscal Studies, UC Irvine, Boston College, Wellesley College,
Tinbergen Institute, University of Lausanne, and University of Lyon-Etienne. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25204.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen, David Powell, Till von Wachter, and Jeffrey B.
Wenger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Working Conditions in the United States and Implications for the Structure of
Wages
Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen, David Powell, Till von Wachter, and Jeffrey B. Wenger
NBER Working Paper No. 25204
October 2018
JEL No. J31,J32
ABSTRACT
This paper documents variation in working conditions among workers in the United States,
presents new estimates of how workers value these conditions, and assesses the impact of
working conditions on estimates of the wage structure and inequality. We use evidence from a
series of stated-preference experiments to estimate workers’ willingness-to-pay for a broad set of
job characteristics, which we validate with actual job choices. We find that working conditions
vary substantially across workers, play a significant role in job choice decisions, and are central
components of the compensation received by workers. Preferences vary by demographic groups
and throughout the wage distribution. We find that accounting for differences in preferences for
working conditions often exacerbates wage differentials by race, age, and education, and
intensifies measures of wage inequality.
Nicole Maestas
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
maestas@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Kathleen J. Mullen
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
Kathleen_Mullen@rand.org
David Powell
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407
powelld@nber.org

Till von Wachter
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
MC 147703
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
tvwachter@econ.ucla.edu
Jeffrey B. Wenger
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
jbwenger@rand.org

1. Introduction
It has long been recognized that wages do not reflect the full compensation that individuals
receive from working, and that workers may be willing to sacrifice higher wages for better job
characteristics when making job choices (e.g., Brown, 1980; Duncan and Holmlund, 1983; Rosen
1986; Kniesner et al., 2012). These wage tradeoffs have the potential to explain persistent
differences in wages among observationally similar workers, such as by gender or race, or wage
inequality more generally. The most recent evidence we have points to substantial variation in job
attributes across demographic groups and across the wage distribution (e.g., Hamermesh, 1999;
Pierce, 2001; Monaco and Pierce, 2015),1 and two recent experimental studies confirm substantial
and heterogeneous willingness-to-pay for schedule-related job amenities (e.g., Mas and Pallais, 2017;
Wiswall and Zafar, 2017).
Despite the available evidence, it has been difficult to assess to what extent differences in the
incidence and valuations of non-wage job characteristics shape persistent wage differentials in the
labor market. In the United States, there currently is no survey of a representative sample of workers
about a broad range of job attributes. Moreover, it has proven very difficult to estimate willingnessto-pay for job amenities based on observational data alone.2 While the theoretical relationship
between job characteristics and wages is clear (e.g., Rosen, 1986), the empirical literature
documenting the existence and magnitude of such tradeoffs has faced substantial challenges given
multiple sources of selection.
To address these difficulties, we study the incidence of job attributes, willingness-to-pay for
these attributes, and their impact on estimates of the wage structure using a new, nationally
Pierce (2001) and Monaco and Pierce (2015) primarily focus on fringe benefits and assign measures of costs, not values
to workers, to each benefit.
2 Clearly, working conditions are not randomly assigned and are potentially correlated with unobserved determinants of
wages, generating non-causal correlations between wages and job amenities that do not reflect the tradeoffs individuals
face. In particular, since the distribution of wages and job amenities are jointly determined by supply and demand,
observed variation in wages reflects labor compensation received by workers, firms’ costs of offering certain amenities
and workers’ preferences for them, and the resulting wage reductions associated with those amenities.
1

2

representative survey of working conditions and a stated-preference approach. Our paper makes
three primary contributions. First, because of the surprising lack of comprehensive data about job
characteristics in the United States, we fielded the American Working Conditions Survey (AWCS) in
2015 to a representative sample of workers enrolled in the American Life Panel. To obtain a
comprehensive view of the incidence and importance of job amenities, we asked about a broad set
of job characteristics including schedule flexibility, telecommuting opportunities, physical demands,
pace of work, autonomy, paid time off, working with others, job training opportunities, and impact
on society. We purposefully focused on amenities that would not be considered monetary job
benefits, because fringe benefits, such as health insurance or pension plans, have been studied
extensively elsewhere. These data enable us, for the first time since the 1970s, to provide a
comprehensive assessment of whether there are systematic differences in these working conditions
by gender, race, education, age, and across the wage distribution.
Second, we estimate the willingness-to-pay for each amenity in the same nationally
representative sample of workers, using a stated-preference approach. The benefits of the statedpreference method are that we can randomize job characteristics and observe the tradeoffs
individuals face, disentangling the presence of a job characteristic from the unobserved worker-,
firm-, and market-specific attributes that affect estimates based on observational data. It also
provides us with information about jobs not chosen as well as those chosen, information which is
necessary to accurately measure tradeoffs underlying willingness-to-pay estimates. This method also
permits us to test for the joint importance of multiple job attributes, providing respondents with
choice sets that vary along a broad set of characteristics. We then fit a model of job choice to the
choice data to estimate the tradeoffs that individuals are willing to make between working conditions
and wages. These tradeoffs yield transparent willingness-to-pay metrics for each job amenity
included in the choice experiments.
3

Third, we use the willingness-to-pay estimates from the stated-preference experiments to
adjust typical estimates of wage differentials by gender, race, and age, and test whether the inclusion
of amenities into the full measure of compensation significantly alters metrics of wage differentials.
We also assess whether accounting for systematic differences in amenities changes the extent of
wage inequality in the U.S. labor market more generally. An added advantage of our approach is
that it also allows us to analyze whether willingness-to-pay for certain amenities differs by
demographic groups, and whether this heterogeneity further affects the adjusted estimates of the
wage structure. If women are willing to pay more for schedule flexibility, then jobs in which workers
have more control over their hours are worth more to women and our compensation metrics can be
adjusted accordingly.
Our first main finding is that a broad range of working conditions varies substantially across
demographic groups and throughout the wage distribution. Our estimates paint a complex picture of
working conditions in the U.S. labor market. While some patterns are expected – for example,
college-educated and older workers have uniformly better job characteristics across nearly all
categories we examined – some are more nuanced. Non-whites tend to have worse job
characteristics than whites, but perhaps less so than expected. Women and older workers hold jobs
with a different mix of job attributes than men and younger workers, respectively. These patterns
imply potentially important effects of differential access to amenities and differential preferences for
amenities on wage differentials and wage inequality.
Our second main finding is that workers have non-negligible willingness-to-pay for most
dimensions of amenities included in our stated-preference experiments. Considering all amenities,
we find that a switch from the worst job (having none of the amenities included in our experiments)
to the best job (having the best set) is equivalent to a 56% wage increase, suggesting that non-wage

4

characteristics play a central role in job choice and compensation. Moreover, we find evidence that
these valuations differ, sometimes substantially, by demographics and across the wage distribution.
Our third main finding is that both variation in amenities and variation in preferences affect
the wage structure. When differences in the incidence of working conditions alone are taken into
account, we find that education-wage differentials are substantially increased. When we account for
differences in preferences for working conditions across groups, we find that wage differentials by
race, gender, and age are affected as well. Wage differentials by race and age widen, while the gender
wage gap narrows. We also find that accounting for amenities exacerbates measured wage
inequality.
We are of course aware that the advantages of the stated-preference approach come at
potential costs, in particular concerns about external validity (Diamond and Hausman, 1994; Manski,
1999; Hausman, 2012). To address these concerns, we exploit the fact that we observe detailed
information about the actual jobs held by our survey respondents. Most notably, we find that
individuals who have a given amenity in their current job value that amenity more highly than
workers who do not have that amenity. Further evidence in support of the stated-preference
approach comes from Mas and Pallais (2017), who show that their findings based on actual wage
variation are consistent with their findings from survey-based stated-preference experiments. Hence,
while stated-preference estimates cannot substitute for revealed preference estimates, given the
impossibility of generating fully comprehensive experimental evidence on the valuation of job
amenities and the importance of the research question, we believe our approach provides important
estimates of valuations across a broad set of working conditions for a representative sample from
the United States labor market.
Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. One strand has investigated reasons
for persistent wages differentials between workers and jobs. The majority of papers have focused on
5

the importance of differences in worker skills and productivity (e.g., Mincer and Polachek, 1974;
Neal and Johnson, 1996; Lang and Manove, 2006), wage differences between employers (e.g.,
Bayard et al., 2003; Price et al., 2018) and regions (e.g., Moretti, 2013), differences in labor supply
(e.g., Neal, 2004), and discrimination in the labor market (e.g., Bertrand and Mullainaithan, 2004;
Farber, Silverman, and von Wachter, 2016). Here, we contribute a comprehensive assessment of the
importance of working conditions by documenting their incidence using a representative survey
fielded for this purpose and providing new estimates of the willingness-to-pay for a broad set of
working conditions.
Similarly, a long literature has analyzed the potential importance of job characteristics in the
labor market. Yet, the last publicly-available, representative surveys of working conditions were
fielded in the 1970s.3 Typically, studies in this literature have implemented a hedonic pricing
approach to assign monetary values to non-wage attributes, often referred to as compensating
differentials. These papers have estimated compensating differentials for job characteristics such as
injury and fatality risk, physical job demands, stress, hazard exposure, schedule flexibility, shift work,
and many other working conditions.4 The literature has recognized the difficulties of isolating
compensating differentials in the presence of many unobservable variables such as skills,
preferences, or search frictions, and missing information about the choice set. Addressing such
confounding factors has proven difficult.5
These were the Quality of Employment Surveys of 1972-1973 and 1979. Information on monetary job benefits, such
as health insurance or pension plans, but not other job amenities, is available in the Current Population Survey, the
Survey of Income and Program Participation, and the National Compensation Survey.
4 E.g., for fatality injury and fatality risk see Smith (1973), Thaler and Rosen (1976), Viscusi (1993), and Viscusi and Aldy
(2003); for physical job demands see Lucas (1977), Bluestone (1974), Brown (1980), Duncan and Holmlund (1983); for
stress see Brown (1980), for hazard exposure see Hamermesh (1977) and Duncan (1976); for schedule flexibility see
Duncan (1976), Duncan and Stafford (1977), and Goldin and Katz (2011); for shift work see Kostiuk (1990).
5 For example, workers with more skill in the labor market select into jobs with both higher wages and better amenities,
creating a cross-sectional positive correlation between monetary and non-monetary compensation (e.g., Hwang et al.
1992). Alternatively, search frictions can cause sizeable bias when estimating willingness-to-pay measures (Dale-Olsen
2006 and Bonhomme and Jolivet 2009). Some researchers have conditioned on individual fixed effects to reduce
concerns about skill heterogeneity (Brown, 1980; Duncan and Holmlund, 1983; Kniesner et al., 2012) but this assumes
that skill is fixed over time such that selection into better jobs is orthogonal to human capital development. Other papers
3

6

We sidestep these difficulties by generating randomized choice data using a stated-preference
approach. A recent literature on job amenities has used new approaches to circumvent the
identification challenges present in the traditional compensating differential literature. For example,
Mas and Pallais (2017) randomized schedule flexibility and the option for telecommuting across a
sample of applicants for entry-level jobs at a national call center, requesting applicants to select
across jobs varying on these dimensions. Wiswall and Zafar (2017) surveyed undergraduate students
at New York University using hypothetical choices for jobs varying randomly based on job stability,
whether part-time work is an option, and future earnings growth.
More generally, the stated-preference approach has provided valuable evidence for many
economic topics including environmental policy (Carlsson and Martinsson, 2001; Carson, 2012),
consumer preferences (Revelt and Train, 1998), labor supply (Kimball and Shapiro, 2008),
retirement decisions (van Soest and Vonkova, 2014), and long-term care (Ameriks et al., 2015). We
advance this line of research by allowing jobs to be multidimensional across a broader set of
characteristics. This provides some of the first evidence on the importance of multiple job
characteristics jointly, such as opportunities to contribute to the community, autonomy in terms of
how one works on tasks, the opportunity to gain transferable skills, and other amenities that are
potentially critical determinants of job choice and wages.
In Section 2, we introduce the data from the American Working Conditions Survey and
describe how we selected job characteristics to investigate. In Section 3, we describe the incidence of
working conditions in the U.S. workforce and explore differences based on demographics and
throughout the wage distribution. In Section 4, we discuss our empirical approach for estimating
valuations of different job characteristics. We present our main willingness-to-pay estimates in
have explicitly modelled the components of the job choice decision that may confound estimation of the true
willingness-to-pay. Hamermesh and Wolfe (1990) model occupational choice while Gronberg and Reed (1994) model
search frictions and use job duration to estimate the willingness-to-pay for job attributes. D’Haultfoeuille and Maurel
(2013) adopt a Roy model approach to account for selection in different jobs.

7

Section 5 and consider the implications for the wage distribution in Section 6. Section 7 summarizes
an extensive analysis of robustness, and Section 8 concludes.
2. Data on Working Conditions and Wages from American Working Conditions Survey
2.A The American Working Conditions Survey
The American Working Conditions Survey (AWCS) is a longitudinal survey designed to elicit
detailed information about a broad range of working conditions in the American workplace. The
AWCS was fielded on the RAND American Life Panel (ALP). The ALP is a nationally
representative, probability-based panel designed for social science research. Panel members take
regular surveys on their computer, tablet, or phone. Participants without access to technology are
provided with internet service and/or a device. The initial wave of the AWCS, fielded during JulyOctober 2015, is modeled on and harmonized with the sixth European Working Conditions Survey
(EWCS), also fielded in 2015 to a representative sample of workers in 35 countries in Europe.6 The
second wave of the AWCS was administered from December 2015-February 2016 and consisted of
the stated-preference experiments used in this paper. Subsequent waves have consisted of follow-up
questions about changes in working conditions, and are ongoing.
There were 3,004 respondents to the stated-preference module, resulting in a response rate
of 60.7%. For the purposes of this paper, we selected respondents who were currently working
(N=1,947) and were between the ages of 25 and 71 (N=1,908). We excluded individuals reporting
hourly wages over $500 or below $1 in our analysis. After further dropping individuals who did not
complete the entire survey, our final analysis sample consists of 1,815 individuals. All statistics are
weighted using weights generated to match demographics in the Current Population Study (CPS).

See Maestas et al. (2017a; 2017b) for further information about the first wave of the AWCS, summary statistics by age,
gender and education, and a data codebook. The first wave of data can be downloaded from:
https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL269.html.

6

8

Table 1 presents mean wages for our full sample, and by gender, race, education and age.
The mean hourly wage in the sample is $29.92. Mean wages vary substantially by gender, race,
education, and age, ranging from $23.69 for non-whites to $37.64 for those with a college degree or
more. Estimating wage differentials jointly in a linear regression, we find that women’s wages are on
average 21.3% lower than men’s, non-whites’ wages are 13.2% lower than those of whites, and
workers with less than a college degree have 54.8% lower wages than those with a college degree.
We explore the potential of differences in working conditions and their valuations in explaining part
of these wage gaps below. In Appendix Table 1, we compare the wage differentials in our data to
those found in the CPS. The CPS topcodes weekly earnings so we present the ALP differentials
with and without comparable topcoding. Overall, the estimated wage gaps are very similar across
groups.7
2.B Main Dimensions of Working Conditions Used in Analysis
The economics literature has previously considered a rather limited set of non-wage job
characteristics due to constraints in available data. Our goal was to investigate characteristics that
broadly define non-wage job attributes currently available in the labor market that are likely to be
valued by workers.
To identify these attributes, we performed a thorough review of the literature, across several
fields. We looked for evidence or hypotheses that a certain amenity or amenities were key features of
jobs, with the potential to influence job choices and wages. In addition, we analyzed the first wave
of the American Working Conditions Survey (AWCS) to identify working conditions that
respondents rated as important and that exhibited variation in the population (see Maestas et al.,
2017a). While our final list of job characteristics does not necessarily capture all of the non-

The exception is middle-aged workers, who have higher wages than older workers in the CPS, and lower wages than
older workers in the ALP. While the ALP age-gradient in wages conforms to typical patterns, we do not put emphasis
on our findings for this particular contrast.

7

9

monetary aspects of a job, we believe that the nine dimensions of job characteristics we selected,
along with wages and hours, define a set of core job attributes for workers today. We directly verify
that these attributes are salient by estimating workers’ willingness-to-pay below. In the remainder of
the section, we briefly summarize the attributes we selected and the prior literature that motivates
their selection.
Schedule Flexibility. There is considerable interest in understanding work arrangements
that facilitate greater flexibility in setting working hours (e.g., Katz and Krueger, 2016). Earlier work
examined the association between flexible work schedules and wages (e.g., Gariety and Shaffer,
2007; Weeden, 2005), while more recent work has sought to determine employee preferences for
schedule flexibility. Mas and Pallais (2017) found that, surprisingly, a majority of workers did not
value schedule flexibility, although they noted considerable heterogeneity across workers and a long
right tail in willingness-to-pay for flexibility. Wiswall and Zafar (2017) found that high-ability
undergraduate women were willing to give up 7 percent of their pay to have a job that included the
option of part-time hours, while men were willing to give up only 1 percent of pay.
Telecommuting. The ability to work from home or “telecommute” is another form of
flexible work arrangement that has received attention in the literature. Although the share of
workers who have the option to work from home has been rising (Oettinger, 2011; Mateyka et al.,
2012), telecommuting is still relatively uncommon (Maestas et al., 2017a). Recent research argues
that employer costs of allowing work from home have declined (Oettinger, 2011), and that work
from home leads to productivity gains (Bloom et al., 2014). Recent research finds that workers place
substantial value on having the flexibility to work at home (Mas and Pallais, 2017).
Physical Job Demands. The role of physical on-the-job demands has been studied often,
including in many of the compensating differential papers mentioned earlier. Duncan and
Holmlund (1983) study compensating differentials associated with hard physical work and find little
10

evidence of wage adjustments. In addition, Hayward et al. (1989), Neumark and McLaughlin (2012),
and Filer and Petri (1988) find that physically-demanding jobs predict earlier retirement.
Pace of Work. There is substantially less research on the importance of work pace and
stress. Work pressure has been found to be associated with decreases in job satisfaction (Lopes et
al., 2014) and work stress predicts retirement (Filer and Petri, 1988). Maestas et al. (2017a) find that
two-thirds of American workers report frequently working at high speeds or under tight deadlines.
Autonomy at Work. Arai (1994) studies wage differentials associated with job autonomy,
finding a positive relationship in the private sector and a negative relationship in the public sector.
The study emphasizes that these differentials do not isolate worker preferences since wages also
respond to the cost of providing more or less worker independence. Job autonomy is significantly
related to job satisfaction and performance (Saragih, 2015).
Paid Time Off. An older literature has sought to determine whether workers in various
sectors would be willing to trade income for reduced work time by asking workers to state their
preferences for different tradeoffs. In one study, nearly half of public sector workers were willing to
trade a portion of their income for additional paid vacation days (Best, 1978). In general, workers
expressed a preference for added days of paid time off from work rather than a shortened work day
(of equal cost to the firm) (Nealy and Goodale, 1967; Best, 1978).
Working in Teams. Teamwork has increased dramatically in recent decades as U.S. firms
have recognized that teams of workers with complementary skills can be more productive than
individuals working alone (e.g., Lazear and Shaw, 2007; Hamilton et al., 2003). That said, there is
little evidence about workers’ preferences for teamwork compared to working alone. We investigate
preferences for teamwork as compared to working by oneself, as well as the importance of being
evaluated on the basis of the team’s performance versus one’s own performance.

11

Job Training. There is a literature on the wage effects of job training opportunities (see e.g.,
Parent, 1999; Barron et al., 1999; Leuven, 2007). Parent (1999) finds substantial returns to on-thejob training in terms of higher hourly wages. Barron et al. (1999) finds that workers receiving on-thejob training receive slightly lower wages when they start a job, but experience greater subsequent
wage growth, as predicted by some model of human capital investment. Fewer papers assess
differences in training across demographic and their impact on wage differentials, though systematic
differences in the rates of training in the labor market have been documented.8
Meaningful Work. Meaningful work is “underrepresented in current models and measures
of work characteristics” (Fairlie, 2011) but has received attention among organizational
psychologists and sociologists (e.g., Smyer and Pitt-Catsouphes, 2007; Matz-Costa et al., 2017; Steger
and Dik, 2012; Steger et al., 2012). There is little evidence about compensating differentials
associated with meaningful work, though there is research on wages and job satisfaction among
workers at non-profit firms (e.g., Preston, 1989; Leete, 2001; Benz, 2005; Rosso et al., 2010).
3. Heterogeneity in Working Conditions in the United States
We next use survey data on the dimensions of job attributes outlined in Section 2 to examine
the variation in working conditions across workers of different demographic and education groups.
We also examine differences in job attributes throughout the wage distribution. Tables 2A and 2B
present summary statistics that describe the incidence of actual job attributes in our sample of
employed workers.
Concentrating on differences by gender, race, age, and education, we find that job
characteristics differ substantially across groups, with some expected and unexpected differences.
College-educated and older workers have uniformly better job amenities among almost all categories
For example, Duncan and Hoffman (1979) and Barron et al. (1993) document that women receive less on-the-job
training than men, and Duncan and Hoffman (1979) show blacks receive less training than whites.

8

12

we considered. Non-whites tend to have somewhat worse job attributes than whites, but perhaps
less so than expected. Women and older workers hold different mixes of job attributes than do men
and younger workers, respectively, but their relative values are less easily quantified without further
analysis of differences in attribute preferences (as we do in Sections 4 and 5). Throughout the
present section, we highlight those differences in incidence of job characteristics that are statistically
significant after accounting for differences in other demographic characteristics (as noted in the
table).
Gender Differences. Overall, women work in jobs that are less physically taxing, have more
paid time off, and offer more frequent opportunities to make a positive community or social impact
(39% versus 30%). For example, we find large differences in the physical demands of jobs: 25% of
men report working in a job requiring intense physical activity, compared to only 13% of women. In
addition, men are more likely than women to report opportunities on the job to learn new skills that
would transfer to other jobs (73% versus 64%). These differences are likely to be related to the
gender wage gap, something we return to in Section 6. A more nuanced result is that on average
women are over 5 percentage points more likely to primarily work alone, while men are 9 percentage
points more likely to work with others and be evaluated based on team performance, perhaps related
to different degrees of managerial duties.
Differences by Race. Due to the sample size, we restrict our analysis to comparisons
between whites (all ethnicities, including Latino) and non-whites (“Black/African-American”,
“American Indian or Alaskan Native”, “Asian or Pacific Islander”, “Other”). Overall, the incidence
of job amenities reveals a mixed picture of white versus non-white differences in job quality. Once
differences by other groups are controlled for, only a few race-specific gaps remain.9 For example,
non-whites have less control over their schedule, have fewer opportunities to work from home, and
9

These results are shown in Appendix Table 2.

13

tend to be in physically demanding jobs. Only control over schedule appears to be directly related to
race, while the other differences vanish once we control for education, gender, and age differences
(see Appendix Table 2). We find little evidence of differences in pace of work by race, and small to
moderate differences in terms of autonomy or working in teams. In contrast, non-whites report
more generous paid time off and have more job training opportunities, with only the latter being
robust to controlling for differences across groups.
Differences by Education Groups. We observe especially large and robust differences in
job characteristics by education. Overall, a college degree is associated with better job characteristics
across almost all dimensions we considered. For example, respondents with a college degree are
more likely to report that they can adapt their hours (within limits) than those without a college
degree (48% vs. 24%), they are substantially more likely to have opportunities to work from home
(55% vs. 24%), and they are much more likely to sit throughout the day at work and less likely to
engage in more intense physical activity (6% vs. 28%). College education is also associated with a
more relaxed environment, more independence, more opportunities to learn new skills, and more
opportunities to make a positive impact on the community. Interestingly, a college degree does not
appear to confer an advantage in paid time off, suggesting rules governing paid time off are similar
across firms and job hierarchies.
Differences by Age Groups. Relative to workers starting out in the labor market (ages 2534), mature and older workers tend to have jobs that are less physically taxing, slower paced, with
more opportunities to work from home, and more independence in work schedule and content. The
availability of paid time off generally increases with age, while opportunities to have an impact on
society tend to decrease with age. On average, the differences tend to be largest for workers 62 and
above. In contrast, the percent reporting job training opportunities decreases from 77% in the
youngest age group to 57% in the oldest age group, consistent with models of human capital
14

investment and job choice over the life cycle. Interestingly, older workers are more likely to work
alone than younger workers. If they are working in teams they are less likely to be evaluated on their
own performance relative to the youngest age group, a pattern that could reflect occupational
differences between age groups.
Working Conditions by Wage Quintile. As a segue to our analysis of how workers trade
wages for job amenities, and how the presence of amenities affects assessments of wage inequality,
Table 3 shows the incidence of job characteristics by quintiles of the hourly wage distribution,
ranging from $12.50 per hour or less (bottom 20% of working population), to $17.05-$25.00 (middle
20%), to $38.18 or more (top 20%). In general, working conditions improve with higher wages, but
the patterns are not uniform and not always monotonic. Clearly, higher-wage workers tend to have
jobs that are less physically taxing, have more control over their work schedule, have more options
to work from home, have more opportunities to learn new skills, and more opportunities to make a
positive impact on society. Some of these differences are quite substantial. For example, the fraction
of workers reporting job training opportunities rises from 61% (bottom 20%) to 77% (top 20%).
However, there are smaller differences in the incidence of paid time off (with exception of a very
low number of mean days but higher share reporting “as needed” for the bottom quintile). Similarly,
the pace of work and the amount of autonomy in how to do a job shows no clear gradient, with the
exception of more independence for the highest wage quintile.10 In some cases, the bottom 20%
appears to fare as well or even better than the top, for example in the fraction of workers setting
their own schedule or the ability to take paid time off as needed. This variation is further indication
that some workers may be willing to trade off wages for certain kinds of working conditions,
something that we turn to in the next section.

The relationship between wages and teamwork is less clear. For example, the highest wage group is least likely to work
alone (27%), but the second highest wage group is the most likely (43%).

10

15

4. Estimating Willingness-to-Pay for Job Amenities
To obtain measures of willingness-to-pay for the job characteristics described in the previous
sections, we administered ten stated-preference experiments to each employed respondent in the
American Working Conditions Survey. In each of these experiments, survey respondents were asked
to select between two jobs, each defined by a partially varying set of job characteristics, hours, and
monetary compensation as described in detail below. The advantage of the stated-preference
approach is that we can randomize offered job attributes in a manner that would be difficult to
implement in the actual labor market. Moreover, we observe the full set of choices offered to each
respondent. To minimize concerns that certain job attributes may signal other, unspecified, job
characteristics (Manski, 1999), we instructed respondents to assume that any job attributes not
explicitly described were identical across jobs. We address the robustness of our implementation
approach as well as common concerns with stated-preference estimates in our sensitivity analysis
below (Section 7).
4.A. Creation of Hypothetical Job Profiles Based on Current Job Characteristics
For each respondent, we first defined a “baseline” job around which job attributes would
vary. The baseline job in 8 of the 10 stated-preference experiments was the respondent’s current job.
We chose to anchor the randomized job profiles around the current job in order to generate
hypothetical profiles that would appear realistic to the respondent. This approach has the advantage
of increasing salience by presenting respondents with job choices that partially reflect their personal
work experiences. It has disadvantages if valuations are affected by familiarity or if interactions
between attributes are important. To facilitate sensitivity analyses, in 2 of the 10 experiments we
used a common baseline job for all respondents. The values of the common baseline job are shown
in Appendix Table 3. We show below (Section 7.F) that our estimates are invariant to the choice of
baseline job.
16

The stated-preference experiments were preceded by a short survey about current job
characteristics, where each survey item corresponded to one of the nine job attributes in the
experiments. This information was used to define the baseline job. To avoid negative
characterizations of attributes in the job profiles and to reduce the dimensionality of the empirical
analysis, we consolidated the number of possible values for some attributes. For example, in the
initial short survey we asked respondents how often their job provides opportunities to make a
positive impact on their community or society. The three values were “Frequently,” “Occasionally,”
and “Never.” In our hypothetical job profiles, there were only two possible values: “Frequently”
and “Occasionally.” To form the baseline job, we mapped people with jobs that never provide
opportunities to make a positive impact to the “Occasionally” category. On the other hand, when
we asked respondents about the pace of their job, they could choose between “Fast-Paced” and
“Relaxed.” Since the same two attribute values were used for the hypothetical jobs, the mapping
between survey responses and the baseline job was one for one. The complete mapping is shown in
Appendix Table 4.
Similarly, we used respondents’ current wage to anchor the wage offers in the hypothetical
job profiles. In the initial short survey, we allowed respondents to report their current earnings at the
hourly, weekly, bi-weekly, twice monthly, monthly, or annual level, and we also asked about the
number of hours worked per week and the number of weeks worked in a full year. We used this
information to calculate an hourly wage for each employed person in the sample. If the implied
hourly wage was very low (e.g., below the prevailing federal minimum wage), we asked the
respondent to confirm their previous answers and provided them with an opportunity to change
their original responses (see Appendix A).
4.B. Random Variation in Hypothetical Job Profiles

17

Starting from the respondents’ baseline job, we created hypothetical Job A and Job B by
randomly selecting two non-wage attributes to vary across the two hypothetical jobs. Within each of
the two randomly selected attributes, attribute values were then chosen at random sequentially first
for Job A and then for Job B without replacement. In this way, we guaranteed variation across the jobs
for that characteristic. We included number of work hours in the set of non-wage attributes.
Whenever hours were selected to vary, the number of hours was randomly chosen to be in one of
five-hour intervals between 15 and 60 hours per week. When the number of hours was 35 or above,
we labeled the job as “Full-Time.” Otherwise, the job was labeled as “Part-Time.”
While the non-wage attributes varied only when selected in the experiment, the offered wage
always varied randomly across Job A and Job B. Given a respondent’s actual hourly wage w, the
hypothetical wages for Job A and Job B were !! !, where !! ~!(1, 0.01) and
!! !, where !! ~!(1, 0.01), respectively. We truncated !! and !! to be between 0.75 and 1.25 so
that the wage difference between the two jobs did not exceed 50% of the worker’s current wage. In
a final step, we converted the hypothetical wage values back to the units in which the respondent
originally reported their earnings (hourly, weekly, bi-weekly, twice monthly, monthly, or annual rate),
by using the hours associated with the hypothetical job, and rounded it. When we converted the
hourly wage to annual earnings, we assumed the job required 52 weeks of work (including paid time
off). When presenting an hourly wage offer for a given job, we also displayed the implied weekly
earnings in parentheses. This enabled us to highlight overtime pay; we calculated overtime pay for
weekly work hours exceeding 40 at 1.5 times the randomly assigned hourly wage and included these
overtime earnings in implied weekly earnings.
Consequently, for any job pair, eight of the non-wage attributes were identical and had the
same attribute values as the respondent’s baseline job, while the values of two attributes varied

18

between Job A and Job B and may or may not have been equal to the baseline job values. The wage
always varied, and similarly could have been equal to the baseline wage by chance.
To increase statistical precision, we limited the number of job pairs in which one of the jobs
dominated the other job on all varying dimensions. When one job was better on all dimensions
(including the wage) than the other, we redrew the scaling parameters !! and !! , and recalculated
the offered wage. This process limited, but did not eliminate, job pairs where one job (potentially)
dominated the other in all respects.11
Once the hypothetical job pair was generated, we displayed the characteristics of Job A and
Job B side by side as in the screenshot provided in Appendix Figure 1. The respondent was asked
to select “Strongly Prefer Job A,” “Prefer Job A,” “Prefer Job B,” or “Strongly Prefer Job B.” We
repeated the entire process 9 times for a total of 10 distinct experiments per respondent.
4.C. Estimation Strategy
The hypothetical choice experiments yield choice data describing the preferred jobs of
respondents given a set of job attributes and a wage. For our main specification, we assume that the
underlying choice process can be approximated by a linear indirect utility function:
!
!
!!"# = ! + !!"#
! + !!"#
! + ! ln !!"# + !!"# ,

where !!"# represents indirect utility for individual i, alternative j, for choice pair t. !!"# is the set of
non-wage characteristics, !!"# represents a flexible function of hours, and !!"# is the wage. We use
the log of the wage because we anchor each person’s wage offer to their current wage and there are
large cross-sectional wage differences in our data (see Table 1). Assuming that !!"# is an Extreme
Value Type I random variable, we estimate the probability that an individual selects a job with

If one job still dominated, we redrew the attribute values. At this point, we used the new draws regardless of their
values. This approach required us to make to a priori judgments about which attribute values were likely preferred within
a job characteristic. Any errors in this judgment will only reduce our statistical power.

11

19

characteristics !!"# , hours !!"# , and wages !!"# over a job with characteristics !!"# , hours !!"# , and
wages !!"# with probability
! !!"# > !!"# =

!
!
!
!
exp [ !!"#
− !!"#
! + !!"#
− !!"#
! + !(ln !!"# − ln !!"# )]
!
!
!
!
1 + exp [ !!"#
− !!"#
! + !!"#
− !!"#
! + !(ln !!"# − ln !!"# )]

.

Using these parameters, we derive our willingness-to-pay measure for a particular attribute r
as follows. Consider an individual who is indifferent between not having a particular attribute r at
wage w, and having the attribute with a corresponding wage decrease equal to !"#! :
! ln ! = ! ! + ! ln ! − !"!!

(1)

where ! and ! ! are the marginal utilities for the log wage and attribute r, respectively.
Solving for willingness-to-pay, we obtain:
!

!"! = ! 1 − !

!!!
!

(2)

In the following sections, we present our estimates in terms of 1 − !
attribute r is equivalent to a 100 1 − !

!!!
!

!!!
!

, such that gaining

% wage increase. Similarly, we summarize the full

valuation of amenities by defining the willingness-to-pay for the “best” job relative to the “worst”
job:
!"!

!"##

=! 1−!

!!
! !
!

,

(3)

where we add up the coefficients for the most preferred value of each attribute.12 To focus on our
main non-monetary job attributes, we do not include variations in offered hours in this calculation
(even though we always control for offered hours in our main estimates). Instead, we discuss
estimated preferences over hours separately below.
To avoid double counting, we use only the coefficient for the attribute value with the largest willingness-to-pay
estimate. For example, for physical demands, we only use the coefficient for moderate physical demands (the most
preferred attribute value) and do not also add up the coefficients for sitting and heavy physical demands.

12

20

As described above, respondents had four different response options when making each job
choice. In our main analysis, we aggregate responses into a dichotomous preference for either Job A
or Job B, ignoring the strength of preferences. However, in Section 7.B, we present an ordered logit
specification which uses the additional information. The results are similar.
Standard errors are calculated using the delta method and adjusted for clustering by
respondent. We weight the regressions by the survey weights in the AWCS, though we show in
Appendix Figure 2 that unweighted results are similar.
5. Main Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay for Job Amenities
Before presenting the willingness-to-pay estimates generated from our stated-preference
experiments, we begin with a nonparametric illustration of the underlying choice patterns in the
data. For each panel of Figure 1, we calculated the fraction of respondents selecting the job with the
indicated characteristics over a job that did not have either of those characteristics. We created
bins13 based on the wage difference between the jobs and plotted the fraction of respondents who
chose the job with the characteristics for each wage-difference bin. We held the x-axis constant
across all panels in Figure 1 and labeled each bin by the average wage difference for that bin.
Negative wage differences mean the job with the indicated characteristics offered a lower wage than
the job without the characteristics, while positive wage differences mean the reverse. Note that
because we have many job attributes in our experiments, any specific combination happens in only a
small fraction of experiments.
Figure 1 shows that across the four panels, a large fraction of respondents are willing to take
a job with better job characteristics even when the offered wage is substantially lower, indicating
Bins were chosen so that they were approximately the same size. In general, bin sizes include about 30 responses.
For Panel D of Figure 1, bin sizes include about 20 responses. The smaller bin sizes in Panel D occur because each
category (physical demands and PTO) takes on 3 possible values, which means there are fewer instances of the
combination that we focus on in Panel D.

13

21

substantial willingness-to-pay for non-wage job attributes. For example, Panel A shows that nearly
40% of respondents preferred a lower-wage job with a flexible work schedule and telecommuting
over a higher-wage job without those attributes. Panel B shows that about 20% of respondents
preferred a higher-wage job with a relaxed environment and no team-based work over a higher-wage
job without those attributes. Not surprisingly, the rate of job acceptance rises as the relative wage for
the job increases, as indicated by the tendency for the acceptance curve to slope upwards.14
5.A. Willingness-to-Pay Estimates for Full Sample
Figure 2 presents our estimated valuations for the full sample of respondents and thus
contains the first main findings of our analysis. Overall, we find that differences in job amenities are
clear predictors of stated job choices, and that individuals are willing to forego substantial earnings
for better working conditions. We also find that, contrary to some of the earlier work based on
hedonic regressions, our willingness-to-pay estimates are of expected signs and reasonable
magnitude. They also compare well to other experimental estimates, where available.
The stated-preference estimates are all statistically significant from zero at the 1% level,
suggesting that each of the job characteristics included in the experiments impacted job choices.
Considering the various attributes separately, we estimate that setting one’s own schedule is
equivalent to a 9.0% wage increase. Telecommuting opportunities are estimated to be equivalent to a
4.1% wage increase. As further discussed below, these stated-preference estimates are similar to
comparable revealed preference estimates (Mas and Pallais 2017), suggesting that stated-preference
estimates are able to recover meaningful underlying valuations.
We also find that physical demands are very predictive of job choices. Relative to a job
requiring “heavy physical activity,” a job in which the person is mostly sitting is equivalent to a
12.0% wage increase while “moderate physical activity” is valued at 14.9% of the wage. We also
As explained in Section 4, we always randomly varied two job attributes at a time in each job profile, and hence it is
difficult to obtain nonparametric estimates of willingness-to-pay for a single job attribute.

14

22

estimate that a switch from a fast-paced job to a relaxed environment is equivalent to a 4.4% wage
increase. Independence at work is worth 3.8% of the wage relative to a job with well-defined tasks.
Paid time off is also a strong predictor of job choice. We estimate that 10 days of paid time
off is equivalent to a 16.4% wage increase. Twenty days of paid time off is equivalent, on average, to
a 23.0% wage increase. If we assume that there are approximately 250 workdays in a year, then 10
days of paid time off represents a 4% reduction in labor supply. However, respondents are willing
to sacrifice substantially more than 4% of their wages to work at a job with this amount of paid time
off. Workers are only willing to forgo 6.6% of their monetary compensation for the subsequent ten
days of paid time off, which suggests diminishing marginal returns to paid time off, though this
magnitude is still larger than 4%. One explanation for the higher valuation is that paid time off
represents more than just a reduction in labor effort. Paid time off also provides job protection,
enabling a worker to take time off when desired and without threat of job loss, consistent with the
higher valuation placed on the initial ten days. It is notable that willingness-to-pay is particularly
high for low-educated workers (shown below) even though the average number of paid days off is
similar by education group (Table 2B). It may be that these workers face scheduling constraints on
other margins.
We also find that individuals prefer to work alone. We estimate that working by oneself is
equivalent to an 8.4% wage increase relative to working on a team and being evaluated based on the
performance of the team. However, we find that most of the value of working by oneself arises
from a desire to be evaluated based on one’s own performance, rather than the team’s performance.
Relative to evaluation as a team, evaluation based on one’s own performance – but still working on a
team – is equivalent to a 6.4% wage increase. As long as evaluation for teamwork is based on one’s
own performance, working alone is only valued at 2.0% of the wage.

23

Job training opportunities are equivalent to a 5.1% wage increase, suggesting that workers
are willing to forgo some current earnings for human capital development opportunities and
potentially higher future earnings.15 Frequent opportunities to impact the community/society are
worth an additional 3.9% relative to occasional opportunities.
Overall, it is clear that individuals systematically value non-monetary job characteristics, and
exhibit substantial willingness-to-pay for these amenities. To quantify the maximum potential impact
of job amenities implied by our findings we assessed the wage impact of an extreme job change, as
measured by the attributes we examined. We estimate that a switch from the worst job, in terms of
amenities, to the best job is equivalent to a 56.1% wage increase. Given the variance in actual job
characteristics we found in the AWCS (Section 3), this is a first indication that willingness-to-pay for
job amenities may play a substantial role in explaining observed variation in wages or meaningfully
exacerbate observed differentials, something we return to in Section 6.
To obtain a benchmark for our stated-preference estimates, we can contrast these results to
revealed-preference estimates for a subset of these amenities by Mas and Pallais (2017). For
example, Mas and Pallais (2017) found that their sample of workers applying to call-center jobs was,
on average, willing to accept 20% lower wages to avoid jobs in which the employer had discretion
over scheduling. Similarly, Mas and Pallais (2017) estimated that job applicants were willing, on
average, to accept 8% lower wages for the opportunity to work from home. Our estimates implied
willingness-to-pay of 9% and 4.1% for these amenities, respectively. Given differences in the study
populations and approach, our stated-preference estimate is reasonably similar. In addition, Mas and
Pallais’ (2017) replicated their own findings using a stated-preference analysis. Overall, despite
It is difficult to gauge the magnitude of this valuation. Based on the National Longitudinal Study of Youth, Parent
(1999) reports that one year of on the job training yields an increase in hourly wages of approximately 10%, and that on
average individuals receive 14 weeks of training. For a 14-week on-the-job training course, that would imply a wage
increase of 2.8% (=0.1*14/50). Given the return to training accrues over many years, the estimated valuation appears
low. But given we do not know what the typical duration of training workers have in mind, and who pays the cost of
training, it is hard to evaluate this magnitude.

15

24

obvious limitations of these direct comparisons, the available evidence suggests stated-preference
estimates are able to recover meaningful underlying valuations.
To obtain a benchmark with respect to the earlier literature based on observed job choices,
we also estimate a traditional compensating differential specification based on a hedonic regression
model using each worker’s current job characteristics and wage. We regress the log of the wage on
indicators for each job characteristic, controlling for age group, race, education, and citizenship
indicators. We report ! !! − 1, where ! represents the estimate on a job characteristic, since a
valuable characteristic – in principle – reduces the wage in a hedonic pricing framework. The results
are shown in Figure 2 alongside our main willingness-to-pay estimates. The compensating
differential and stated-preference estimates are often opposite signs. While the stated-preference
estimates take the expected signs, the compensating differential estimates often do not, consistent
with there being bias from unobserved factors that are correlated with both wages and job
characteristics (Hwang et al., 1992). While the literature has sought to improve on the basic hedonic
estimates in various ways, we did not pursue this further. Overall, these results offer further
confirmation that the stated-preference approach can yield findings that are both novel and
meaningful.
5.B. Heterogeneity in Willingness-to-Pay
In the remainder of this section, we use our data to assess systematic differences in the
willingness-to-pay for job amenities in the population. We purposefully focus on the key differentials
that have been the focus of much of the literature on the wage structure – differences in valuations
by gender, race, education, age, and by position in the wage distribution itself. We find precisely
estimated differences in how workers value amenities across groups, with women, older and more
educated workers placing on average a higher value on job amenities, and non-whites placing a
somewhat lower value on amenities. These differences turn out to be numerically important when
25

we assess the impact of job amenities on wages differentials in Section 6. We present results in this
section graphically, but point estimates and standard errors can also be seen in Appendix Table 5.
Gender Differences. We estimate the valuations separately by gender and present the results
graphically in Figure 3. Overall, women are more willing to trade off monetary compensation for onthe-job amenities than men. A switch from the worst job to the best job is equivalent to a 53.3%
wage increase for men and a 59.5% wage increase for women. Most notably, we find large
differences in preferences to avoid heavy physical activity by gender – women value primarily sitting
at work at 15.3% of the wage and moderate physical activity at 19.0%. We estimate smaller
valuations for men at 9.2% and 11.6%, respectively. Paid time off also plays a more important role
in job choice for women. Women value a switch from no paid time off to 10 days paid time off as
equivalent to an 18.2% wage increase, while men only value it at 14.8%. An additional 10 days
receives similar valuations for both men (5.7%) and women (7.7%). While there are small
differences for other amenities, the valuations are generally similar across all other characteristics.
Race Differences. Figure 4 presents estimates of valuations separately for whites and nonwhites. In general, whites place more value on job amenities than non-whites. A switch from the
worst job to the best job is equivalent to a 50.5% wage increase for non-whites and a 57.6% wage
increase for whites. We find some interesting differences by race in terms of valuations of hours
flexibility, work autonomy, working alone, and being evaluated in teams. We find that whites place
more value on schedule flexibility. For whites, setting their own schedule is equivalent to a 10.2%
wage increase, compared to only 4.0% for non-whites. We also observe large differences in work
autonomy, valued at 4.8% for whites but a small, statistically insignificant negative valuation for nonwhites. It also appears that while non-whites value working alone as equivalent to a (statistically
significant) 6% wage increase, they do not value being evaluated based on their own performance.

26

Whites, on the other hand, value evaluation based on their own performance at 7.5% of their wage,
while they place little additional value on working alone.
Education Differences. We divide our sample into three education categories: high school
degree or less, some college, and at least a college degree. We estimate substantial education
gradients for many of our job characteristics. Overall, we find that the value of job amenities
increases monotonically with education. Respondents with a high school degree or less consider a
switch from the worst job to the best job as worth a 52.0% wage increase. By comparison, those
with a college degree consider such a switch equivalent to a 60.1% wage increase. Individuals
without any college experience are estimated to place no value on telecommuting opportunities
while those with some college and those with a college degree are willing to pay 4% and 7%,
respectively, of their wage for this option. We also estimate monotonic relationships for physical
demands. The lowest education group values the job amenity “mostly sitting” (“moderate physical
activity”) at 9.4% (12%) of the wage, but the highest education group values it at 13.6% (17.1%).
We observe a similar monotonic relationship for the value of work autonomy.16
Differences by Age. We examined preferences for job characteristics based on age groups
(Figure 6). Overall, we find that job amenities matter much more to workers at older ages. A move
from the worst job to the best job is equivalent to a 47.8% wage increase for ages 25-34, 56.2% for
ages 35-49, 58.9% for ages 50-61, and 74.3% for ages 62+. As expected, we estimate especially large
differences based on the physical demands of the job. The valuations for both sitting and moderate
physical activity increase monotonically by age. Workers ages 62 and above value moderate physical
activity as equivalent to a 30.1% wage increase and sitting as equivalent to a 24.0% wage increase.

In fact, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the lowest education group places no value on work autonomy (point
estimate is 0.1%) while the highest education group considers it equivalent to a 5.8% wage increase.

16

27

Schedule flexibility and work autonomy are also disproportionately important at older ages.17 Older
workers also have stronger preferences for paid time off. Interestingly, while younger workers
appear to be indifferent towards team-based evaluation, willingness-to-pay for this job attribute
increases to 6.8% for ages 35-49, 9.2% for ages 50-61, and 13.7% for ages 62+. We estimate similar
patterns for working alone, increasing from 3.3% for the youngest age group to 17.8% for the
oldest. There is less evidence of age heterogeneity for training opportunities and opportunities to
impact the community.
Differences throughout Wage Distribution. We create five groups based on wage quintiles
(the same groups as in Table 3).18 In general, as shown in Figure 7, the highest wage group appears
to value job amenities more than respondents with lower wages. For the lowest-wage workers, we
estimate a total value of 47.9% of the wage while the corresponding estimate for the highest wage
group is 61.4%. This pattern is consistent with on-the-job amenities being normal goods, as highwage workers are willing to sacrifice some of their additional compensation for better working
conditions.19 This suggests that estimates of the wage distribution that do not take into account
amenity differences may understate the true extent of inequality in underlying productivity. For
example, willingness-to-pay increases with the wage for schedule flexibility, telecommuting, work
autonomy, and lower physical activity on the job. Exceptions to these patterns are the valuations for
paid time off, which follow an inverse U-shape pattern, increasing at lower wages and peaking at the
third quintile. Training opportunities appear valued similarly across the wage distribution.
5.C. Preferences for Hours Worked
For ages 25-34, we estimate the schedule flexibility is worth about 7.0% of the wage, but this valuation increases to
14.6% for ages 62+. For the younger three age groups, we estimate autonomy as worth 2-5% of the wage. For the
oldest age group, this estimate jumps to 11.2%.
18 The lowest wage group makes $12.50 per hour or less; the second group makes between $12.50 and $17.05 per hour;
the third group’s wages are between $17.05 and $25.00; the fourth quintile has wages between $25.00 and $38.18; the
highest wage group consists of respondents with wages above $38.18.
19 The observed wage distribution is, of course, “treated” by the existing distribution of amenities and the compensating
differentials attached to these amenities, suggesting that the differences across the untreated wage distribution (i.e., wages
holding amenities constant) would be even starker.
17

28

In this section, we report estimates of preferences for hours worked generated from the
same model underlying our main results in Figure 2. In the classic model of labor supply, individuals
work until the marginal disutility of work equals the wage. However, for infra-marginal choices
individuals may place more or less value on an additional hour of work than their prevailing
(marginal) wage. Moreover, factors such as fixed costs of working may lead to deviations between
workers’ valuation of an additional hour worked from the marginal wage. The choice of hours
worked may also itself be a job amenity, for example representing an element of flexibility.
We normalize the coefficient for “60 hours” to zero and evaluate hours preferences relative
to this excluded category.20 The estimates and 95% confidence intervals are presented graphically in
Figure 8. Willingness-to-pay for work hours follows an inverse U-shape that peaks at 45 hours per
week. 21 The estimates imply that respondents are willing to pay 10% of their wage to move from a
60-hours-per-week job to a 45-hours-per-week job, and to pay 17% to move from a 20-hours-perweek job to an equivalent 40-hours-per-week.22 In Appendix Figure 3, we show these patterns
separately by gender. As might be expected, men have a higher willingness-to-pay for moving from
part- to full-time work. The general patterns of the estimates are similar for men and women –
increasing until 45-hours-per-week and then decreasing -- though we can statistically reject that the
estimates are identical across the two groups.
6. Implications of Incidence and Valuation of Job Amenities for the Wage Distribution

20

In forthcoming work, Mas and Pallais (forthcoming) estimate willingness-to-pay measures for an additional five hours
of work given a job involving 5 to 35 hours per week.
21 Note that in our experiments, jobs with 35+ hours per week were labeled “Full-Time” while jobs with fewer than 35
hours per week were labeled “Part-Time.” We do not observe an especially large jump in valuation at 35 hours per week
in Figure 8 when compared to the increasing trend at lower levels of hours, suggesting that respondents did not
disproportionately value the switch to full-time work beyond the explicit increase in hours.
22 As a point of comparison, from their sample of call center applicants Mas and Pallais (2017) estimate valuations of
about 20% to 40% of wages for moving from a 20-hours-per-week to a 40-hours-per-week job, depending on baseline
earnings. The wider range could be due to the fact that their study population was primarily comprised of lower-wage
workers in need of additional hours.

29

In this section, we assess how wage differentials grow or shrink when differences in amenities
are accounted for.23 We perform this assessment of wage differentials in two different ways. First,
we use the attribute valuations estimated for the full sample (see Figure 2) to calculate each
respondent’s total compensation based on the attributes of their current job, as they reported them
in the short initial survey preceding the stated-preference experiments. Second, we perform the
same exercise, but allow the attribute valuations to differ based on the individual characteristics of
the respondent (e.g., gender, race, education and age). Both approaches provide important
information. The first approach quantifies the contribution to wage differences arising only from
differences in the incidence of amenities across groups (as discussed in Section 3), using a common
metric for determining which attributes are considered positives and which are considered negatives,
and a simple way to aggregate them together. The second approach adjusts for the fact that holding
preferences constant may misrepresent the true value of the bundle of job characteristics for some
demographic groups. For example, if women value schedule flexibility more than men, then
providing this amenity to women generates a larger increase in compensation than providing
equivalent schedule flexibility to men. Using these approaches, we investigate differentials based on
gender, race, education, and age as well as measures of wage inequality.
For both of these cases, we show two metrics capturing the effect of job amenities on total
compensation. Let !! be an indicator equal to one if the respondent’s current job has attribute r.
Given our estimated valuation for attribute r, we can adjust the respondent’s wage for the value of
this attribute based on whether they have that attribute. We report several metrics. Based on our
random utility model introduced in Section 4, the log of the total value of on-the-job characteristics
is equal to

23

As before, we do not consider “number of hours” as an amenity for these calculations.

30

ln ! 1 − !

! !
! ! !
!

!

,

where ! ! is the marginal utility of a given attribute r, and ! is the marginal utility of the log wage w.
We refer to this term as the “amenity value” and to log of the term in square brackets as the “amenity
multiplier.” We will also provide differentials with respect to the log of “total compensation,” defined as
the log of the wage plus the total value of the respondent’s current attributes:
ln ! + ! 1 − !

! !!
! ! !
!

.

Because the preference parameters are estimated, to obtain standard errors we bootstrap the entire
process – estimation of equation (2) followed by estimation of a wage differential specification –
using a block (by respondent) bootstrap.24
We present our estimates of these compensation differentials in Table 4. We find that
accounting for differences in the incidence and valuation of job amenities has different effects on
different groups in the labor market. It substantially reduces the gender wage gap (by 30% relative to
the wage gap unadjusted for amenities); it substantially raises the gap between whites and nonwhites
(by 25%) and the gap between older and younger workers (by close to 100%); and it increases the
cross-sectional returns to education (by 16%). Overall wage inequality also increases once we
account for amenities, particularly at the bottom of the wage distribution.25
Gender Wage Gap. Accounting for the presence of job amenities reduces the gender wage
gap by about a third. In our data, we estimate a log-wage gender differential equal to -0.187,
We use this approach even when the dependent variable is the log of the wage, which does not use any estimated
valuations, for uniformity across all outcomes.
25 We also analyzed how total compensation differs across groups, holding constant differences in amenities and
preferences based on other individual covariates by jointly estimating preferences across all groups. The results are
shown in Appendix Table 7. The approach is complex and explained in Appendix B, since amenities and preferences
enter total compensation in a nonlinear fashion. While we find the results interesting and reassuring in their similarity to
the estimates in Table 4, we do not include these in the main text given the added complexity.
24

31

implying that women have 17% lower wages than men.26 The amenity multiplier is positive and
statistically different from zero (Panel A), implying that conditional on their wage, women have
better amenities. However, the effect is moderate – when amenities are factored in, the
compensation gap is reduced to -0.172 (-15.8%), representing an 8% reduction in the size of the
differential. In contrast, when we also allow valuations to vary by gender (Panel B), the log
compensation gap shrinks to -0.131 (-12%), representing a substantial 30% reduction in the size of
the differential. The further reduction in the gap arises primarily because women place more value
on paid time off and avoiding heavy physical activity.27
Race Wage Gap. Accounting for amenities increases the race wage gap. The unadjusted
white-nonwhite log wage differential is -0.214, implying 19% lower wages for non-whites in our
data. Holding amenity valuations constant, we estimate only small and statistically insignificant
amenity multiplier differentials by race, consistent with our finding in Section 3 that there are few
racial differences in the incidence of amenities after controlling for differences in education and
other characteristics. However, we found in Section 5 that whites value amenities much more highly
than non-whites. When we permit valuations to differ by race, we estimate that the amenity
multiplier is statistically different between whites and non-whites and reinforces the wage gap. As a
result, the total compensation differential is estimated to increase in magnitude to -0.268, representing
a 25% increase relative to the wage differential unadjusted for amenities.
Returns to Education. Accounting for amenities substantially increases the cross-sectional
returns to education. In our data, workers with a college degree have 70% higher wages than those
without a college degree (a differential of 0.532 log points). Since we found large differences in the
We report 100× exp ! − 1 % throughout this section where ! represents the coefficient on the demographic
indicator of interest.
27 To provide information about which specific amenities are affecting wage differentials the most, we have also
sequentially added each amenity into the above expression. The order matters in terms of how large of a difference
adding another amenity can make relative to the baseline. While the patterns differ by demographic group, paid time off
and physical demands tend to have the largest impacts on wage differentials. The results are shown in Appendix Tables
6A (constant values) and 6B (heterogeneous valuations).
26

32

incidence of amenities by education in Section 3, at constant valuations the education gap in total
compensation increases to 0.577 log points (80%), representing an 8% increase. We also found in
Section 5 that college graduates value job amenities more highly, and when we permit amenity
valuations to differ based on education, the total log compensation differential increases even
further to 0.619 (85%). This corresponds to an increase of 16% relative to the unadjusted crosssectional returns to education.
Wage-Age Gradient. As with the race gap, differences in the valuation of job amenities
play a key role when adjusting the age-wage gradient. We estimate small and statistically insignificant
amenity multiplier differentials across all age groups (relative to ages 62-71) when we hold valuations
constant. However, when we permit valuations to vary, we find that the wage differential between
older workers and workers ages 25-34 and 35-49 more than doubles, since older workers have
strong preferences for non-wage amenities.
Overall Wage Inequality. Finally, as a summary of the overall net effect of adjusting for
amenities on the wage structure, we report how our adjustments affect differences between the 90th,
50th, and 10th percentiles of the hourly wage distribution in Table 5. Overall, adjusting for the
presence of job amenities increases wage inequality, particularly so in the bottom half of the wage
distribution. The effect is present and precisely estimated when we hold valuations constant (Panel
A), but roughly doubles in magnitude when we allow valuations to vary (Panel B). For example,
converting the numbers in Table 5 to percentages, the unadjusted 90th-50th log difference is 168%
(0.986 in column 1), increases to 179% (1.027 in column 2, Panel A) when we introduce amenities at
common values, and increases to 184% (1.043 in column 2, Panel B) when we allow valuations to
vary. The corresponding numbers for the 50th-10th log difference are 100% (0.692, unadjusted),
106% (0.723, common valuations), and 120% (0.787, differing valuations), respectively. These

33

results underscore that wage inequality is exacerbated by the incidence of amenities and systematic
differences in the valuations of those amenities throughout the wage distribution.
7. Robustness Analysis
Our analysis has relied on several assumptions that we test in this section, including the
statistical methods used to estimate our willingness-to-pay metrics, the attentiveness of survey
participants to the stated-preference questions, and the effectiveness of our stated-preference
estimates in capturing the true preferences of the respondents. We explored these issues in great
detail, but only summarize the main findings here. In general, we find that our results are robust to
our estimation technique and to respondent attentiveness. We also find that our willingness-to-pay
estimates are correlated to actual job choices. Since we also show that anchoring the randomization
around current jobs does not drive our estimates, the correlation between actual job attributes and
stated preferences provides some direct validation of the stated-preference approach in our context.
7.A. Accounting for Valuations of Amenity Combinations (Interaction Terms)
If workers care about particular combinations of job amenities, interactions between job
characteristics would matter in explaining job choices, something not captured by our approach
based on a linear additive indirect utility function. Even though these interactions are likely to be
orthogonal to our main effects since we randomize job characteristics in our experiments, we tested
this assumption explicitly. We permitted utility and choices to also respond to all two-way
interactions of job characteristics and estimated the valuations of the main effects and these two-way
effects (not shown). When interactions are included, we estimate that moving from the worst to the
best job is equivalent to a 53% wage increase, compared to 56% to our main findings. While it is
still possible that more flexible interactions may matter to some workers, the similarity of these
estimates suggests that the additive specification is not driving our main results.
34

7.B. Accounting for Preference Ordering (Ordered Logit)
We further test the importance of our functional form and distributional assumptions in
Appendix Figure 4. In our experiments, we provided respondents with four options: Strongly Prefer
Job A, Prefer Job A, Prefer Job B, and Strongly Prefer B. Our analysis above dichotomizes these
options into whether the respondent preferred Job A over Job B. However, we can exploit the
additional information provided by the full range of options and estimate valuations using an
ordered logit model. We find little difference in the estimated valuations across all job
characteristics and our estimates are relatively unaffected by focusing on the dichotomous choice
between the two jobs.
7.C. Accounting for Unobserved Heterogeneity in Preferences (Mixed Logit)
For simplicity, we have modeled preferences as static across individuals and provided
evidence that they vary based on observable characteristics. It is possible that preferences vary
based on unobservable characteristics as well, in which case logit estimates may be biased (Train,
2003). To test for the importance of modeling preferences as homogenous, we estimate a mixed
logit model, permitting the coefficients on job characteristics (including hours) to be normally
distributed. We further allow for correlations in preferences across all job characteristics. We report
the mean valuation estimates in Appendix Figure 4 as well. The results are similar to our main
results, indicating that unobserved preference heterogeneity is not introducing bias to our estimates.
7.D. Robustness to Assumption of Extreme Value Distribution (Special Regressor Method)
To assess the robustness of our findings to assuming a specific distribution for the error
term, we use the so-called special regressor estimator which does not require distributional
assumptions on the error term and estimates mean valuations even in the presence of random
coefficients (Dong and Lewbel, 2015; Lewbel, 2014). This approach has been used previously in
estimating willingness-to-pay parameters (e.g., Kalisa et al., 2016; Bontemps and Nauges, 2015;
35

Agarwal and Somaini, 2014).28 The resulting willingness-to-pay estimates are similar to the main
estimates (Appendix Figure 4).
7.E. Attentiveness to Survey Questions
One common concern with stated-preference experiments and surveys more generally is that
respondents may not read the questions closely. This tends to introduce noise, if individuals choose
randomly, but could impart a status-quo bias if inattentive individuals gravitate toward characteristics
similar to their current job. We tested the importance of respondent inattention by asking each
respondent two “trick questions” that appeared randomly (and non-consecutively) between the third
and the last experiment (e.g., Berinsky et al., 2014). The introductory text of the question specified
that the respondent should answer in a specific manner, regardless of their true answer to a question
presented immediately below. The questions were ostensibly about job search and job preferences
and are shown in Appendix Figures 5 and 6. We label respondents as paying attention if they
answered at least one of the questions correctly. This sample consists of 65% of the respondents in
our full sample.
In Appendix Figure 7, we display our valuations separately for the group that correctly
answered both trick questions. The valuations are quite similar. The “attentive” sample has slightly
higher valuations for almost all amenities with the exception of sitting, frequent opportunities to
serve the community, and schedule flexibility.29 Overall, however, there is little evidence that our
results are driven by systematic respondent inattention.
7.F. Anchoring to Baseline Job
The log of the wage in our specification meets the three assumptions necessary for a special regressor. It enters the
specification additively and is independent of !!!! − !!!! given the randomization in our stated-preference
experiments. Finally, it has large support as we permitted differences in wages as large as 50% of the individual’s current
wage. To the extent that this range is too small to capture the full distribution of valuations for the job characteristic,
Magnac and Maurin (2007) shows that there is no bias if the tails of the distribution are symmetric where the “tails” of
the distribution are the parts that are not captured by the support of the special regressor. For more details on this
method, see Appendix C.
29 Since we scale the coefficients on the amenities by the coefficient on the log wage, inattention will not necessarily bias
the estimates.
28

36

As discussed in Section 4, we based our hypothetical job profiles on each respondent’s
current job for all but two experiments. In two randomly selected experiments, the baseline job was
the same for all respondents (as defined in Appendix Table 3). By using a uniform baseline job, we
reduce concerns that omitted interaction terms are confounding our linear utility estimates since the
interaction terms will not systematically vary across respondents in the experiments (see also Section
7.A above). Appendix Figure 8 shows that using a common baseline barely affects our results,
although confidence intervals increase given the reduced sample size. This suggests our results are
not driven by our decision to anchor the job characteristics to respondents’ most recent jobs.
7.G. Stated vs. Actual Preferences
Using a stated-preference approach permits us to randomize job attributes across
respondents, minimizing concerns that the available or chosen job characteristics are confounded by
unobserved individual, job, or market factors. However, there are concerns that respondents may
not answer in a manner that is consistent with how they would actually respond in the labor market,
given the same options. Our data allow us to investigate the consistency between respondent
selections and their revealed preferences by testing whether individuals who have selected into jobs
with specific amenities value those amenities more. To do so, we add to our main specification
interactions of each of amenity with the respondent’s actual characteristics in their current job. In
Appendix Figure 9 we show the estimated valuation for respondents without a particular job
amenity as well as the estimated valuations for respondents with that job amenity. We only report
interactions in which the respondent’s current job characteristic is the same as the characteristic in
the experiment.30

For attributes such as physical demands in which there are more than two possible options, we include the interaction
of “sitting” with an indicator for whether the respondent’s current job involves moderate physical activity in the model,
but we suppress these interactions in Appendix Figure 9. All estimates displayed in Appendix Figure 9 are estimated
jointly.

30

37

We find substantial evidence that individuals who have selected into jobs with specific
amenities disproportionately value those characteristics. For example, those with flexibility in setting
their schedule consider this job characteristic equivalent to a 10.6% wage increase, four percentage
point higher than the valuation of those without schedule flexibility. For workers in intense physical
activity jobs, we estimate a small, statistically insignificant negative valuation for sitting. However,
people with jobs that require mostly sitting place high valuations on this amenity, equivalent to a
16.0% wage increase. Such differences are true for most other amenities we consider, including a
relaxed environment and autonomy at work, working by oneself and evaluation by oneself, and
frequent opportunities to serve the community among those selecting into such jobs.
Overall, we find strong evidence that workers selected hypothetical jobs in the statedpreference experiments based on characteristics that they have also selected in real jobs. This
suggests that stated preferences indeed reflect actual preferences. It could be, of course, that the
relationship arises because workers are more familiar with their actual jobs and less familiar with
alternative options, and hence ‘default’ into these choices. However, our finding in Section 7.F that
switching the baseline profile from the current job to a fixed, common job profile did not affect our
willingness-to-pay estimates speaks against such an interpretation. We are well aware that these
added findings cannot conclusively link stated to actual preferences. However, they give added
confidence in our main findings.
8. Conclusion
A large group of studies has examined sources of persistent wage differentials by gender,
race, age, and education, and wage inequality more generally, typically studying the traits of workers
or firms. In this paper, we assess to what extent differences in job characteristics can help explain
some of these persistent wage differences. To do so, we first provide comprehensive evidence about
38

how working conditions differ across demographic groups and throughout the wage distribution
based on the American Working Conditions Survey, a nationally representative survey we fielded for
this purpose. We also estimate how much workers are willing to pay for those job characteristics
based on carefully designed stated-preference experiments. To capture a broad range of working
conditions, we focus on nine specific dimensions of job characteristics. We then use the incidence of
job characteristics and our estimated willingness-to-pay measures to adjust typical wage differentials
and measures of wage inequality in order to illustrate the effect of job amenities on total
compensation.
Overall, we find that job characteristics differ systematically across the U.S. labor market. We
also document substantial willingness-to-pay for all of the amenities we study, and show that
valuations can differ substantially across workers. This preference heterogeneity is a critical
component when studying differences in compensation. Accounting for both differences in the
incidence of working conditions and preference heterogeneity attenuates the gender wage gap but
exacerbates the race wage gap when comparing whites to non-whites. It also increases the crosssectional returns to college education. We further find that working conditions become increasingly
important throughout the lifecycle. Finally, both job amenities and preferences for job amenities
rise throughout the wage distribution. Consequently, metrics of wage inequality increase further as
we account for systematic differences in job characteristics.
Overall, our analysis confirms recent experimental and stated-preference estimates that
suggest that workers have substantial willingness-to-pay for certain job amenities. A key advantage
of our stated-preference approach is that it allows us to study a broad range of job amenities that are
difficult to analyze in a truly randomized setting. Another advantage is that our data allow us to
extend the existing evidence for specific amenities and populations to a broad range of working
conditions and a nationally representative sample while linking it to that population’s existing job
39

amenities. This allows us to quantify the total potential effect of working conditions on the wage
structure.
It is also worth highlighting a few caveats of our analysis. As we discussed, we are aware of
the potential limitations of the stated-preference approach, and we sought to address this directly in
the analysis. Future waves of the American Working Conditions Survey will further allow us
compare stated and revealed preferences in a longitudinal setting. As a partial-equilibrium analysis of
willingness-to-pay, it also bears noting that the experimental analysis we have conducted here to
monetize how individuals value job amenities is distinct from a counterfactual analysis in which
firms would randomly add or remove amenities from jobs. Our analysis recovers average valuations
across individuals for particular amenities. Although we have demonstrated that there is substantial
heterogeneity in valuations across individuals, it is not possible to know which of these individuals
are on the margin of a given labor market equilibrium without further information about labor
demand by firms when amenities may be costly to provide. In a counterfactual analysis, for example,
marginal valuations may be more informative than average valuations, and there may be additional
wage adjustments by firms that would depend on the costs of providing particular amenities.
However, our results suggest that amenities play a critical role in job choices. While we limit
our attention to only a subset of workplace amenities, we nevertheless estimate that these
characteristics compose an important component of compensation, suggesting a first-order role for
non-wage amenities for understanding the level and structure of wages in the U.S. labor market.

40

References
Agarwal, N. and Somaini, P., 2014. Demand Analysis using Strategic Reports: An application to a school choice
mechanism (No. w20775). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ameriks, J., Briggs, J.S., Caplin, A., Shapiro, M.D. and Tonetti, C., 2015. Long-Term-Care Utility and
Late-in-Life Saving (No. w20973). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Arai, M., 1994. Compensating wage differentials versus efficiency wages: an empirical study of job
autonomy and wages. Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 33(2), pp. 249-262.
Barron, J. M., Black, D.A. and Loewenstein, M.A., 1993. Gender Differences in Training, Capital,
and Wages. The Journal of Human Resources 28, no. 2: 343-64.
Barron, J.M., Berger, M.C. and Black, D.A., 1999. Do workers pay for on-the-job training? Journal of
Human Resources, pp.235-252.
Bayard, K., Hellerstein, J., Neumark, D., and Troske, K., 2003. New Evidence on Sex Segregation
and Sex Differences in Wages from Matched Employee-Employer Data. Journal of Labor
Economics, 21(4), pp. 887-922
Benz, M., 2005. Not for the Profit, but for the Satisfaction?–Evidence on Worker Well-Being in
Non-Profit Firms. Kyklos, 58(2), pp.155-176.
Berinsky, A. J., Margolis, M. F. and Sances, M. W., 2014. Separating the Shirkers from the Workers?
Making Sure Respondents Pay Attention on Self-Administered Surveys. American Journal of
Political Science, 58: 739-753.
Bertrand, M., and Mullainathan, S., 2004. Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and
Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination. American Economic Review, 94 (4),
pp. 991-1013.
Best, F., 1978. Preferences on worklife scheduling and work-leisure tradeoffs. Monthly Lab. Rev., 101,
p.31.
41

Bloom, N., Liang, J., Roberts, J. and Ying, Z.J., 2014. Does working from home work? Evidence
from a Chinese experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1), pp.165-218.
Bluestone, B.A., 1974. The Personal Earnings Distribution: Individual and Institutional
Determinants. Final Report for the Period July 1, 1970--October 31, 1973.
Bonhomme, S. and Jolivet, G., 2009. The pervasive absence of compensating differentials. Journal of
Applied Econometrics, 24(5), pp.763-795.
Bontemps, C. and Nauges, C., 2015. The impact of perceptions in averting-decision models: An
application of the special regressor method to drinking water choices. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 98(1), pp.297-313.
Brown, C., 1980. Equalizing differences in the labor market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94(1),
pp.113-134.
Carlsson, F. and Martinsson, P., 2001. Do hypothetical and actual marginal willingness to pay differ
in choice experiments? Application to the valuation of the environment. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 41(2), pp.179-192.
Carson, R.T., 2012. Contingent valuation: A practical alternative when prices aren't available. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(4), pp.27-42.
D’Haultfœuille, X. and Maurel, A., 2013. Inference on an extended Roy model, with an application
to schooling decisions in France. Journal of Econometrics, 174(2), pp.95-106.
Dale-Olsen, H., 2006. Wages, fringe benefits and worker turnover. Labour Economics, 13(1), pp.87105.
Diamond, P.A. and Hausman, J.A., 1994. Contingent valuation: Is some number better than no
number? The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4), pp.45-64.
Dong, Y. and Lewbel, A., 2015. A simple estimator for binary choice models with endogenous
regressors. Econometric Reviews, 34(1-2), pp.82-105.
42

Duncan, G.J., 1976. Earnings functions and nonpecuniary benefits. Journal of Human Resources,
pp.462-483.
Duncan, G.J. and Holmlund, B., 1983. Was Adam Smith right after all? Another test of the theory of
compensating wage differentials. Journal of Labor Economics, 1(4), pp.366-379.
Duncan, G.J. and Stafford, F., 1977. Pace of Work, Unions, and Earnings in Blue Collar
Jobs. Manuscript. March.
Duncan, G. J., and Hoffman, S., 1979. On-the-Job Training and Earnings Differences by Race and
Sex. Review of Economics and Statistics 61 (November 1979): 593-603.
Fairlie, P., 2011. Meaningful work, employee engagement, and other key employee outcomes:
Implications for human resource development. Advances in Developing Human Resources, 13(4),
pp.508-525.
Farber, H. S., Silverman, D., and von Wachter, T.M., 2017. Factors Determining Callbacks to Job
Applications by the Unemployed: An Audit Study. Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social
Sciences, 3(3), pp 168-201.
Filer, R.K. and Petri, P.A., 1988. A job-characteristics theory of retirement. The Review of Economics
and Statistics, pp.123-128.
Gariety, B.S. and Shaffer, S., 2007. Wage differentials associated with working at home. Monthly Lab.
Rev., 130, p.61.
Goldin, C. and Katz, L.F., 2011. The cost of workplace flexibility for high-powered
professionals. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 638(1), pp.45-67.
Gronberg, T.J. and Reed, W.R., 1994. Estimating workers' marginal willingness to pay for job
attributes using duration data. Journal of Human Resources, pp.911-931.
Hamermesh, D.S., 1977. Economic aspects of job satisfaction. Essays in Labor Market Analysis. New
York: John Wiley, pp.53-72.
43

Hamermesh, D.S., 1999. Changing inequality in markets for workplace amenities. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 114(4), pp.1085-1123.
Hamermesh, D.S. and Wolfe, J.R., 1990. Compensating wage differentials and the duration of wage
loss. Journal of Labor Economics, 8(1, Part 2), pp.S175-S197.
Hamilton, B.H., Nickerson, J.A. and Owan, H., 2003. Team incentives and worker heterogeneity:
An empirical analysis of the impact of teams on productivity and participation. Journal of Political
Economy, 111(3), pp.465-497.
Hausman, J., 2012. Contingent valuation: from dubious to hopeless. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 26(4), pp.43-56.
Hayward, M.D., Grady, W.R., Hardy, M.A. and Sommers, D., 1989. Occupational influences on
retirement, disability, and death. Demography, 26(3), pp.393-409.
Hwang, H.S., Reed, W.R. and Hubbard, C., 1992. Compensating wage differentials and unobserved
productivity. Journal of Political Economy, 100(4), pp.835-858.
Kalisa, T., Riddel, M. and Shaw, W.D., 2016. Willingness to pay to avoid arsenic-related risks: a
special regressor approach. Journal of Environmental Economics and Policy, 5(2), pp.143-162.
Katz, L.F. and Krueger, A.B., 2016. The rise and nature of alternative work arrangements in the United States,
1995-2015 (No. w22667). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kimball, M.S. and Shapiro, M.D., 2008. Labor supply: Are the income and substitution effects both large or
both small? (No. w14208). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kniesner, T.J., Viscusi, W.K., Woock, C. and Ziliak, J.P., 2012. The value of a statistical life:
Evidence from panel data. Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), pp.74-87.
Kostiuk, P.F., 1990. Compensating differentials for shift work. Journal of Political Economy, 98(5, Part
1), pp.1054-1075.

44

Lang, K. and Manove, M., 2011. Education and Labor Market Discrimination. American Economic
Review, 101(4): 1467-96.
Lazear, E.P. and Shaw, K.L., 2007. Personnel economics: The economist's view of human
resources. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(4), pp.91-114.
Leete, L., 2001. Whither the nonprofit wage differential? Estimates from the 1990 Census. Journal of
Labor Economics, 19(1), pp.136-170.
Leuven, E., 2007. The Economics of Private Sector Training. Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 19, No.
1: 91-111.
Lewbel, A., 2014. An Overview of the Special Regressor Method. In The Oxford Handbook of Applied
Nonparametric and Semiparametric Econometrics and Statistics.
Lopes, H., Lagoa, S. and Calapez, T., 2014. Work autonomy, work pressure, and job satisfaction: An
analysis of European Union countries. The Economic and Labour Relations Review, 25(2), pp.306326.
Lucas, R.E., 1977. Hedonic wage equations and psychic wages in the returns to schooling. The
American Economic Review, pp.549-558.
Maestas, N., Mullen, K.J., Powell, D., von Wachter, T. and Wenger, J.B., 2017a. Working Conditions
in the United States: Results of the 2015 American Working Conditions Survey. Santa Monica,
CA: RAND Corporation, RR-2014-APSF.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2014.html.
Maestas, N., Mullen, K.J., Powell, D., von Wachter, T. and Wenger, J.B., 2017b. The American
Working Conditions Survey Data: Codebook and Data Description. Santa Monica, CA: RAND
Corporation, TL-269-APSF. https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL269.html.
Magnac, T. and Maurin, E., 2007. Identification and information in monotone binary models. Journal
of Econometrics, 139(1), pp.76-104.
45

Manski, C.F., 1999. Analysis of Choice Expectations in Incomplete Scenarios. Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 19(1), pp.49-66.
Mas, A. and Pallais, A., 2017. Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements. American Economic Review,
107(12): 3722-3759.
Mas, A. and Pallais, A., forthcoming. Labor Supply and the Value of Non-Work Time: Experimental
Estimates from the Field. American Economic Review: Insights.
Mateyka, P.J., Rapino, M. and Landivar, L.C., 2012. Home-based workers in the United States: 2010. US
Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, US Census Bureau.
Matz-Costa, C., Cosner Berzin, S., Pitt-Catsouphes, M. and Halvorsen, C.J., 2017. Perceptions of the
meaningfulness of work among older social purpose workers: An ecological momentary
assessment study. Journal of Applied Gerontology, p.0733464817727109
Mincer, J. and Polacheck, S., 1974. Family Investment in Human Capital: Earnings of Women.
Journal of Political Economy, 1974, vol. 82, issue 2, S76-S108
Monaco, K. and Pierce, B., 2015. Compensation inequality: evidence from the National
Compensation Survey. Monthly Lab. Rev., 138, p.1.
Moretti, E., 2013. Real Wage Inequality. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1): 65-103.
Neal, D.A. and Johnson, W.R., 1996. The role of premarket factors in black-white wage
differences. Journal of Political Economy, 104(5), pp.869-895.
Nealey, S. M., & Goodale, J. G., 1967. Worker preferences among time-off benefits and pay. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 51(4, Pt.1), 357-361.
Neumark, D. and McLaughlin, J.S., 2012. Barriers to later retirement: Increases in the full retirement
age, age discrimination, and the physical challenges of work.
Oettinger, G.S., 2011. The incidence and wage consequences of home-based work in the United
States, 1980–2000. Journal of Human Resources, 46(2), pp.237-260.
46

Parent, D., 1999. Wages and mobility: The impact of employer-provided training. Journal of labor
economics 17 (2): 298-317.
Pierce, B., 2001. Compensation inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), pp.1493-1525.
Preston, A.E., 1989. The nonprofit worker in a for-profit world. Journal of Labor Economics, 7(4),
pp.438-463.
Price, D., Song, J., Guvenen, F., Bloom, N., and von Wachter, T., forthcoming. Firming Up
Inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Revelt, D. and Train, K., 1998. Mixed logit with repeated choices: households' choices of appliance
efficiency level. Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(4), pp.647-657.
Rosen, S., 1986. The theory of equalizing differences. Handbook of Labor Economics, 1, pp.641-692.
Rosso, B. D., Dekas, K. H., and Wrzesniewski, A., 2010. On the meaning of work: A theoretical
integration and review. Research in Organizational Behavior, 30, 91-127.
Saragih, S., 2015. The effects of job autonomy on work outcomes: Self efficacy as an intervening
variable. International Research Journal of Business Studies, 4(3).
Smyer, M. and Pitt-Catsouphes, M., 2007. The meanings of work for older workers. Generations,
31(1), pp.23-30.
Smith, R.S., 1973. Compensating wage differentials and hazardous work (No. 5). US Dept. of Labor, Office
of the Assistant Secretary for Policy, Evaluation, and Research.
Steger, M.F. and Dik, B.J., 2012. Work as meaning: Individual and organizational benefits of
engaging in meaningful work. Oxford Handbook of Positive Psychology and Work.
Steger, M.F., Dik, B.J. and Duffy, R.D., 2012. Measuring meaningful work: The work and meaning
inventory (WAMI). Journal of Career Assessment, 20(3), pp.322-337.
Thaler, R. and Rosen, S., 1976. The value of saving a life: evidence from the labor market.
In Household Production and Consumption (pp. 265-302). NBER.
47

Train, K., 2003. Mixed logit. Discrete choice methods with simulation, pp.139-154.
Van Soest, A. and Vonkova, H., 2014. How sensitive are retirement decisions to financial incentives?
A stated preference analysis. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29(2), pp.246-264.
Viscusi, W.K., 1993. The value of risks to life and health. Journal of Economic Literature, 31(4), pp.19121946.
Viscusi, W.K. and Aldy, J.E., 2003. The value of a statistical life: a critical review of market estimates
throughout the world. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(1), pp.5-76.
Weeden, K.A., 2005. Is there a flexiglass ceiling? Flexible work arrangements and wages in the
United States. Social Science Research, 34(2), pp.454-482.
Wiswall, M. and Zafar, B., 2017. Preference for the workplace, investment in human capital, and
gender. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1), pp.457-507.

48

1
.8
.6

Difference in Log Wage

.2
5

.2

.1
5

.1

.0
5

Difference in Log Wage

Fraction Accepting
95% Confidence Intervals

Fraction Accepting
95% Confidence Intervals

B. Relaxed Environment and Work by Self

.8
.6
.4

.2

.2
5

.1
5

.1

.0
5

0

-.1

-.0
5

-.1
5

-.2
5

Difference in Log Wage

-.2

0
.2
5

.2

.1

.1
5

.0
5

0

-.0
5

-.1

-.1
5

-.2

-.2
5

0

.2

.2

.4

.6

Fraction Accepting

.8

1

1

A: Flexible Work Schedule and
Telecommuting

Fraction Accepting

0

-.0
5

-.1

-.1
5

-.2

-.2
5

.2
5

.2

.1
5

.1

0

.0
5

-.0
5

-.1

-.1
5

-.2

0

.2

.4

Fraction Accepting

.6
.4
-.2
5

0

.2

Fraction Accepting

.8

1

Figure 1: Fraction Preferring Job with Indicated Attributes (over Job without Indicated
Attributes) by Relative Wage, Based on Stated-Preference Experiments

Difference in Log Wage

Fraction Accepting
95% Confidence Intervals

Fraction Accepting
95% Confidence Intervals

C: Independence and Training

D: Sitting and 20 Days PTO

Notes: This figure shows that higher relative wages for a given set of job characteristics is
associated with a higher share of respondents selecting that job. To show this we created “bins”
of approximately 30 observations (20 for Panel D) for job choice experiments in which one job
offer provided the two listed amenities while the other job choice did not. The bins are defined
by the difference in the wage offers; the lowest 30 wage offers for the job with the listed
amenities relative to the alternative job option are placed in the first bin. The next lowest 30 are
placed in the next bin, etc. We plot each point on the x-axis based on the average log wage
difference for that bin. The y-axis represents the share of respondents in that bin accepting the
job with the two indicated amenities.

49

Figure 2: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay from Stated-Preference Experiments and
Compensating Differential Estimates from Hedonic Regressions

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Stated Preference Estimates
Compensating Differential Estimates

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent
provided responses to 10 stated-preference experiments. Willingness-to-pay estimates from
stated-preference experiments are expressed as a percent of respondents’ wage. Compensating
differential estimates are the implied value from a traditional hedonic pricing model. Controls
variables for the compensating differential model include age group, gender, education, race, and
citizenship indicators. All results are weighted using population weights; unweighted counts are
N=18,150 for stated-preference estimates and 1,815 for compensating differential estimates.

50

Figure 3: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay for Job Amenities by Gender from StatedPreference Experiments

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
0

.05

.1
Men

.15

.2

.25

.3

Women

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent
provided responses to 10 stated-preference experiments. All results are weighted using
population weights; unweighted counts are N=8,040 for men; 10,110 for women.

51

Figure 4: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay for Job Amenities by Race from StatedPreference Experiments

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
-.1

-.05

0

.05
White

.1

.15

.2

.25

.3

Non-White

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent
provided responses to 10 stated-preference experiments. All results are weighted using
population weights; unweighted counts are N=14,160 for whites; 3,990 for non-whites.

52

Figure 5: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay for Job Amenities by Education from StatedPreference Experiments

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

HS Degree or Less
College Degree

.15

.2

.25

.3

Some College

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent
provided responses to 10 stated-preference experiments. All results are weighted using
population weights; unweighted counts are N=2,360 for high school degree or less; 6,370 for
some college; 9,420 for college degree.

53

Figure 6: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay for Job Amenities by Age from StatedPreference Experiments

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
0

.05

.1

.15

Ages 25-34
Ages 50-61

.2

.25

.3

.35

.4

Ages 35-49
Ages 62+

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent
provided responses to 10 stated-preference experiments. All results are weighted using
population weights; unweighted counts are N=3,000 for ages 25-34; 5,420 for ages 35-49; 7,000
for ages 50-61; 2,730 for ages 62+.

54

Figure 7: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay for Job Amenities by Wage Quintile from
Stated-Preference Experiments

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
0

.05

.1

$12.50 or less
$17.05-$25.00
$38.18+

.15

.2

.25

.3

$12.50-$17.05
$25.00-$38.18

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent
provided responses to 10 stated-preference experiments. All results are weighted using
population weights. Unweighted counts are N=4,050; 3,120; 3,900; 3,470; and 3,610 for the
wage quintile categories, respectively. Wage quintiles were determined by the weighted sample
such that the unweighted size of each quintile is not uniform.

55

0
-.1
-.3

-.2

Estimated Valuation

.1

.2

Figure 8: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay for Weekly Work Hours Based on StatedPreference Experiments

10

20

30

Hours

40

50

60

Notes: 95% confidence intervals are presented and adjusted for clustering by respondent.
Estimates are jointly estimated along with other amenities in Figure 2. All results are weighted
using population weights; unweighted count is N=18,150.

56

Table 1: Differences in Hourly Wages by Gender, Race, Education, and Age
from American Working Conditions Survey 2015

Observations

Mean
Hourly
Wage

1,815

29.92

Female
Male

Non-White
White

Full Sample

Log Wage
Raw Log
Differential
Wage
from Joint
Differential
Regression
--

--

1,011
804

Gender
25.86
33.54

-0.187***
(0.047)

-0.213***
(0.042)

399
1,416

Race Groups
23.69
31.47

-0.214***
(0.057)

-0.132***
(0.050)

-0.532***
(0.044)

-0.548***
(0.045)

-0.155*
(0.088)
-0.093
(0.066)
-0.042
(0.063)

-0.177**
(0.079)
-0.033
(0.059)
-0.001
(0.056)

Education Groups
Less than College

873

24.67

College or More

942

37.64
Age Groups
29.93

Ages 25-34

300

Ages 35-49

542

28.62

Ages 50-61

700

30.21

34.31
Ages 62-71
273
Notes: Tabulations based on American Working Conditions Survey as explained
in text. Column 3 shows the unadjusted difference in log wages, whereas
column 4 shows the differences from a joint regression when dummies for all
the groups are included jointly. Standard errors in parentheses. Corresponding
wage differentials in the Current Population Survey are shown in Appendix
Table 1.

57

Table 2A: Working Conditions in the United States by Gender and Race from the American Working Conditions Survey 2015
Gender
Full
Sample

Female

43.33%

Race

Male

NonWhite

White

41.06%

45.36%

49.78%

41.73%

8.04%

8.35%

7.76%

12.98%

6.81%

I can adapt my hours within limits.

33.41%

35.05%

31.94%

26.88%

35.02%

I can determine my schedule.

15.23%

15.54%

14.95%

10.36%

How much control do you have over your working schedule?
My schedule is set by my company/organization with no
possibility for changes.
I can choose between several fixed working schedules set by
my company/organization.

(a)

(a)

16.43%

Is it possible for you to work from home or another location of your choosing at least some of the time?
Yes

36.45%

37.25%

I primarily sit throughout the day.

42.77%

49.51%

My job requires moderate physical activity, such as standing
for periods of time or regular walking.

38.19%

37.85%

My job requires more intense physical activity, such as heavy
lifting, stooping, or prolonged walking.

19.04%

12.63%

Fast-Paced

69.47%

66.79%

Relaxed

30.53%

33.21%

35.73%

31.10%

37.77%

37.31%

44.13%

40.96%

37.50%

21.74%

18.37%

71.85%

69.42%

69.48%

28.15%

30.58%

30.52%

How would you describe the physical demands of this job?
(a)

36.76%

38.49%
(a)

24.75%

How would you describe the pace of this job?

How much independence do you have in determining what you work on and how you do your work?
A lot of independence

43.36%

45.37%

41.56%

40.55%

44.06%

Some independence

43.31%

41.64%

44.81%

42.96%

43.40%

Very little independence

13.33%

12.99%

13.63%

16.49%

12.54%

22.99%

17.53%

20.16

18.84

(a)

29.74%

33.66%

(a)

23.11%

17.38%

47.15%

48.96%

How much paid time off (sick days plus vacation days, but not counting paid holidays) do you get per year?
18.61%

As needed

19.09

Mean Number of Days (if not "As needed")

19.95%
22.22

17.42%
16.39

(a)

Which statement best describes how much you work with others at your place of work?
I primarily work by myself.
I primarily work with others and I am evaluated mostly based
on the team’s performance.
I primarily work with others but I am evaluated mostly based
on my own performance.

32.88%

35.79%

30.29%

18.52%

13.84%

22.69%

48.60%

50.38%

47.02%

Does your job provide you with opportunities to learn new skills that would transfer to other jobs?
69.09%

Yes

64.49%

(a)

73.19%

74.70%

(a)

67.70%

How often does your job provide opportunities to make a positive impact on your community or society?
34.59%

Frequently

39.43%

Occasionally

47.01%

42.82%

Never

18.39%

17.75%

(a)

30.65%

35.57%

(a)

50.61%

46.12%

18.75%

18.31%

30.29%
50.75%

18.97%

Notes: Tabulations from American Working Conditions Survey. Sample sizes for each column are in Table 1.
(a) These cells are found to be statistically significantly different from the reference group in a regression of a dummy for the
given amenity category (row) on indicators for all groups (omitting indicators for females, non-whites, non-college and ages 2534). Point estimates and standard errors are shown in Appendix Table 2.

58

Table 2B: Working Conditions by Education and Age from the American Working Conditions Survey 2015
Education

Age

Full
Sample

Less than
College

College

43.33%

50.67%

32.53%(a)

42.59%

45.94%

43.16%

35.35%

8.04%

10.14%

4.94%(a)

8.31%

8.19%

8.60%

4.88%

I can adapt my hours within limits.

33.41%

23.64%

47.77%(a)

36.93%

32.07%

31.84%

33.92%

I can determine my schedule.

15.23%

15.54%

14.77%

12.17%

13.79%

16.40%

25.86%(a)

How much control you have over your working schedule?
My schedule is set by my company/organization with no
possibility for changes.
I can choose between several fixed working schedules set by
my company/organization.

Ages 25-34 Ages 35-49 Ages 50-61 Ages 62+

Is it possible for you to work from home or another location of your choosing at least some of the time?
36.45%

24.00%

54.76%(a)

34.09%

37.13%(a)

35.31%

43.77%(a)

I primarily sit throughout the day.

42.77%

32.80%

57.44%(a)

39.05%

45.25%(a)

43.05%

42.24%

My job requires moderate physical activity, such as standing for
periods of time or regular walking.

38.19%

39.13%

36.79%

43.11%

32.68%(a)

38.61%

45.48%

My job requires more intense physical activity, such as heavy
lifting, stooping, or prolonged walking.

19.04%

28.07%

5.76%(a)

17.83%

22.07%

18.35%

12.29%

Fast-Paced

69.47%

73.21%

63.97%(a)

75.32%

71.01%

66.46%(a)

56.37%(a)

Relaxed

30.53%

26.79%

36.03%(a)

24.68%

28.99%

33.54%(a)

43.63%(a)

Yes
How would you describe the physical demands of this job?

How would you describe the pace of this job?

How much independence do you have in determining what you work on and how you do your work?
A lot of independence

43.36%

40.64%

47.36%(a)

43.57%

41.93%

43.79%

47.22%

Some independence

43.31%

42.47%

44.56%

47.69%

43.18%

42.31%

34.85%(a)

Very little independence

13.33%

16.89%

8.09%(a)

8.74%

14.90%

13.90%

17.92%(a)

18.44%

18.19%

17.27%

24.98%

(a)

(a)

How much paid time off (sick days plus vacation days, but not counting paid holidays) do you get per year?
As needed
Mean Number of Days (if not "As needed")

18.61%

19.38%

19.09

19.09

17.49%
19.08

15.44

21.02

21.49

13.29

Which statement best describes how much you work with others at your place of work?
I primarily work by myself.
I primarily work with others and I am evaluated mostly based
on the team’s performance.
I primarily work with others but I am evaluated mostly based on
my own performance.

32.88%

32.09%

34.04%

27.22%

32.40%

36.85%(a)

38.17%(a)

18.52%

21.39%

14.30%(a)

15.58%

21.86%

18.23%

14.07%

48.60%

46.52%

51.65%

57.20%

45.74%(a)

44.92%(a)

47.76%(a)

77.42%

69.41%

65.27%(a)

56.60%(a)

Does your job provide you with opportunities to learn new skills that would transfer to other jobs?
Yes

69.09%

66.14%

73.42%(a)

How often does your job provide opportunities to make a positive impact on your community or society?
Frequently

34.59%

31.44%

39.23%

30.24%

37.87%(a)

35.20%

31.57%

Occasionally

47.01%

45.43%

49.33%

56.55%

42.33%(a)

45.71%(a)

43.50%(a)

Never

18.39%

23.12%

11.44%(a)

13.21%

19.80%

19.09%

24.92%(a)

Notes: Tabulations from American Working Conditions Survey. Sample sizes for each column are in Table 1.
(a) These cells are found to be statistically significantly different from the reference group in a regression of a dummy for the given amenity category (row)
on indicators for all groups (omitting indicators for females, non-whites, non-college and ages 25-34). Point estimates and standard errors are shown in
Appendix Table 2.

59

Table 3: Working Conditions by Quintile of the Distribution of Hourly Wages from the American Working Conditions Survey 2015
Full
Sample

$12.50 or
less

$12.50$17.05

$17.05$25.00

$25.00$38.18

$38.18+

43.33%

44.63%

61.76%

51.58%

36.48%

21.81%

8.04%

11.20%

7.33%

6.76%

6.68%

8.07%

I can adapt my hours within limits.

33.41%

22.42%

22.17%

31.77%

40.65%

50.64%

I can determine my schedule.

15.23%

21.76%

8.75%

9.88%

16.20%

19.47%

How much control you have over your working schedule?
My schedule is set by my company/organization with no
possibility for changes.
I can choose between several fixed working schedules set by my
company/organization.

Is it possible for you to work from home or another location of your choosing at least some of the time?
No

63.55%

76.92%

79.91%

69.57%

54.89%

35.59%

42.77%

23.77%

35.09%

41.09%

53.03%

62.08%

38.19%

50.64%

37.16%

39.43%

32.79%

30.04%

19.04%

25.59%

27.75%

19.48%

14.18%

7.88%

Fast-Paced

69.47%

73.94%

63.21%

71.53%

68.93%

69.24%

Relaxed

30.53%

26.06%

36.79%

28.47%

31.07%

30.76%

How would you describe the physical demands of this job?
I primarily sit throughout the day.
My job requires moderate physical activity, such as standing for
periods of time or regular walking.
My job requires more intense physical activity, such as heavy
lifting, stooping, or prolonged walking.
How would you describe the pace of this job?

How much independence do you have in determining what you work on and how you do your work?
A lot of independence

43.36%

36.56%

40.29%

40.73%

43.27%

56.25%

Some independence

43.31%

48.54%

44.51%

47.97%

43.12%

32.00%

Very little independence

13.33%

14.90%

15.20%

11.30%

13.60%

11.76%

How much paid time off (sick days plus vacation days, but not counting paid holidays) do you get per year?
As needed
Mean Number of Days (if not "As needed")

18.61%

26.92%

16.54%

14.69%

12.23%

22.17%

19.09

8.02

19.00

21.99

23.24

22.21

Which statement best describes how much you work with others at your place of work?
I primarily work by myself.
I primarily work with others and I am evaluated mostly based
on the team’s performance.
I primarily work with others but I am evaluated mostly based on
my own performance.

32.88%

31.28%

34.67%

29.32%

42.86%

27.17%

18.52%

16.14%

22.16%

21.45%

14.15%

18.46%

48.60%

52.58%

43.16%

49.23%

42.99%

54.36%

71.09%

70.09%

77.22%

Does your job provide you with opportunities to learn new skills that would transfer to other jobs?
Yes

69.09%

61.01%

66.21%

How often does your job provide opportunities to make a positive impact on your community or society?
Frequently

34.59%

28.67%

34.75%

35.83%

33.24%

40.56%

Occasionally

47.01%

47.32%

42.48%

42.63%

52.13%

50.91%

Never

18.39%

24.02%

22.77%

21.54%

14.63%

8.54%

Notes: Tabulations from American Working Conditions Survey. Sample sizes for each column are in Table 1.

60

Table 4: Effect of Adjusting for the Incidence and Valuation of Job Amenities on
Wage Differentials by Gender, Race, Age, and Education
Panel A: Log Differentials, Holding Valuations Constant
Adjusted Wage
Unadjusted Difference in Difference in
Differential
Wage
Amenity
Total Value of
(Gap in Total
Differential
Multiplier
Amenities
Compensation)
Female
-0.187***
0.070***
-0.113*
-0.172***
(0.047)
(0.026)
(0.059)
(0.049)
Non-White
-0.214***
-0.003
-0.214***
-0.217***
(0.057)
(0.025)
(0.070)
(0.059)
0.532***
0.177***
0.713***
0.577***
College
(0.044)
(0.023)
(0.053)
(0.045)
Ages 25-34
-0.155*
-0.004
-0.160
-0.155*
(relative to 62-71)
(0.088)
(0.032)
(0.100)
(0.090)
Ages 35-49
-0.093
-0.033
-0.132
-0.100
(relative to 62-71)
(0.066)
(0.039)
(0.087)
(0.070)
Ages 50-61
-0.042
0.004
-0.037
-0.041
(relative to 62-71)
(0.063)
(0.027)
(0.077)
(0.066)
Panel B: Log Differentials, Allowing Valuations to Vary Across Groups
Unadjusted
Wage
Differential

Difference in Difference in
Amenity
Total Value of
Multiplier
Amenities

Female

Adjusted Wage
Differential
(Gap in Total
Compensation)

-0.187***
0.206***
0.023
-0.131**
(0.047)
(0.072)
(0.093)
(0.054)
Non-White
-0.214***
-0.202**
-0.412***
-0.268***
(0.057)
(0.094)
(0.118)
(0.065)
0.532***
0.322***
0.858***
0.619***
College
(0.044)
(0.074)
(0.092)
(0.050)
Ages 25-34
-0.155*
-0.564***
-0.720***
-0.320***
(relative to 62-71)
(0.088)
(0.094)
(0.135)
(0.094)
Ages 35-49
-0.093
-0.373***
-0.473***
-0.205***
(relative to 62-71)
(0.066)
(0.089)
(0.119)
(0.074)
Ages 50-61
-0.042
-0.258***
-0.300***
-0.127
(relative to 62-71)
(0.063)
(0.077)
(0.110)
(0.072)
Notes: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels. Standard errors in parentheses
generated from block bootstrap in which new willingness-to-pay measures are
estimated for each bootstrap sample. The “Wage” and “Amenity Multiplier”
columns mechanically add to the “Amenity Value” column.

61

Table 5: Effect of Adjusting for the Incidence and Valuation of Job Amenities on the
Distribution of Hourly Wages

Percentile
Difference
90th-50th

Panel A: Holding Valuations Constant
Difference in
Difference in
p-value for H0:
Change Accounting
ln(Wage) ln(Compensation)
for Amenities (2)-(1)
(1)=(2)
(1)
(2)
0.986
(0.047)
0.692
(0.036)
1.678
(0.054)

1.027
0.041
0.054
(0.047)
50th-10th
0.723
0.031
0.032
(0.038)
90th-10th
1.751
0.073
0.002
(0.054)
Panel B: Allowing Valuations to Vary Across Groups
Difference in
Difference in
p-value for H0:
Percentile
Change Accounting
ln(Wage) ln(Compensation)
Difference
for Amenities (2)-(1)
(1)=(2)
(1)
(2)
90th-50th
0.986
1.043
0.057
0.138
(0.047)
(0.056)
50th-10th
0.692
0.787
0.095
0.000
(0.036)
(0.045)
90th-10th
1.678
1.830
0.152
0.000
(0.054)
(0.061)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses results from block bootstrap in which new willingnessto-pay measures are estimated for each bootstrap sample. Compensation refers to the
wage adjusted for amenity valuations.

62

Web Appendix
For

“The Value of Working Conditions in the United States
and Implications for the Structure of Wages”

Nicole Maestas
Harvard University and NBER
Kathleen J. Mullen
RAND
David Powell*
RAND
Till von Wachter
University of California Los Angeles and NBER
Jeffrey Wenger
RAND

*

Corresponding author: dpowell@rand.org

Appendix A: Surveying Respondents about Their Wage
We asked all respondents for information concerning monetary payments at the frequency
that they wanted to report this information (hourly rate, weekly, bi-weekly, twice monthly, monthly,
or annually). We also asked for information on weeks worked and hours worked per week. Using
this information, we calculated their hourly wage. If this wage was less than $7, we asked the
respondent to confirm their previous information on compensation, hours, and weeks. If the
respondent had not directly provided their hourly wage, their implied rate was still less than $7, and
they had previously answered that they were paid hourly, then we asked them to provide their hourly
rate instead.
Appendix B: Fully-Interacted Model to Account for Effect of Amenities on Wage
Differentials ‘Holding Constant’ Differences in Amenity and Wages from Other Groups
For Appendix Table 7, we replicate Table 4 but estimate all parameters jointly. We implement this
approach by interacting all job amenities (including hours) and log wages in our main specification with
indicators for female, non-white, and college-educated as well as age group dummies. This approach
permits job choice decisions to vary based on these covariates additively. We use this approach instead of
a fully-interacted model because of the small number of individuals in some of the cells and because we
will analyze the generated outcomes in a linear, additive model. This part of the method helps isolate the
preferences that men have for job characteristics relative to women, conditional on other individual
covariates, accounting for observable differences between groups.
Given these estimates, we can calculate each person’s amenity value using the estimated preferences
relative to the log wage (which vary based on individual covariates) and the amenities that they currently
have at their job. We then create the same metrics as analyzed in Table 4. In Table 4, we studied
differences in these outcome for women relative to men. Here, we regress the outcome on all individual
covariates to jointly estimate the relationship between the covariates and measures of compensation. The

A2

motivation of this exercise is to determine whether women receive different compensation conditional on
other covariates.

Appendix C: Details on the Special Regressor Method
The special regressor method first requires estimation of
!!" ≡

!!" − 1 ln !!!! ≥ ln !!!!
!!|! ln !!!! − ln !!!! | !!!! − !!!!

where the denominator is the conditional probability density function of the difference in the log
of the wages between the two jobs conditional on the job characteristics and !!" represents a binary
outcome. This variable is the outcome for the OLS regression. Lewbel (2014) shows that this
expected value of !!" is equal to the expected value of the mean willingness-to-pay. The only
difficulty in estimating !!" is often that it requires estimating a conditional density function for the
denominator and it is often necessary to winsorize this variable. However, we generated the wages
for both jobs, making it straightforward for us to accurately simulate this distribution. For a given
set of characteristics for individual i, we simulate the distribution of ln !!!! − ln !!!! by re-drawing
the wages in the same manner as the experiment. For each !, ! , we replicate this process 1000
times and then estimate a kernel density function, evaluated at the difference in the log of the wages
used in that job choice experiment. Given this estimate, we calculate !!" . This variable is used as
the outcome of an OLS regression on the difference in the job characteristics (including the log of
hours). The coefficient estimates are the estimated mean willingness-to-pay measures.

A3

Appendix Figure 1: Screenshot of Hypothetical Job Pair Evaluated by a Respondent

Appendix Figure 2: Weighted vs Unweighted Willingness-to-Pay Estimates

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
0

.05

.1

Weighted

.15

.2

.25

Unweighted

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent provided responses to 10 stated-preference
experiments.

A5

0
-.1
-.3

-.2

Estimated Valuation

.1

.2

Appendix Figure 3: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay for Weekly Work Hours by Gender

10

20

30

Hours

Women

40

50
Men

Notes: Joint test of equality of all estimates rejects equality (p<.01)

A6

60

Appendix Figure 4: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay Using Different Estimation Techniques

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
0

.05

.1

Logit
Mixed Logit

.15

.2

.25

Ordered Logit
Special Regressor

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent provided responses to 10 stated-preference
experiments.

A7

Appendix Figure 5: First “Trick” Question to Test Whether Respondents Were Paying Attention

A8

Appendix Figure 6: Second “Trick” Question to Test Whether Respondents Were Paying Attention

A9

Appendix Figure 7: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay Using Sample that Correctly Answered Trick Questions

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
0

.05

.1

Full Sample

.15

.2

.25

.3

Paying Attention

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent provided responses to 10 stated-preference
experiments. N=11,760 for the “Paying Attention” sample.

A10

Appendix Figure 8: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay Using Common Baseline Job

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

Full Sample
Common Baseline Sample

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent provided responses to 10 stated-preference
experiments. The “common baseline sample” consists of responses to 2 of these 10 experiments, in which attribute randomization was
performed around the same baseline job for all respondents, rather than the respondent’s current job.

A11

Appendix Figure 9: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay by Selection into Job Characteristics

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How Do Work
10 Days PTO
20 Days PTO
Work on Team, Evaluated Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to Serve
-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

.3

Valuations For Those Without Amenity
Valuations For Those With Amenity

Notes: 95% confidence intervals adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent provided responses to 10 stated-preference
experiments.

A12

Appendix Table 1: Comparison of Wage Differentials in American Life Panel
(ALP) to Current Population Survey (CPS)
CPS

ALP

Log Wage
Raw Log
Differential
Wage
from Joint
Differential
Regression

Topcoded Not Topcoded
as in CPS (As in Table 1)

Female

-0.185

-0.227

-0.155

-0.187

Non-White

-0.185

-0.115

-0.184

-0.214

Less than College

-0.423

-0.436

-0.535

-0.532

Ages 25-34

-0.120

-0.136

-0.165

-0.155

Ages 35-49

0.067

0.065

-0.095

-0.094

Ages 50-61

0.076

0.084

-0.035

-0.042

90th-50th

0.877

--

0.897

0.986

50th-10th

0.663

--

0.692

0.692

90th-10th
1.540
-1.590
1.678
Notes: We use the 2015 December CPS, selecting on employed individuals
ages 25-71 (N=13,300). Weights are generated based on race*education,
education*gender, age group*gender, and income categories*marital
status.

A13

Appendix Table 2: Differences in Log Wages and Incidence of Amenities by Demographic Groups, Holding Differences Across Other
Groups Constant (Additional Job Characteristics in Separate Table)

Log
Hourly
Wage

Telecommuting

Control over Schedule
None

Physical Demands

A little

Some

Lots

No

-0.007
(0.020)

-0.022
(0.029)

-0.008
(0.022)

-0.001
(0.028)

-0.061 -0.055** 0.058
(0.042) (0.028) (0.037)

0.058**
(0.024)

-0.029
(0.035)

0.046
(0.038)

-0.312***
(0.028)

0.247***
(0.030)

Male

8.182*** 0.036
(2.622) (0.032)

White

5.695**
(2.542)

College 13.009***-0.173***-0.048*** 0.234*** -0.012
(3.014) (0.031) (0.018) (0.030) (0.021)

Sit

Moderate Intense

-0.116*** 0.006
(0.031)
(0.032)
-0.032
(0.042)

Pace
Fast

Relaxes

0.110***
(0.027)

0.043
(0.027)

-0.043
(0.027)

-0.014
(0.037)

0.017
(0.034)

-0.017
(0.034)

-0.032 -0.215*** -0.096*** 0.096***
(0.031) (0.024)
(0.027) (0.027)

Ages 35-49

0.618
(5.426)

0.009
(0.048)

-0.007
(0.028)

-0.015
(0.044)

0.013
(0.031)

-0.077*
(0.040)

0.097** -0.108**
(0.043)
(0.047)

0.012
(0.040)

Ages 50-61

1.698
(5.372)

-0.011
(0.046)

0
(0.024)

-0.027
(0.043)

0.037
(0.030)

-0.048
(0.038)

0.064
(0.040)

-0.047
(0.047)

-0.017
(0.036)

-0.100*** 0.100***
(0.037) (0.037)

Ages 62-71

4.793
(5.627)

-0.075
(0.053)

-0.033
(0.022)

-0.024 0.132***
(0.051) (0.039)

-0.109**
(0.047)

0.037
(0.047)

0.025
(0.054)

-0.062
(0.040)

-0.194*** 0.194***
(0.048) (0.048)

N

1,815

1,815

1,815

1,815

1,815

1,815

1,815

1,815

1,815

-0.057
(0.037)

1,815

0.057
(0.037)

1,815

Notes: Each column corresponds to a separate worker-level linear regression, with the dependent variable being either the wage or a
dummy indicating presence the value of the particular amenity. Standard errors in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance
levels

A14

Appendix Table 2 (continued): Differences in Log Wages and Incidence of Amenities by Demographic Groups, Holding Differnces Across Other
Groups Constant
Independence

Paid Time Off (PTO)

Some

Male

-0.036
(0.032)

0.031
(0.033)

0.004
(0.024)

-0.024
(0.025)

-5.686**
(2.764)

White

0.029
(0.042)

0.005
(0.043)

-0.034
(0.032)

-0.052
(0.034)

-1.42
(3.717)

0.034
(0.038)

0.021
(0.042)

-0.076**
(0.035)

College

0.062*
(0.032)

0.019 -0.081***
(0.032) (0.021)

-0.018
(0.024)

0.525
(2.120)

0.02 -0.056** 0.036
(0.029) (0.024) (0.032)

0.078***
(0.028)

0.079*** 0.034 -0.113***
(0.030) (0.031) (0.022)

Ages 35-49

-0.008
(0.048)

-0.042
(0.048)

0.05
(0.031)

-0.004
(0.036)

5.630*
(2.889)

0.053
(0.042)

0.057 -0.110**
(0.036) (0.048)

-0.066
(0.041)

0.086* -0.135*** 0.049
(0.046) (0.047) (0.034)

Ages 50-61

0.007
(0.046)

-0.051
(0.046)

0.044
(0.027)

-0.011
(0.034)

6.035***
(2.216)

0.096**
(0.041)

0.025 -0.120***
(0.034) (0.045)

-0.106***
(0.040)

0.055 -0.100** 0.045
(0.043) (0.045) (0.030)

Ages 62-71

0.036 -0.127** 0.091**
(0.053) (0.053) (0.037)

0.068
(0.043)

-2.126
(1.624)

0.107**
(0.048)

-0.012
(0.039)

-0.095*
(0.053)

-0.197***
(0.049)

0.012 -0.123** 0.112***
(0.048) (0.053) (0.042)

1,815

1,462

1,815

1,815

1,815

1,815

1,815

1,815

Team /
Team

Yes

OccFrequent asional

Never

-0.054* 0.088*** -0.034
(0.030) (0.026) (0.033)

0.092***
(0.029)

-0.088*** 0.081**
(0.031) (0.032)

0.007
(0.025)

Self

-0.056
(0.035)

Team /
Self

Meaningful Work

A lot

1,815

PTO
Days

Job
Training

Very
little

N

Can take
as needed

Working with Others

0.045
(0.037)

1,815

-0.048
(0.042)

1,815

0.004
(0.032)

1,815

Notes: Each column corresponds to a separate worker-level linear regression, with the dependent variable being either the wage or a dummy
indicating presence the value of the particular amenity. Standard errors in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels

A15

Appendix Table 3: Common Baseline Job Used for All Respondents in 2 of 10 Experiments
Job Characteristic
Hours
Control Over Hours
Option to Telecommute
Physical Demands
Work Environment
Independence
Paid Time Off (Vacation and Sick Leave)
Working with Others
Training
Impact on Society

Assigned Baseline Value
30 Hours (Part-Time)
Set your own schedule
Yes
Mostly Sitting
Relaxed
You can choose how you do your work
20 paid days per year
Team-based but you are evaluated on your own performance
You have the skills for this job and there are opportunities to gain valuable new skills
Frequent opportunities to make a positive impact on your community or society

A16

Appendix Table 4: Mapping from Current Working Conditions to Baseline Jobs for Experiments

Question asked to respondent…
How much control you have over your working schedule?
My schedule is set by my company/organization with no possibility for changes.
I can choose between several fixed working schedules set by my company/organization.
I can adapt my hours within limits.
I can determine my schedule.

Attribute assigned based on response
Control Over Hours
Schedule set by manager
Set your own schedule
Set your own schedule
Set your own schedule

Is it possible for you to work from home or another location of your choosing at least some of the time?
Yes
No

Option to Telecommute
Yes
No

How would you describe the physical demands of this job?
I primarily sit throughout the day.
My job requires moderate physical activity, such as standing for periods of time or regular walking.
My job requires more intense physical activity, such as heavy lifting, stooping, or prolonged walking.

Physical Demands
Mostly sitting
Moderate physical activity
Heavy physical activity

How would you describe the pace of this job?
Fast-Paced
Relaxed

Pace
Fast-Paced
Relaxed

How much independence do you have in determining what you work on and how you do your work?
A lot of independence
Some independence
Very little independence

Independence
You can choose how you do your work
You can choose how you do your work
Your tasks and procedures are well-defined

How much paid time off (sick days plus vacation days, but not counting paid holidays) do you get per year?
As needed
(Integer)

Paid Time Off (Vacation and Sick Leave)
20 paid days per year
If 0, assign to 0. If greater than 0 and less than 15, assign to 10. Otherwise, assign to 20.

Which statement best describes how much you work with others at your place of work?
I primarily work by myself.
I primarily work with others and I am evaluated mostly based on the team’s performance.
I primarily work with others but I am evaluated mostly based on my own performance.

Working with Others
Mainly work by yourself
Team-based and evaluated on performance of team
Team-based but you are evaluated on your own performance

Does your job provide you with opportunities to learn new skills that would transfer to other jobs?
Yes
No

Trainings
You have the skills for this job and there are opportunities to gain valuable new skills
You already have the skills for this job

How often does your job provide opportunities to make a positive impact on your community or society?
Frequently
Occasionally
Never

Impact on Society
Frequent opportunities to make a positive impact on your community or society
Occasional opportunities to make a positive impact on your community or society
Occasional opportunities to make a positive impact on your community or society

How are you paid?
Hourly wage
Annual salary
Other

Hourly
Salaried
Hourly

Enter the number of hours that you usually work per week:
Integer

Hours
Same integer

A17

Appendix Table 5A: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay from Stated-Preference Experiments and Compensating Differential Estimates from Hedonic
Regressions (Point Estimates and Standard Errors Corresponding to Figure 2)
Set Own Schedule
Telecommute? Yes
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How do Work
10 days PTO
20 days PTO
Team-Based, Evaluate Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to serve community
Best Job
N

Full Sample
0.090***
(0.006)
0.041***
(0.007)
0.149***
(0.010)
0.120***
(0.010)
0.044***
(0.007)
0.038***
(0.007)
0.164***
(0.009)
0.230***
(0.010)
0.064***
(0.009)
0.084***
(0.010)
0.051***
(0.007)
0.039***
(0.007)
0.561***
(0.016)
18,150

Compensating Differentials
-0.036
(0.027)
-0.155***
(0.028)
-0.032
(0.043)
-0.187***
(0.037)
0.114***
(0.032)
0.033
(0.045)
-0.181***
(0.041)
-0.308***
(0.032)
0.039
(0.039)
0.043
(0.045)
-0.059**
(0.030)
-0.036
(0.026)

Excluded Category
Schedule set by manager
No

Heavy Physical Activity

Fast-Paced
Tasks well-defined

0 Days

Team-Based, Evaluate Team

Already have skills
Occasional Opportunities to serve community
Worst Job

1,851

Notes: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent is surveyed 10 times.
“Best Job” metric compares the best possible job (as measured by estimates) to “Worst Job.” Compensating differential estimates refer to estimates from a regression
of log(wage) on covariates and the job characteristics listed above. We report the implied valuation of these estimates.

A18

Appendix Table 5B: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay from Stated-Preference Experiments by Gender (Point Estimates and Standard Errors
Corresponding to Figure 3)
Set Own Schedule
Telecommute? Yes
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How do Work
10 days PTO
20 days PTO
Team-Based, Evaluate Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to serve community
Best Job
N

Women
0.091***
(0.008)
0.056***
(0.008)
0.190***
(0.012)
0.153***
(0.013)
0.038***
(0.008)
0.029***
(0.008)
0.183***
(0.012)
0.260***
(0.012)
0.074***
(0.012)
0.089***
(0.012)
0.039***
(0.008)
0.036***
(0.009)
0.595***
(0.017)
10,110

Men
0.088***
(0.009)
0.030***
(0.011)
0.116***
(0.014)
0.092***
(0.014)
0.048***
(0.011)
0.044***
(0.010)
0.148***
(0.013)
0.205***
(0.015)
0.055***
(0.014)
0.079***
(0.015)
0.062***
(0.010)
0.044***
(0.010)
0.533***
(0.025)
8,040

Excluded Category
Schedule set by manager
No

Heavy Physical Activity

Fast-Paced
Tasks well-defined

0 Days

Team-Based, Evaluate Team

Already have skills
Occasional Opportunities to serve community
Worst Job

Notes: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent is surveyed 10 times.
“Best Job” metric compares the best possible job (as measured by estimates) to “Worst Job.”

A19

Appendix Table 5C: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay from Stated-Preference Experiments by Race (Point Estimates and Standard Errors
Corresponding to Figure 4)
Set Own Schedule
Telecommute? Yes
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How do Work
10 days PTO
20 days PTO
Team-Based, Evaluate Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to serve community
Best Job
N

White
0.102***
(0.007)
0.045***
(0.008)
0.154***
(0.010)
0.115***
(0.011)
0.039***
(0.008)
0.048***
(0.007)
0.166***
(0.010)
0.231***
(0.011)
0.075***
(0.010)
0.090***
(0.012)
0.049***
(0.008)
0.039***
(0.008)
0.576***
(0.018)
14,160

Non-White
0.040***
(0.013)
0.029**
(0.013)
0.126***
(0.024)
0.139***
(0.021)
0.063***
(0.014)
-0.006
(0.015)
0.159***
(0.021)
0.229***
(0.022)
0.011
(0.023)
0.060***
(0.022)
0.062***
(0.014)
0.039***
(0.015)
0.505***
(0.031)
3,990

Excluded Category
Schedule set by manager
No

Heavy Physical Activity

Fast-Paced
Tasks well-defined

0 Days

Team-Based, Evaluate Team

Already have skills
Occasional Opportunities to serve community
Worst Job

Notes: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent is surveyed 10 times.
“Best Job” metric compares the best possible job (as measured by estimates) to “Worst Job.”

A20

Appendix Table 5D: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay from Stated-Preference Experiments by Race (Point Estimates and Standard Errors Corresponding to
Figure 5)
Set Own Schedule
Telecommute? Yes
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How do Work
10 days PTO
20 days PTO
Team-Based, Evaluate Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to serve community
Best Job
N

HS Degree of Less
0.083***
(0.016)
-0.003
(0.020)
0.120***
(0.023)
0.094***
(0.024)
0.038**
(0.019)
0.009
(0.018)
0.180***
(0.025)
0.241***
(0.029)
0.064**
(0.025)
0.110***
(0.028)
0.041**
(0.018)
0.036*
(0.019)
0.520***
(0.046)
2,360

Some College
0.077***
(0.010)
0.041***
(0.010)
0.145***
(0.013)
0.119***
(0.013)
0.039***
(0.010)
0.040***
(0.010)
0.158***
(0.014)
0.227***
(0.014)
0.056***
(0.014)
0.074***
(0.014)
0.051***
(0.010)
0.043***
(0.010)
0.546***
(0.022)
6,370

College Degree
0.105***
(0.008)
0.070***
(0.008)
0.171***
(0.013)
0.136***
(0.013)
0.051***
(0.007)
0.058***
(0.007)
0.161***
(0.010)
0.226***
(0.010)
0.071***
(0.011)
0.073***
(0.012)
0.062***
(0.008)
0.040***
(0.008)
0.601***
(0.016)
9,420

Excluded Category
Schedule set by manager
No

Heavy Physical Activity

Fast-Paced
Tasks well-defined

0 Days

Team-Based, Evaluate Team

Already have skills
Occasional Opportunities to serve community
Worst Job

Notes: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent is surveyed 10 times. “Best Job”
metric compares the best possible job (as measured by estimates) to “Worst Job.”

A21

Appendix Table 5E: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay from Stated-Preference Experiments by Race (Point Estimates and Standard Errors Corresponding to
Figure 6)
Set Own Schedule
Telecommute? Yes
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How do Work
10 days PTO
20 days PTO
Team-Based, Evaluate Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to serve community
Best Job
N

Ages 25-34
0.070***
(0.012)
0.031**
(0.012)
0.089***
(0.017)
0.069***
(0.019)
0.047***
(0.013)
0.039***
(0.014)
0.139***
(0.016)
0.193***
(0.016)
0.011
(0.018)
0.033*
(0.019)
0.065***
(0.013)
0.048***
(0.013)
0.478***
(0.033)
3,000

Ages 35-49
0.097***
(0.011)
0.046***
(0.014)
0.143***
(0.017)
0.125***
(0.016)
0.028**
(0.013)
0.016
(0.010)
0.180***
(0.015)
0.245***
(0.019)
0.068***
(0.016)
0.098***
(0.017)
0.045***
(0.013)
0.045***
(0.012)
0.562***
(0.027)
5,420

Ages 50-61
0.087***
(0.011)
0.044***
(0.010)
0.186***
(0.015)
0.144***
(0.016)
0.053***
(0.010)
0.049***
(0.011)
0.160***
(0.016)
0.236***
(0.018)
0.092***
(0.015)
0.095***
(0.018)
0.047***
(0.009)
0.025**
(0.011)
0.589***
(0.026)
7,000

Ages 62+
0.146***
(0.022)
0.060***
(0.020)
0.301***
(0.034)
0.240***
(0.033)
0.074***
(0.022)
0.112***
(0.022)
0.176***
(0.032)
0.262***
(0.030)
0.137***
(0.027)
0.178***
(0.032)
0.051**
(0.022)
0.033
(0.021)
0.743***
(0.033)
2,730

Excluded Category
Schedule set by manager
No

Heavy Physical Activity

Fast-Paced
Tasks well-defined

0 Days

Team-Based, Evaluate Team

Already have skills
Occasional Opportunities to serve community
Worst Job

Notes: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent is surveyed 10 times. “Best
Job” metric compares the best possible job (as measured by estimates) to “Worst Job.”

A22

Appendix Table 5F: Estimates of Willingness-to-Pay from Stated-Preference Experiments by Race (Point Estimates and Standard Errors Corresponding to Figure 7)

Set Own Schedule
Telecommute? Yes
Moderate Physical Activity
Sitting
Relaxed
Choose How do Work
10 days PTO
20 days PTO
Team-Based, Evaluate Own
Work by Self
Training Opportunities
Frequent Opportunities to serve community
Best Job
N

$0-12.50
0.069***
(0.014)
0.029*
(0.015)
0.123***
(0.020)
0.093***
(0.021)
0.046**
(0.018)
0.026
(0.018)
0.151***
(0.022)
0.187***
(0.023)
0.049**
(0.021)
0.068***
(0.025)
0.041***
(0.015)
0.027*
(0.016)
0.479***
(0.044)
4,050

$12.50-$17.05 $17.05-$25.00 $25.00-$38.18 $38.18+
0.076***
0.095***
0.092***
0.115***
(0.013)
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.012)
0.062***
-0.003
0.057***
0.055***
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.017)
0.126***
0.159***
0.151***
0.179***
(0.026)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.019)
0.099***
0.138***
0.129***
0.140***
(0.021)
(0.022)
(0.020)
(0.019)
0.035**
0.038***
0.050***
0.052***
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.016)
0.024
0.017
0.055***
0.060***
(0.016)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.014)
0.157***
0.207***
0.161***
0.146***
(0.023)
(0.021)
(0.015)
(0.018)
0.225***
0.265***
0.241***
0.230***
(0.024)
(0.023)
(0.016)
(0.022)
0.049**
0.060***
0.041**
0.110***
(0.022)
(0.020)
(0.017)
(0.023)
0.096***
0.075***
0.059***
0.105***
(0.023)
(0.018)
(0.019)
(0.028)
0.034**
0.059***
0.066***
0.053***
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.018)
0.068***
0.056***
0.022*
0.022
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.012)
(0.017)
0.521***
0.590***
0.573***
0.614***
(0.040)
(0.029)
(0.025)
(0.032)
3,120
3,900
3,470
3,610

Excluded Category
Schedule set by manager
No

Heavy Physical Activity

Fast-Paced
Tasks well-defined

0 Days

Team-Based, Evaluate Team

Already have skills
Occasional Opportunities to serve community
Worst Job

Notes: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering by respondent. Each respondent is surveyed 10 times. “Best Job” metric compares the
best possible job (as measured by estimates) to “Worst Job.”

A23

Appendix Table 6A: Change in Wage Differential When the Value of Each Amenity is Taken Into Account Separately (Homogeneous Valuations)
Change in Unadjusted Wage Differential When Only the Value of Given Amenity is Taken Into Account
Adjusted Wage
Unadjusted
Differential
Work on
Wage
Moderate
(Gap in Total Schedule
10
Days
20
Days
Team,
TeleWork by
Differential
Training
Sitting
Relaxed Autonomy
Compensation, Flexibility commute Physical
PTO
PTO
Self
Evaluated
(Table 4)
Activity
see Table 4A)
Own
Female

Impact

-0.187***

-0.172***

(0.047)

(0.049)

-0.214***

-0.217***

(0.057)

(0.059)

0.532***

0.577***

(0.044)

(0.045)

(0.044)

(0.045)

(0.044)

(0.045)

(0.044)

(0.044)

(0.044)

(0.045)

(0.045)

(0.045)

(0.045)

(0.045)

Ages 25-34

-0.155*

-0.155*

-0.162*

-0.165*

-0.167*

-0.170*

-0.175**

-0.172*

-0.163*

-0.160*

-0.157*

-0.161*

-0.155*

-0.155*

(relative to 62-71)

(0.088)

(0.090)

(0.088)

(0.089)

(0.088)

(0.089)

(0.089)

(0.089)

(0.089)

(0.090)

(0.090)

(0.090)

(0.090)

(0.090)

Non-White

College

-0.183*** -0.183*** -0.184*** -0.171*** -0.169*** -0.170*** -0.174*** -0.172*** -0.171*** -0.170*** -0.173*** -0.172***
(0.048)

(0.048)

(0.047)

(0.048)

(0.048)

(0.048)

(0.047)

(0.049)

(0.049)

(0.049)

(0.049)

(0.049)

-0.220*** -0.223*** -0.219*** -0.224*** -0.224*** -0.225*** -0.218*** -0.216*** -0.216*** -0.218*** -0.216*** -0.217***
(0.058)

(0.059)

(0.058)

(0.059)

(0.059)

(0.059)

(0.058)

(0.060)

(0.060)

(0.060)

(0.059)

(0.059)

0.548*** 0.558*** 0.554*** 0.576*** 0.578*** 0.578*** 0.567*** 0.578*** 0.578*** 0.577*** 0.576*** 0.577***

Ages 35-49

-0.094

-0.100

-0.103

-0.105

-0.119*

-0.116*

-0.120*

-0.118*

-0.111*

-0.102

-0.103

-0.105

-0.101

-0.1

(relative to 62-71)

(0.066)

(0.070)

(0.068)

(0.068)

(0.067)

(0.068)

(0.068)

(0.068)

(0.067)

(0.069)

(0.069)

(0.069)

(0.070)

(0.070)

Ages 50-61

-0.042

-0.041

-0.049

-0.051

-0.059

-0.058

-0.06

-0.058

-0.057

-0.043

-0.044

-0.044

-0.042

-0.041

(relative to 62-71)

(0.063)
(0.066)
(0.064)
(0.065)
(0.064)
(0.065)
(0.065)
(0.065)
(0.064)
(0.066)
(0.066)
(0.066)
(0.066)
(0.066)
Notes: Adjustment of wage differential as discussed in text, where each column from 3 to 14 adjusts for only the particular amenity. Column 2 shows adjustments for all amenities. Standard
errors in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels

A24

Appendix Table 6B: Change in Wage Differential When the Value of Each Amenity is Taken Into Account Separately (Valuations Allowed to Differ by Group)
Change in Unadjusted Wage Differential When Only the Value of Given Amenity is Taken Into Account
Adjusted Wage
Unadjusted
Differential
Work on
Wage
Moderate
(Gap in Total Schedule
TeleWork by
10
Days
20
Days
Team,
Differential
Sitting
Relaxed Autonomy
Training
Compensation, Flexibility commute Physical
Evaluated
Self
PTO
PTO
(Table 4)
Activity
see Table 4B)
Own
Female

Non-White

College

-0.187***

-0.131**

(0.047)

(0.054)

-0.182*** -0.174*** -0.154*** -0.121**

-0.214***

-0.268***

(0.057)

(0.065)

0.532***

0.619***

(0.044)

(0.050)

(0.045)

(0.048)

(0.049)

(0.049)

(0.051)

-0.123**
(0.051)

-0.134** -0.135*** -0.122**
(0.053)

(0.052)

(0.053)

Impact

-0.119**

-0.118**

-0.130**

-0.131**

(0.053)

(0.054)

(0.054)

(0.054)

-0.251*** -0.256*** -0.258*** -0.253*** -0.247*** -0.279*** -0.269*** -0.259*** -0.273*** -0.278*** -0.268*** -0.268***
(0.058)

(0.059)

(0.059)

(0.061)

(0.061)

0.562*** 0.589*** 0.594*** 0.622*** 0.626***
(0.045)

(0.045)

(0.047)

(0.047)

(0.065)
0.643***
(0.048)

(0.063)

(0.065)

(0.066)

(0.066)

(0.065)

(0.065)

0.626*** 0.622*** 0.622*** 0.617*** 0.619*** 0.619***
(0.047)

(0.049)

(0.050)

(0.051)

(0.051)

(0.050)

Ages 25-34

-0.155*

-0.320***

-0.195**

(relative to 62-71)

(0.088)

(0.094)

(0.090)

(0.091)

Ages 35-49

-0.094

-0.205***

-0.122*

-0.126*

(relative to 62-71)

(0.066)

(0.074)

(0.069)

(0.070)

(0.069)

(0.072)

(0.072)

(0.072)

(0.070)

(0.072)

(0.073)

(0.074)

(0.074)

(0.074)

Ages 50-61

-0.042

-0.127

-0.073

-0.078

-0.117*

-0.141**

-0.148**

-0.165**

-0.158**

-0.126*

-0.128*

-0.131*

-0.127*

-0.127*

-0.204** -0.269*** -0.320*** -0.330*** -0.346*** -0.333*** -0.312*** -0.329*** -0.343*** -0.324*** -0.320***
(0.090)

(0.094)

(0.093)

(0.096)

(0.094)

(0.094)

(0.094)

(0.094)

(0.094)

(0.094)

-0.185*** -0.214*** -0.227*** -0.262*** -0.244*** -0.206*** -0.211*** -0.215*** -0.209*** -0.205***

(relative to 62-71)

(0.063)
(0.072)
(0.067)
(0.068)
(0.068)
(0.071)
(0.071)
(0.071)
(0.070)
(0.071)
(0.072)
(0.072)
(0.072)
(0.072)
Notes: Adjustment of wage differential as discussed in text, where each column from 3 to 14 adjusts for only the particular amenity. Column 2 shows adjustments for all amenities.
Standard errors in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels

A25

Appendix Table 7: Effect of Adjusting for the Incidence and Valuation of Job
Amenities on Wage Differentials by Gender, Race, Age, and Education - Holding
Differences for Other Groups Constant by Estimating the Effects of Amenities
Jointly
Panel A: Log Differentials, Holding Valuations Constant
Adjusted Wage
Unadjusted Difference in Difference in
Differential
Wage
Amenity
Total Value of
(Gap in Total
Differential
Multiplier
Amenities
Compensation)
Female
-0.213***
0.060**
-0.149***
-0.200***
(0.041)
(0.024)
(0.051)
(0.043)
Non-White
-0.132***
0.015
-0.113*
-0.130**
(0.050)
(0.024)
(0.061)
(0.052)
0.548***
0.175***
0.727***
0.593***
College
(0.045)
(0.022)
(0.052)
(0.046)
-0.190**
Ages 25-34
-0.177**
-0.012
-0.179**
(relative to 62-71)
(0.081)
(0.031)
(0.088)
(0.082)
Ages 35-49
-0.033
-0.015
-0.054
-0.035
(relative to 62-71)
(0.058)
(0.036)
(0.076)
(0.060)
Ages 50-61
-0.001
0.017
0.016
0.003
(relative to 62-71)
(0.054)
(0.026)
(0.066)
(0.057)
Panel B: Log Differentials, Allowing Valuations To Vary Across Groups
Unadjusted
Wage
Differential

Difference in Difference in
Amenity
Total Value of
Multiplier
Amenities

Female

Adjusted Wage
Differential
(Gap in Total
Compensation)

-0.213***
0.173**
-0.036
-0.168***
(0.041)
(0.071)
(0.086)
(0.046)
Non-White
-0.132***
-0.188*
-0.315***
-0.181***
(0.050)
(0.097)
(0.114)
(0.057)
0.548***
0.318***
0.870***
0.630***
College
(0.045)
(0.072)
(0.089)
(0.050)
Ages 25-34
-0.177**
-0.588***
-0.765***
-0.349***
(relative to 62-71)
(0.081)
(0.103)
(0.135)
(0.087)
Ages 35-49
-0.033
-0.366***
-0.406***
-0.145**
(relative to 62-71)
(0.058)
(0.093)
(0.115)
(0.066)
Ages 50-61
-0.001
-0.265***
-0.265**
-0.09
(relative to 62-71)
(0.054)
(0.085)
(0.109)
(0.065)
Notes: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1% Significance levels. Standard errors in parentheses
generated from block bootstrap in which new willingness-to-pay measures are
estimated for each bootstrap sample. The “Wage” and “Amenity Multiplier”
columns mechanically add to the “Amenity Value” column. All estimates in the
same column are estimated jointly. Valuations are also estimated jointly for Panel
B.

A26

