                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           SEX, DRUGS, AND BABY BOOMS:
                         CAN BEHAVIOR OVERCOME BIOLOGY?

                                        Michele Baggio
                                        Alberto Chong
                                         David Simon

                                      Working Paper 25208
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25208


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




We are grateful to seminar participants at the University of Oregon and University of New
Hampshire, to Ben Anderson, Alan Barreca, Charles Courtemanche, Anuj Gangopadhyaya, Dan
Rees, Stephen Ross, Brock Smith, Rusty Tchernis, and participants of the 2018 American Society
of Health Economics conference for their useful comments and suggestions. Camila Morales and
Tareena Musaddiq provided excellent research assistance. Researcher(s) own analyses calculated
(or derived) based in part on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing
databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at
The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen
data are those of the researcher(s) and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not
responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results
reported herein. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Michele Baggio, Alberto Chong, and David Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sex, Drugs, and Baby Booms: Can Behavior Overcome Biology?
Michele Baggio, Alberto Chong, and David Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 25208
November 2018
JEL No. D90,I18,J13,K10,K29

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the behavioral changes due to marijuana consumption on fertility and its key
mechanisms, as opposed to physiological changes. We can employ several large proprietary data
sets, including the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Nielsen Retail Scanner database,
as well as the Vital Statistics Natality files and apply a differences-in-differences approach by
exploiting the timing of the introduction of medical marijuana laws among states. We first
replicate the earlier literature by showing that marijuana use increases after the passage of
medical marijuana laws. Our novel results reveal that birth rates increased after the passage of a
law corresponding to increased frequency of sexual intercourse, decreased purchase of condoms
and suggestive evidence on decreased condom use during sex. More sex and less contraceptive
use may be attributed to behavioral responses such as increased attention to the immediate
hedonic effects of sexual contact, delayed discounting and ignoring costs associated with risky
sex. These findings are consistent with a large observational literature linking marijuana use with
increased sexual activity and multiple partners. Our findings are robust to a broad set of tests.


Michele Baggio                                   David Simon
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Connecticut                        University of Connecticut
365 Fairfield Way, U-1063                        365 Fairfield Way, U-1063
Storrs, CT 06269                                 Storrs, CT 06269
michele.baggio@uconn.edu                         and NBER
                                                 david.simon@uconn.edu
Alberto Chong
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
14 Marietta Ave.
Atlanta, GA 30303
achong6@gsu.edu
1. Introduction

While exceptions may occur in every discipline, in sciences such as biology, chemistry, or physics
causal links are seen as a truth clad in iron. There is, essentially, a deterministic view on the average
predictions of these disciplines. This is not the case in the social sciences, where claiming any
causal link is particularly difficult as data are difficult to come by and are noisy, empirical
techniques depend on strict assumptions, and results tend to be not robust enough. While hard and
soft sciences are frequently perceived to move in parallel worlds they sometimes intersect, which
potentially allow researchers to study specific questions from these two perspectives and thus help
provide relevant insights, comparisons, and contributions that may enhance the understanding of
the issue under analysis. Fertility is a topic where one finds such an intersection between hard and
soft sciences, as there has been a long tradition to understand how some substances may impact
both changes in sexual behavior as well as the biological propensity for child bearing.
        In recent years, and largely because of the mainstreaming of marijuana use, the medical
and biological literatures have placed intense scrutiny on how this substance may impact fertility
by focusing on the specific physiological changes that occur due to its use, as marijuana use may
impact hormones related to fertility. As a result of this research, there is some consensus that
cannabis-related compounds negatively impact both male and female reproductive physiology. In
the case of men these compounds disrupt some important biological connections in the body,
which result in a significant reduction of hormones, a dramatic decrease of plasma testosterone
levels as well as a significantly reduction in semen volume, sperm count, sperm motility, loss of
libido, and impotence. In the case of women, the active component in cannabis disrupts the
menstrual cycle, suppresses egg production, and impairs embryo implantation and development
(e.g., Bari et al., 2011; Djernis et al., 2015; Fronczak et al., 2012).
        Research in the hard sciences appears to have established a negative causal link between
cannabis and reproductive likelihood through physiological mechanisms. However, this likely tells
part of the story only, as drugs in general and cannabis in particular may also impact attitudes,
perceptions, and ultimately the behavior of individuals. Indeed, conventional wisdom suggests that
mood-enhancing drugs and sex are complements. In the specific case of marijuana, it is typically
believed that its consumption heightens sensory perception, increases relaxation, reduces stress
and diminishes anxiety (e.g., Palamar et al, 2018). It is reasonable to expect that attitudes and
perception towards sexual activity may be impacted as well. Enhanced senses may contribute to


                                                   1
an increase in sexual activity. A feeling of relaxation may change attitudes toward taking sexual
risks by becoming less concerned about the consequences of sexual intercourse, including reducing
protection or taking on more sexual partners. Cannabis consumption may have a direct bearing on
attitudes and perception towards sexual activity as well as on the risk associated to it all of which
may be directly related to fertility impacts. Overall, it is unclear whether any potential behavioral
changes in individuals may help compensate or even overcompensate the likely reduction due to
physiological mechanisms, so that instead of a reduction, as predicted by the hard sciences, we
may end up observing an increase in fertility rates. In other words, it is unclear whether behavior
may overcome biology through changes in sex frequency and risk factors.
       In this paper we focus on the link between cannabis and fertility as well as its potential key
behavioral mechanisms by exploiting the exogenous variations in medical marijuana laws
(MMLs). In particular our approach is to seek a causal relationship between the legalization of
medical marijuana and fertility rates by exploiting differences in the timing of the change of
marijuana laws among states. We adopt a difference-in-difference (DID) research design by
estimating a reduced-form model conditioning on county and year-quarter fixed effects while also
controlling for state-specific time trends. The latter allows for different trends in each state and
thus relax the parallel trend assumption that is required in the DID approach. We take clues from
the associational evidence of the medical literature, which has studied the correlation between
marijuana and increased sexual pleasure and relaxation, and we focus on the potential mechanisms
that may contribute to the increase in fertility rates. In particular, we look at increases in the
frequency of sexual activity and risky sexual behavior, derived from heightened pleasure or some
impairment in judgment. Previous studies on these mechanisms are rather limited in terms of
sample size and representativeness, and have rarely been published in the economic literature; and
most if not all focus on correlation only (e.g., Sarvet, et al., 2018; Sun and Eisenberg, 2017). In
fact, to our knowledge, there is not a single empirical study that provides causal evidence between
marijuana use, sexual behavior, and fertility rates.
       To understand relationship between marijuana, fertility, and sexual behavior; we gathered
data from multiple sources, many of which were restricted use. Our main findings show a
consistent relationship across three large, restricted data sets. First, to study fertility we use the
county geo-coded Vital Statistics Natality files for years 2005–2014, which we merge onto the
SEER population counts data to calculate the general birth rate in a county-year-quarter, defined


                                                  2
as the total number of births in a county in each year-quarter divided by population counts on the
population of women ages 15 to 44 in their county of residence. To understand the relationship
between marijuana use, sexual activity and risk taking in sex, we employ the restricted use, geo-
coded, National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97), from years 2005 to 2011.1 The
NLSY97 allows us to both confirm the effects found in the earlier literature that medical marijuana
laws increase marijuana use in adults and to demonstrate that such laws are associated with
increased sexual activity. Additionally, we test in the NLSY97 the degree to which MMLs change
sexual risk-taking behavior as proxied by sex with strangers and condom use. While we find some
suggestive evidence that MMLs decrease condom use, small sample sizes in this data set means
statistical power is limited. Therefore, we supplement this analysis with data from the Nielsen
Retail Scanner database on monthly purchases of condoms in grocery, convenience, drug, or mass
distribution stores in US counties for the period 2006-2014 in order to better understand the
relationship between MMLs and condom use. Additionally, data on the implementation of MMLs
come from the Marijuana Policy Project (MPP) previous literature (e.g., Anderson et al., 2013 and
2015; Sabia et al., 2017).
        We find that behavior trumps biology as we provide causal evidence on the impact of
marijuana use on the general fertility rate and find that such causal link is positive and
economically significant. In addition, we find increases in the frequency of intercourse as a
mechanism that explains increased fertility rates. Changes in risk perception are another
mechanism as we find a negative causal link between MMLs and the purchase of condoms. In
particular, our results show increased birth rates coupled with a higher likelihood of an individual
having sex and lower county level sales of condoms. In line with the medical literature, which is
mostly based on correlation of small non-representative samples, the changes in sexual behavior
that we document may be attributable to several factors. First, the earlier literature shows there
might be effects on the extensive margin i.e. cannabis use may lead to early initiation of sex
(Cavazos-Rehg et al., 2011; Heil et al., 2011; Tapert et al., 2001). This is further substantiated by
van Gelder et al. (2011) finding that that drug users are on average younger than nonusers at first


1
 The NLSY97 is a nationally representative survey of a cohort of individuals conducted annually from 1997 to 2015
and includes information on detailed aspects of sexual activity and substance use of individuals as they develop from
adolescents through their adulthood. The questions on marijuana use are reported continuously only through 2011;
and then are not asked again until 2015. Likewise, questions on sexual behavior are only continuously asked from
2000 to 2011. We therefore only look at the NLSY from 2005 to 2011.


                                                         3
vaginal sex and are more likely to have engaged in risky sexual behavior in the previous year.
Second, increased frequency for sexual intercourse is potentially due to a large literature linking
marijuana use to multiple and casual partners (Basikin-Sommers et al, 2006; Grossman et al., 2004;
LaBrie et al., 2005). Finally, a drop in sales of condoms may be attributed to lower use due to
behavioral responses such as increased attention to immediate hedonic effects of sexual contact,
delayed discounting and ignoring costs associated with risky sex (George and Koob, 2010,
Vangsness et al., 2005, Kingree and Phan, 2002). To supplement this, we provide additional, albeit
noisy evidence on individual condom use. Declines in condom use is consistent with evidence that
substance use may affect contraception either directly or indirectly even if it does not immediately
precede sexual intercourse: the latter being due to its earlier effects on partner selection and partner
communication. If individuals are engaging with multiple and/or casual partners, these interactions
are likely to be unplanned, resulting in lesser use of contraception. (Zabin and Hayward, 1994).
Our findings are robust, as placebo, falsification tests, and event study analysis confirm a causal
interpretation of the findings between MMLs, fertility rates with increased sexual activity as a
main mechanism.
       The paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a literature review. Section 3
introduces the data. Section 4 presents the empirical strategy and different estimation methods. In
Section 5 we discuss results, provide evidence on mechanisms and apply several robustness
checks. In Section 6 we discuss the magnitude of our findings including likely mechanisms for
spillover effects. Finally, in the last section we provide a brief summary and conclusions.


2. What Do We Know?
2.1 Biological effects of marijuana use on fertility
       Fertility rates can be impacted by altered hormone activity resulting from use of marijuana.
In recent years the medical literature has provided strong evidence that cannabis use may be
associated with reduced male fertility through impairment in semen quality (Sansone et al., 2018;
du Plessis et al., 2015; Gundersen et al., 2015; Pacey et al, 2015), an increase in the percentage of
motile sperm (Close et al., 1990), an increase in ejaculation problems, a reduction in sperm count,
and impotence (Bari et al., 2017; Djernis, 2015). Similarly, in the case of female fertility, marijuana
disrupts the menstrual cycle, suppresses egg production, and impairs embryo implantation and
development (Bari, et al., 2017). There is also evidence of biological changes in the brain following


                                                   4
the use of alcohol and marijuana. Substance use inhibits neural activity in the prefrontal cortex,
the area of the brain responsible for planning for the future and integrating behavioral alternatives
with context and long-term goals. Research shows that behavioral responses to substance use, such
as increased attention to immediate hedonic effects of sexual contact, delayed discounting and
ignoring costs associated with risky sex, can partially be attributed to these changes in neural
activity in the brain (George and Koob, 2010, Vangsness et al., 2005).


2.2. Marijuana use and risky sexual behavior
         In addition to any direct physiological effects, there are other links associated with sexual
behavior and cannabis use. A host of studies, starting in the 1980s, shows a positive association
between marijuana use and risky sexual behavior, though these studies fail to address potential
selection biases. This extensive literature finds that substance use is positively associated with
several sexual behaviors such as early initiation of sexual intercourse, multiple sexual partners,
and engaging in intercourse without contraception. There are several types of risky behaviors
resulting from substance use that can lead increased fertility and unwanted pregnancies. First,
substance use can result in early sexual intercourse (Ramrakha et al, 2000; Tapert et al., 2001).
For instance, Cavazos-Rehg et al. (2011) link teen marijuana use to greater probability of sexual
intercourse and pregnancy.2 Second, individuals are more likely to have multiple sexual partners
(Basikin-Sommers et al, 2006). For example, Grossman et al (2004) suggest that cannabis may be
employed as a way to “break the ice” with a new partner.3 Third, marijuana use is associated with
inconsistent or no condom use (Brooks et al., 2004; Shrier et al., 1997; Guo et al., 2002; Hittner




2
  Heil et al. (2011) also find that use of marijuana at the age of nineteen increases likelihood of subsequent unplanned
pregnancy and, as a result, higher rates of abortion. In addition, they found evidence that women who use marijuana
are at an increased likelihood of abortion independent of unplanned pregnancy rates.
3
  Likewise, LaBrie et al. (2005) also suggest that levels of substance use in conjunction with sexual activity differ
across partner types, with substance use being more common with newer or less well-known partners. Anderson and
Stein (2011) find that on days of sexual activity with casual partners, the likelihood of risky sex was 2.5 times higher
when marijuana was used than when marijuana was not used. However, on days of sexual activity with regular
partners, marijuana use had no effect on risky sex. In addition, a positive association exists between sexual
assertiveness and length of sexual relationship, suggesting that women may be more sexually assertive with known
partners compared with new partners (Mokoroff et al., 2009). Multiple or casual partners can hence increase the
likelihood of risky sex. Alternatively, a teenager who chooses to have many sexual partners may use drugs and alcohol
to cope with society’s negative view of such behavior (Cooper et al., 1990). In effect, the teenager would consume
these substances to lower the psychic costs of risky sex. Cooper et al. (1990) hence suggest that there can be reverse
causality between drug use and multiple sexual partners.


                                                           5
and Kennington, 2008).4 Specifically, studies suggest that marijuana use at the time of sexual
activity reduces the likelihood of condom use (Bailey et al., 1998; Kingree and Betz, 2003; Kingree
and Phan, 2002).5
         The effect of marijuana on risky sex need not occur directly through impairing judgement
or encouraging risky sexual behavior. Research on young adult relationships suggests that
contraceptive use is greatest when sexual activity is planned and when partners have developed a
close relationship (Zabin and Hayward, 1994). Substance use may affect these important
determinants of birth control through influencing how a romantic relationship develops and the
communication between two partners. Interestingly, this suggests that substance use may affect
the use of contraception and sexual behavior even if it does not immediately precede sexual
intercourse because of its earlier effects on partner selection and partner communication. In fact,
there is evidence from experimental studies that verbal communication is impaired after marijuana
consumption (e.g., Haney et al., 1999)6.
         While these studies provide mounting evidence of positive association between marijuana
use and risky sexual behavior, causality is difficult to establish due to issues of endogeneity.
Adolescent sexual behavior and substance use can depend on a set of personal and social behaviors,
many of which are unmeasured. Thus, researchers need a credible empirical strategy in order to
overcome this bias7.



4
  In addition, several recent studies have assessed daily fluctuations in substance use (alcohol or marijuana) and
condom use behavior (e.g. Leigh et al., 2008; Schroder et al., 2009; Anderson et al., 2011; Cooper, 2006), thus
allowing for modeling of individual (within-person) effects, as well as situational and contextual factors, such as
partner type.
5
  Earleywine (2002) suggests a woman, who is high on marijuana and faces a situation in which she needs to initiate
or insist upon condom use, will be more likely to have unprotected sex than when not high. This can be a result of
being more focused on the moment and the physical sensations (due to heightened sexual arousal and pleasure) and
positive mood presented by the sexual situation, rather than thinking about potential future negative consequences of
not using condoms (e.g. STIs, unwanted pregnancies, etc.).
6
  Marijuana use hence may decrease the ability to engage in effective communication about condom use e.g.
negotiation and sexual assertiveness. Lower levels of sexual assertiveness have been associated with unprotected sex
(frequency of condom use) and intentions to use condoms (Stoner et al., 2008; Morokoff et al., 2009; Parks et al.,
2012).
7
  This is precisely why the causal nature of this relationship is not well established, with only a handful of studies
attempting to establish causality and not just association (Rashad and Kaestner, 2004). To address this, Rees et al.
(2001) use IV and bivariate probit models on data from NLSY97 and conclude that the link between substance use
and sexual behavior found by previous researchers may not reflect causation. Their results suggest that the positive
correlation between substance use and risky sexual behavior can, more often than not, be attributed to the influence
of unobservables, yielding only weak evidence that marijuana and alcohol use influence sexual behavior.



                                                          6
2.3. Marijuana use and non-risky sexual behavior.
       While there is an extensive literature on marijuana use and risky sex, a smaller literature
also appreciates that marijuana consumption may directly lead to increased relaxation, arousal and
enjoyment of sex. Regular marijuana users report a set of physiological and perceptual effects that
are likely to influence sexual decision-making and perception. These include a sense of enhanced
responsiveness to sexual touch, an increase in positive mood and relaxation, as well as an increase
in strong emotions. Supporting this, animal studies show that using a cannabinoid compound to
stimulate the same neuro receptors that process THC leads to copulation in previously non-
sexually active rats (Canseco-Alba and Rodriguez-Manzo, 2012). In humans, low levels of
cannabis use are associated with increased reported sexual arousal. While higher doses of
marijuana eventually led to a diminished libido in men, both high and low doses of marijuana is
associated with increased sexual proclivity in women (Gorzalka, Hill, and Chang, 2010; Koff,
1974; Bari et al., 2017; Djernis, 2015).
       To the degree that medical marijuana relieves chronic pain, pain during sex, and improves
life satisfaction, then it is natural that sexual activity could also increase. Consequently, with the
liberalization of marijuana laws there has been a steep increase in cannabis products designed to
improve sexual wellness, and use of marijuana in sexual therapy to remove psychological anxiety
or physical pain associated with sex (Palamar, et al, 2018; Sun and Eisenberg, 2017). While this
supports increased frequency of sexual activity there is a dearth of evidence (that we know of)
connecting marijuana use to increased decisions to bear children. Therefore, we believe the most
likely interpretation of declining condom use is that it reflects increase in risk taking during sex.
       In summary, in spite of many attempts at establishing a link between marijuana and sexual-
related activities, the related causal evidence is rail thin and rather weak. Moreover, the existing
associational literature is also limited with the relationship predominantly studied in adolescents
and young adults or in selected subpopulations and geographically concentrated areas.
Unsurprisingly, the evidence on behavioral changes that marijuana use may produce on fertility is
nonexistent, to our knowledge. The causal relationship being unknown, raises concerns about
policy making and laws that relax substance use, in terms of their spillover effects on sexual
behavior.


2.4 Medical marijuana laws, marijuana use, and other potential channels


                                                  7
        Our identification strategy relies on medical marijuana laws (MMLs) in our sample
increasing marijuana use. A growing literature on MMLs supports this assumption. Specifically,
MMLs have been shown to increase the probability of marijuana use by 14-15% over the mean
(e.g., Wen et al., 2015; Pacula et al, 2015). Wen et al. specifically show a substantial increase in
reported marijuana use using the National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) using similar
variation to us in late adopting states from 2004 to 2012. There could be a variety of mechanisms
by which this increased use of marijuana occurs. There could be direct effects of increased medical
use, though the number of registered medical patients is relatively small, suggesting a large portion
of increased marijuana use is not purely due to medical use. Alternatively, medical marijuana could
be diverted to recreational use, though this is not the only way that non-patient users could increase
use after MMLs. Medical marijuana laws could have nuanced impacts on the black market: for
example, these laws decrease the price of high-quality black market marijuana by 26% (Anderson
et. al, 2013), and may encourage dealers to focus marketing sales to adults instead of teens
(Anderson et al, 2014). Finally, MMLs could embolden marginal users who see the liberalization
of marijuana laws as a reflection of greater societal approval of marijuana use8.
        To that end we document a robust increase in marijuana among young adults following the
passage of these laws using the NLSY97. We show through an event study analysis that this
increase in use is not driven by a pre-trend. It is also recognized that states that allow home
cultivation of marijuana may be particularly susceptible to recreational take-up. Therefore,
following the earlier literature (Anderson et al, 2013), we show separate results assigning treatment
based on the date any medical marijuana law is enacted, and for the date home cultivation is
allowed (if ever), as well as heterogeneity in effects across other types of MMLs.
        In this analysis we do not look at recreational legalization of marijuana for three reasons.
First, most states legalized recreational marijuana late in our sample (from 2012 - 2014). Given
the limitations of our restricted use birth certificate data: there would be a very limited post period
for our findings. This is particularly true for fertility, which requires at least nine months after the
passage of a law to observe effects. Second, there have been documented large cross border
spillovers of recreational marijuana use (Hansen et al. 2018), making it unclear that a state level


8
  Other evidence of MMLs on illegal supply has shown that passage of a law potentially increases farmer output in
local state markets and reduces demand for illegally imported marijuana, in turn reducing violent crime in states
on the Mexican border, (Gavrilova et al, 2017).


                                                        8
difference in difference design using nearby states as controls is appropriate. Finally, the NLSY97
stops reporting yearly interviews in 2011, and any questions on marijuana use in 2013, limiting
the available data for studying the effect of recreational marijuana laws on marijuana use, sex, and
condom use.


3. Data
3.1 Data on marijuana laws
         We exploit variation across states and over time in the implementation of MMLs. For this
analysis we focus on the period 2004-2014.9 Information on the exact date of enactment and
implementation of MMLs come from the Marijuana Policy Project (MPP), the previous literature
(e.g., Anderson et al., 2013 and 2015; Wen et al., 2015; Sabia et al., 2017), and specialized Internet
websites. It has been noted in this literature that there is sometimes a lag between when a law is
enacted in a state and the actual date of operation of dispensaries or otherwise when legally
supplied marijuana becomes available (e.g., Choi et al., 2016; Anderson et al., 2018; Powell et al.,
2018).10 At the same time, monitoring and enforcement of marijuana use may change with
enactment of a law even if other channels for legal supply are not yet in operation. Likewise,
MMLs could make marginal users feel emboldened to begin use as soon as an MML passes. With
this in mind, we take a parsimonious approach: showing our main results both assigning treatment
based on whether any MML was passed and assigning treatment based on whether\when home
cultivation is allowed in a state. We focus on home cultivation because it is one of the clearest
avenues by which supply for recreational use could become available, in part due to the difficulties
involved in states regulating home cultivators. Generally, we see larger effects on marijuana use


9
  We limit these years because they are the only ones we consistently have across all of our major datasets. While the
NLSY97 starts in 1997: the majority of the respondents did not come to age until 2005, and since the earlier literature
and our own tests show no effect on teen use of MMLs we cannot document first stage effects on marijuana use or
sexual activity before this time. Likewise, while the Vital Statistics goes back further, the US standard birth certificate
changed substantially in 2003 and without being able to document effects on sexual activity and marijuana use we
decided to not look at fertility in this earlier period. Regardless, one of the advantages of focusing on the 2004-2014
period is that it limits our sample to recent MML changes, which is arguably most relevant for future policy
predictions. Finally, we only have Nielsen data going back to 2006.
10
   For instance, although Connecticut passed a MML in 2012, home cultivation was not allowed and the first
dispensary opened in 2014, only. Delaware passed a MML in 2011 but home cultivation was not allowed and the first
dispensary did not open until 2015. New Hampshire passed a MML in 2013 but home cultivation was not allowed and
the dispensary did not open until 2016. New Jersey passed a MML in 2010 but home cultivation was not allowed and
the first dispensary did not open until 2012. New York passed a MML in 2014, but the first dispensary did not open
until 2016.


                                                            9
and fertility in states that allow home cultivation. We have also replicated our analysis using the
date when the first legal supply channel became available, defined as the date either that home
cultivation is allowed, or as of the opening of the first dispensary or treatment center. In practice
results based on “first legal supply available” were similar to assigning treatment based on date of
home cultivation.
        Table 1 presents a list of dates of when the medical marijuana law in a state first became
effective, whether the state allows home cultivation, the date when the first dispensary or
compassionate treatment center opened, and whether medical marijuana can be prescribed for non-
specific pain symptoms. Unless otherwise noted, states that allowed home cultivation or had non-
specific pain provisions, enacted these provisions at the same time the law was enacted. For
reference, we also show the date that “legal supply first became available” as defined above. In
some cases, a law is enacted outside of our sample while a provision is passed within the time
frame of our sample. In this case we leave the date as “----”, so that table 1 only shows variation
from the passage of laws/provisions used in this study.
3.2 Birth Rates
        The primary data on fertility are birth records from the restricted use Vital Statistics
Natality files from the National Center for Health Statistics11, geo-coded at the county level for
cohorts conceived between 2004 and 2014 (birth certificate data years 2005-2014). The Vital
Statistics contains information from all birth certificates in the U.S. such as birth outcomes,
gestational length, and parental demographic information. We begin by calculating for each birth
the estimated year and quarter of conception using gestational age as reported on the birth
certificate.   From there we construct the number of births for each county-year-quarter of
conception, giving us conceptions beginning in the first quarter of 2004 and ranging to the third
quarter of 2014. From this information we derive the numerator of the general fertility rate as the
number of conceptions that result in a live birth in a given county-year-quarter cell. To calculate
the denominator, we use county-level population estimates come from the SEER population
provided by the National Cancer Institute.12 Specifically, the denominator of the general fertility


11
   As compiled from data provided by the 57 vital statistics jurisdictions through the Vital Statistics Cooperative
Program.
12
   These data were downloaded from the NBER website: http://www.nber.org/data/. A main advantage of SEER is
that it is to our knowledge viewed as providing the best publically available county level population estimates in
intercensal years.


                                                        10
rate is defined based on the population (in 1000s) of women of childbearing age (15 to 44) during
the corresponding quarter-year of conception.                  Month and location of birth, together with
gestational length, allow us to assign to each birthrate cell the status of MMLs at the quarter when
the child was conceived. We assign treatment to conceptions that occurred the first full quarter
after the passage of the law. We similarly construct subgroup specific fertility rates by taking
subgroup counts of births from the vital statistics and dividing by the appropriate denominator
from the SEER data.13 However, we do not have SEER data counts by marital status or education
so in this case we divide by the full population of women14. In our sample, the general fertility
rate is 14.83 per 1000 women of child bearing age in a county-quarter. Summary statistics are
presented in Table 2, Panel A.


3.3 Sexual Behavior and Marijuana Use
         Data on marijuana use and sexual behavior are available from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97). The NLSY97 is a nationally representative survey of a cohort
of individuals who were 12-16 years of age in December 1996 and has been conducted annually
from 1997 to 2011, and every two years afterwards. The survey includes information on many
detailed aspects of individuals as they develop from adolescents through their adulthood. Using
this dataset for our analysis presents at least two advantages. First, it includes detailed questions
about sexual activity and substance use of the respondent. The survey asks about marijuana use
and sex frequency in the previous 30 days. It also includes questions about the propensity to risk
of the respondent with regards to sexual activity such as condom use and promiscuity.15 The second
advantage is that since respondents are followed over time we can control for individual
unobserved heterogeneity that may be correlated with marijuana use and MMLs (Anderson et al.,


13
   For example, when constructing the Black fertility rates, we total the number of Black mothers and divide by the
number of Black women in the appropriate county-year-quarter cell ages 15 to 14
14
   Mechanistically this means the marital status specific fertility rates will be lower than the general fertility rate.
However, for our purposes we use this subgroup analysis mainly to compare effects across marital status groups or
estimate effects relative to the mean.
15
   The specific questions are the following. For sexual frequency: “About how many times have you had sexual
intercourse in the past four weeks?” This question has been asked continuously starting in 2000 until 2011. For
marijuana use: “On how many days have you used marijuana in the last 30 days?” This question has been asked
continuously from 1997 until 2011. For sex with strangers: “Since the last interview, have you had sex with someone
who was a stranger to you?” This question has been asked continuously starting in 2000 until 2011. For condom use:
“Thinking about all the times that you have had sexual intercourse since the last interview, about what percent of the
time, from 0 to 100, have you or your sexual partner or partners used a condom?” This question has been asked
continuously since 2002.


                                                          11
2015). One limitation of this dataset is that because the survey began with cohorts who were
teenagers in 1997, in the survey years 2005-2011 our observations are on individuals that are no
younger than 21 and no older than 30. Therefore, we only estimate effects on young adults in this
dataset. However, because these ages represent peak child bearing years, this is arguably the most
important margin corresponding with our fertility results.
         For the NLSY97, using the date of the interview we can match each respondent to whether
an MML was passed at the time of the reported behavior. Because the questions on marijuana
consumption and sexual activity refer to the previous month, we match treatment to 30 days before
the interview. For sexual activity, we create an indicator if the respondent had sexual intercourse
once or more in the 30 days preceding the date of the interview, and an indicator for having sex
three or more times. Jointly we felt these two variables captures different margins of the intensity
of sexual activity across which marijuana use may affect behavior, but we have tested the
robustness of these results to other definitions of sexual frequency.16
         The NLSY97 data also allows us to observe other behaviors related to sex. To proxy for
promiscuity, we create an indicator for reported sexual intercourse with a stranger since the past
interview.17 To capture likelihood of contraceptive use we look at reported condom use. Condom
use is measured as the percent of the time the respondent, or their partner, used a condom during
sexual intercourse since the previous interview. Unfortunately, we have very small sample sizes
on condom use: this is due to low response rates and the fact that reports of condom use are by
definition conditional on reported sexual activity since the last interview. There are roughly 6 times
fewer observations for this outcome than the other outcomes in the NLSY97. Summary statistics
are reported in Panel B of Table 2.


3.3 Retail Condom Sales




16
   We also measure frequency of sexual activity as an indicator for having intercourse three times or more in the past
month as well counts for the number of times of sexual intercourse (top-coded at 7 or more). Our results are generally
consistent across these methods, though the “number of times” measure has larger standard errors, suggesting more
precise impacts on the lower end of the distribution of sexual frequency.
17
   As with sexual frequency, we can precisely match the reported behavior to the timing of the laws. However, in
this case because the behavior on condom use and promiscuity is reported for the time between the two interviews,
we match the treatment variable to the period since the previous interview. In other words, the respondent is
considered to be treated if starting from the date of the previous interview medical marijuana was legalized in
her/his state of residence.


                                                         12
        Because of the relatively small sample sizes in the NLSY97 and the fewer number of
respondents to questions on birth control, we supplement the analysis on condom use by using the
Nielsen Retail Scanner database to study whether MMLs had an effect on condom sales. While
retail sales do not strictly represent behavioral use of condoms, sales also do not suffer from
underreporting and measure error problems prevalent in self-reported data. Condom sales could
decline with decreased use or decreases in sexual activity. However, given that we estimate
increases in sexual activity, we interpret declines in condom sales as net of increased sex. We have
access to store level data on condom sales observed in the scanner database for states before and
after MMLs became effective. The database contains purchases of products in all categories for
grocery, convenience, drug, or mass distribution stores across the United States for the period
2006-2014, including detailed product characteristics, price, and quantities for different condom
types and brand. The Scanner data ensure a wide spatial coverage of sales across the 48 contiguous
states of the US. Consistently with the analysis on birth rate, we aggregate sales data to the county-
quarter level. Overall, we have sales data for more than two thousand US counties. Summary
statistics are reported in Panel C of Table 2.


3.4 Covariates
        We control for a set of time-varying covariates that could potentially influence sexual
behavior and fertility and also be correlated with MMLs. The SEER population data are used to
construct controls for the demographic composition of counties over time. Specifically, we include
quarterly measures of the share of the population male, Hispanic, by race group (White, Black,
Asian, and Other) age groups (0-19, 20-39, 40-64, 65 plus). We additionally control for state-level
share of educational groups, which is not available in SEER but is provided by the ACS: (high
school dropout, high school graduate, some college, and college educated). 18 Information on
economic characteristics such as the unemployment rate and median household income comes
from Local Area Unemployment Statistics and Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates. As
described earlier, the NLSY97 includes detailed information on the demographic characteristics
of the respondents. Therefore, in addition to controls for the demographic composition of the
state/county, when using the NLSY97 we also include indicator variables for race, gender,


18
  Although county-level data is available in the ACS, a non-negligible number of counties are missing when we
turn to the ACS. We thus prefer to rely on state-level data on share of the population by education group.


                                                       13
educational attainment, and age-in-years fixed effects.
         We are also concerned with the existence of contemporaneous policies that may be
correlated with an MMLs implementation. We are particularly concerned about policies that affect
consumption of marijuana for reasons other than the legalization of medical use and policies that
affect fertility. We address the first concern by creating dichotomous indicators for states that
decriminalized and/or legalized the consumption of recreational marijuana. We also include annual
state-level data on beer and cigarette tax rates. 19 Passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
allowed states to choose to expand Medicaid coverage, and Medicaid is a prominent provider of
family planning services. We therefore created an indicator for the states that opted-into expanded
Medicaid coverage in 2014. It is possible that more conservative states may be less likely to
legalize medical marijuana and more likely to limit access to abortion. Recently several states have
passed so called Targeted Regulation of Abortion Provider (TRAP) laws, which impose more
stringent requirements on abortion clinics, making abortion less accessible (Jones et al., 2018). We
control for the different components of these TRAP laws using data from the Policy Surveillance
Program’s website.20 Summary statistics for all state-year level policies as well as all our individual
and county level covariates are presented in Table A1.

4. Empirical Methodology
         We estimate a Difference-in-Difference panel model to identify the impact of marijuana
use on sexual behavior and fertility outcomes. Specifically, we estimate the following model:


                                !"#$ = &''(#$ + *" + +$ + ,# - + ./ "#$ + 1"#$ ,                                   (1)


where ycst is one of several outcomes related to either fertility, sexual behavior or marijuana use,21
observed in county c, in state s, in time t. Time fixed effects are defined at the year-quarter level


19
   State cigarette and beer tax information is based on several sources: American Petroleum Institute, state revenue
departments, Distilled Spirits Council of the U.S., Commerce Clearing House, Orzechowski and Walker’s “Tax
Burden on Tobacco”, and the Tax Foundation.
20
   Data are available on LawAtlas.org; accessed on April 2018. These laws cover the regulation of licensing of
provisions and accreditation (AFL), requirements for the ambulatory surgical centers (ASC), and hospitalization
requirements (HR) for facilities providing abortion. Indeed, as a result of these more stringent regulations the number
of clinics offering abortion has indeed decreased in states that have imposed these restrictions (Jones and Jerman,
2017).
21
   As discussed above in the data section, we explore the impacts of change in MMLs on several outcome variables.
We use the NLSY97 data to investigate the effect on marijuana use and sexual frequency. We also use the NLSY97


                                                          14
across all datasets. MML is an indicator for whether in state s medical marijuana law is effective
in time t, and & is the coefficient of interest. The treatment variable MML is equal to 1 if the state
has either enacted legalized medical marijuana or one of its key provisions at time t. The terms *"
represent geographic fixed effects (county in the vital statistics or state in the NLSY97), and +$
represents time fixed effects (year-quarter of conception in the vital statistics or year-quarter of
interview in the NLSY97).             We also include state-specific time trends, ,# -, to control for
systematic pre-trend differences in birth rates between treated and control states22, as well as for
unobservable state-level factors evolving over time at a constant rate. / "#$ is a vector of control
variables, that is, demographic, economic, and policy variables listed in the appendix, Table A1.
In all models and datasets, the standard errors are clustered at the state level allowing for within
state serial correlation (Bertrand et al., 2004). All regressions are weighted using sample weights
for the NLSY97 regressions, and using county-year population for fertility and condom sales
regressions.
         Across our datasets we examine the sensitivity of the estimated parameter of interest, to
including different sets of control variables in / "#$ . Given their importance to marijuana use and
fertility in all specifications we control for laws for the decriminalization and legalization of
recreational marijuana, as well as a rich set of controls for county demographic shares by race,
ethnicity, age, and education as described in section 3.4 above and shown in Table A1. In our
second specification, we then add the county unemployment rate and interactions between county
demographic characteristics and the unemployment rate.23 This is an important control since
participation in the labor market affects the opportunity cost of childbearing and thus influences
fertility rates (e.g., Adsera, 2004; Del Bono et al., 2012; Schaller, 2016). For our final and preferred
specification, we include an additional rich set of policy and demographic relevant controls: state



examine the impact on risky sexual behavior by focusing on the use of condom and having sexual intercourse with
someone that is a stranger. The analysis on condom use is supplemented by looking at the effect of MMLs on the log
of quarterly sales of condoms across U.S. counties. Finally, using the natality data we investigate the impacts on the
general birth rate.
22
   We include state linear time trends in our main specification because in many cases the state level pre-period is
somewhat longer than the post period (see table 1), making it more important to absorb trends over time. We also
have run our results without linear trends and find that the coefficient estimates are almost identical to our preferred
specification but that the standard errors are substantially larger. This supports the notion that there are trends over
time in fertility and marijuana use that are unrelated to MMLs but add noise to our estimates. We show results on
fertility without linear trends in appendix table A2.
23
   This allows for differential impacts of the demographic shares based on the other relative shares in the population
and the unemployment rate, though including these terms have little overall effect on the coefficient of interest.


                                                          15
cigarette and beer tax variation, an indicator for expanding Medicaid under the ACA, TRAP laws,
median county income, and all interactions between the various demographic covariates.
         Unlike the fertility and retail scanner data, the NLSY97 has unique data related advantages
and disadvantages that affect how we specify our models. First, we can include individual level
covariates, such as age-in-year fixed effects, in addition to county demographic controls in all
models (see section 3.5 above and Table A-1). Second, because the NLSY97 follows the same
cohort of individuals over time, this data allows us to test our preferred specification for
unobserved individual heterogeneity using individual fixed effects. We do not add individual fixed
effects to the regressions on condom use because we only observe condom use for those who are
sexually active which itself is changing with the laws.24 Likewise, we are unable to reliably include
state-linear trends in the condom use regressions.25 Finally, since there is not a comprehensive set
of counties in the NLSY97 we use state fixed effects instead of county fixed effects. Beyond these
few differences, we match our specifications between our data sets.


4.1 Event Study Methodology
         One way to verify the validity of our results is to visually check for differential trends in
an event study. This method has the advantage of both verifying that there are no differential pre-
trends and showing that the coefficients are identified off of changes that occur around the time of
the policy. We estimate event studies using the following equation:


                        !"#$ = ∑:5;<= 45 1(7"$ = 8) + *" + +$ + ,# - + ./ "#$ + 1"#$ ,                              (2)


where 7"$ indicates the event quarter-year, which takes value equal to one when an observation is
j semesters away from the quarter the law became effective.26 These event dummy variables


24
   In addition to making the individual fixed effect endogenous, this makes it unclear to us how to interpret within
person differences in condom use. Specifically, if the marginally sexually active individual is more (or less) likely to
use a condom due to marijuana this person is unobserved in the pre-period and therefore removed from identification
when individual fixed effects are included.
25
   We did not feel that there were enough observations before and after the passage of MMLs to reliably estimate
both quarter-year fixed effects and state-specific quarter-year linear trends, and therefore we dropped the trends
from these regressions.
26
   We aggregate event time into six-month bins to reduce noise, particularly in the NLSY97, which has relatively
small sample sizes. However, we find qualitative similar patterns to putting event time in quarters and, importantly,
no indication of a confounding pre-trend when we aggregate the event dummies in other ways.


                                                          16
replace the MML treatment dummy from equation (1). 7"$ indexes these dummy variables such
that when 7"$ = 0 this denotes the period of the policy change. Period -1 is the reference period
in all specifications. The end points are inclusive on the dummy variables such that they denote
more than four semesters after and more than six semesters before the legalization became
effective. Overall, the coefficients 45 capture the impact on the outcome variable in treated states
both prior to and after the treatment. They were estimated relative to the semester before the policy
change, the omitted coefficient. The vector / "#$ includes all control variables in our “preferred”
specification described above. For the event studies we focus on the date the law is enacted rather
than a specific law provision such as dispensaries becoming operative or home cultivation being
allowed. We do this because the event study itself makes trends over time in the effects of laws
explicit. If there are smaller increases in marijuana use directly after a law is enacted due solely to
changes in enforcement, monitoring, or attitudes from enacting the law; then assigning treatment
at a later date would cause these changes to be picked up as pre-trends in the model.


5. Results

5.1 MMLs and Marijuana use

       We first document that MMLs increase marijuana use in our sample and time period. We
use equation (1) to estimate the effect of MMLs on increasing the likelihood of marijuana use in
the past 30 days, with results shown in Table 3. We use both definition of treatment: when MMLs
became effective and the effective date for states where home cultivation is allowed. We find that
compared to non-MML states, individuals living in states that changed medical marijuana laws are
more likely to consume marijuana in the past 30 days. Estimates are consistent across
specifications, including when we add individual fixed effects or focus on home cultivation.
Overall, these results suggest around a 5.14 percentage points increase in the likelihood of
consuming marijuana or an effect of roughly 33% of the mean. Results for states that passed home
cultivation laws are consistent, although slightly larger in magnitude. Overall, these effects are
larger but generally in line with the earlier literature. Wen et al. (2015) report a 14% increase in
marijuana use for individuals aged 21 and above over the period 2004-2012. Focusing on non-
medical population, Chu (2014) finds a 10-20% increase in marijuana related arrests and
treatments, which jointly provides indirect evidence of increasing recreational use. However, our



                                                  17
estimates are unique in that, unlike earlier papers, we look only at young adults between the ages
of 21-30. We believe these results show that adults in this age are more responsive to recreational
take up of marijuana in response to an MML law change than those who are older or younger. 27
Notably, teenagers are also less responsive to MMLs than adults, and we have replicated the earlier
literature by Anderson et al. 2015 that MMLs do not affect teen use (results available upon
request).
        Figure 1 shows the event study in marijuana use. Before the law is passed, reported
marijuana use has a flat pre-trend, with none of the pre-period coefficients being statistically
different from zero. There is a relatively sharp increase in reported use in the period during which
the law is passed. Marijuana use continues to increases in the following two years, consistent with
the gradual spread of marijuana availability in the wake of the law. This is also consistent with
their being a delay, in some states, between passing the law and enacting supply side measures
such as making dispensaries operational.


5.2 MMLs, Fertility, and Sexual Behavior

        Table 4 Panel A, shows the impact of MMLs on the fertility rate. Overall, we find
consistent results across specifications. The first column shows results controlling for county and
year-quarter fixed effects, state-specific time trends, and demographic covariates. We find that the
enactment of any medical marijuana laws increases the birth rate by 0.40 or approximately 4 births
per quarter for every 10,000 women of childbearing age. Adding controls for the unemployment
or focusing on the passage of home cultivation laws generally yields slightly larger effects. Finally,
including state level policies in our preferred and final specification does not substantially affect
the results: suggesting that MMLs caused 5.3 additional births per 10,000 women if any law is
enacted or 6 births in states that pass home cultivation law. Jointly these results show increased
birthrates in medical marijuana legalizing states of around 3% of the mean.
        These results provide evidence that marijuana use has a considerable, unintended, and
positive effect on fertility. This is in-spite of the negative biological effects suggested by the

27
   Specifically, Pacula et al (2014) use the NLSY9 and find a 14.3% increase in marijuana use once different types of
laws are controlled for. However, their sample includes teens, which as shown in Anderson et al. (2015), MMLs have
little no effect on teen use, particularly when individual fixed effects are included. Likewise Wen et al. (2015) and
Choi et al. (2018) find a smaller increase in marijuana use; however, these papers look at the population ages 12 and
older and 18 and older respectively: rather than just those aged 21-30.


                                                         18
medical literature. Next, we attempt to understand this finding by looking at the underlying
mechanisms. In other words: how does behavior change in a way that overcomes the biological
impacts of the substance? First, we consider sexual frequency. Mechanically, the fertility rate will
rise as more individuals engage in sexual activity, irrespective of contraceptive use. Panels B and
C in Table 4 shows passage of MMLs is associated with increases in sexual activity. In accordance
with the literature (e.g. Cavazos-Rehg et al., 2011; Heil et al., 2011; Tapert et al., 2001) we expect
to find a stronger effect of MMLs on sexual frequency at the extensive margin (sex once or more
in the past 30 days). Indeed, MMLs raise the probability of becoming sexually active in the past
30 days by as much as 6.9 percent over the mean rate. Results lose significance when focusing on
“home cultivation”, however are qualitatively similar with a t-statistic above 1, and we cannot rule
out large positive effects on sexual activity in this specification28. Evidence at the margin of “3 or
more acts of intercourse” also supports an increase in overall sexual activity; however, the effects
are smaller and less precisely estimated.
         The second way in which behavior could overcome the biological effect of marijuana is
due to how it affects risky sexual behavior and contraceptive use. Conditional on sexual activity,
the birth rate is expected to increase if individuals are less likely to actively prevent pregnancies
through contraception. We account for this mechanism by investigating the impact of MMLs on
self-reported condom use, and administrative data on condoms sales. Table 5, Panels A and B,
report the estimates for the impact of MMLs on contraceptive use and sales, respectively.
Consistent with the literature (e.g. George and Koob, 2010, Vangsness et al., 2005, Kingree and
Phan, 2002) we find that the sign on the coefficient of MMLs on condom use is negative,
suggestive of a decrease in condom use. However, this self-reported measure is noisy, and the
results are statistically insignificant. This is likely due (in part) to sample sizes that are 6 time
smaller than the rest of our NLSY outcomes.29 Supplementing this result by using the retail sales
data on condom sales we find that passage of an MML lowers condom sales by more than 4.3%.
         It is important to note that the latter result indicate that MMLs lead to lower condom sales
(and possibly use), but we are unable to comment with confidence whether this impact is clear

28
   One reason for loss of significance here is that when using this outcome from the NLSY97, unlike with the vital
statistics, there are only four states that passed home cultivation laws: making statistical power a concern.
29
   As discussed in the empirical methodology section, state linear trends are excluded from the condom use regressions
because small sample means it is likely that in including them we will be unable to reliably estimate both state trends
over time and the effects of the laws. The results become very small, positive, and with standard errors that are 6
times as large as the point estimates, making it difficult to draw any conclusions in this case.


                                                          19
evidence of higher risky sexual activity. Thus, we also examine the impact of MMLs on other
forms of sexual risky behavior, namely sexual activity with strangers. Panel C in Table 5 shows
that MMLs have no impact on individuals’ likelihood to have sex with someone unknown to the
respondent. We have also estimated the effect of changes in MMLs on sexual transmitted diseases
(STDs) using state-level data on chlamydia, syphilis, and gonorrhea available from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) finding no significant effect.30 In light of the findings
regarding risky sexual behaviors, we conclude that the impact of MMLs on the birth rate is
primarily driven by higher frequency of non-risky sexual activity, and suggestively through lower
use of contraceptives.


5.3 Fertility, and sex, event study results
         We proceed to conduct an event study in order to formally test the validity of our findings
on fertility and sexual activity. The event studies were estimated using equation (2) and all the
covariates from our preferred specification. Figure 2 depicts the event study results of the impact
of MMLs on the birth rate. There is generally no evidence of differential birth rate trends in the
semesters prior to the passing of MMLs. 31 The figure then indicates a sustained increase in birth
rate in the period following the policy change. Figure 3 shows our event study on the most
prominent mechanism leading to an increase in birth rates: the probability of having sex once or
more in the past 30 days. While there is a dip down in sexual activity two periods before the law
passes, otherwise the pre-trends are fairly flat and not statistically different from zero. Further,
Figure 3 shows an increase in sex beginning after the law change, with a small increase overtime
as marijuana availability becomes more widespread.32


5.4 Law Heterogeneity
         It is widely recognized in the MML literature that not all marijuana laws are the same.
While, our main estimates make explicit differences in effects between any law being enacted and

30
   Results are available upon request.
31
   For the event study analysis using the NLSY97 data we reduce the number of periods because of the fewer years of
available data.
32
   Appendix Figure A1 also shows an event study in retail condom sales. The pattern is more difficult to clearly make
out due to large confidence intervals relative to the effect size. Still, we were reassured not to see no distinct pre-trend
in the pre-period followed by a relatively sharp decline following the passage of the law. We also did an event study
on having sex “3 or more times” in the past 30 days. There was no evidence of a pre-trend and the pattern of
coefficients was similar to our extensive margin measure of sex.


                                                            20
those that allowed for home cultivation, we recognize it is important to look at the full spectrum
of laws. We focus this law heterogeneity analysis on fertility outcomes both because we see
fertility as the end result of additional marijuana use and sex, and because the large sample size
and longer panel of years available in the vital statistics makes it practical to horse race the effects
of different laws.
        Table 6 shows the results of different type of MMLs on the birth rate. The first column
only defines treatment as laws that allow for home cultivation and is identical to the third column
results in table 3. The second column assigns treatment based on when dispensaries in a state
become operational and are actively supplying marijuana. The third column assigns treatment
based only on states who pass laws that allow for “non-specific pain” for MML prescriptions.
These states allow prescriptions to be given for generic “chronic pain” rather than a more specific
condition, allowing a prescription to be more easily obtained. The final column horse races the
relative effectiveness of these laws by including all of them in the same regression. Jointly, these
three types of laws reflect the major ways in which the legal supply of marijuana could be most
easily obtained.
        Table 6 shows that the largest results on fertility comes from states that allow for home
cultivation. Non-specific pain provision laws have reasonably sized effects, but are imprecisely
estimated and not statistically significant. When these provisions are included separately in the
same specification, home cultivation increases births by 4 births in a quarter per 10,000 women of
child bearing age, and an operating dispensary increases births by 3 births per 10,000 women.


5.5 Quantifying the effects
        We now put some prospective on the effect sizes in our estimates. The sexual activity
results suggest that for adults aged 21-30, there is an increase in the likelihood of having sex once
or more in the past month of around 4.5 percentage points. A rough back of the envelop
calculation, implies that for every 10,000 women in this age group about 1350 more of them are
likely to have intercourse in the past quarter33: in turn, resulting in 4 additional births within a
quarter. This doesn’t consider any intensive margin effects for those who would otherwise already
be sexually active in a month. Further, the likelihood of a birth increases a great deal if


33
  A 4.5 percentage point increase per 10,000 women suggests 450 more having sex at least once per month, or 1350
per quarter.


                                                       21
contraception is not regularly used during intercourse. While our results on decreased condom use
are largely suggestive: they imply a greater likelihood that our estimates of frequent intercourse
will result in a pregnancy. Therefore, relative to our estimated increases in sexual activity, we
consider 4 births per quarter a plausible increase in fertility. Another way to think about the
magnitude of effects is to benchmark them against other policies or shocks that have changed
fertility. We find effects on the fertility rate of 3% of the mean. Overall, these results are more
modest then the impact of opening family planning clinics that reduced the fertility of poor mothers
by 30% (Bailey, 2012) and similar to the estimated 2.6% decline in births due to increased
temperatures from climate change (Barreca et al. 2015).


5.6 Further robustness and heterogeneity checks
       We conduct a series of robustness checks to examine the sensitivity of the results. We test
whether the effects from the legalization are realized before they should occur. This is done in two
ways. First, by adding leads for the MMLs change to our preferred specification from Table 3.
Panel A in Tables 7 and 8 shows the results from the robustness checks using sexual frequency
and the general birth rate as outcome variables, respectively. The two columns add leads for 1 and
2 years before the policy, and thus control for a policy change at different times prior to MMLs
becoming effective. The main treatment variable remains significant with a magnitude that is not
substantially different from before while the coefficients for the leads are negative and statistically
insignificant. These results indicate that the impact of the policy remains captured by the original
treatment variable and it is not absorbed by leads.
       Second, we check that the effects we find are not spurious by replacing the main policy
variable with 1,000 sets of placebo dates for the change in MMLs. Specifically, using a uniform
distribution we randomly generated 1,000 sets of fake dates from the first quarter of 2006 to one
year before the actual effective date of the change in the laws. This allows us to have data on births
at least one year before and after the change in MML laws. Data on births occurring from the true
effective date were dropped from the sample to avoid contaminating the test with the truly treated
period. Then, we estimated equation (1) 1,000 times where at each time the treatment indicator,
MMLst, was defined according to the placebo dates. Summary statistics from the distribution of the
placebo treatments are presented in Panel B of Tables 7 and 8. We find that these placebo dates do
not capture any effect for the policy change. The estimated effects are small and statistically


                                                  22
insignificant at any conventional level, and were positive and statistically significant at the 10
percent level only 65 times for sex frequency and 108 times for fertility out of 1,000 replications.
       In appendix Table A-2 we also test for the sensitivity of the fertility results to using state
instead of county fixed effect as well as the exclusion of linear trends. Notably, when we do not
include state-linear trends the coefficient estimate is virtually identical to our preferred
specification, though the standard errors are substantially larger. We interpret this as there being
linear trends over time across in sex and fertility that are explained by linear trends that are not
related to the laws but help substantially with provision. Regardless, after including county fixed
effects, the coefficient on MMLs becomes very stable to the inclusion of additional covariates (as
shown in Table 3). This reinforces that county fixed effects absorb some important heterogeneity
and reinforces our decision to include those in our main specification.
       Finally, we find evidence of heterogeneous effects of MMLs between different
demographic groups. Table A-3 presents these results. As shown in Panel A, MMLs has a
statistically and economically significant effect across groups identified by marital status.
However, the impact of MMLs is more strongly observed among unmarried individuals, with the
overall effect being 4.3% over the mean birth rate for this subgroup. Alternatively, of the 5.7 births
from an MML for every 10,000 women, 3.7 of them are from unmarried mothers. However, this
does not mean that these births are necessarily “unwanted” as the rate of out of wedlock births has
been increasing in recent years suggesting that the “marginal birth” in the US is to an unmarried
mother. Heterogeneous effects by racial group show that whites exhibit a stronger fertility
response than blacks; with an increase of 4%. Hispanics exhibit a stronger response than non-
Hispanics with an increase of 3.7%. Lastly, we can’t rule out any differences across education
groups, though the coefficient on MMLs for college educated mothers is negative (but imprecisely
estimated).


6. Recreational Spillovers

       Despite the fact that we focus on medical marijuana laws, which covers a very narrow
segment of the population, we find that the related impacts on the overall population are rather
large. This raises the issue of the extent to which marijuana that was originally authorized for
medical purposes is spilling over to other segments of the population. To get a sense of this, we
first calculate the population of our treated states and their number of medical marijuana patients


                                                 23
in 2014. We choose 2014 as this is the last year of our sample and therefore represents a reasonable
approximation of our post period. Using the treatment effect of 4 births per 10,000 women we
calculate the number of additional births in these states from MMLs. Under the assumption that
all of the births are due to the population of legal medical marijuana patients this would imply a
treatment on the treated birth rate, which represents 76 births per 1,000 women. This is a rate that
is 4.6 times larger than the general birth rate in the US population.34 Put it in a different way, if all
of these births are due to non-medical marijuana users who, somehow, were able to obtain cannabis
from medical users we find that for every 100 medical marijuana users 7 individuals are able to
both divert cannabis to non-medical use and pregnancy results. Therefore, it seems likely our
results are largely driven by recreational use.

        While early adopters, such as California, Colorado, Oregon, and Washington had relatively
little monitoring of the supply and related mechanisms, late adopters put in more strict restrictions
that, it was believed, left little room for potential spillovers to non-medical use (Anderson and
Rees, 2014, 2014a). However, recent studies that also exploited variation in the laws for late
adopters find evidence of significant spillover effects (Wen et al., 2015; Choi et al., 2018).35 Our
findings, do not appear to be spurious given their consistency across the board and in particular
given the very strong evidence provided above that there are very significant first stage effects that
parallel our fertility findings that show that marijuana laws do spill over to non-medical use, at
least for the population of young adults in peak childbearing years. They are also consistent with
findings in the medical literature. For instance, Hasin, et al (2017) show that illicit cannabis use
increased significantly more in states that passed medical marijuana laws than in other states and
that, in general, such laws have contributed to an increased prevalence of illicit cannabis use, which
has also resulted in a dramatic increase in cannabis-related health disorders.

        We argue that there are several mechanisms that further help explain the reason why
spillovers occur even if the medical supply has become more tightly regulated for late adopting
states. First, as tightly as laws are written, they are very difficult to enforce and monitor because
cannabis is highly transportable, which undermines many of the restrictions local governments
seek to impose on the distribution of the drug. Even if effective, the laws simply tend to displace


34
   We have a quarterly population of about 14 million people in our treated states, which in theory give birth almost
56,000 babies due to medical marijuana laws.
35
   Wen, et al. (2015) focus on the period 2004 to 2012 and Choi, et al, (2018) focus on the period 2002-2015.


                                                         24
activities onto more permissive jurisdictions nearby (Mikos, 2015, 2017). In fact, very recent
research on recreational marijuana highlights the issue of transportability (Hansen, et al., 2018;
Hao and Cowan, 2017).36 A second reason that helps explain our findings is marijuana potency,
which is consistent with our finding of increased sexual activity. As ElSohly et al., (2016) and
Sevigny, et al., (2014) show, marijuana potency has risen dramatically over the past two decades.
In particular, the latter find suggestive evidence that potency increased by a half percentage point
on average after legalization of medical marijuana and that legal allowances for retail dispensaries
had the strongest influence, significantly increasing potency by about one percentage point on
average. Along the same lines, Freeman, et al., (2018) show that cannabis potency is correlated
with the fact that the number of people entering specialist drug treatment for cannabis problems.
In particular, in their 16-year observational study, they find positive links between changes in
cannabis potency and first-time cannabis admissions to drug treatment. In addition to increased
sexual activity, transportability, and potency, it is reasonable to expect that factors such as social
acceptance of marijuana compounded by emboldened suppliers who tend to focus on the adult
population (Anderson et al., 2015) as well as perceptions that penalties and related enforcement
have become more lax for illegal possession by claiming medical use, and drastic price decrease
of marijuana on the black market (Anderson et al, 2013.) may likely play a role, too.


7. Summary and Conclusions
         There is widespread belief that the discoveries in the hard sciences are more credible than
those in the soft sciences. In this paper we argue that several first order research questions are best
addressed from an interdisciplinary perspective. We test this general idea by focusing on the causal
link between consumption of marijuana and fertility rates, a question that stands in the intersection
between the social and medical sciences. In fact, whereas this question has not been previously
addressed in the former it is a question in which the physiological literature has reached some


36
   Hansen, et al. (2018) measure trafficking with a natural experiment on recreational marijuana and find that
Washington retailers along the Oregon border experienced a 41 percent decline in sales immediately following
Oregon's market opening. In counties that are the closest crossing point the estimated decrease was a staggering 58
percent. They also find suggestive evidence that inter-state spillovers lead to health externalities. Similarly, Hao and
Cowan (2017) focus on the spillover effects of recreational marijuana legalization in Colorado and Washington on
neighboring states and finds that it causes a sharp increase in possession arrests in border counties of neighboring
states relative to non-border counties. They also show an increase in use in neighboring states relative to non-
neighboring states.


                                                          25
consensus. This makes an interdisciplinary approach particularly relevant given the potential
public policy implications.
        We answer this question by exploiting the differences in timing in the introduction of
medical marijuana laws among states, an uncontroversial methodological approach that has been
used in several recent papers that study the impact of marijuana use on different outcomes,
including domestic violence, alcohol consumption, traffic fatalities, and others. In fact, we believe
that by using this approach we are also better able to study the main driving behavioral mechanisms
that may cause cannabis use to increase fertility rates. We also believe that focusing on the
unintended consequences of the legalization of medical marijuana is important in of itself for at
least three reasons. First, medical marijuana is likely to be legalized by more states in the future.
Unlike legalization of recreational marijuana, passage of MMLs is more likely to occur in states
that do not necessarily have more liberal views towards drug use. Legalization of medical
marijuana is a first, albeit important step toward the legalization for recreational use. Finally, given
the potential extent of spillovers towards recreational use, the legalization for medical use has a
quasi-legalization effect, which helps predict the impact of future adoption of recreational
marijuana laws.37
        Overall, we find evidence that behavior may overcome physiological mechanisms, as we
find that the overall causal link between MMLS and fertility ends up being positive and
economically significant. The stated physiological link in the medical literature that asserts a
negative relationship is apparently dominated by positive behavioral changes in sexual activity. In
other words, the consumption of cannabis may produce changes in behavior that surpass the
hormonal changes detected in physiology to the extent that the overall impact on fertility may end
up being positive, not negative.
        The behavioral mechanisms that drive our findings are mainly two. We find that increased
intercourse and changes in perceived risk are both causal mechanisms that explain increased birth
rates in the population. In particular, our results show increased birth rates coupled with a higher
likelihood of having intercourse. We also find suggestive evidence that shows a decrease in
condom use and retail condom sales, which may be due to behavioral responses such as increased


37
   It should be noted that to our knowledge there are no datasets containing information on both sex and
drug use spanning across the adoption of recreational marijuana laws, which renders the study of medicinal
use as particularly useful.

                                                   26
attention to immediate hedonic effects of sexual contact, delayed discounting and ignoring costs
associated with risky sex. These findings are robust, as placebo, falsification tests, and event study
analysis confirm our causal interpretation of our findings between cannabis, fertility rates and the
main mechanisms identified.
       From a public policy perspective, we also raise some relevant issues. Our back-of-the-
envelope calculations show that the increase in births due to spillovers to non-medical users is
significant. Therefore, the public health implications are potentially large, particularly given the
fact that spillovers may impact some groups more than others. This may mean that cannabis use
results in increases on public health expenditures related to pregnancy, though this could be
balanced out by beneficial increases to the population growth, which has been “below the
replacement rate” in the United States and other developed countries. These effects may be
compounded by the fact that recreational cannabis may be further legalized in additional States to
the current ones. This finding brings to the fore not only the importance of better understanding
the fertility-related magnitudes that the legalization of recreational marijuana may bring in the near
future, but also other potential health-related negative (and positive) externalities derived from its
use, including stress and mental health related impacts, which interestingly have not been well
studied.




                                                 27
Figure 1 – Event Study. Having used marijuana in the past 4 weeks (2005-2011).




 Notes: The graph shows parameter estimates and 95% confidence interval for semesters before and after
 the change in MMLs from a regression that controls for all covariates: share of total county population
 by race, heritage, age, and educational achievement, unemployment rate together with the interactions
 between demographic variables and unemployment rate, state cigarette, beer tax, Medicaid expansion
 and abortion laws, as well as all interactions between each of the demographic and educational covariates.
 Furthermore, each regression also controls for state and year-quarter fixed effects, state-specific time
 trend, and for decriminalization and legalization of recreational marijuana consumption. The regression
 also includes individual-level covariates on demographic and educational attainment of respondents.
 Regression is weighted using sample weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                    28
Figure 2 – Event Study. Fertility: General Birth Rate (2005-2014).

              1.5      1
    Parameter Estimate
           .5 0
              -.5




                           <-6   -6   -5     -4    -3     -2  -1    0      1     2         3      >3
                                           Semesters since MMLs became effective


 Notes: The graph shows parameter estimates and 95% confidence interval for quarters before and after
 the change in MMLs from a regression that controls for all covariates: share of total county population
 by race, heritage, age, and educational achievement, unemployment rate together with the interactions
 between demographic variables and unemployment rate, state cigarette, beer tax, Medicaid expansion
 and abortion laws, as well as all interactions between each of the demographic and educational covariates.
 Furthermore, each regression also controls for state and year-quarter fixed effects, state-specific time
 trend, and for decriminalization and legalization of recreational marijuana consumption. Regression is
 weighted by total county population. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                         29
Figure 3 – Event Study. Sexual frequency in the past 4 weeks: Had sex at least once (2005-
2011).




 Notes: The graph shows parameter estimates and 95% confidence interval for semesters before and after
 the change in MMLs from a regression that controls for all covariates: share of total county population
 by race, heritage, age, and educational achievement, unemployment rate together with the interactions
 between demographic variables and unemployment rate, state cigarette, beer tax, Medicaid expansion
 and abortion laws, as well as all interactions between each of the demographic and educational covariates.
 Each regression also includes individual-level covariates on demographic and educational attainment of
 respondents. Furthermore, each regression also controls for state and year-quarter fixed effects, state-
 specific time trend, and for decriminalization and legalization of recreational marijuana consumption.
 Regression is weighted by survey sampling weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                    30
                                     Table 1 –Dates of Medical Marijuana Laws and Provisions, 2004-2014
 State                   Law becomes effective             Home                         Open first                              Legal Supply First             Non-
                                                         cultivation           Dispensary /treatment center                     Available in State            specific
                                                                                                                                                               pain
 Arizona                     April 14, 2011a                  Yes                        December 2012                        April 14, 2011                Yes
 Connecticut                 October 1, 2012                   No                       August 20, 2014b                     August 20, 2014                No
 Delaware                      July 1, 2011                    No                          --------------                      --------------               Yes
 D.C.                         July 27, 2010                    No                         July 30, 2013                       July 30, 2013                 No
 Illinois                    January 1, 2014                   No                          --------------                      --------------               No
 Maine                          --------------                -----                        March 2011                          --------------                ---
 Maryland                      June 1, 2014                    No                        not operational                     not operational                Yes
 Massachusetts               January 1, 2013                  Yes                          --------------                      Jan. 1, 2013                 No
 Michigan                   December 4, 2008                  Yes                          --------------                      Dec. 4, 2008                 Yes
 Minnesota                    May 30, 2014                     No                          --------------                      --------------               No
 New Hampshire                July 23, 2013                    No                          --------------                      --------------               Yes
 New Jersey                 October 1, 2010a                   No                       December 6, 2012                       Dec. 6, 2012                 Yes
 New Mexico                    July 1, 2007                   Yes                          June 2009c                          July 1, 2007                 No
 New York                      July 5, 2014                    No                          --------------                      --------------               No
 Oregon                         --------------                 ----                        March 2014                          --------------                ---
 Rhode Island                January 3, 2006                  Yes                        April 19, 2013                      January 3, 2006                Yes
 Vermont                       July 1, 2004                   Yes                           June 2013                          July 1, 2004                 Yesd
Notes: Home cultivation and Non-specific pain provisions become effective when the law becomes effective, unless otherwise stated. The “First supply” date is
the date legal supply of marijuana becomes available in the state and is assigned as either the first date of home cultivation or the first date that a dispensary becomes
open and active. Sometimes an MML first becomes enacted outside of our sample period even though it later passes a provision that occurs within our sample
timeline. In these cases, we mark the date or provision as “--------”, since we do not use this variation in our analysis. Dates for all Medical Marijuana Laws (MMLs)
and provisions are gathered from the Marijuana Policy Project (MPP): “State-by-State Medical Marijuana Laws Report and Medical Marijuana Program
Implementation Timelines”. Because of discrepancies between MPP and existing literature we rely on effective dates published in previous MMLs papers or other
sources: a Sabia et al (2017); Anderson et al (2013 and 2015); b Wen et al (2015). c DEA Position on Marijuana, US Dept. of Justice, July 2010; accessed September
2018 d Wen et al. (2015) reports 2007/07, so we assigned the law from this date. See the references for web hyperlinks.




                                                                                   31
Table 2 – Descriptive Statistics for Outcome Variables from Vital Statistics (2005-2014),
NLSY97 (2005-2011), and Condom Sales (2006-2014).
 Panel A: Vital Statistics, Fertility Rates        N. Obs.       Mean            Std.
  (per 1000 women of child bearing age)
 General                                             122,415        14.83           8.76
 Married                                             122,415          8.84          5.64
 Unmarried                                           122,415          6.00          3.89
 White                                               122,415        15.19           9.51
 Black                                               122,415        14.74          12.79
 Hispanic                                            122,415        19.56          17.08
 Not Hispanic                                        122,415        13.72           8.33

 Panel B: NLSY97
 Using Marijuana in the last 30 days                                      40,708            0.1499           0.3594
 Had sex more than once in the last 4 weeks                               38,193            0.6574           0.4746
 Had sex more than three times in the last 4 weeks                        38,193            0.5339           0.4989
 Percentage of condom use since last interview                             5,336            36.944           43.378
 Sex with stranger since last interview                                   40,651            0.0556           0.2292

 Panel C: Nielsen Scanner Data, Condom Sales
 County-quarter sales                                                     84,732      $215,110.5       $392,465.9
Notes: All means are weighted by sampling weights for the NLSY97 data and total county population for condom
sales and vital statistics. All the monetary data are in 2015 dollars. Fertility rates are based on number of women of
child bearing age (18-44) in a county/quarter. We do not have county level population counts by marital status and
age. Therefore, for marital status subgroup specific fertility rates we use total (female child bearing) population in
the denominator. Hence, these rates are mechanistically lower than the general fertility rate.




                                                          32
Table 3 – Medical Marijuana Laws on Marijuana Use (2005-2011).
                                              (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)

 Using in the past 30 days

 Any MML Effective                        0.0501**         0.0544**         0.0629***          0.0512**
                                          (0.0198)         (0.0232)          (0.0196)          (0.0239)

 Home cultivation                         0.0605**          0.0684*         0.0778***          0.0650**
                                          (0.0277)          (0.0346)         (0.0269)          (0.0296)

 Observations                               40,693           40,693           40,693            40,693
 Mean                                        0.15

 Demographic Controls                        YES              YES               YES              YES
 Unemployment Rate                           NO               YES               YES              YES
 State Policies                              NO               NO                YES              YES
 Individual FEs                              NO               NO                NO               YES

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. First enacted denotes the date the law became effective. Home
cultivation denotes the effective date for states where home cultivation is allowed. Each regression includes
county and year-quarter FEs, state-specific time trend, and controls for decriminalization and legalization
of recreational marijuana consumption. Demographic Controls: share of total county population by race,
heritage, age, and educational achievement. Unemployment Rate: unemployment rate together with the
interactions between demographic variables unemployment rate. State Policies: state cigarette and beer tax,
Medicaid expansion and abortion laws, and all interactions between each of the demographic and
educational covariates. Regressions are weighted using sample weights. Standard errors in all regressions
are clustered at the state level.




                                                     33
Table 4 --Medical Marijuana Laws on Fertility (2005-2014) and Sexual Behavior (2005-
2011).
                                     (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)
 Panel A: Fertility rate
 Any MML Effective                 0.403**         0.490***        0.537***
                                   (0.133)          (0.125)         (0.102)

 Home cultivation                 0.396***         0.513***        0.603***
                                   (0.102)          (0.138)         (0.132)

 Observations                      122,415          122,415         122,415
 Mean                               14.83

 Panel B: Had sex at
 least once
 Any MML Effective                 0.0318          0.0451**        0.0412**       0.0428**
                                  (0.0233)         (0.0207)        (0.0175)       (0.0211)

 Home cultivation                  0.0102            0.0282          0.0305         0.0300
                                  (0.0158)          (0.0214)        (0.0219)       (0.0203)
 Mean                              0.657

 Panel C: Had sex at
 least three times
 Any MML Effective                 0.0208           0.0244*         0.0225*         0.0240
                                  (0.0131)          (0.0127)        (0.0121)       (0.0186)

 Home cultivation                  0.0150            0.0187          0.0221         0.0252
                                  (0.0139)          (0.0161)        (0.0161)       (0.0225)
 Observations                      38,179            38,179          38,179         38,179
 Mean                              0.534

 Demographic Controls               YES               YES             YES            YES
 Unemployment Rate                  NO                YES             YES            YES
 State Policies                     NO                NO              YES            YES
 Individual FEs                     NO                NO              NO             YES
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. First enacted denotes the date the law became effective. Home
cultivation denotes the effective date for states where home cultivation is allowed. Each regression includes
county and year-quarter FEs, state-specific time trend, and controls for decriminalization and legalization
of recreational marijuana consumption. Panel A: regressions are weighted by total population of the county
by year. Panel B and C: each regression also includes individual-level covariates on demographic and
educational attainment of respondents and is weighted using sample weights. Standard errors in all
regressions are clustered at the state level.




                                                     34
Table 5 – Medical Marijuana Laws on Risky Sex.
                                              (1)                      (2)                   (3)

 Panel A: Condom Use since previous interview

 Any MML Effective                         0.00124                  -0.00552              -0.00971
                                           (0.0213)                 (0.0265)              (0.0419)
 Observations                               5,334                     5,334                 5,334
 Mean                                       0.369

 Panel B: Condom Sales

 Any MML Effective                        -0.0398*                 -0.0443**             -0.0363**
                                          (0.0202)                  (0.0196)              (0.0169)
 Observations                              84,732                    84,732                84,732
 Mean                                       10.73

 Panel C: Sex with Strangers since previous interview

 Any MML Effective                         0.00538                  0.00314               0.00768
                                           (0.0188)                 (0.0203)              (0.0220)
 Observations                               40,636                   40,636                40,636
 Mean                                       0.0556

 Demographic Controls                        YES                      YES                   YES
 Unemployment Rate                           NO                       YES                   YES
 State Policies                              NO                       NO                    YES

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. First enacted denotes the date the law became effective. Each
regression includes county and year-quarter FEs, state-specific time trend, and controls for
decriminalization and legalization of recreational marijuana consumption. Demographic Controls: share of
total county population by race, heritage, age, and educational achievement. Unemployment Rate:
unemployment rate together with the interactions between demographic variables unemployment rate. State
Policies: state cigarette and beer tax, and abortion laws, and all interactions between each of the
demographic and educational covariates. State linear time trends are dropped from the condom use
regressions due to the extremely small sample sizes. Panel A and C: each regression also includes
individual-level covariates on demographic and educational attainment of respondents. Regressions are
weighted using sample weights. Panel B: regressions are weighted by total population of the county by
year. Standard errors in all regressions are clustered at the state level.




                                                    35
Table 6 – Policy Heterogeneity in Medical Marijuana Laws on Fertility Rate (005-2014).
                                   (1)                     (2)                 (3)               (4)

 Home cultivation             0.603***                                                         0.415*
                               (0.132)                                                         (0.211)

 Dispensary Open                                         0.314**                              0.308**
                                                         (0.137)                              (0.136)

 Non-specific pain                                                            0.507             0.285
 Provision                                                                   (0.156)           (0.196)
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Each regression includes county and year-quarter FEs, state-
specific time trend, and controls for decriminalization and legalization of recreational marijuana
consumption. The title of each column denotes the specific included in the regression. In all specifications
we include the full set of demographic and state policy controls.




                                                    36
Table 7 – Robustness Checks for Sexual Frequency, Had sex at least once: Time Indicators /
Policy Reassignment.
                                                                        (1)                      (2)
 Panel A: Time Indicators

 Any MML Effective                                                   0.0487**                0.0407**
                                                                     (0.0146)                (0.0193)

 1 year before                                                        0.0146
                                                                     (0.0204)
 2 years before                                                                               -0.0034
                                                                                             (0.0211)

 Observations                                                         38,179                  38,179

 Panel B: Policy Reassignment, placebo dates

 Average placebo MML estimate                                         -0.0059
                                                                     (0.0300)

 Placebo coefficient > 0                                               416
 Placebo coefficient > 0 and significant at 5% level                    46
 Placebo coefficient > 0 and significant at 10% level                   65
 Observations                                                         36,775
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Each regression controls for all covariates: demographic controls,
unemployment rate and interactions, state policies and interactions, as well as individual-level covariates,
state, and year-quarter fixed effects, state-specific time trend, and for decriminalization and legalization of
recreational marijuana consumption. Regressions are weighted using sample weights. Standard errors in all
regressions are clustered at the state level.




                                                      37
Table 8 – Robustness Checks for General Fertility Rate: Time Indicators / Policy
Reassignment.
                                                                          (1)                  (2)
 Panel A: Time Indicators

 Any MML Effective                                                     0.525***            0.4536***
                                                                        (0.098)              (0.101)

 1 year before
                                                                         -0.105
                                                                        (0.072)
 3 years before                                                                               0.045
                                                                                             (0.089)

 Observations                                                          122,415              122,415

 Panel B: Policy Reassignment, placebo dates

 Average placebo MML estimate                                           0.0259
                                                                       (0.1073)

 Placebo coefficient > 0                                                 588
 Placebo coefficient > 0 and significant at 5% level                     72
 Placebo coefficient > 0 and significant at 10% level                    108
 Observations                                                          118,073

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Each regression controls for all covariates: demographic controls,
unemployment rate and interactions, state policies and interactions, as well as state and year-quarter fixed
effects, state-specific time trend, and for decriminalization and legalization of recreational marijuana
consumption. Regressions are weighted using sample weights. Standard errors in all regressions are
clustered at the state level. Regressions are weighted by total population of the county by year. Standard
errors in all regressions are clustered at the state level.




                                                    38
References

Almond, D., Hoynes, H.W. and Schanzenbach, D.W., 2011. Inside the war on poverty: The impact
       of food stamps on birth outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2), pp.387-
       403.
Anderson, D.M., B. Hansen, and D. Rees. (2015). “Medical marijuana laws and teen marijuana
       use.” American Law and Economics Review. 1 7(2), pp.495-528.
Anderson, B. and D. Rees (2014) “The Legalization of Recreational Marijuana: How Likely Is the
       Worst‐Case Scenario?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33, 1: 221-232
Anderson, B. and D. Rees (2014a) “The Role of the Dispensaries: The Devil is on the Details”,
       Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33, 1: 235-240
Anderson, D.M., B. Hansen, and D. Rees. (2013). "Medical Marijuana Laws, Traffic Fatalities,
       and Alcohol Consumption." The Journal of Law and Economics 56 (2): 333-369.
Anderson, B. J., and Stein, M. D. (2011). A behavioral decision model testing the association of
       marijuana use and sexual risk in young adult women. AIDS and Behavior, 15(4), 875-884.
Anderson, D.M., Rees, D.I. and Tekin, E., 2018. Medical marijuana laws and workplace fatalities
       in the United States. International Journal of Drug Policy, 60, pp.33-39.
Androvicova, R., J. Horacek, T. Stark, F. Drago, and V. Micale (2016) “Endocannabinoid system
       in sexual motivational processes: Is it a novel therapeutic horizon?” Pharmacological
       Research, 115: 200-208.
Baggio, M., Chong, A., and Kwon, S. (2017). Helping Settle the Marijuana and Alcohol Debate:
       Evidence from Scanner Data. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3063288 or
       http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3063288.
Bailey, Martha J. 2012. Reexamining the Impact of Family Planning Programs on US Fertility:
       Evidence from the War on Poverty and the Early Years of Title X. American Economic
       Journal: Applied Economics, 4 (2): 62-97.
Bailey, S., Camlin, C., and Ennett, S. (1998). Substance use and risky sexual behavior among
       homeless and runaway youth. Journal of Adolescent Health, 23(6), 378-388.
Barreca, Allan, Deschenes, O, and Guldi M. (2015). NBER Working Paper No. 21681.
Bari, M., N. Battista, V. Pirazzi, and M. Maccarrone (2011) “The manifold actions of
       endocannabinoids on female and male reproductive events”, Frontiers in Bioscience
       (Landmark Edition), 16: 498-516.
Brook, J., Adams, R., Balka, E. B., and Whiteman, M. (2004). Illicit drug use and risky sexual
       behavior among African American and Puerto Rican urban adolescents: The longitudinal
       links. The Journal of Genetic Psychology, 165(2), 203.
Canseco Alba, Ana, and Gabriela Rodríguez Manzo (2013). Anandamide transforms
       non-copulating rats into sexually active animals. The journal of sexual medicine 10.3
       (2013): 686-693.
Cavazos-Rehg, P. A., Krauss, M. J., Spitznagel, E. L., Schootman, M., Cottler, L. B., and Bierut,
        L. J. (2011). Substance use and the risk for sexual intercourse with and without a history
       of teenage pregnancy among adolescent females. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs,
       72(2), 194-198.
Choi, A., Dave, D. and Sabia, J.J., 2018. Smoke Gets in Your Eyes: Medical Marijuana Laws and
       Tobacco Cigarette Use. American Journal of Health Economics, (Forthcoming), pp.1-44.
Close, C. E., Roberts, P. L., and Berger, R. E. (1990). Cigarettes, alcohol and marijuana are related
       to pyospermia in infertile men. The Journal of Urology, 144(4), 900-903.


                                                 39
Cooper, M. L. (2006). Does drinking promote risky sexual behavior? A complex answer to a
       simple question. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15(1), 19-23.
Cooper, M. L., Skinner, J. B., and George, W. H. (1990). Alcohol use and sexual risk-taking among
       adolescents: methodological approaches for addressing causal issues. Progress in Clinical
       and Biological Research, 325, 11.
Crost, Benjamin and Santiago Guerrero. 2012. "The Effect of Alcohol Availability on Marijuana
       use: Evidence from the Minimum Legal Drinking Age." Journal of Health Economics 31
       (1): 112-121.
du Plessis, S. S., Agarwal, A., and Syriac, A. (2015). Marijuana, phytocannabinoids, the
       endocannabinoid system, and male fertility. Journal of assisted reproduction and
       genetics, 32(11), 1575-1588.
Earleywine, M. (2002). Understanding marijuana: A new look at the scientific evidence. Oxford
       University Press.
ElSohly, M., Z. Mehmedic, S. Foster, C. Gon, S. Chandra, and J. Church (2016) “Changes in
       Cannabis Potency over the Last Two Decades (1995-2014) - Analysis of Current Data in
       the United States”, Biological Psychiatry, 79, 7: 613-19.
Fairman, B.J. (2016). Trends in registered medical marijuana participation across 13 US states and
       District of Columbia. Drug & Alcohol Dependence, 159, pp.72-79.
Feingold, D., M. Weiser, J. Rehm, and S. Lev-Ran (2016) “The association between cannabis use
       and anxiety disorders: Results from a population-based representative sample”, European
       Neuropsychopharmacology, 26, 3: 493-505
Freeman T., P. van der Pol, W. Kuijpers, R. Das, S. Rigter, M. van Laar, P. Griffiths, W. Swift, R.
       Niesink, and M. Lynskey (2018) “Changes in cannabis potency and first-time admissions
       to drug treatment: a 16-year study in the Netherlands”, Psychological Medicine, 31:1-7
Fronczak, C., Kim, E., and Barqawi A. (2012) “The Insults of Illicit Drug Use on Male Fertility”,
       Journal of Andrology, 33, 4: 515-528
Gavrilova, E., Kamada, T., and Zoutman F, (2014). “Is Legal Pot Crippling Mexican Drug
       Trafficking Organizations? The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on US Crime.” The
       Economic Journal.
George, O., and Koob, G. F. (2010). Individual differences in prefrontal cortex function and the
       transition from drug use to drug dependence. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews,
       35(2), 232-247.
Gorzalka, Boris B., Matthew N. Hill, and Sabrina CH Chang (2010). "Male–female differences in
       the effects of cannabinoids on sexual behavior and gonadal hormone function." Hormones
       and behavior 58.1 (2010): 91-99.
Green, B. O. B., Kavanagh, D., and Young, R. (2003). Being stoned: A review of self-reported
       cannabis effects. Drug and Alcohol Review, 22(4), 453-460.
Grossman, M., Kaestner, R., and Markowitz, S. (2004). Get high and get stupid: The effect of
       alcohol and marijuana use on teen sexual behavior. Review of Economics of the Household,
       2(4), 413-441.
Gundersen, T. D., Jørgensen, N., Andersson, A. M., Bang, A. K., Nordkap, L., Skakkebæk, N. E.,
       ... and Jensen, T. K. (2015). Association between use of marijuana and male reproductive
       hormones and semen quality: a study among 1,215 healthy young men. American journal
       of epidemiology, 182(6), 473-481.




                                                40
Guo, J., Chung, I. J., Hill, K. G., Hawkins, J. D., Catalano, R. F., and Abbott, R. D. (2002).
        Developmental relationships between adolescent substance use and risky sexual behavior
        in young adulthood. Journal of Adolescent Health, 31(4), 354-362.
Haney, M., Ward, A., Comer, D., Foltin, W., and Fischman, W. (1999). Abstinence symptoms
        following smoked marijuana in humans. Psychopharmacology, 141(4), 395-404.
Hansen, B., K. Miller and C. Weber (2018) “The Grass is Greener on the Other Side: How
        Extensive is the Interstate Trafficking of Recreational Marijuana?” NBER Working Paper
        23762, Cambridge, MA.
Hao, Z and B. Cowan (2017) “The Cross-Border Spillover Effects of Recreational Marijuana
        Legalization” NBER Working Paper 23426, Cambridge, MA.
Hasin, D., A. Sarvet, M. Cerdá, K. Keyes, M. Stohl, S. Galea, and M. Wall (2017) “US Adult Illicit
        Cannabis Use, Cannabis Use Disorder, and Medical Marijuana Laws: 1991-1992 to 2012-
        2013”, JAMA Psychiatry, 74, 6: 579-588.
Heil, H., Jones, E., Arria, A., Kaltenbach, K., Coyle, M., Fischer, G., and Martin, P. R. (2011).
        Unintended pregnancy in opioid-abusing women. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment,
        40(2), 199-202.
Hittner, J. B., and Kennington, L. E. (2008). Normative Perceptions, Substance Use, Age of
        Substance Use Initiation, and Gender as Predictors of HIV-Risky Sexual Behavior in a
        College Student Sample. Journal of Applied Biobehavioral Research, 13(2), 86-101.
Koff, Wayne C. "Marijuana and sexual activity (1974)." Journal of Sex Research 10.3 (1974):
        194-204.
Kelleher, L. M., Stough, C., Sergejew, A. A., and Rolfe, T. (2004). The effects of cannabis on
        information-processing speed. Addictive Behaviors, 29(6), 1213-1219.
Kingree, J. B., and Betz, H. (2003). Risky sexual behavior in relation to marijuana and alcohol use
        among African–American, male adolescent detainees and their female partners. Drug and
        Alcohol Dependence, 72(2), 197-203.
Kingree, J. B., and Phan, D. (2002). Marijuana use and unprotected sexual intercourse among
        adolescent detainees: An event analysis. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 29(6), 705-717
Jones, R.K. and Jerman, J., 2017. Abortion incidence and service availability in the United States,
        2014. Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 49(1), pp.17-27.
Jones, B.S., Daniel, S. and Cloud, L.K., 2018. State law approaches to facility regulation of
        abortion and other office interventions. American journal of public health, 108(4), pp.486-
        492.
Leigh, B. C., Vanslyke, J. G., Hoppe, M. J., Rainey, D. T., Morrison, D. M., and Gillmore, M. R.
        (2008). Drinking and condom use: Results from an event-based daily diary. AIDS and
        Behavior, 12(1), 104-112.
Lev-Ran, S., M. Roerecke, B. Le Foll, and T. George (2014) “The association between cannabis
        use and depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies,”
        Psychological Medicine, 44, 4: 797-810.
Marijuana Policy Project (2015). State-by-State Medical Marijuana Laws Report (with a
        December 2016 supplement). Accessible at https://www.mpp.org/issues/medical-
        marijuana/state-by-state-medical-marijuana-laws/state-by-state-medical-marijuana-laws-
        report/. Accessed last on September 2018.
Mikos R. (2015) “Marijuana Localism”, Case Western Law Review, 65: 719-769.




                                                41
Mikos, R. (2017) “Spillover Effects of Permissive Marijuana Laws: Lessons from Local Alcohol
        and Firearms Controls” In: Marijuana Law Policy and Authority, Aspen Casebook Series,
        Walters Kluwer, New York, NY.
Morokoff, P. J., Redding, C. A., Harlow, L. L., Cho, S., Rossi, J. S., Meier, K. S., and Brown-
        Peterside, P. (2009). Associations of sexual victimization, depression, and sexual
        assertiveness with unprotected sex: A test of the multifaceted model of HIV risk across
        gender. Journal of Applied Biobehavioral Research, 14(1), 30-54.
Pacey, A. A., Povey, A. C., Clyma, J. A., McNamee, R., Moore, H. D., Baillie, H., ... and
        Participating Centres of Chaps-UK. (2014). Modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors for
        poor sperm morphology. Human Reproduction, 29(8), 1629-1636.
Pacula, R. L. 1998. "Does Increasing the Beer Tax Reduce Marijuana Consumption?" Journal of
        Health Economics 17 (5): 557-585.
Pacula, R.L., Powell, D., Heaton, P. and Sevigny, E.L., 2015. Assessing the effects of medical
        marijuana laws on marijuana use: the devil is in the details. Journal of Policy Analysis and
        Management, 34(1), pp.7-31.
Palamar, J, P. Acosta, D. Ompad, S. Friedman, 2018, “A Qualitative Investigation Comparing
        Psychosocial and Physical Sexual Experiences Related to Alcohol and Marijuana Use
        among Adults”, Archives of Sexual Behavior, 47, 3: 757-770.
Powell, D., Pacula, R.L. and Jacobson, M., 2018. Do medical marijuana laws reduce addictions
        and deaths related to painkillers? Journal of Health Economics, 58, pp.29-42.
Ramrakha, S., Caspi, A., Dickson, N., Moffitt, T. E., and Paul, C. (2000). Psychiatric disorders
        and risky sexual behavior in young adulthood: cross sectional study in birth cohort. BMJ,
        321(7256), 263-266.
Rashad, I., and Kaestner, R. (2004). Teenage sex, drugs and alcohol use: problems identifying the
        cause of risky behaviors. Journal of Health Economics, 23(3), 493-503.
Rees, D. I., Argys, L. M., and Averett, S. L. (2001). New evidence on the relationship between
        substance use and adolescent sexual behavior. Journal of Health Economics, 20(5), 835-
        845.
Sabia, J.J., Swigert, J. and Young, T., 2017. The effect of medical marijuana laws on body weight.
        Health economics, 26(1), pp.6-34.
Sansone, A., Di Dato, C., de Angelis, C., Menafra, D., Pozza, C., Pivonello, R., and Gianfrilli, D.
        (2018). Smoke, alcohol and drug addiction and male fertility. Reproductive Biology and
        Endocrinology, 16(1), 3.
Sarvet, A., Wall, M., Fink, D., Greene, E., Le, A., Boustead, A., Pacula, R., Keyes, K., Cerdá,
        M., Galea, S. and Hasin, S. (2018) “Medical marijuana laws and adolescent marijuana use
        in the United States: A systematic review and meta-analysis”, Addiction, 1-14
Sevigni, E., R. L Pacula, and P. Heaton (2014) “The Effects of Medical Marijuana Laws on
        Potency” International Journal of Drug Policy, 25, 2: 308-19.
Schroder, K. E., Johnson, C. J., and Wiebe, J. S. (2009). An event-level analysis of condom use as
        a function of mood, alcohol use, and safer sex negotiations. Archives of Sexual Behavior,
        38(2), 283-289.
Sen, B. (2002). Does alcohol-use increase the risk of sexual intercourse among adolescents?
        Evidence from the NLSY97. Journal of Health Economics, 21(6), 1085-1093.
Shrier, L. A., Emans, S. J., Woods, E. R., and DuRant, R. H. (1997). The association of sexual risk
        behaviors and problem drug behaviors in high school students. Journal of Adolescent
        Health, 20(5), 377-383.


                                                42
Stoner, S. A., Norris, J., George, W. H., Morrison, D. M., Zawacki, T., Davis, K. C., and Hessler,
        D. M. (2008). Women's condom use assertiveness and sexual risk-taking: Effects of
        alcohol intoxication and adult victimization. Addictive Behaviors, 33(9), 1167-1176.
Subbaraman, Meenakshi S. (2016) “Substitution and Complementarity of Alcohol and Cannabis:
        A Review of the Literature”, Substance Use and Misuse, 51, 11: 1399-1414.
Sun, A. and Eisenberg, M. (2017) “Association Between Marijuana Use and Sexual Frequency in
        the United States: A Population-Based Study” Journal of Sexual Medicine, 14:1342–1347.
Tapert, S. F., Aarons, G. A., Sedlar, G. R., and Brown, S. A. (2001). Adolescent substance use and
        sexual risk-taking behavior. Journal of Adolescent Health, 28(3), 181-189.
Terplan, M., Hand, D. J., Hutchinson, M., Salisbury-Afshar, E., and Heil, S. H. (2015).
        Contraceptive use and method choice among women with opioid and other substance use
        disorders: a systematic review. Preventive medicine, 80, 23-31.
van Gelder, M. M., Reefhuis, J., Herron, A. M., Williams, M. L., and Roeleveld, N. (2011).
        Reproductive health characteristics of marijuana and cocaine users: Results from the 2002
        National Survey of Family Growth. Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health,
        43(3), 164-172.
Vangsness, L., Bry, B. H., and LaBouvie, E. W. (2005). Impulsivity, negative expectancies, and
        marijuana use: A test of the acquired preparedness model. Addictive Behaviors, 30(5),
        1071-1076.
Wen, Hefei, Jason M. Hockenberry, and Janet R. Cummings. 2015. "The Effect of Medical
        Marijuana Laws on Adolescent and Adult use of Marijuana, Alcohol, and Other
        Substances." Journal of Health Economics 42: 64-80. Yörük, Barış K. and Ceren Ertan
        Yörük. 2013. "The Impact of Minimum Legal Drinking Age Laws on Alcohol
        Consumption, Smoking, and Marijuana use Revisited." Journal of Health Economics 32
        (2): 477-479
Yörük, Barış K. and Ceren Ertan Yörük. 2011. "The Impact of Minimum Legal Drinking Age
        Laws on Alcohol Consumption, Smoking, and Marijuana use: Evidence from a Regression
        Discontinuity Design using Exact Date of Birth." Journal of Health Economics 30 (4): 740-
        752.
Zabin, LS and C Hayward. Adolescent Sexual Behavior and Childbearing. New York: Sage
        Publications, 1994




                                               43
Appendix Figures
Figure A1 – Event Study: Condom Sales (2006-2014).




Notes: The graph shows parameter estimates and 95% confidence interval for quarters before and after
the change in MMLs from a regression that controls for all covariates: share of total county population
by race, heritage, age, and educational achievement, unemployment rate together with the interactions
between demographic variables and unemployment rate, state cigarette, beer tax, Medicaid expansion
and abortion laws, as well as all interactions between each of the demographic and educational covariates.
Furthermore, each regression also controls for state and year-quarter fixed effects, state-specific time
trend, and for decriminalization and legalization of recreational marijuana consumption. Regression is
weighted by total county population. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                   44
Table A1 – Descriptive Statistics for Covariates
                                                                          N.         Mean             Std.
                                                                         Obs.
 Panel A: individual-level covariates NLSY (2005-2011)
 Black                                                                  40,828           0.157           0.364
 Male                                                                   40,828           0.513           0.499
 Dropout                                                                40,828           0.083           0.277
 High school                                                            40,828           0.581           0.493
 Higher education                                                       40,828           0.329           0.469

 Panel B: county-level covariates
 Total population                                                       31,402 1,100,279 1,904,628
 % Male                                                                 31,402      0.492      0.012
 % White                                                                31,402      0.795      0.149
 % Black                                                                31,402      0.136      0.133
 % Asian                                                                31,402      0.055      0.074
 % Other                                                                31,402      0.013      0.035
 % Hispanic                                                             31,402      0.161      0.165
 % Population 0-19 years old                                            31,402      0.269      0.031
 % Population 20-39 years old                                           31,402      0.270      0.041
 % Population 40-64 years old                                           31,402      0.329      0.029
 % Population 65- years old                                             31,402      0.132      0.036
 Unemployment rate                                                      31,402      7.007      2.700
 Median income                                                          31,402 $57,323.86 $15,085.28

 Panel C: state-level covariates
 % Dropout                                                                 510           0.119           0.029
 % High school                                                             510           0.308           0.051
 % Some college                                                            510           0.284           0.032
 % College                                                                 510           0.288           0.051
 Decriminalized                                                            510           0.352           0.477
 Legalized                                                                 510           0.007           0.085
 Cigarette tax                                                             510           1.249           0.876
 Beer tax                                                                  510           0.267           0.222
 Medicare expansion                                                        510           0.063           0.243
 TRAP AFL                                                                  510           0.086           0.281
 TRAP HR                                                                   510           0.220           0.414
 TRAP ASC                                                                  510           0.047           0.212



Notes: Weighted by total county population. Individual level covariates are from the NLSY97 and are weighted by
sampling weights. All the monetary data are in 2015 dollars.



                                                       45
Table A2 – Fertility Results: Sensitivity to Different Fixed Effect (FE) Specifications.
                                           (1)                     (2)                        (3)


 Any MML Effective                       0.562                  0.746***                   0.537***
                                        (0.420)                  (0.221)                   (0.102)

 Observations                           122,415                 122,415                    122,415
 Birth Rate (mean)                       14.83

 State FE                                 YES                     YES                        NO
 State linear Trends                      NO                      YES                        YES
 County FE                                NO                      NO                         YES


Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Outcome variable is general birth rate. Each regression controls for
all covariates: share of total county population by race, heritage, age, and educational achievement,
unemployment rate together with the interactions between demographic variables and unemployment rate,
state cigarette, beer tax, Medicaid expansion and abortion laws, as well as all interactions between each of
the demographic and educational covariates. Furthermore, each regression also controls for
decriminalization and legalization of recreational marijuana consumption. The title of each column denotes
the specific controls that are added to the regression. Regressions are weighted by total population of the
county by year. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                    46
Table A3 – Heterogeneity. Subgroup-Specific Fertility Rates.

 Panel A:
 Marital Status
                              Whole             Unmarried             Married
                            Population

 MML=1                       0.537***             0.370**             0.167*
                              (0.102)             (0.086)             (0.101)
 Observations                 122,415             122,415             122,415
 Birth Rate (mean)             14.83                5.99               8.84

 Panel B:                      White               Black              Hispanic          Not Hispanic
 Race/Ethnicity

 MML=1                       0.640***              0.352              0.717**              0.317**
                              (0.114)             (0.346)             (0.260)              (0.127)
 Observations                 122,415             122,415             122,415              122,415
 Birth Rate (mean)             15.19               14.74               19.56                13.72


 Panel C:                  High School         High School             Some                College
 Education                  Dropouts                                  College

 MML=1                         0.272               0.288               0.149                -0.342
                              (0.184)             (0.278)             (0.299)              (0.369)
 Observations                 122,415             122,415             122,415              122,415
 Birth Rate (mean)             2.60                3.64                3.68                  3.73

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Each regression controls for all covariates: share of total county
population by race, heritage, age, and educational achievement, unemployment rate together with the
interactions between demographic variables and unemployment rate, state cigarette, beer tax, Medicaid
expansion and abortion laws, as well as all interactions between each of the demographic and educational
covariates. Furthermore, each regression also controls for state and year-quarter FEs, state-specific time
trend, and for decriminalization and legalization of recreational marijuana consumption. Regressions are
weighted by total population of the county by year. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                   47
