                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  ELECTORAL SYSTEMS AND INEQUALITIES IN GOVERNMENT INTERVENTIONS

                                       Garance Genicot ⓡ
                                       Laurent Bouton ⓡ
                                       Micael Castanheira

                                       Working Paper 25205
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25205


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2018




We benefited from comments by Patrick Francois, Leyla Karakas, Alessandro Lizzeri, Dilip
Mookherjee, Massimo Morelli, Nicola Persico, and Debraj Ray, as well as seminar and
conference participants at Princeton, Georgetown, MSU, Texas A&M, UBC, Bocconi, Collegio
Carlo Alberto, EUI, TSE, ETH Zurich, Copenhagen, CERGE-EI, Cornell PE Conference 2018,
ThReD Conference 2018, Quebec PE Conference 2018, POLECON UK 2nd Annual Workshop,
CORE Belgian-Japanese Public Finance Workshop, and the 13th Conference on Economic
Growth and Development. We are grateful to Dario Sansone for excellent research assistance.
Names are in random order following Ray ⓡ Robson 2018. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25205.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Garance Genicot, Laurent Bouton, and Micael Castanheira. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Electoral Systems and Inequalities in Government Interventions
Garance Genicot ⓡ Laurent Bouton ⓡ Micael Castanheira
NBER Working Paper No. 25205
October 2018
JEL No. D72,H00

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies the political determinants of inequality in government interventions under the
majoritarian and proportional representation systems. Using a model of electoral competition
with targetable government intervention and heterogeneous localities, we uncover a novel relative
electoral sensitivity effect in majoritarian systems. This effect, which depends on the geographic
distribution of voters, can incentivize parties to allocate resources more equally under
majoritarian systems than proportional representation systems. This contrasts with the
conventional wisdom that government interventions are more unequal in majoritarian systems.


Garance Genicot                                 Micael Castanheira
Georgetown University                           ECARES, ULB CP 114
Department of Economics                         50 Av. F.D. Roosevelt
37th & O Streets, NW                            1050 Brussels, Belgium
Washington, DC 20057                            micael.casta@gmail.com
and NBER
gg58@georgetown.edu

Laurent Bouton
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
37th & O Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20057
and CEPR
and also NBER
boutonllj@gmail.com
1       Introduction

Government interventions are fraught with inequalities. Substantial geographic in-
equalities have been documented both in terms of quantity and quality of pub-
lic goods and services (Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly (1999), Banerjee, Iyer, and
Somanathan (2008), World Bank (2004)) and taxation (Albouy (2009), Troiano
(2017)). A large empirical literature on distributive politics highlights the impor-
tance of political factors. These factors include the apportionment of constituencies
(Ansolabehere, Gerber, and Snyder (2002)); their electoral contestability (Strömberg
(2008)); and voters’ characteristics such as turnout (Martin (2003), Strömberg
(2004)), information (Besley and Burgess (2002), Strömberg (2004)), the presence of
core supporters (or co-ethnics) of the candidate/party (Schady (2000), Hodler and
Raschky (2014)), and their responsiveness to electoral promises (Johansson (2003),
Strömberg (2008)). Overall, the political distortions of government interventions
appear substantial: For instance, using Brazilian data, Finan and Mazzocco (2016)
estimate that 25 percent of public funds allocated by legislators are distorted relative
to the socially optimal allocation.

This paper studies the political determinants of inequalities in government inter-
ventions under Majoritarian (maj) and Proportional Representation (pr) systems.1
These systems are ubiquitous: 82 percent of legislative elections held in the 2000s
employed either maj or pr (Bormann and Golder (2013)).

The conventional wisdom is that maj systems are more conducive to inequality,
because they provide steeper incentives for targeting government interventions onto
specific groups (Persson and Tabellini (1999, 2000); Persson (2002); Lizzeri and Per-
sico (2001); Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti, and Rostagno (2002); Grossman and Helpman


    1
     In maj systems, there are a multitude of electoral districts that each select a limited number
of representatives using some winner-take-all method. The epitome of those systems is the version
with single-member districts and first-past-the-post voting. In pr systems, there are fewer electoral
districts that each select at least two representatives, more or less in proportion to the vote shares
of each party. The epitome of pr systems is the version with a single nationwide electoral district.

                                                  1
(2005)). This view is based on multiple theoretical arguments (see Section 2 for
details). One of the most powerful is that of Lizzeri and Persico (2001): In maj,
parties only need fifty percent of the votes in fifty percent of the electoral districts
to win a majority of seats in the national assembly. By contrast, they need fifty
percent of all votes in pr systems, doubling the number of votes required to hold a
majority of seats. Similar arguments lie at the core of a literature in trade, arguing
that countries with maj systems are more likely to impose targeted trade barriers
to favor specific regions. Instead, countries with pr systems are more likely to have
free trade (Rogowski (1987) and Grossman and Helpman (2005)).

However, this view overlooks another important difference: The geographic distri-
bution of voters matters differently in the two systems. In maj systems, parties
must win in different electoral districts in order to win multiple seats. Paraphrasing
Lizzeri and Persico (2001), they need to win fifty percent of the votes in at least
fifty percent of the districts. This geographical constraint is largely absent in pr
systems: Additional votes from any location help a party win more seats in the
national assembly.

Taking account of the geographical distribution of voters uncovers a relative electoral
sensitivity effect present only in maj systems. We identify conditions under which
this effect induces parties to “sprinkle” resources across districts, resulting in lower
inequalities in government intervention in maj systems than in pr ones. These
findings shed a new light on the mixed empirical evidence in the literature that
compares government interventions under those systems (see Section 2).

In our model of electoral competition, two parties compete by targeting governmen-
tal resources (cash transfers, goods, or services) to heterogeneous localities, poten-
tially smaller than electoral districts. Heterogeneity is multidimensional: Localities
may differ in population size, turnout rate, and swingness.2 Together, these dimen-

   2
     In practice, there can be substantial variations across localities in each of these dimensions.
For instance, Stashko (2018) shows that, in 2012, U.S. counties had a mean population size of
99,970, with a standard deviation of 319,922. She also identifies substantial variation in turnout:

                                                 2
sions determine the electoral sensitivity of a locality. The objective of parties is
identical across systems, implying that the difference between maj and pr stems
only from how votes translate into seats.3 In pr, the number of seats won by a party
is proportional to its nationwide vote share. In maj, there are several single-member
districts. To win a district’s seat, a party needs to obtain at least 50% of the votes
from the localities that compose that district.

We first characterize the allocation of government resources under each system. We
show that pr creates an incentive to allocate more resources to localities that are
more electorally sensitive (e.g., with higher turnout), independent of their location.
In maj, parties must instead accumulate victories in different districts to increase
their seat share. This has several implications. First, parties have incentives to
discriminate against localities in non- (or barely) contestable districts. It is this
mechanism that drives the standard result in the existing literature. Second, for
a given level of district contestability, parties have incentives to allocate more re-
sources to localities with higher relative electoral sensitivity, as compared to the
other localities in the same district. We find that, as a consequence, parties may
“sprinkle” governmental resources over more localities than in pr.

How do these differences determine the eventual level of inequality in government
interventions? We consider two different perspectives. First, we consider the impli-
cations in terms of horizontal inequality: how government intervention differs across
localities with identical characteristics. We find that the relative electoral sensitivity
effect reinforces horizontal inequality under maj. This feature is in line with the
existing literature. Second, we focus on vertical inequality: how government inter-
vention differs across localities with different characteristics. Here, we find that the
standard result in the literature can actually be reversed: maj may end up producing
less vertical inequality than pr. This typically happens when contestability effects

in 2010, the mean turnout was 0.38 with a standard deviation of 0.15.
   3
     The main model focuses on the case in which parties maximize their share of seats in the
national assembly. In the extensions, we consider parties that maximize their probability of winning
at least fifty percent of the seats.

                                                 3
are weak, and localities are more similar within a district than between districts.

However, all inequalities need not be socially undesirable. The Samuelson condition,
for instance, requires that more populated localities receive higher levels of public
goods. To determine which system produces the least politically distorted alloca-
tions, we develop a welfare-based measure of inequality in government interventions
a la Atkinson. Using that measure, we identify conditions under which either pr or
maj produces more socially undesirable inequalities. These conditions depend on
the heterogeneity of within- and between-district levels of electoral sensitivities and
on district contestabilities.

Section 6 explores various extensions of the model. The first one studies the effect
of the electoral system on the composition of government spending (pure targeted
transfers vs. global public good). This allows us to revisit Lizzeri and Persico (2001)
and show that its conclusion can be overturned by the relative electoral sensitivity
effect. The second extension shows that our results are robust to a modification in
the parties’ objective. Parties can either maximize their share of seats in the national
assembly, or their probability of winning a majority of seats. The third extension
studies pr systems in which each electoral district carries a pre-determined seat
share. Except for the influence of turnout, our results for pr with a nationwide
district extend to those alternative systems. The last extension shows how other
dimensions of heterogeneity among voters would affect the electoral sensitivity of
localities.

Finally, Section 7 concludes with a discussion of the implications of the relative
electoral sensitivity effect for the empirical literature on distributive politics.




                                            4
2     Related Literature

Our paper contributes to the literature on distributive politics, which studies the
allocation of governmental resources to various subsets of the population. Within
that literature, our work more closely relates to studies of the effects of electoral
systems. As already mentioned, a recurrent theme in this literature is that parties
want to target a smaller fraction of the population in maj systems than in pr ones.
There are various mechanisms that produce this outcome. We already mentioned
the fifty-of-fifty percent mechanism (Lizzeri and Persico (2001)), which becomes
fifty-of-at-least-fifty percent in the presence of heterogeneity at the locality level.

Another mechanism highlights the importance of district contestability (the likeli-
hood that electoral promises change which party wins a district) in maj systems.
Persson and Tabellini (1999, 2000) and Persson (2002) show that parties target the
most contestable districts. As long as there are voters to be swung all over the
country, such incentives do not exist in pr systems. Building up on that mecha-
nism, Strömberg (2008) highlights the importance of the pivotability of a district
in the national assembly – i.e., the likelihood that the identity of the party holding
a majority of seats will change. Parties have incentives to target districts that are
both contestable and pivotal. Our model captures those different incentives.

Grossman and Helpman (2005) highlights the importance of bargaining between
party leaders (who care about national welfare) and legislators (who care about
the welfare of their constituents). In pr systems, legislators have a national con-
stituency. Their incentives are therefore aligned with those of party leaders, which
means they do not geographically target policies. By contrast, in maj systems, leg-
islators’ constituencies are geographically determined, hence the tension with party
leaders. As soon as legislators have bargaining power, this leads to more geographi-
cally targeted policies than under pr systems. This mechanism, which is related to
Rogowski (1987), is absent from our model.



                                            5
Rogowski and Kayser (2002) points to the seats-votes elasticity as a key factor
influencing the targeting of government interventions. When elasticity is higher,
parties have stronger incentives to target groups that can deliver many votes at the
margin. Given that maj systems have a higher seats-votes elasticity than pr systems
(Taagepera and Shugart (1989)), there should be more targeting toward electorally
responsive groups under maj systems. We could view our results as refining this
prediction. We microfound the electoral sensitivity of localities and show how it
differentially affects government interventions under maj and pr systems.

There is a large empirical literature comparing maj and pr systems. This literature
can be divided into two strands.4 The first relies on government accounts and has to
make assumptions about which items can reasonably be thought to represent broad
public goods as opposed to targeted transfers. Using cross-country regressions, most
of these studies find that pr systems are associated with lower levels of spending
classified as targeted and higher levels of spending classified as universal (Persson
and Tabellini (1999, 2000); Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti, and Rostagno (2002); Blume
et al. (2009); Funk and Gathmann (2013)). One exception is Aidt, Dutta, and
Loukoianova (2006), which studies the changes from maj to pr rules that took
place in 10 European countries between 1830 and 1938. It finds that these led to a
decrease in spending classified as universal.

The second strand focuses on trade policies. These studies compare trade barriers
in maj and pr systems. The interpretation is that trade barriers are targeted trans-
fers. The empirical evidence is mixed: Using cross-country regressions, a number of
studies find that maj countries are more protectionist (Evans (2009); Hatfield and
Hauk (2014); Rickard (2012)), while others find more protectionism in pr countries
(Mansfield and Busch (1995); Rogowski and Kayser (2002); Chang, Kayser, and Ro-
gowski (2008); Betz (2017)). The difference seems to originate in the type of trade

   4
     At least two studies do not fit that nomenclature, because they focus on the behavior of
individual politicians instead of the behavior of the parties controlling the government budget.
These are (i ) Gagliarducci, Nannicini, and Naticchioni (2011), which uses Italian data, and (ii )
Stratmann and Baur (2002), which uses German data.

                                                6
barriers considered: Non-tariff barriers tend to be used more often in pr systems,
while tariffs tend to be used more heavily in maj systems.

There are a number of methodological challenges that remain unaddressed in these
studies. In particular, Keefer (2004) and Golden and Min (2013) have criticized
the arbitrary nature of the classification of expenditures as broad public goods or
targeted transfers. Moreover, these classifications happen to vary across studies,
and a given classification of government expenditures by type is unlikely to fit all
countries.5 Another issue is that such classifications rest on the assumption that
there exists such a thing as a “universal public good.” Instead (with some excep-
tions, such as nuclear deterrence), one is bound to admit that “public goods” are
targetable, geographically or otherwise. The key question, then, is to identify when
governments exploit their margin of action to target them in practice.6

To understand how these issues affect empirical findings, we have revisited Persson
and Tabellini (1999) and Blume et al. (2009) using a new measure of how encom-
passing, as opposed to targeted, governmental spending is. This measure is based
on the assessment of local experts. While obviously imperfect, it has the advantage
of (i ) not relying on the choices of the econometrician and (ii ) potentially taking
into account the specificities of the different countries in the sample. We find no
significant differences in how targeted government expenditures are between maj
and pr countries. The details of the analysis can be found in Appendix 2.

As mentioned in the Introduction, our relative electoral sensitivity effect sheds a
new light on this mixed empirical evidence. The theoretical literature provides at
least one other reason why pr systems may lead to more targeting of government

   5
     For instance, road expenditures are typically seen as targeted expenditures (“pork-barrel”) in
the US, but could be envisioned as broad public goods in small and/or developing countries.
   6
     Large-sample cross-country or panel analyses (see, e.g., Persson and Tabellini (2003), Iversen
and Soskice (2006), or Blume et al. (2009)) have typically avoided this problem. Only a few recent
analyses have looked at a much more granular level to measure how public goods are supplied
locally – e.g., between municipalities of a similar district (see, e.g., Azzimonti (2015); Blakeslee
(2015); Funk and Gathmann (2013); Gagliarducci, Nannicini, and Naticchioni (2011); Min (2015);
Strömberg (2008), and Golden and Min (2013) for a survey).

                                                 7
interventions: There are usually more parties in pr systems. And, as shown by
Cox (1990) and Myerson (1993), an increase in the number of parties should be
associated with the targeting of government interventions toward a narrower subset
of the electorate. The incentive to provide global public goods should thus also de-
crease (see Lizzeri and Persico (2005)). Using Indian data, Chhibber and Nooruddin
(2004) finds that the provision of public good decreases when the number of parties
increases, and conversely for the provision of club goods. Similar results emerge
in multi-country panel analyses such as Park and Jensen (2007), which focuses on
agricultural subsidies in OECD countries, or Castanheira, Nicodème, and Profeta
(2012), which focuses on tax reforms in EU countries.

Last but not least, Stashko (2018) provides evidence of the relevance of the relative
electoral sensitivity effect. After generalizing this effect to a setup in which localities
(“counties” in her model) can span multiple districts, she tests this effect using
data on US state governments and legislative elections. She finds that the effect is
statistically and economically significant: The amount received by a county depends
both on the electoral sensitivity of that county and the electoral sensitivity of other
counties in the same district.




3     The Model

In this section, we lay out our model of electoral competition. It is a standard
probabilistic voting model, in the tradition of Enelow and Hinich (1982); Lindbeck
and Weibull (1987); Dixit and Londregan (1996); Grossman and Helpman (1996);
Persson (2002); Strömberg (2004). Our model has two key features: (i) We allow for
targeting of government interventions at the sub-district level, and (ii) we consider
multidimensional voter heterogeneity.




                                            8
3.1     The Economy

Consider a country with a continuum of individuals of total mass 1. The population
                                                                P
is partitioned into localities l ∈ {1, 2....L} of size nl , s.t. l nl = 1. Each locality
belongs to an electoral district d ∈ {1, 2....D}.7

An elected government has to allocate a total budget y among the different localities.
We denote by ql the amount of government intervention per capita in locality l. The
intervention of the government is then summarized by q = {q1 , ..., qL }. This implies
that governmental resources can be targeted at a finer level than the electoral district
(except for the special case L = D, when there is exactly one locality per district).

We cover a variety of government interventions that range from pure local public
goods to pure transfers. The central difference between the types of government
interventions is the extent of the economies of scale with respect to population
size. With pure public goods, costs are independent of the number of individuals
who benefit from the intervention. In contrast, with pure transfers, costs are pro-
portional to the number of individuals who benefit. To also capture intermediate
situations, we assume that the cost of providing ql to the nl individuals in locality l
is: nαl ql , with α ∈ [0, 1]. The government’s aggregate budget constraint is thus:

                                          X
                                                nαl ql ≤ y,                                      (1)
                                            l


When α = 1, the government intervention is a pure transfer, and the budget con-
                 P
straint becomes:   l nl ql ≤ y. When α = 0, ql is a pure local public good, and the
                             P
budget constraint becomes l ql ≤ y.

Individuals of locality l have preferences ul (q) for the government intervention, with


   7
      We use the word “locality” to describe any sub-electoral district population group that can
be targeted within a district. We chose this term because governments often use geography to
target their interventions. But when feasible, they may also target additional subgroups – using,
for instance, gender, ethnic origin, or age criteria. Stashko (2018) considers the case of localities
split across districts.

                                                  9
∂ 2 ul (q)/∂ql2 < 0 < ∂ul (q)/∂ql – the function is strictly increasing and strictly
concave in ql . Moreover, we assume that ul (q) = u (ql ), meaning that government
interventions do not produce spillover across localities.



3.2    Normative Benchmark

Before introducing the structure of electoral competition, we establish the politics-
free benchmark. To maximize utility in the population, a social planner would:

                                   X                       X
                    max W(q) =           nl ul (q), s.t.       nαl ql = y.            (2)
                      q
                                     l                     l


The socially optimal allocation must satisfy the standard Samuelsonian conditions:

                                 ∂ul (q)
                                         = λSW nα−1
                                                l   ∀l,                               (3)
                                  ∂ql

where λSW is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the budget constraint.

It is important to note that, except for the limit case of pure transfers – i.e., ∀α < 1 –
the socially optimal allocation responds positively to population size in the locality.
This implies that the social optimum tolerates “vertical inequalities”: Individuals
in localities of different population sizes should benefit from different levels of gov-
ernment intervention. Electoral competition may, however, generate incentives that
lead to different patterns of government interventions.



3.3    Electoral Competition

We consider an election with two parties, A and B, that compete for seats in the
national assembly. We assume for now that their objective is to maximize their
expected number of seats. Section 6.2 further discusses this objective function and
covers the polar case in which they maximize their probability of winning.


                                            10
We contrast two different electoral systems: the proportional representation system
(pr henceforth), where seats are attributed in proportion to the fraction of national
votes garnered by each party, and the majoritarian system (maj henceforth), where
seats are proportional to the fraction of districts won by each party. In line with the
literature, we consider a “pure” majoritarian system, in which each electoral district
sends a single seat to the national assembly and the party with the most votes in a
district wins its seat.

To maximize their expected seat share, both parties simultaneously make a binding
budget proposal, qA and qB , that details the allocation of resources across localities.8
These proposals must satisfy the government budget constraint (1).

Beyond their population size, localities are heterogeneous in various dimensions.
They may differ in turnout rates, and/or the distribution of voter preferences, and
they may belong to different electoral districts. In Section 6.4, we show that the
model could include other dimensions of heterogeneity, such as information about
electoral promises, intensity of preferences, and partisanship.

Consider individual i in locality l. Because of eligibility constraints (e.g., age) or
other reasons (e.g., excessive cost of voting) she may, or may not, cast a valid vote on
election day. We denote by tl – for turnout – the exogenous probability with which
a randomly sampled individual in locality l actually casts a valid vote. Hence, out
of a local population size nl , the number of active voters is tl nl .9

Conditional on casting a valid ballot, and given the parties’ proposals, we assume
that individual i votes for party A if and only if:


                                       ∆ul (q) ≥ νi,l + δd ,                                     (4)


   8
     As explained in Golden and Min (2013, p.84): “Studies overwhelmingly find that incumbent
politicians are rewarded by voters for distributive allocations, and in particular for those that are
clientelistic and from which recipients can be excluded.”
   9
     We could also endogenize turnout, as in Lindbeck and Weibull (1987). As in their model, the
equilibrium allocations would not be substantially affected.

                                                 11
where ∆ul (q) := ul (qA ) − ul (qB ) is the policy component of the preferences, and
the shocks νi,l and δd capture all the political dimensions that do not belong to
the budget constraint (party-related scandals, foreign policy shocks, etc.) and/or
political preferences that are ex ante unknown to the parties, in the probabilistic
voting tradition. For simplicity and in line with Persson and Tabellini (1999, 2000),
we assume these shocks are uniformly distributed:
                                                                     
                         −1 1                             1          1
                νi,l ∼ U    ,            and δd ∼ U βd −     , βd +       .
                         2φl 2φl                         2γd        2γd

Hence, from the parties’ standpoint, each individual in a locality l has political pref-
erences that are the result of two random shocks.10 The first, νi,l , captures differences
in individual-specific preferences. These shocks are independent and identically dis-
tributed draws from a locality-specific distribution. The parameter φl (> 0), which
identifies the density of this distribution, is what is called the swingness of locality
l. The second shock, δd , captures district-level shifts in preferences. These shifts
represent the ex ante uncertainty faced by parties regarding their overall support in
the district. From an ex ante standpoint, they only know the district’s deterministic
bias βd in favor of (respectively against) B when positive (respectively negative) and
the density γd (> 0) of the distribution. We call γd the contestability of district d
because the probability that district d is within ε/2 of a tie is equal to γd ε.




4        Equilibrium Analysis

This section characterizes the unique pure strategy equilibrium under both pr and
maj, and discusses properties of the equilibrium allocations under the two systems.




    10
     For our purposes, adding locality-specific biases and/or a national shock would only complicate
the notation without adding insight.

                                                12
4.1     Preliminaries

For any given district shock δd , we can use equation (4) to identify the swing voter
in locality l:
                                  νl (q, δd ) ≡ ∆ul (q) − δd .

Voters to the left (resp. right) of that swing voter, i.e. with νi,l < (>) νl (q, δd ),
strictly prefer to vote A (B).

Throughout the paper, we assume that there are voters to be swung in all localities:

                                                                                         
Assumption 1 (Interior) For all q and δd , νl (q, δd ) ∈                − 2φ1 l , 2φ1 l       in all localities.


With this assumption (which is discussed in Appendix 1), locality-level vote shares
can be computed as:

                                             1
                             πl (q; δd ) =   2
                                                 + φl (∆ul (q) − δd ),                                      (5)


and the vote share of party B is therefore 1 − πl (q; δd ).



4.2     Proportional Representation System

Under pr, maximizing the expected share of seats in the national assembly is equiv-
alent to maximizing the country-wide expected vote share. This translates into the
following objective function for party A (see Appendix 1):

                                                  X tl nl
                     max         πpr   (q) =              πl (q; δd )
                 qA | l nα
                     P
                         l ql =y                      l
                                                        T
                                                        X sl
                                                  1
                                                                             
                                             =    2
                                                      +       ∆ul (q) − βd(l) ,                             (6)
                                                        l
                                                          T




                                                   13
             P
where T :=       k tk nk   is total turnout (the total number of votes) in the country, d(l)
is the district to which locality l belongs, and:


                                           sl := tl nl φl


is the electoral sensitivity of locality l.

The first order conditions are thus:
                                          
                                   ∂ul qA     T nαl P R
                                            =      λ , ∀l,                              (7)
                                     ∂qlA      sl

where λP R is the Lagrange multiplier of the budget constraint under PR. Following
the same steps for party B shows that qA = qB in equilibrium. We prove that there
exists a unique equilibrium in Appendix 1.

It follows that localities with higher electoral sensitivity benefit from more govern-
ment interventions. That is, they combine a large population, a high turnout, and a
more ideologically homogeneous population. Comparing these conditions with the
Samuelsonian conditions (3), we see that only the effect of population size nl is
identical. Any other component of electoral sensitivity introduces deviations from
the social optimum.



4.3     Majoritarian System

Under maj, maximizing the expected share of seats in the national assembly requires
the parties to maximize the number of districts won.

We first characterize a party’s vote share at the district level:

                                      X      tl nl
                    πd (q; δd ) =         P             πl (q; δd )
                                     l∈d   k∈d   t k nk
                                         X           s
                                  = 12 +      P l            (∆ul (q) − δd ),           (8)
                                         l∈d      k∈d tk nk



                                                14
which is thus a weighted average of the locality vote shares in that district, where
each locality is weighted by its number of valid ballots.

The probability that the party wins the district seat is the probability that this
share is at least fifty percent. We denote it by pd (q) := Pr (πd (q; δd ) ≥ 1/2). Using
(8), this becomes:
                                                                                 !
                                                        X
                                 pd (q) = Pr δd ≤             P sl         ∆ul (q) .            (9)
                                                                  j∈d sj
                                                        l∈d




To avoid corner solutions and ensure that payoffs are differentiable everywhere,
throughout the paper we assume that this probability is non-degenerate for any
allocation. In other words, we assume that all districts are contestable:11


Assumption 2 (Contestability) pd (q) ∈ (0, 1) , ∀d, q.


Appendix 1 identifies the parameter conditions needed for Assumption 2 to hold
and shows that party A’s objective function under maj can then be written as:
                                                           "                         #
                                                    1 X     X
                   maxα          πmaj (q) =   1
                                                  +     γd       P sl    ∆ul (q) − βd .        (10)
                                              2                   j∈d sj
            qA |
                   P
                    l nl ql =y                      D d      l∈d




The first order conditions are thus:
                                           
                                    ∂ul qA          P
                                                      j∈d(l) sj    nαl maj
                                             =                          λ  ∀l,                 (11)
                                      ∂qlA              sl
                                                                  γd(l)

where λmaj is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the budget constraint under
maj. As in pr, there is a unique pure strategy equilibrium with qA = qB .


  11
     Following Persson and Tabellini (1999) and Galasso and Nunnari (2018), we could also consider
some non-contestable districts. Non-contestable districts are such that, for any allocation, one of
the parties has a zero probability of winning – that is, pd (q) = 0 or pd (q) = 1 ∀q. By definition,
non-contestable districts cannot be swung, and therefore parties would not spend any of their
budget on localities belonging to such districts.

                                                        15
The key difference with pr is that the localities receiving a larger share of the
government budget are now the ones with a higher relative electoral sensitivity.
In other words, parties only compare their electoral sensitivity sl to the average
                                 P
sensitivity in the same district: l∈d(l) sj .



4.4       Comparing the Systems

In this section, we compare government interventions under maj and pr systems.
The following Theorem, which follows directly from Sections 4.2 and 4.3, forms the
basis of the comparison:


Theorem 1 In PR, ql ≷ ql0 iff sl n−α
                                  l  ≷ sl0 n−α
                                            l0 .               In MAJ, ql ≷ ql0 iff
         s n−α                    s 0 n−α
γd(l)   P l l        ≷   γd(l0 ) P l l0         .
         k∈d(l) sk                k∈d(l0 ) sk




Theorem 1 identifies key differences between the two systems. First, localities that
are electorally more sensitive are systematically better treated in pr. In contrast, in
maj, the electoral sensitivity of each locality is only assessed in comparison to that
of the other localities in its district: It is the relative electoral sensitivity that mat-
ters. Second, as already emphasized by the literature, maj introduces the distortion
that localities belonging to more contestable districts (high γd(l) ) receive a dispro-
portionately large share of the resources. Last, in the limit case of pure transfers,
the effects of local population size disappear, but the effects of (relative) turnout
and (relative) swingness remain.

Which of the two systems produces the highest level of inequality is thus far from
clear. To better identify the comparative properties of the two systems, we ana-
lyze two dimensions of inequality in turn. First, we consider horizontal inequality:
how government interventions differ across localities with identical characteristics.
Second, we turn to vertical inequality: how government interventions differ across
localities with different characteristics. Throughout, we focus on α = 0 (pure public
good), since it captures the essence of the results for all α < 1.

                                                    16
4.4.1   Horizontal Inequality


The most straightforward implication of Theorem 1 concerns the possible discrimi-
nation between two localities with the same characteristics. While they necessarily
receive the same allocation under pr, they may receive substantially different gov-
ernment interventions under maj. This can either be the result of different district
contestabilities or – and this is the novel effect identified here – because they are
surrounded by different localities in their respective districts.

We illustrate the latter effect with an example that builds on the case of CRRA
utility functions developed in Appendix 1. Table 1 considers utility functions u(ql ) =
√
  ql , and four localities grouped in two districts. To isolate the relative electoral
sensitivity effect, we assume that the districts have the same contestability: γ1 = γ2 .

Consider localities 2 and 3 in Table 1: they have the same electoral sensitivity sl ,
but they belong to two different districts. As shown in Theorem 1, they must receive
the same allocation under pr: 5.5% of the total budget in Table 1.


                 District   locality    Sensitivity (sl )        qlP R   qlM AJ

                     1         1                   0.5           1%       9%
                     1         2                    1            5.5%    36%
                     2         3                    1            5.5%     3%
                     2         4                    4            88%     52%
                Table 1: equilibrium allocations under pr and maj
                                               √
                                   (u(ql ) =       ql , α = 0)


The allocation is noticeably different under maj: It is strongly skewed towards
locality 2, which ends up receiving about 12 times more resources than locality
3, only because it is surrounded by other localities with different characteristics.
Locality 2 is the most sensitive in district 1. In district 2, however, locality 3 is
electorally less sensitive than locality 4. Following the adage that “in the land of
the blind, the one-eyed is king,” in maj, more governmental resources flow to locality

                                               17
2 than to locality 3.

Theorem 1 implies that there will generically be more horizontal inequality under
maj than pr. While this corroborates traditional results (see, e.g., Persson and
Tabellini (2000), Strömberg (2008)), the mechanism is different (relative sensiti-
tivites, instead of district contestabilities). Moreover, focusing on horizontal in-
equality overshadows the differences in treatment between localities with different
characteristics.



4.4.2   Vertical Inequality


To isolate how maj and pr affect vertical inequality, we focus again on the case of
equally contestable districts (γd = γ, ∀d). The differences between these localities
can only be their electoral sensitivity (sl ) and their relative electoral sensitivity
     P
(sl / k∈d(l) sk ). Theorem 1 tells us that, in pr, a locality with a higher sl always
receives a larger fraction of the government resources. In contrast, if districts consist
of localities that are electorally more homogeneous, then maj will tend to produce
less inequality.

Let us return to the example in Table 1 to illustrate: Under pr, locality 1 “competes”
directly with locality 4. Since it is electorally the least sensitive of the four localities,
it receives 88 times less than locality 4. Under maj, districts act as a fence that
insulate some localities from one another. Locality 1 only competes with locality 2,
and locality 3 only against locality 4. While this comes at a cost of some resources
for localities 3 and 4, it substantially benefits locality 1. Under maj, locality 1
receives only about 6 times less than locality 4. In this example, the Gini coefficient
of inequality is actually lower under maj than under pr.

To go beyond the example, consider the case in which each locality would form a
district by itself. There are then L districts, and all localities have a relative electoral
sensitivity equal to 1. As a consequence, they all receive the same level of government


                                             18
intervention as long as districts have the same contestability. Under pr, this would
only be true if sl = sl0 ∀l, l0 . In other words, with a fine level of districting or large
homogeneous districts, inequalities in government intervention may well disappear
completely under maj: It induces parties to sprinkle public interventions all over
the country.




5     Normative Analysis

We can conclude from the previous section that either system may create the largest
level of inequality, depending on the circumstances. However, looking at inequality
alone does not give us the full picture: not all inequalities are socially undesirable.

To measure the social cost of politically motivated distortions, we propose to build
on Atkinson (1970, 1983), who introduce a welfare-based measure of inequality. We
adapt his approach to derive a measure of inequality in government interventions
for the utilitarian social welfare function defined in equation (2).

Following Atkinson, we work under the assumption of CRRA preferences, with ρ(>
0) denoting individual risk aversion:
                                       
                                        ln(q ) if ρ = 1
                                               l
                              ul (q) =     1−ρ
                                        ql      if ρ 6= 1.
                                          1−ρ




Under these preferences, maximizing the social welfare function (2) implies that a
                                           1   P 1
locality l should receive a share σlSW = nlρ /( j njρ ) of the budget y (see Appendix
1). Denoting by W
                f (y) the indirect utility function that represents the result of the

planner’s maximization problem under budget y, we have:
                              
                                P
                               l nl ln(nl ) + ln(y) if ρ = 1
                              
                      W
                      f (y) =         1
                                         ρ
                                 P    ρ     y 1−ρ
                              
                                  l nl     1−ρ
                                                     if ρ 6= 1.



                                            19
We then contrast the level of welfare with the one that results from the actual allo-
cation of resources across localities, q. We denote that level by W(q). Generically,
the budget actually needed to reach that level of welfare can be reduced by reopti-
mizing the allocation q. This allows us to define y E as the smallest budget needed
to reach the level of social welfare W(q):


                                                f −1 (W(q))
                                      y E (q) = W


Following Atkinson’s approach, we use the comparison between y E and y to measure
inequality in government interventions:
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                          1 − y1 Πl (ql /nl )nl       if ρ = 1
                                                                    1
                            y E (q)
                                         
                                                                1−ρ
                 A(q) ≡ 1 −         =                                                    (12)
                               y             Pl nl (ql /y)!1−ρ 
                                      
                                      
                                       1 −  P 1 ρ                        if ρ 6= 1.
                                                        ρ
                                                    j nj
                                      



This is a measure of the social cost of politically motivated distortions: the fraction
of the budget that could be saved by improving the allocation of government inter-
ventions while maintaining welfare at a constant level. A(q) is 0 when the allocation
is fully efficient, and 1 when it is pure waste.
                                                                                         
Using this measure, we say that pr Atkinson-dominates maj when A qP R                        <
        
A qM AJ and vice versa. We show in Appendix 1 that:12


Lemma 1 pr Atkinson-dominates maj if and only if:

                                                                    1−ρ
                                                         γ    s        ρ
                                                        P d(l) l
                                1−ρ
                                           P
                                           l nl
                     P
                          nl (sl )
                                 ρ
                                                    k∈d(l) sk
                    Pl          1 1−ρ
                                      ≶                  ρ1 1−ρ for ρ ≷ 1,          (13)
                           (s  ) ρ        P      γd(k) sk
                         k   k                  P
                                               k        j∈d(k) sj




We can interpret each side of this inequality as the “score” of an electoral system

  12
       In Appendix 1, we also solve for the case where ρ = 1.

                                                   20
on the Atkinson scale. The higher the score, the lower the distortion. The left-
hand side is the score of pr, which only depends on the absolute sensitivity of each
locality. On the right-hand side, the score of maj depends on district contestability
and relative sensitivities within each district.

To gain further understanding, it is useful to consider specific scenarios. First,
consider the scenario in which all localities have the same turnout and swingness
(sl = k nl , ∀l). In that case, electoral sensitivity only varies with population size,
and pr produces the socially optimal allocation: pr generically Atkinson-dominates
maj. Second, consider the opposite scenario: Localities are identical in terms of
population size, and districts have the same contestability (nl = 1/L, ∀l and γd =
γ, ∀d), but they differ in electoral sensitivity sl . Let us also assume that there is
one locality per district, such that all districts/localities have a relative electoral
                        P
sensitivity of one (sl / k∈d(l) sk = 1). In this case, maj leads to the socially optimal
allocation: All localities should be and are treated equally. maj induces maximal
sprinkling of government resources.

Moving to a more general comparison, when we shut down the population size effect,
we find that:


Proposition 1 pr Atkinson-dominates maj if γd(l) / d (γd )1/ρ is a mean preserving-
                                                       P

spread of sl / Lk=1 (sk )1/ρ (or conversely) when either:
              P
               P
(1) ρ = 1 and l∈d nl = 1/D ∀d or
(2) ρ 6= 1, there is one locality per district, and nl = 1/D ∀d.


The intuition behind this result is straightforward: We have seen that the Atkinson
measure of inequality increases as the equilibrium allocation further differs from
the social optimum. Such deviations can either be due to differences in electoral
sensitivities caused by heterogeneous turnout or political preferences, or to unequal
district contestabilities. Proposition 1 shows that this intuition is formally correct
when districts are well apportioned (for ρ = 1) and capture all the targetability


                                           21
of government resources (for ρ 6= 1). Well-apportioned districts imply that gov-
ernment interventions should be similar across districts, in which case any further
heterogeneity in sl or in γd becomes socially harmful.




6     Extensions

This section explores different extensions of our model. The first extension allows
for two instruments of government intervention: pure targeted transfers and a global
public good. The second modifies the objective of parties. The third studies a variant
of pr systems. The last extension considers other dimensions of heterogeneity among
voters.



6.1       Targeted versus Universal Spending

The model in this section includes two instruments that the government can use:
targeted transfers and a global public good. Our purpose here is to highlight the
role of the sprinkling effect and district contestability in the choice between those
two instruments, in line with the questions raised by Lizzeri and Persico (2001) and
Persson and Tabellini (2000).

Following Persson and Tabellini (2000), we assume that individuals in locality l
have quasi-linear preferences in a transfer ql (corresponding to α = 1 in the previous
setup) and a global public good that benefits the entire population:


                                wl (q, G) = ql + u(G),


with u(·) strictly increasing and strictly concave in G. The budget is exogenously
                                                   P
given as y so that the budget constraint becomes l nl ql + G = y.

As shown in Appendix 1, only one locality may receive transfers. In the unique


                                         22
equilibrium under pr, this is the locality with the highest sl /nl . If some transfers
are given, then:
                                                    sl   1
                               u0 (G) = max            PL     .                      (14)
                                           l        nl k=1 sk


Under maj, the equivalent FOC characterizing the equilibrium is:

                              γd(l)      1      s
                         max P               P l         = u0 (G).                   (15)
                           l
                                 d∈D γ d n l  k∈d(l) s k




By comparing (14) and (15), we can identify whether pr or maj leads to the largest
provision of the global public good. First, there is the effect of district contestability
in maj, as identified by Lizzeri and Persico (2001) and Persson and Tabellini (2000).
Heterogeneous contestabilities increase transfers and decrease the provision of the
national public good in maj versus pr. Suppose that all localities are identical in
sl and nl , and that all electoral districts have the same number of localities; then,
there is no transfer under pr. In this case, heterogeneous district contestabilities
make transfers more attractive in maj.

Second, there is the electoral sensitivity effect. To isolate its influence, let us switch
off the former channel by assuming that contestability is the same across districts
(γd = γ for all d) and focus on a situation that provides maximal incentive to sprinkle
resources across the country. As seen in Section 4.4, this would happen when there
is one locality per district (such that all relative electoral sensitivities are equal to
one) and these localities all have the same population size.

For this situation, we find a simple sufficient condition under which GP R ≤ GM AJ
in equilibrium – with a strict inequality when GM AJ > 0. This condition is that
the highest level of electoral sensitivity is larger than the average. That is, as soon
as there is some heterogeneity in electoral sensitivities, the standard result in the
literature – i.e., that the level of broad public good should be higher in pr than in
maj– gets reversed.



                                               23
6.2    The Objective of Parties

So far, we have worked under the assumption that parties maximize their expected
seat share. We now discuss the validity of this assumption and then show that our
main results are robust to parties maximizing their probability of winning a majority
of seats instead.

Some political economy models assume that parties maximize their probability of
obtaining a majority of seats in majand their expected vote share in pr (see, e.g.,
Lizzeri and Persico (2001), Strömberg (2008)). The main motivation for using
system-specific utility functions is the perception that the party winning a majority
of seats obtains an extra payoff under maj as compared to pr. As discussed in Sny-
der (1989), modeling maj in this way highlights the pivotability of a seat/district in
the national assembly. However, just because a party has a one-seat majority in the
legislative assembly does not automatically mean it can pass all the legislation it
wants (one case in point is the current situation in the US Senate). Passing legisla-
tion is typically much easier when it has a comfortable super-majority. Hence, even
in maj, parties benefit from earning extra seats beyond simple majority, a benefit
that we are trying to capture with our objective function. Finally, there is empirical
evidence in support of our assumption that parties maximize the number of seats in
the national assembly (see Jacobson (1985) and Incerti (2015)).

To address any further potential concerns about this assumption, we study the
case of parties that maximize their probability of winning a majority of seats in
the national assembly, both for the pr and the maj systems. Under pr and maj
respectively, the parties’ objective functions (6) and (10) become:
                                                  "                              #
                                                      X sl
                                       1
                                                                            
                    In pr:    max      2
                                           + Pr                ∆ul (q) − βd(l) ≥ 0 ,   (16)
                               q
                                                       l
                                                           T
                                             "               #
                                                 X         D
                    In maj:    max Pr                 1d ≥     ,                       (17)
                                   q
                                                  d
                                                           2



                                                      24
where 1d takes value 1 if πd (q; δd ) ≥ 1/2, and 0 otherwise.

The objective function (16) under pr is just a monotone transformation of the
original objective function (6). For this reason, it produces the same first order
conditions, and therefore the same equilibrium allocations as in Section 4.

The differences are more consequential under maj, where achieving a majority in
each district separately no longer matters. Winning a given district only matters
insofar as it helps reach the threshold of 50% of all districts.

As explained in Lindbeck and Weibull (1987) and Strömberg (2008), this problem
is technically intractable. However, we can focus on its approximate solution, which
exploits Lyapunov’s central limit theorem. In Appendix 1, we detail how this can
be applied to our model in the case of a large enough number of districts. Defining:

                                         X
                            σE2 (q) :=       pd (q) [1 − pd (q)] ,
                                         d


to be the variance of the distribution of seat shares, and letting λ0 be the Lagrange
multiplier, we find that the equilibrium allocation must satisfy:
                                                    P                     
                    0           s n−α    0             d γd β d
                   λ =   γd(l) P l l      u (ql ) 1 + 2         γd(l) βd(l) ,       (18)
                                j∈d(l) sj             σE (q)

which directly compares to (11), the FOC under maj. We see that the two are
identical except for the second term inside the square bracket. This implies that
both the relative electoral sensitivity of localities and the contestability of districts
are still key in explaining government interventions.

The second term in the square bracket has a natural interpretation. The fraction
denotes the average, national, bias in favor of B: If positive, B is more likely to
win than A, and vice versa. Let us assume it is positive for the sake of discussion.
In this case, the localities benefiting from more government interventions are those
belonging to districts that are more contestable and also biased toward B (γd(l) βd(l)



                                              25
large). This is the same “pivotality effect” as the one identified in Lindbeck and
Weibull (1987, pp288-289): “[District d] is more likely to be a pivot [district] the
stronger is [its] bias in favour of the more popular party, since the exclusion of such
[a district] from the electorate leaves the remaining electorate as little biased as
possible, and hence also as likely as possible to produce a tie.”



6.3     Other Proportional Representation Systems

In line with most of the literature, thus far we have assumed that, in pr, the
number of seats that a party obtains is proportional to its total number of votes
in the population. While this is a good representation of, for instance, the Dutch
electoral system, some countries instead use a district-specific proportional election
system. In Belgium or Brazil, for instance, each electoral district is entitled to a
pre-determined seat share that is proportional to each district’s total population.

We can extend our model to these district-specific pr systems by allowing each
                                                                 P
district to receive some arbitrary fraction µd of the seats, with d µd = 1. The
objective function (6) then becomes:

                                               X         X sl
                     districts         1
                max πpr        (q) =   2
                                           +        µd          [∆ul (q) − E [δd ]],
                  q
                                               d         l∈d
                                                             md



where md is the total number of active voters in the district. Defining the average
turnout rate in a district as td := l∈d tl nndl , with nd := l∈d nl , we obtain md = td nd .
                                   P                        P

Taking first order conditions and letting λDP R denote the multiplier on the budget
constraint, we have:
                                           −1
                            ∂ul qA     µd sl
                                    =            nαl λDP R ∀l,                                   (19)
                              ∂qlA     nd td

        µd
where   nd
             is equal to 1 when seat shares are perfectly apportioned, and above/below 1
                                                                               sl
when the district is over/under-apportioned. The second fraction,              td
                                                                                  ,   is the electoral
sensitivity of the locality relative to the district turnout.

                                               26
We now see how the nationwide and district-specific versions of pr differ in terms
of government interventions. In the nationwide version of pr, µd is implicitly made
equal to the number of voters: nd td . For this reason, district borders become im-
material to parties’ platforms. In the district-specific version of pr, each locality’s
turnout is compared to the turnout of the other localities in the same district. More-
over, ceteris paribus, localities in over-apportioned districts will receive more than
those in under-apportioned districts.

District-specific pr systems thus share features with both systems in Section 4. Like
in maj, a high-turnout locality will receive less if it is located in a higher, as opposed
to lower, turnout district. The other results remain identical: District contestability
and the relative swingness of the locality are immaterial to the eventual allocation
of governmental resources.13



6.4     Other Dimensions of Heterogeneity.

In our baseline model, we considered only two sources of heterogeneity among voters
of different localities: their swingness and their turnout rate. This was done for the
sake of expositional clarity. We could easily consider other sources of heterogeneity,
such as information, partisanship, and preference intensity.

Information. Following Strömberg (2004), we could assume that some voters do
not observe the parties’ proposals by the time of the vote. For each locality l,
parties would then assign a probability χl that a voter knows the parties’ proposals.
In that version of the model, the electoral sensitivity of locality l, sl , would include
the parameter χl . The level of information voters have would then influence the
allocation of governmental resources in the same way swingness does under both pr
and maj.



  13
     The same holds for other possible dimensions of heterogeneity, such as information and par-
tisanship, discussed in Section 6.4.

                                              27
Preference Intensity. Again, following Strömberg (2004), we could assume that
some voters benefit more from government interventions than others. Denoting
as ηl the preference intensity of voters in locality l, it follows that the electoral
sensitivity of locality l, sl , would include the parameter ηl . The same conclusion as
for heterogeneity in information follows.

Partisanship and Core Voters. While our baseline model focuses on the “swing
voter” theory of elections, Dixit and Londregan (1996) shows how it could be ex-
tended to study the impact of “core voters.” This alternate approach captures the
fact that different population groups can have different party affinities (e.g., they are
from the same ethnic or cultural group). As each party becomes more effective at
delivering favors to its core supporters, either the parties’ costs of providing public
goods or the voters’ valuation of each party’s promises become party-locality spe-
cific. As a result, each locality’s electoral sensitivity parameter sl must be replaced
by party-specific values sPl . The upshot, as shown by Dixit and Londregan (1996),
is that each party favors their core voters. The key difference with the swing voter
approach is that the two parties make different electoral promises – i.e., qA 6= qB .

Yet the effect of partisanship differs across systems. Indeed, in maj, the relative
partisanship of localities within districts would be key. Consider, for instance, a
locality l with a large fraction of A core voters. That locality would receive more
from party A (and less from party B) if it belongs to a district with many B core
voters than if it belongs to a district with many A core voters.




7     Conclusions

In this paper, we studied the impact of the electoral system on inequalities in gov-
ernment interventions. We compared majoritarian (maj) and proportional repre-
sentation (pr) systems. The main novelty of our approach is that we take account
of the fact that the geographic distribution of votes matters more in maj systems.


                                            28
We uncovered a novel relative electoral sensitivity effect in maj systems. This effect
can induce parties to “sprinkle” resources across districts, thus reducing inequality.
We found that this effect can be strong enough that inequalities in government in-
tervention end up being lower in maj than pr systems. This result runs against a
recurrent theme in the literature, which argues that parties target a smaller fraction
of the population under maj systems. We also explored the implications of the
relative electoral sensitivity effect for the composition of government expenditures
(broad public good vs. targeted transfers).

The relative electoral sensitivity effect has important implications for the large em-
pirical literature on distributive politics (see, e.g., the literature reviews in Berry,
Burden, and Howell (2010) and Golden and Min (2013)). This effect implies that
there is a risk of omitted variable bias in studies of the allocations of governmental
resources at the sub-district level in maj systems. These studies indeed ought to
control for the electoral sensitivity of other groups of voters in the same district. In
a companion paper, Bouton r al. (2018), we revisit this empirical literature with
the relative electoral sensitivity effect in mind.




                                           29
References
Aidt, T.S., Jayasri Dutta, and Elena Loukoianova. 2006. “Democracy comes to
  Europe: Franchise extension and fiscal outcomes 1830-1938.” European Economic
  Review 50 (2):249–283.

Albouy, David. 2009. “The Unequal Geographic Burden of Federal Taxation.” Jour-
  nal of Political Economy 117 (4):635–667.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly. 1999. “Public Goods and Ethnic
  Divisions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (4):1243–1284.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, Alan Gerber, and James Snyder. 2002. “Equal Votes, Equal
  Money: Court-Ordered Redistricting and Public Expenditures in the American
  States.” The American Political Science Review 96 (4):767–777.

Atkinson, A.B. 1970. “On the Measurement of Inequality.” Journal of Economic
  Theory :244–263.

———. 1983. The Economics of Inequality. Clarendon Press, II ed. Oxford, UK.

Azzimonti, Marina. 2015. “The dynamics of public investment under persistent
  electoral advantage.” Review of Economic Dynamics 18 (3):653–678.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Lakshmi Iyer, and Rohini Somanathan. 2008. “Public Action for
  Public Goods.” In Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 4, edited by T. Paul
  Schultz and John A. Strauss, chap. 49. Elsevier, 3117–3154.

Banks, Jeffrey S. and John Duggan. 1999. “The Theory of Probabilistic Voting in
  the Spatial Model of Elections.” Working paper, University of Rochester.

Berry, Christopher R., Barry C. Burden, and William G. Howell. 2010. “The Pres-
  ident and the Distribution of Federal Spending.” American Political Science Re-
  view 104 (4):783799.




                                       30
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess. 2002. “The Political Economy of Government
  Responsiveness: Theory and Evidence from India.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 117 (4):1415–1451.

Betz, Timm. 2017. “Trading Interests: Domestic Institutions, International Negoti-
  ations, and the Politics of Trade.” The Journal of Politics 79 (4):1237–1252.

Blakeslee, David S. 2015. “Politics and Public Goods in Developing Countries:
  Evidence from the Assassination of Rajiv Gandhi.” Working papers, New York
  University.

Blume, Lorenz, Jens Möller, Stefan Voigt, and Carsten Wolf. 2009. “The economic
  effects of constitutions: replicating and extending Persson and Tabellini.” Public
  Choice 139 (1):197–225.

Bormann, Nils-Christian and Matt Golder. 2013. “Democratic Electoral Systems
  around the world, 1946-2011.” Electoral Studies 32 (2):360 – 369.

Castanheira, Micael, Gaëtan Nicodème, and Paola Profeta. 2012. “On the political
  economics of tax reforms: survey and empirical assessment.” International Tax
  and Public Finance 19 (4):598–624.

Chang, Eric C. C., Mark Andreas Kayser, and Ronald Rogowski. 2008. “Electoral
  Systems and Real Prices: Panel Evidence for the OECD Countries, 1970 2000.”
  British Journal of Political Science 38 (04):739–751.

Chhibber, Pradeep and Irfan Nooruddin. 2004. “Do Party Systems Matter? The
  Number of Parties and Government Performance in the Indian States.” Compar-
  ative Political Studies 37 (2):152–187.

Cox, Gary W. 1990. “Centripetal and Centrifugal Incentives in Electoral Systems.”
  American Journal of Political Science 34 (4):903–935.

Dixit, Avinash and John Londregan. 1996. “The Determinants of Success of Special
  Interests in Redistributive Politics.” The Journal of Politics 58 (4):1132–1155.


                                            31
Enelow, James and Melvin Hinich. 1982. “Nonspatial Candidate Characteristics and
  Electoral Competition.” The Journal of Politics 44 (1):115–130.

Evans, Carolyn L. 2009. “A Protectionist Bias In Majoritarian Politics: An Empir-
  ical Investigation.” Economics & Politics 21 (2):278–307.

Finan, Frederico and Maurizio Mazzocco. 2016. “Electoral Incentives and the Al-
  location of Public Funds.” Working Paper 21859, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Funk, Patricia and Christina Gathmann. 2013. “How Do Electoral Systems Affect
  Fiscal Policy? Evidence From Cantonal Parliaments, 1890-2000.” Journal of the
  European Economic Association 11 (5):1178–1203.

Gagliarducci, Stefano, Tommaso Nannicini, and Paolo Naticchioni. 2011. “Electoral
  Rules and Politicians’ Behavior: A Micro Test.” American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 3 (3):144–74.

Galasso,    Vincenzo and Salvatore Nunnari. 2018.             “The Economic Ef-
  fects    of   Electoral   Rules:   Evidence   from   Unemployment     Benefits.”
  CEPR Discussion Papers 13081,          C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.         URL
  https://ideas.repec.org/p/cpr/ceprdp/13081.html.

Golden, Miriam A. and Brian K. Min. 2013. “Distributive Politics Around the
  World.” Annual Review of Political Science 16:73–99.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1996. “Electoral Competition and Spe-
  cial Interest Politics.” The Review of Economic Studies 63 (2):265–286.

———. 2005. “A Protectionist Bias in Majoritarian Politics.” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 120 (4):1239–1282.

Hatfield, John William and William R. Hauk. 2014. “Electoral regime and trade
  policy.” Journal of Comparative Economics 42 (3):518–534.




                                        32
Hodler, Roland and Paul A. Raschky. 2014. “Regional Favoritism*.” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics .

Incerti, D. 2015. “The Optimal Allocation of Campaign Funds in House Elections.”
  Working paper.

Iversen, Torben and David Soskice. 2006. “Electoral Institutions and the Politics of
  Coalitions: Why Some Democracies Redistribute More Than Others.” American
  Political Science Review 100 (2).

Jacobson, Gary C. 1985.      “Party Organization and Distribution of Campaign
  Resources: Republicans and Democrats in 1982.” Political Science Quarterly
  100 (4):603–625.

Johansson, Eva. 2003. “Intergovernmental grants as a tactical instrument: empirical
  evidence from Swedish municipalities.” Journal of Public Economics 87 (5):883 –
  915.

Keefer, Philip. 2004. “What does political economy tell us about economic develop-
  ment and vice versa?” Annual Review of Political Science 7:247–272.

Lindbeck, Assar and Jörgen Weibull. 1987. “Balanced-budget redistribution as the
  outcome of political competition.” Public Choice 52 (3):273–297.

Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico. 2001. “The Provision of Public Goods under
  Alternative Electoral Incentives.” American Economic Review 91 (1):225–239.

———. 2005. “A Drawback Of Electoral Competition.” Journal of the European
  Economic Association 3 (6):1318–1348.

Mansfield, Edward D. and Marc L. Busch. 1995. “The political economy of nontariff
  barriers: a cross-national analysis.” International Organization 49 (04):723–749.

Martin, Paul S. 2003. “Voting’s Rewards: Voter Turnout, Attentive Publics, and
  Congressional Allocation of Federal Money.” American Journal of Political Sci-
  ence 47 (1):110–127.

                                        33
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, Roberto Perotti, and Massimo Rostagno. 2002. “Elec-
  toral Systems and Public Spending.”         The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  117 (2):609–657.

Min, Brian. 2015. “Electrifying the Poor: Power and Politics in India.” Tech. rep.

Myerson, Roger B. 1993. “Incentives to Cultivate Favored Minorities Under Alterna-
  tive Electoral Systems.” The American Political Science Review 87 (4):856–869.

Park, Jong Hee and Nathan Jensen. 2007. “Electoral Competition and Agricultural
  Support in OECD Countries.” American Journal of Political Science 51 (2):314–
  329.

Persson, Torsten. 2002. “Do Political Institutions Shape Economic Policy?” Econo-
  metrica 70 (3):883–905.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 1999. “The size and scope of government::
  Comparative politics with rational politicians.” European Economic Review 43 (4-
  6):699–735.

———. 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy. MIT Press Books.
  The MIT Press.

———. 2003. The Economic Effects of Constitutions, MIT Press Books, vol. 1. The
  MIT Press.

Rickard, Stephanie. 2012. “A Non-Tariff Protectionist Bias in Majoritarian Politics:
  Government Subsidies and Electoral Institutions.” 56:777–785.

Rogowski, Ron and Mark Kayser. 2002. “Majoritarian electoral systems and con-
  sumer power: price-level evidence from the OECD countries.” American Journal
  of Political Science 46 (3):526–539.

Rogowski, Ronald. 1987. “Trade and the variety of democratic institutions.” Inter-
  national Organization 41 (02):203–223.



                                         34
Schady, Norbert R. 2000. “The Political Economy of Expenditures by the Peruvian
  Social Fund (FONCODES), 1991-95.” The American Political Science Review
  94 (2):289–304.

Snyder, James M. 1989. “Election Goals and the Allocation of Campaign Resources.”
  Econometrica 57 (3):637–660.

Stashko, Allison. 2018. “Crossing the District Line: Border Mismatch and Targeted
  Redistribution.” Georgetown mimeo .

Stratmann, Thomas and Martin Baur. 2002. “Plurality Rule, Proportional Rep-
  resentation, and the German Bundestag: How Incentives to Pork-Barrel Differ
  across Electoral Systems.” American Journal of Political Science 46 (3):506–514.

Strömberg, David. 2004. “Radio’s Impact on Public Spending.” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 119 (1):189–221.

———. 2008. “How the Electoral College Influences Campaigns and Policy: The
  Probability of Being Florida.” American Economic Review 98 (3):769–807.

Taagepera, Rein and Matthew Soberg Shugart. 1989. Seats and Votes: The effects
  and determinants of electoral systems. Yale University Press.

Troiano, Ugo. 2017. “Do Taxes Increase Economic Inequality? A Comparative
  Study Based on the State Personal Income Tax.” Working Paper 24175, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

World Bank. 2004. World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for
  Poor People. World Bank and Oxford University Press.



Ray, D. r A. Robson, 2018, Certified random: A new order for co-authorship,
American Economic Review 108, 489–520.




                                        35
8         Appendix 1: Theory
Assumption 1

Assumption 1 posits that there are swingable voters in any localities, that is:

                                                                                         1   1
                                      νel (q, δ) ≡ ∆ul (q) − δd ∈ (−                       ,    )
                                                                                        2φl 2φl
                     ¯ = u(y) − u(0) be the largest possible utility difference coming from
for all q and δ. Let ∆
the allocation of public goods. There are always some swing voters in l if

                               ¯ − βd −      1      1    ¯ − βd + 1 < 1 .
                              −∆                >−     & ∆
                                            2γd    2φl           2γd 2φl

Notice that the first (second) inequality is more likely to bind if βd is positive (negative).
The assumption is satisfied if

                                                      ¯− 1 + 1 .
                                             |βd | < −∆
                                                        2γd 2φl

Assumption 1 requires the variance in the individual preference to be large enough com-
pared to the bias.


Objective in PR

Parties maximize their expected nationwide vote share. The vote share of party A is the
                                              P tl nl                      P
weighted average of its locality vote shares:  l T πl q; δd(l) , where T :=    k tk nk is

the total number of votes in the country.

Recall that sl = nl tl φl is the electoral sensitivity of locality l. By (5), party A’s objective
function is thus:
                                                          "                                                            #
                                                              X
                                                                          tl nl
                                                                                  1                          
                       Pmaxα
                                     πpr (q) := Eδ                         T       2   + φl (∆ul (q) − δd(l) )
                  q|    l nl ql ≤y
                                                                  l
                                                                      X
                                                     1        1
                                                                                                
                                             =       2    +   T              sl ∆ul (q) − E δd(l) ,
                                                                      l
                                                                      X
                                                     1        1
                                                                                               
                                             =       2    +   T              sl ∆ul (q) − βd(l) ,                          (20)
                                                                      l

where d(l) is the district to which locality l belongs.14



    14
                                              P           P                                         P
         For this last equality, note that       d   βd       l∈d sl        can be rewritten as         l sl βd(l) .


                                                                  36
Equilibrium Existence and Uniqueness

                                             nαl ql ≤ y} is compact and convex. Let’s define
                                                     P
The set of feasible allocations Q = {q|                  l

the expected plurality shares a la Banks and Duggan (1999) PlA (q) = 2sl ∆ul (q) − E δd(l) −
                                                                                              

nl tl and PlB (q) = nl tl − 2sl ∆ul (q) − E δd(l) . Since PlA (q) and PlB (q) are jointly con-
                                                 

tinuous in q, Plj (q) is strictly concave in qj for j ∈ {A, B} and PlA (q) + PlB (q) is constant
for all q then Theorems 2 and 3 of Banks and Duggan (1999) guarantee existence and
uniqueness of the equilibrium. The argument for existence and uniqueness of the equil-
brium is the same as for PR.


Assumption 2

The set of contestable districts is C ≡ {d|pA
                                            d (q) ∈ ] 0, 1 [ ∀q} Therefore, a district is

contestable if and only if:
                              P
                                  l∈d sl ∆ul (q)                      1                1
                                                      ∈ [βd −        2γd , βd   +     2γd ].
                                      sd
                                      sl
                                               ul (qA ) − ul (0) be the largest possible utility gain in
                                 P                              
Let ∆U d = maxqA | P      A
                       l ql =y    l∈d sd

the district coming from the allocation of public goods. The district is contestable if

                                                      1                                  1
                            −∆U d ≥ βd −             2γd     & ∆U d ≤ βd +              2γd .


Notice that the first (second) inequality is more likely to bind if βd is positive (negative).
                                                                            1
Hence, the assumption is satisfied iff: ∆U d + |βd | ≤                     2γd .      That is, to be contestable, the
variance of the district shock must be large enough compared to the bias.


Objective in MAJ

Under MAJ, seats are proportional to the number of districts won by each party. From
(8), the probability that A wins at least 50% of the votes in district d is:
                                   "                                    #
                                     X
                                         P sl
                     pd (q) = Pr              tk nk (∆ul (q) − δd ) ≥ 0
                                                         k∈d
                                               l∈d
                                           "          P                       #
                                                             l∈d sl ∆ul (q)
                                 = Pr δd ≤                     P                  ,                              (21)
                                                                  j∈d sj
                                                                                                         P
where the second line is obtained by multiplying both sides of the inequality by                            k∈d tk nk ,

and isolating δd .


                                                             37
Under Assumption 2, this probability is always strictly between 0 and 1, and can be
directly derived from the CDF of a uniform distribution:
                  "P                 #         "P                              #
                      l∈d sl ∆ul (q)               l∈d sl ∆ul (q)       1
              Fδd      P               = γd ×       P              +      − βd
                          j∈d sj                       j∈d sj         2γd
                                                   "P                        #
                                                        l∈d sl ∆u l (q)
                                       = 12 + γd ×        P             − βd               (22)
                                                            j∈d sj

Aggregating these probabilities across districts yields A’s expected seat share:
                                               hP                      i
                                        P              sP
                                                        l ∆ul (q)
                                          d γd     l∈d            − βd
                                                          j∈d sj
                      πM AJ (q) = 12 +
                                                      D

Example: CRRA utility function

This appendix constructs the explicit solution of the welfare optimum and of the equilib-
rium under each electoral system for a particular utility function: the Constant Relative
Risk Aversion (CRRA) utility functions:

                                               ql1−ρ
                                   u (ql ) =          , if ρ 6= 1
                                              1−ρ
                                            = log ql , if ρ = 1.

For simplicity, we focus on the case of pure local public goods (α = 0) so that the budget
               P
constraint is: l ql ≤ y.

In this case, (3) tells us that the socially optimal allocation of public goods is:
                                                   1  
                                                    ρ
                                                  nl
                                      ql∗ = y         .                                  (23)
                                                P ρ1
                                                  k nk

Under pr , the FOCs in (7) and some straightforward manipulations produces the following
allocation of public goods:                                             !
                                                       (sl )1/ρ
                                   qlP R   =y    PL               1/ρ
                                                                            ,              (24)
                                                      k=1 (sk )
where sl = nl tl φl is the electoral sensitivity of locality l.

Finally, the FOCs for maj (11) yield:
                                                                    1/ρ           !
                                                  γd(l) sl /sd(l)
                            qlM AJ = y     PL                               1/ρ       ,   (25)
                                                k=1    γd(k) sk /sd(k)
             P
where sd =      k∈d sk .


                                                      38
CRRA utility implies that the budget shares of each locality are independent of the budget
size y. We see that while the socially optimal allocation only depends on local population
size, the shares under pr weighs localities by their electoral sensitivity and the shares under
maj weighs the locality by their relative sensitivity in the district and the contestability
of their district.


Proof of Lemma 1

Clearly A qP R < A qM AJ iff y E                        qP R > yρE qM AJ where
                                                                     

                             
                             
                             
                             
                                                   Πl (ql /nl )nl                  if ρ = 1;
                             
                                                                        1
                                                                          1−ρ
                     E
                    y (q) =                             P
                                                          nl (ql )1−ρ 
                                                                                                                                 (26)
                                                          l
                                                                                    if ρ 6= 1.
                             
                                                                !ρ 
                                                          P ρ1
                             
                                                   
                             
                                                          j jn



Consider first the logarithmic case (ρ = 1). Plugging the values qP R and qM AJ into y E /y
tells us that A qP R < A qM AJ iff:
                                 

                                              !nl                                                !nl
                                    t l φl                            tl φl γd(l) /sd(l)
                        Πl         PL                   > Πl        PL
                                     k=1 sk                          k=1 sk γd(k) /sd(k)
                                              !nl                                                !nl
                                       1                                   γd(l) /sd(l)
                        Πl         PL                   > Πl        PL                                 .                         (27)
                                     k=1 sk                          k=1 sk γd(k) /sd(k)
                                                                                                 P     γd   P                P
Note that the denominator on the RHS of (27) is equivalent to                                        d sd       k∈d sk   =   d γd .
                                                                                                 P
Similarly, we can re-write the denominator on the LHS of (27) as                                      d sd .

Substituting for these into (27), we get

                                                   γd(l) /sd(l) nl
                                       nl                   
                                   1
                           Πl P             > Πl     P             .
                                   d sd                  d γd
                                   P
Taking logarithms, and noting that   nl = 1, yields:
                    "         #                             "       #
                                              γd(l)
                     X            X                         X
              − log       sd0   >    nl log           − log      γd0 or
                        0
                                              sd(l)            0
                      d            l                          d
                    "         #                                        "      #
                     X            X                 X                    X
              − log       sd0   >    nd log γd −       nd log sd − log     γd0 or
                              d0                    d                     d                                d0
                                                                             
         X                    sd                 X                   γd
               nd log P                      >           nd log P           ,                                                    (28)
           d                  d0 sd0                d                d0 γd0
               P
where nd =         l∈d nl .



                                                              39
This proves Lemma 1 for the logarithmic case.

Similarly for ρ 6= 1, we substitute the equilibrium values of the allocation under each
                                            P ρ1 ρ/(1−ρ)
                                                   
                       E                                  . This tells us that A qP R <
                                                                                     
electoral system into y /y and multiply by     j nj

A qM AJ iff:
          

                                   1                                              1
                          !1−ρ  1−ρ                           1/ρ     !1−ρ  1−ρ
                   1/ρ                           sl γd(l) /sd(l)
      X       (sl )                     X
        nl PL         1/ρ
                                     >   nl P                      1/ρ                           (29)
                  (s )                         L
       l     k=1 k                       l     k=1 sk γd(k) /sd(k)

which directly leads to Lemma 1.


Proof of Proposition 1

We normalize y = 1 without loss of generality since, with CRRA utility functions, equi-
librium budget shares are budget invariant.

Using Lemma 1 makes proving Proposition 1 straightforward.

Consider the case ρ = 1. When all districts are well apportioned (nd = 1/D ∀d), inequality
(28) becomes                                                       
                            1 X         sd        1 X         γd
                                log   P         >     log   P
                            D          d0 sd0     D          d 0 γd 0
                                 d                             d

Atkinson (1983) shows the strict concavity of the log implies that this inequality holds if
P γd      is a mean preserving spread of         P sd      (and vice versa).
 d0 sd0                                           d0 sd0

Next, consider the case ρ 6= 1 and L = D. With one locality per district, all relative
sensitivities are 1 (sl /sd(l) sl = 1) . Simplifying for nl = 1/L, inequality (29) becomes:
                                                   1                                   1
                                          !1−ρ  1−ρ                    1/ρ !1−ρ  1−ρ
                 X           (sl )1/ρ                     X         γd(l)
                      PL            1/ρ
                                                       >         P        1/ρ
                                                                                         .
                  l         k=1 (sk )                          l    d (γd )

or                                               !1−ρ                          1/ρ !1−ρ
                 1 X                 (sl )1/ρ                 1 X        γd(l)
                                PL         1/ρ
                                                           >                       1/ρ
                                                                                         .           (30)
                1−ρ                                          1−ρ
                                                                        P
                        l         k=1 (sk )                        l     d (γ  d )
Again, the strict concavity of the CRRA function implies (Atkinson (1983)) that this
inequality holds if   P γd      is a mean preserving spread of         P sd      (and vice versa).
                       d0 sd0                                           d0 sd0




                                                        40
Targeted versus Universal Spending

The objectives in maj and pr are similar to (6) and (10) adjusting for the utility ∆wl (q, G)
and the budget constraint. In PR, the first order conditions are thus:
                                       X
                                              sl u0 (G) = T λP R                             (31)
                                         l

and
                                     sl
                                        = T λP R ∀l with ql > 0                              (32)
                                     nl
where λP R is the Lagrange multiplier of the budget constraint under PR.

In a symmetric equilibrium, only individuals in the locality with the highest sl /nl receives
a transfer. If some transfers are given, then

                                                          sl   1
                                     u0 (G) = max            PL     .                        (33)
                                                  l       nl k=1 sk

A necessary and sufficient condition for some transfer to arise in equilibrium is:

                                                          sl   1
                                     u0 (y) < max                    .                       (34)
                                                          nl L
                                                             P
                                                              k=1 sk
                                                  l


In MAJ, the first order conditions become:
                                      X
                                             γd u0 (G) = DλM AJ ,                            (35)
                                      d∈D

and
                           γd(l)    s
                                 P l       = DλM AJ ∀l with ql > 0                           (36)
                            nl          s
                                  k∈d(l) k

where λM AJ is the Lagrange multiplier of the budget constraint under MAJ.

In a symmetric equilibrium, then only individuals in the locality with the highest left hand
side in (36) could receive a transfer. If some transfers arise in equilibrium:

                                     γd(l)     1      s
                                max P              P l        = u0 (G).                      (37)
                                 l     d∈D γ d n l  k∈d(l) sk


Parties’ Objective

Let                                                            "P                        #
                                          D X                      l∈d sl ∆ul (q)
                           X
                µ (q) :=         pd (q) =   + γd ×                  P             − βd
                                          2                            j∈d sj
                            d                         d




                                                      41
be A’s expected seat share, and define:
                                                  X
                                     2
                                    σE (q) :=              pd (q) [1 − pd (q)] .
                                                      d

Since, the individual pd (q) are statistically independent from one another, the CLT of
Liapounov tells us that:                          P
                                                      d 1d   − µ (q)
                                                                     ,
                                                          σE (q)
is asymptotically distributed as a standard normal.

The probability that A wins a majority of the seats given policy platforms q is therefore:
                                 P                              
                                     d 1d − µ (q)    D/2 − µ (q)
                     πA (q) = Pr                  ≥
                                       σE (q)           σE (q)

Using the asymptotic distribution in this, the probability that A wins is:

                                          πA (q) ≈ 1 − Φ [S(q)] ,
                 D
                   −µ(q)
where S(q) =     2
                  σE (q)   and Φ[·] is the standard normal cumulative density function.

Note that:                                      "                  #2
                              2       D   X      X sl ∆ul (q)
                             σE (q) =   −   γd2    P          − βd                                            (38)
                                      4                j∈d sj
                                                  d∈C             l∈d

which implies:
                                                             hP                              i
                                                  P                    sP
                                                                        l ∆ul (q)
                                              −       d γd         l∈d                − βd
                                                                          j∈d sj
                      S(q) =                                hP                              i2 1/2          (39)
                                          D       P      2             sP
                                                                        l ∆ul (q)
                                          4   −       d γd         l∈d               − βd
                                                                          j∈d sj



Assuming that parties maximize their approximate probability of winning, the problem of
party A becomes:
                                                                                                        
                                                                  hP                              i
                                                      P                       sP
                                                                               l ∆ul (q)
                                                  −        d γd         l∈d                − βd
                                                                                 j∈d sj
                                                                                                         
                      max 1 − Φ  
                                                                                                         
                       qA                                        hP                               i2 1/2 
                                                                              sP
                                                                               l ∆ul (q)
                                                                                                         
                                              D       P      2
                                              4   −       d γd          l∈d                − βd
                                                                                 j∈d sj
                             X
                      s.t.         nαl ql = y,
                               l




                                                             42
which leads to the first order conditions:
                                                   2 (q)
                                                         
                                    ∂µ(q)       ∂σE
                                  −  ∂ql           ∂q
nαl λA = −φ(S(q)) S(q) ×  D                 − 2 l 
                                 2 − µ (q)
                                                σE (q)

                                     γd(l) P sl sj u0 (ql )          2 P sl
                                                                                                           
                                                                                    0 (q ) × p            1
                                                                                             
                                                                    γd(l)       s  u     l     d(l) (q) − 2
                                                                          j∈d(l) j
       = −φ(S(q)) S(q) ×  P           hP j∈d(l)                 i−                    2 (q)
                                                                                                             
                                    γ           sP
                                                 l ∆ul (q)
                                                           − β                      σ  E
                                   d d      l∈d         sj
                                                      j∈d
                                                               d


As explained by Strömberg (2008), the first term captures the incentive of the candidate
to influence the expected number of electoral votes won, the mean of the distribution,
while the second term arises from the incentive to influence the variance in the number of
electoral votes.

It is easy to show that in equilibrium, qA = qB , which allows us to simplify the FOC into:
                                                                         P
              λ A × d γd β d                                           ×
                   P
                                                          γ      β          d γd βd
                                                                                   
                                        sl n−α 0            d(l)  d(l)
                              = γd(l) P l sj u (ql ) 1 +              2 (q)
              φ(S(q)) S(q)              j∈d(l)                     σE

where the left-hand side of the equation is independent of l. We can thus label it as λ0 ,
which leads to (18).


9        Appendix 2: Empirical
As discussed in the introduction, the empirical literature on the economic effect of consti-
tution suffer from a certain arbitrariness in deciding that some government expenditure
categories are more easily geographically targetable than others. To avoid this issue, a
possibility is to remove the decision of whether a government policy is targetable or broad
from the hand of the researchers.

The variable encompassing from the VDem dataset15 allows us to do just that. It ag-
gregates national expert assessments about whether national government policy is more
“particularistic” (score of 1 or 2) or more “encompassing” (score of 3 or 4). Knowing
that such an assessment is bound to be influenced by the comparison with neighboring
countries, we compare the regression results with and without regional fixed effects in the
cross-sectional analysis.

    15
     Coppedge, Michael, John Gerring, Staffan I. Lindberg, Svend-Erik Skaaning, Jan Teorell,
with David Altman, Michael Bernhard, M. Steven Fish, Adam Glynn, Allen Hicken, Carl Henrik
Knutsen, Kelly McMann, Pamela Paxton, Daniel Pemstein, Jeffrey Staton, Brigitte Zimmerman,
Rachel Sigman, Frida Andersson, Valeriya Mechkova, and Farhad Miri. 2015. “V-Dem Codebook
v5.” Varieties of Democracy (VDem) Project.

                                                 43
Using cross-country data for 68 democratic countries from 1992 to 2013 (we keep only
country-years with polity2 > 0), we estimate the following:

                         Eit = β0 + β1 P rit + β2 Xit + δt + β4 Ri + it                      (40)

where Eit is our measure of encompassiveness ; P ri is one of our measure of proportional
representation (PR or District Magnitude), Xit includes a set of country controls (see the
list of variables below) including whether the country is considered presidential16 , δt are
year fixed effects and Ri are either regional dummies for OECD, AFRICA, ASIAE and
LAAM or country fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.

The results are in Table 1. The first three columns use pr as a measure of proportional
representation while the last three use District magnitude. Column (1) and (5) use Persson
and Tabellini (1999)’s list of controls without regional dummies. Column (2) and (6) use
Persson and Tabellini (1999)’s list of controls with regional dummies. Finally, column (5)
and (7) use Blume et al. (2009)’s full list of controls with regional fixed effects. Column
(4) and (8) use Blume et al. (2009)’s full list of controls with country fixed effects.17

Overall, we do not find that proportional representation correlate with more encompassing
policies. Only with the most parsimonious controls and no regional fixed effect do we find
a weakly significant correlation between district magnitude and encompassing policies.
This correlation has the opposite sign to the usual prediction in the literature that PR
systems are more conducive to encompassing policies and not robust to the addition of
further controls. With country fixed effects, we find a negative correlation between pr
and encompassiveness in the few countries that have changed electoral system.

Variables

    • PR which take value 1 if, according to the HOU SESY S variable from Keefer
       (2012)’s “Database of Political Institutions”, a minority of the Lower House (par-
       liament or congress) seats are elected in SMD.


  16
    The interactions between presidential and the electoral system being insignificant we omitted
them in the results presented here.
  17
     The variation in district magnitude within countries over time represents a large share of the
overall variation. More surprisingly maybe is that a number of countries in our sample change
electoral system over the period: Armenia, Bolivia, Cambodia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guinea-
Bissau, Iraq, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Macedonia, Mongolia, Nepal, Sierra Leone and Ukraine.

                                                44
         Table 1: Proportional Representation and Encompassing 1992-2013


 Equation No.          (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)         (8)

 PR                  -0.122     -0.001 0.015 -0.362**
                     (-0.78)    (-0.01) (0.11) (-2.13)
 Presidential        -0.025      0.075 0.044   0.127*-0.057               0.073   0.057      0.127*
                     (-0.13)    (0.46) (0.33)  (1.87)
                                                    (-0.29)              (0.46) (0.45)       (1.86)
 District Magn                                      -0.396*              -0.198 -0.095        0.013
                                                    (-1.92)              (-0.73) (-0.48)     (0.12)
 Regional FE         No       Yes     Yes  No          No                  Yes     Yes         No
 Country FE          No       No      No   Yes         No                  No      No          Yes
 R-squared         0.309     0.501 0.638  0.116      0.317                0.505   0.640       0.076
 N                  533       533     393  393        535                  535     395         395
 Notes: Year dummies included. Standard errors clustered at             the country level.   *
 p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



   • District Magnitude is the the ratio of Mean District Magnitude (MDMH) and Total
       Seats. MDMH is the weighted average of the number of representatives in the lower
       house elected by each constituency size (if available). This variable has been derived
       from the Database of Political Institutions, 2012 version (DPI2012). Total Seats is
       the number of total seats in the legislature, or in the case of bicameral legislatures,
       the total seats in the lower house.18


Following Persson and Tabellini (1999), we include the following controls:

   • GDP: log of per capita income; is obtained from the World Economic Output of the
       IMF. In particular, we have taken the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) per capita
       GDP (divided by 1000). To avoid simultaneity issues, we have taken the lagged
       value (1 year lagged).

   • TRADE: log of openness, measured as the log of the sum of exports plus imports
       in gdp;

   • PROP65: the share of the population above 65;

  18
     Using MDMH instead of MDMH/Total Seats in the regressions above does not affect the
results.

                                               45
   • FEDERAL: centralization of government spending (measured as expenditures of
       central government divided by expenditures of general government).

In addition, following Blume et al. (2009) we also include the following controls:   19



   • POLITY2, a measure of democracy,

   • NYYRSDEM: number of democratic years since 45 from Acemoglu,

   • PROP1564: the share of the population between 15 and 64,

   • Variable capturing a history of colonization by the UK, Spain and other colonial
       powers.




  19
     Blume et al. (2009) use the Gastil measure instead of Polity2 and the age of a democracy
instead of NYYEAR. The results are not sensitive to the measure of democracy used.

                                             46
Appendix 3: Online Appendix
Should we expect government spending to be higher under maj or under pr? To address
this question, the model in this appendix endogenizes the size of the government budget.
For the sake of simplicity and comparability with previous results in the literature (see,
e.g., Persson (2002)), we assume that the government finances its interventions through a
non-distortionary and linear tax τ on income.

To isolate the effect coming from the targeting of resources by the government, we need
to remove all possibility of local targeting using taxation. To do so, we assume that all
individuals have the same income y. The government budget constraint is thus: l nαl ql ≤
                                                                               P

yτ .

Individuals of locality l have the following preferences for taxation τ and the government
interventions q:
                              wl (q, τ ) = v(y(1 − τ )) + ul (q),                        (41)

with u, v strictly increasing and strictly concave.

We focus on the case of local public goods (α = 0) and assume γd = γ > 0, ∀d. This
last assumption guarantees that the effects we identify are not driven by differences in
contestability across districts, a mechanism already identified in the existing literature
(see, e.g., Persson and Tabellini (1999), and Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti, and Rostagno (2002)).

The optimization problems of the parties in pr and maj are similar to (6) and (10)
respectively but for three differences: (i) ∆ul replaced by ∆wl , as defined in (41), (ii) the
total budget is yτ , and (iii) parties choose both q and τ .

In pr, the first order conditions become:
                             X
                                  sl · v 0 (y(1 − τ )) = T λP R ,                        (42)
                              l
                                              sl u0l (q) = T λP R ∀l,                    (43)

where λP R is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the budget constraint in PR.

While in maj, we have :
                            X
                                  γ v 0 (y(1 − τ )) = DλM AJ ,                           (44)
                              d
                                    sl
                             γP               u0 (ql ) = DλM AJ ∀l,                      (45)
                                  k∈d(l) sk


                                                 47
where λM AJ is the multiplier associated with the budget constraint in MAJ.

In each of these sets of first order conditions, we can average the second equality over
all localities and equate the left-hand-sides to see that in a symmetric equilibrium the
following must be satisfied:
                                              L
                                           1X   sl
                   v 0 (y(1 − τ P R )) =      PL      u0l (qP R ) in pr;                         (46)
                                           L   k=1 sk
                                             l=1
                                                L
                                            1  X          sl
                 v 0 (y(1 − τ M AJ )) =               P            u0l (qM AJ ) in maj.          (47)
                                           LD          k∈d(l) sk
                                                l=1

From these two conditions, we see that the total budget depends positively on a weighted
average of the electoral sensitivities in pr and on a weighted average of the relative electoral
sensitivities in maj.

To explore the effect of the electoral system on the size of the government, we focus on
two extreme cases that give full power to the forces that distinguish maj and pr in our
model. These two cases exacerbate the difference between absolute and relative electoral
sensitivity. In case 1, electoral sensitivities are the same, sl = sl0 ∀l, l0 , but relative electoral
sensitivities can differ. In case 2, there is one locality per district so that relative electoral
sensitivities are the same but electoral sensitivities can differ.

The overall message that stems out of the analysis of those two cases is that when the
electoral system incentivizes parties to distribute resources more equality across localities,
parties also have incentives to increase the size of the government. This is encapsulated
in the following proposition:

Proposition 2 If u000 ≤ 0 ∀l, then the government is (i) larger in pr than in MAJ,
τ P R > τ M AJ , in case 1; (ii) smaller in pr than in MAJ, τ P R < τ M AJ , in case 2.


The intuition is that when politicians want to spread the resources unequally, the dimin-
ishing marginal utility of q is decreasing the impact of the marginal unit of public good
in the localities that they want to target. The restriction on u000 ≤ 0 ensures that changes
in the expected marginal utility when resources are spread do not counteract this effect.
While we cannot prove a general result when u000 > 0, it is easy to show that the re-
sults in Proposition 2 are not necessarily reversed. For instance, they hold for the case of
logarithmic utility.



                                                  48
Proof of Proposition 2

Case 1: In this case, all sl are the same though relative sensitivities differ.

From the first order conditions (43) and sl = sl0 ∀l, l0 , we have that qlP R = qlP0 R ∀l, l0 and
therefore that
                                                                 L
                                                           1 X 0 PR
                                           u0 (qlP R ) =      u (ql )                                      (48)
                                                           L
                                                               l=1

Conditions (46) and (47) boil down to:
                                                               L
                                                            1 X 0 PR
                            v 0 (y(1 − τ P R )) =                ul (q );                                  (49)
                                                            L2
                                                                 l=1
                                                                 L
                                                            1    X      1
                           v 0 (y(1 − τ M AJ )) =                            u0 (qM AJ ),                  (50)
                                                            L          DLd(l) l
                                                                 l=1

where Ld(l) is the number of localities in district d(l). These two conditions together with
the concavity of v give us that τ P R > τ M AJ if and only if
                                    L                      L
                               1 X 0 PR     X 1
                                  ul (q ) >        u0 (qM AJ ).                                            (51)
                               L             DLd(l) l
                                    l=1                    l=1

                                                                                                    1
The first order condition (45) implies that qlM AJ is positively correlated with                   Ld(l)   and
therefore that
                                    L                                L
                                    X       1              X1
                                                  qlM AJ >    q M AJ .                                     (52)
                                           DLd(l)           L l
                                     l=1                             l=1

Now, it follows from Jensen’s inequality and u000 ≤ 0 ∀l that
                                L                                L
                               X     1                X 1
                           u0 (            qlM AJ ) >        u0 (qM AJ )).                                 (53)
                                    DLd(l)             DLd(l) l
                              l=1                              l=1

We are now in position to prove the result stated in the proposition. We proceed by contra-
diction. Let us suppose that τ P R < τ M AJ . This directly implies that L      1 M AJ
                                                                                       > qP R .
                                                                          P
                                                                           l=1 L ql

From (52), this implies that L       1
                                         qlM AJ > q P R and thus that u0 ( L      1
                                                                                     qlM AJ ) <
                            P                                             P
                               l=1 DL           d(l)                        l=1 DL          d(l)

u0 (q P R ).   Combining this with (48) and (53), we obtain:
                                    L                      L
                               1 X 0 PR     X 1
                                  ul (q ) >        u0 (qM AJ ).                                            (54)
                               L             DLd(l) l
                                    l=1                    l=1

From (51), this gives τ P R > τ M AJ , a contradiction. We must thus have τ P R > τ M AJ .

Case 2. For this case relative electoral sensitivities are all 1 while sensitivities differ.



                                                           49
Conditions (46) and (47) then boil down to:
                                                                  L
                          0                                 1X   sl
                        v (y(1 − τ         PR
                                                )) =           PL     u0l (qP R );                    (55)
                                                            L       s
                                                                k=1 k
                                                                  l=1
                                                                    L
                                                            1      X
                       v 0 (y(1 − τ M AJ )) =                               u0l (qM AJ ).             (56)
                                                            L2
                                                                  l=1


These two conditions together with the concavity of v give us that τ P R > τ M AJ if and
only if
                          L                                                  L
                          X               sl                     1 X 0 M AJ
                                    PL           u0l (qP R )   >    ul (q   ).                        (57)
                                      k=1 sk
                                                                 L
                              l=1                                           l=1

From the first order conditions (45), we have that qlM AJ = qlM AJ ∀l, l0 and therefore that
                                                              0


                              L                         L
                              X                         X        sl
                                    u0 (qlM AJ ) =             PL                 u0 (qlM AJ ).       (58)
                              l=1                        l=1       k=1 sk


The first order condition (43) tells us that qlP R is positively correlated with sl , so that
                                     L                                        L
                                     X           sl                   1 X PR
                                           PL            qlP R >         ql .                         (59)
                                                k=1 sk
                                                                      L
                                     l=1                                     l=1

This and the concavity of u imply
                                 L                                                 L
                                X
                                0    sl                               1 X PR
                                                                        0
                              u(   PL                   qlP R )   <u(    ql ).                        (60)
                                               k=1 sk
                                                                      L
                                    l=1                                           l=1

Now, u000 ≤ 0 ∀l and Jensen’s inequality mean that
                         L                                            L
                         X            sl                              X            sl
                                    PL          u0 (qlP R ) < u0 (                PL       qlP R ).   (61)
                          l=1        k=1 sk                           l=1            k=1

We are now in position to prove the result stated in the proposition. We proceed by
contradiction. Let us suppose that τ P R > τ M AJ . This directly implies that L   1 PR
                                                                              P
                                                                               l=1 L ql  >
q M AJ and thus that u0 ( L    1 PR      0 M AJ ). Combining this with conditions (60) and
                         P
                           l=1 L ql ) < u (q

(61), we obtain:
                                    L
                                    X       sl
                                          PL            u0l (qP R ) < u0 (qlM AJ )                    (62)
                                    l=1        k=1 sk

From (57), given that qlM AJ = qlM AJ ∀l, l0 , this implies τ P R < τ M AJ , a contradiction. We
                                 0


must thus have τ P R < τ M AJ .




                                                           50
