                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MOVING BEYOND THE VALLEY OF DEATH:
                REGULATION AND VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENTS
                  IN EARLY-STAGE BIOPHARMACEUTICAL FIRMS

                                        Yujin Kim
                                    Chirantan Chatterjee
                                    Matthew J. Higgins

                                     Working Paper 25202
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25202


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 2018, Revised May 2019




We are grateful for helpful comments and suggestions from Bruce Weinberg, Sampsa Samila,
Jian Wang, Lee Fleming, Ben Handel, Peter Kline, Ramana Nanda, Yongwook Paik, Steve
Tadelis, Jagadeesh Sivadasan and Noam Yuchtman as well as seminar participants at Tsinghua
University, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Peking University HSBC Business
School, Waseda University, Hitotsubashi University, 2018 Barcelona GSE Workshop, Carey
School of Business, Johns Hopkins University and the 2019 Bates White Lifesciences
Symposium. Kim acknowledges financial support from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Dissertation
Fellowship and the Korea Foundation of Advanced Studies Fellowship. Chatterjee acknowledges
support from the Bharti & Max Institute Research Fellowship in Public Policy and Healthcare at
the Indian School of Business, the ICICI Bank Chair in Strategic Management at IIM Ahmedabad
and 2018-2019 W. Glenn Campbell and Rita Ricardo-Campbell National Fellowship at the
Hoover Institution, Stanford University. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Yujin Kim, Chirantan Chatterjee, and Matthew J. Higgins. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Moving Beyond the Valley of Death: Regulation and Venture Capital Investments in Early-Stage
Biopharmaceutical Firms
Yujin Kim, Chirantan Chatterjee, and Matthew J. Higgins
NBER Working Paper No. 25202
October 2018, Revised May 2019
JEL No. G24,L51,L65

                                         ABSTRACT

Can regulation reduce risks associated with investing in early-stage firms? Using the passage of
the European Orphan Drug Act (EU-ODA), we examine this question in the biopharmaceutical
industry. We provide causal evidence that venture capitalists (VCs) are more likely to invest in
early-stage firms operating in sub-fields disproportionately affected by EU-ODA. The switch to
early-stage investments appears strongest among VCs that previously faced greater levels of
information asymmetry. We also find that the level of syndication declined for early-stage
investments and exit performance improved. We conclude discussing the implications of our
findings for public policy, entrepreneurship and innovation.

Yujin Kim                                           Matthew J. Higgins
Shanghai Tech University                            Scheller College of Business
Huaxia Middle Road 393,                             Georgia Institute of Technology
Pudong New District                                 800 West Peachtree Street
Shanghai                                            Atlanta, GA 30308
China                                               and NBER
yjkim@shanghaitech.edu.cn                           matt.higgins@scheller.gatech.edu

Chirantan Chatterjee
Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad
Room 15F, Wing 15, Heritage Campus
Ahmedabad
India
chirantan@gmail.com
INTRODUCTION


         Extant research shows that many startups find it difficult to secure early-stage funding

(Kerr and Nanda, 2011). A notable reason for this shortage is the difficulty in valuing these firms;

they often involve novel scientific approaches or target new markets. They also often lack

verifiable measures such as publications, patents, products, or sales that can be useful in

objectively estimating the commercial feasibility and value of a venture. In the absence of such

measures nascent firms may turn to alternative signals to convey quality (e.g., Hsu and Ziedonis,

2013; Higgins et al., 2011; Nicholson et al., 2005; Stuart et al., 1999; Audretsch and Stephan,

1996; Podolny, 1993). However, in these cases VCs often have to depend on their ‘gut feelings’

thereby making early-stage deal valuation as much an art as it is a science (Huang and Pearce,

2015).

         This information asymmetry has led to the concern that VCs underfinance high-tech

ventures that push the scientific frontier (e.g., Dimov and Murray, 2008; Parhankangas, 2007;

Auerswald and Branscomb, 2003) resulting in a rotation from early-stage to late-stage

investments (Lerner, 2009). Within the biopharmaceutical industry some have argued that VCs

have begun to herd into similar technologies (Dimov and Murray, 2008; Auerswald and

Branscomb, 2003). Others have suggested that the lack of early-stage funding has slowed the

transition from the ‘valley of death’ thereby hindering productivity (Hudson and Khazragui,

2013).

         This paper examines whether regulation can effectively be used to help alleviate these

information asymmetries (Alvarez-Garrido, 2015; Milanesi et al., 2013; Schwienbacher, 2013)

and drive investment towards early-stage firms. Empirical work linking regulation and venture

capital is sparse.1 To fill this gap we exploit the introduction of the Orphan Drug Act in the


1
 Lerner (2000) considers the relationship between SBIR grants and subsequent VC funding. Gans and
Stern (2003) find that SBIR awardees performed better in industries that attracted more VC investment.
Finally, Samila and Sorenson (2011) show that federal R&D funding and VC funding are complements.


                                                                                                         2
European Union (EU-ODA) in 2000. The EU-ODA was designed to incentivize and facilitate

treatments for rare diseases. We present causal evidence that the EU-ODA increased early-stage

VC investments by five percent, on average, for firms operating in biopharmaceutical sub-fields

affected by the policy.

        Unintendedly, the provisions of the EU-ODA provided investors credible signals about

the scientific viability of novel drug candidates and clarity on their potential market value. We

find that the dissipation of information asymmetries allowed VCs to shift from late-stage to early-

stage investments when investing in EU-based startups, relative to US-based startups. This

suggests that the expected return for EU-based startups increased relative to their counterparts in

the US. Interestingly, we also find that new investments were more likely to come from US-based

VCs as opposed to EU-based VCs. US-based VCs faced greater levels of information

asymmetries due to their distance but it appears that the benefits from EU-ODA were a

significant mechanism enough to induce cross-border investment.

        In addition to causing VC investment to shift to earlier stages we also find that the level

of syndication declined in early-round investments. This suggests that the information-

provisioning role of the EU-ODA, for early-stage startups, diminishes the need for peer input and

evaluation that comes from syndication. It also suggests that benefits conferred by the EU-ODA

outweigh the potential value-adding activities normally attributed to syndication (e.g.,

Chemmanur and Tian, 2011; Casamatta and Haritchabalet, 2007; Brander et al., 2002).

Additionally the amount raised in these early rounds does not change after EU-ODA, which

suggests that VCs had been using syndication as a way to decrease risk related to early-stage

investments.

        Lastly, we document a significant increase in exit performance for our focal EU-ODA

treated firms. Notably, this increase was in the form of IPOs versus acquisitions, reversing a trend

observed over the recent past (Gao et al., 2013). It appears that the signals conferred by the EU-

ODA allowed VCs to select higher quality firms earlier and move them to IPO. This trend


                                                                                                      3
reversal should be viewed positively for investors since IPOs, on average, have higher returns

than acquisitions (Smith et al., 2011). Importantly, we do not see any statistically significant

difference in bankruptcies for firms affected by the EU-ODA. This suggests that the mitigation in

risk due to the signals of the EU-ODA make these treated investments no more risky (in terms of

failure) than control investments. This is important evidence that demonstrates the role regulation

can play in mitigating market failures that may exist due to information asymmetries, opening the

door to private investment.

EUROPEAN UNION REGULATION 141/200: ORPHAN DRUG ACT

         The first Orphan Drug Act enacted anywhere was by the US in 1983 (US-ODA). It was

intended to facilitate the development of treatments for rare diseases (Grabowski, 2005; Rohde,

2000). Most rare diseases remain “orphans” because market sizes are too small to justify their

development costs. To solve this market failure, the US-ODA provided for a variety of incentives

to firms. The considerable success of the US-ODA encouraged others, including the EU, to adopt

similar legislation (Yin, 2008; Cheung et al., 2004; Lichtenberg and Waldfogel, 2003). The EU’s

adoption of their Orphan Drug Act occurred in December 1999 and it was implemented starting

in January 2000.2

         In order to file for orphan designation in the EU the prevalence of the underlying disease

must be below five per 10,000 of the EU population. Exceptions exist in cases where the expected

return on investment is insufficient to justify a drug’s development costs. The EU also considers

whether the condition being treated is life threatening and if there exists a current treatment (or if

the proposed treatment provides significant benefit over an existing drug). Key aspects of the

application include discussions on the scientific rationale and medical plausibility of a drug

candidate. Firms may file for orphan designation at any time during the development process up

until they file for marketing authorization for the drug. In reality, however, applications need to


2
 EU Regulation 141/200: http://ec.europa.eu/health//sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-
1/reg_2000_141_cons-2009-07/reg_2000_141_cons-2009-07_en.pdf


                                                                                                      4
be filed 8-12 months prior to a submission for marketing approval given the time delays by the

Committee for Orphan Medicinal Products (COMP) to process applications.

         Receiving orphan drug status confers several key benefits to a firm including: protocol

assistance and follow-up, reduced/waived regulatory fees, accelerated approval pathways and

extensions to market exclusivity. Importantly, orphan status provides an assessment by the

COMP of the medical plausibility of a drug candidate. It is this assessment that provides key

scientific information to the market about the viability and risk of a drug candidate. In the EU,

new drugs are awarded eight years of market exclusivity. The granting of orphan status confers

another two years of market exclusivity, for a total of 10 years.3 Another two years is available

(for a total of 12 years) if the drug targets a pediatric indication.4 Moreover, the granting of

orphan status limits approvals of other drugs for the same indication unless they can be shown to

provide significant benefit over an existing treatment (Hall and Carlson, 2014).5

         All of these incentives were designed to encourage pharmaceutical innovation directed

towards rare diseases. The evidence appears to suggest that the ODAs in the US and EU have

been successful (Stockklausner et al., 2016). For example, since its passage in 1983, close to

3,000 drugs have received orphan drug status with 448 approvals in the US. In the EU,

designations exceed 1,200 with nearly 100 approvals (Hall and Carlson, 2014). The ODAs are not

without their detractors, however, where issues of gaming and high prices in the US have recently

been called into question.6

         Finally, the EU-ODA includes provisions that make some of the benefits tagged to

protocol assistance and fee waivers more generous for small and medium size firms. As noted in



3
  In contrast, in the US chemical-based drugs are awarded five years of market exclusivity with orphan
drug status conferring another two years for a total of seven years.
4
  During market exclusivity generics are unable to enter the market. While this confirms monopoly
positions to these firms, drug prices are regulated in the EU.
5
  There are exceptions to these rules, for example if the original firm provides their consent or if they are
unable to supply enough product. See Hall and Carlson (2014) for a more extensive discussion.
6
  For a discussion see: https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2017/02/10/514373480/sen-grassley-
launches-inquiry-into-orphan-drug-laws-effect-on-prices


                                                                                                                5
Figure 1, the EU-ODA does not include the same kind of R&D tax credits that exist in the US. It

is important to note that the intention of the EU-ODA was to incentivize development of

treatments for rare diseases; it was not intended per se to solve potential underfinancing of

nascent firms. We could not find any relevant discussion of this topic in the legislative record. As

such, for the purposes of providing an information-provisioning role to VCs and steering

investment towards these firms, the EU-ODA can plausibly be viewed as an exogenous shock.

This will be important for identification as parties might a priori behave strategically, a topic we

return to below.

VENTURE FINANCING OF EARLY-STAGE FIRMS

        Most biopharmaceutical startups lack the financial resources to take a product all the way

to market. These firms largely depend on outside funding, especially during their nascent stages.

It is at this stage of development, unfortunately, that conventional means of financing is severely

limited (e.g., Budish et al., 2015; Murray, 1999; Myers and Majluf, 1984). Traditionally, VCs

have filled this financing gap and carried firms forward to a liquidity event. Moreover, early-stage

biopharmaceutical firms are notoriously difficult to value as many are working on innovative

products at the frontier of technology and often lack publications, patents or products necessary to

evaluate their commercial viability (Higgins et al., 2011; Gans et al., 2008). As such, investments

in these firms often depend on the ‘gut feelings’ of VCs (Huang and Knight, 2017; Huang and

Pearce, 2015) or other less traditional signals (e.g., Hsu and Ziedonis, 2013; Higgins et al., 2011;

Nicholson et al., 2005; Stuart et al., 1999; Audretsch and Stephan, 1996; Podolny, 1993) .

        These difficulties make investors seeking to fund early-stage startups vulnerable to

information asymmetry problems such as adverse selection and moral hazard (e.g., Wu, 2016;

Kerr et al., 2014). The problems compound when VCs do not have the specialized scientific

knowledge to fully understand the nuances of startup technologies (Schwienbacher, 2013). Some

have argued that VCs have responded to these challenges by switching from financing

exploratory to exploitative ventures that are easier to understand and shifting from early- to late-


                                                                                                       6
stage firms (Alvarez-Garrido, 2015). The net effect of this herding behavior (Scharfstein and

Stein, 1990) is that many firms suffer a financing gap in their early-stages or when they are at

their so-called “valley of death” (Hudson and Khazragui, 2013).

         Signaling Effects of the ODA

         There is a vast literature on the role that signals play in markets dating back to Spence

(1974). Effective signals can moderate the market failure problem caused by information

asymmetry (e.g., Gorry and Useche, 2017; Heeley et al., 2007; Mann, 2004; Long, 2002). For

example, in the context of entrepreneurial finance, prior work has demonstrated the signaling role

of status (e.g., Stuart et al., 1999; Podolny, 1993), star-scientists (e.g., Higgins et al., 2011;

Zucker et al., 2002; Zucker and Darby, 1997), alliance partners (Nicholson et al., 2005), venture

capital backing (Meggison and Weiss, 1991), prestige of the underwriter (Higgins and Gulati,

2003; Meggison and Weiss, 1991) and university connections (Fuller and Rothaermel 2012;

Audretsch and Stephan, 1996). Directly relevant to our study is the literature examining the role

that regulation and policy play in providing government-backed signals so that the private sector

can reasonably estimate the commercial and scientific viability of a project (e.g., Hoenig and

Henkel, 2015; Useche, 2014; Hsu and Ziedonis, 2013).7

         The EU-ODA provides two different signals that are beneficial in decreasing information

asymmetries that we will categorize as scientific-based and market-based. Scientific-based

signals are ones that help a VC understand and form estimates about the scientific viability of a

project while market-based signals help estimate the economic viability of projects. If we

consider a simple expected profit function: E(Π) = ρ(TR – TC), where E(Π) is defined as

expected profit, TR is defined as the sum of all future discounted revenues, TC is the sum of all

future discounted costs and ρ represents some estimated probability that those revenues and costs

will be realized. Effectively what the EU-ODA does is increase (or bring clarity to) TR, decrease

7
 Unlike prior literature that has studied the impact of government grants, awards and funding on
subsequent venture capital financing (e.g., Islam et al., 2018), here the companies are not receiving
funding. Rather, the signal is coming in the form of scientific validation and additional market protections.


                                                                                                                7
TC and improve estimates of ρ, all of which should either individually or collectively increase

expected profits.

         Expanding on the above, the early scientific review by regulators during the EU-ODA

application process should improve clarity about the viability of a drug candidate. Because of

this early review, orphan designation is often seen as a ‘golden badge’. Essentially the EU-ODA

transforms unobservable information about the quality of novel drugs into observable

information, thereby decreasing the VC’s cost of acquiring information necessary to make more

informed decisions. Ultimately, this should translate into better approximations of transition

probabilities and ultimately improved estimates of ρ.8 The additional years of market exclusivity

and limits on approvals of other drugs within the same therapeutic category should improve

estimates of TR. It is important to note that the restrictions on other drugs do not include those

that are shown to be superior. As such, revenue estimates still remain probabilistic. Finally, fee

waivers and protocol assistance should reduce TC.

         Cross-border Venture Investing

         Entrepreneurial financing markets vary across regions. The VC market in the US is large,

mature and relatively established compared to other regions. As such, US-based VCs regularly

make cross-border investments to other regions, such as the EU and Asia, where entrepreneurial

financing markets are still being grown (Iriyama et al., 2010; Loree and Guisinger, 1995). Due to

the positive impacts of the foreign investments on entrepreneurial activities and innovation in the

host country, many governments have pursued policies that make foreign investments more

favorable (Kim and Li, 2014; Globerman and Shapiro, 1999).

         Likewise, the information and signals provided by the EU-ODA acted in a similar

manner, causing an increase in the flow of VC investments into EU-based firms from non-EU

based investors. Compared to domestic VCs foreign VCs often face greater levels of information


8
  In a different context, research has demonstrated the positive signaling effects of regulatory certification
in the case of the ISO 9000 Quality Management Standard (Terlaak and King, 2006).


                                                                                                                 8
asymmetries when valuing local, early-stage firms (Vedula and Matusik, 2017; Dai et al., 2012).

In our context, EU-based VCs can more easily access information sources such as local networks,

referrals from domestic firms or local government, and informal reputation that can be either

directly or indirectly used to verify a local firm’s quality. While information may be observable

by local VCs, the same information may not be equivalently observable to foreign VCs due to

factors such as geographic distance and/or cultural/linguistic differences (Bruton and Ahlstrom,

2003). Hence, the government-backed designations, such as that provided under EU-ODA, can

turn less explicit information into more observable signals, thereby lowering the uncertainty

surrounding US-based investments in EU-based firms (Zacharakis et al., 2007). We argue that

this may be a positive externality created in our context for cross-border venture investments and

we examine if this indeed holds in our analysis.

        Venture Capital Syndication

        VC deal syndication refers to two or more funds participating in an equity stake for a

given investment and financing round. The argued benefits behind syndication include: improved

deal quality selection; peer evaluation of technology; ‘better’ or more accurate valuations;

improved guidance to investee firms; and a way to decrease VC portfolio risk (e.g., Gompers et

al., 2016; Jääskeläinen et al., 2007; Wright and Lockett, 2003; Brander et al., 2002; Gompers and

Lerner, 2000; Lerner, 1994). Unfortunately, these benefits do not come without potential costs.

Casamatta and Haritchabalet (2007) argue that during the selection process VCs will ‘tip their

hand’ and reveal potential deals to syndicate partners who themselves could turn into competitors

for the deal.

        Information and benefits provided by the EU-ODA could diminish the need for early-

stage deal syndication in several ways. First, the medical and scientific review should decrease

the need for peer evaluation of an underlying technology. The granting of orphan status should

also serve as a signal of quality and improve overall deal selection, again reducing the need for

peer evaluation. Second, the extensions to market exclusivity and limits on potential competition


                                                                                                    9
should improve a VC’s ability to value the firm. Finally, the cost benefits of EU-ODA, on the

margin, may decrease the need for funds making it less likely that a VC may want or need to

spread risk across other firms.

EMPIRICAL METHODOLOGY & DATA

        Methodology

        To tease out the causal relationship between EU-ODA and VC investments, we employ a

difference-in-differences (DiD) approach to compare subfields primarily affected by EU-ODA to

non-affected subfields, as we discuss more fully below. We estimate the following equation:

                1    𝑌!"# = 𝛼! + 𝛾! + 𝑋! + 𝛽! (𝐷𝑟𝑢𝑔 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑! ) + 𝛽! (𝐴𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑂𝐷𝐴! )

                                  + 𝛽! { 𝐷𝑟𝑢𝑔 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑! ) ∗ (𝐴𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑂𝐷𝐴! } + 𝜀!"#

where Yijt is defined as the various outcome variables we explore (i.e., timing of investment, the

number of investors per round, invested amount per round and exit performance), i indexes

individual investments at the investee-round-investor level (𝑖 ∈ {1...44,867}), j indexes industry

categories (𝑗 ∈ {1...12}), and t indexes the year (𝑡 ∈ {1989...2011}). Drug related is a dummy

variable that equals one if an investment is in the EU-ODA affected subfields (treatment group),

zero otherwise. After ODA is a dummy variable equal to one if an investment occurred after 2000,

zero otherwise. Xi is a vector of control variables that includes: location of the startup

headquarters, location of the investor firm headquarters, and type of investors.

        The coefficient of interest is β2. The coefficient captures the difference in the outcome

variables of the treatment group relative to the control group as a result of the treatment by the

EU-ODA. To assign the treatment and the control groups, we use the fact that EU-ODA

disproportionately affects firms pursuing development of novel drugs for human diseases. Among

the investment categories in VentureExpert relating to medical, health and life sciences, we

categorized the following into our treatment group: Biotech-Human, Med/Health Products,

Medical Diagnostics, Medical Therapeutics and Pharmaceuticals. The control group consists of




                                                                                                     10
investment categories in the medical, health and life sciences not directly related to developing

treatments for human disorders: Biosensors, Biotech Equipment, Biotech Other, Biotech

Research, Biotech Animal, Biotech Industrial, and Med/Health Services.9

         Finally, it is possible that the composition of VCs may somehow change after EU-ODA.

For example, there may be entry of new VCs into drug-related fields for reasons other than the

EU-ODA. If this happened then our DiD would only capture the impact of how investment

patterns of entrant VCs differed from incumbent VCs, but not the changes of incumbent VCs

caused by EU-ODA. To account for this possibility we report both OLS and fixed effect models

with the intuition being that new VC entry will be controlled for by technology category, investor

and time fixed effects.10

         Data and Variables

         Our data comes from VentureXpert and we start by collecting the population of global

investments between 1989 and 2011 in the medical, health and life science categories. We

exclude observations that do not disclose essential information such as: investment date,

investment stage, industry category and other major characteristics of investing firms. This leaves

us with a final dataset of 44,867 investments made to 6,643 startups by 3,072 investing firms. A

time trend of investments by year is presented in Appendix Figure 1 and summary statistics are

presented in Table 1.

         Our primary unit of analysis is at the investee-investor-investment round level. Our

startups, on average, receive investments over 3.9 rounds. Each round, on average, includes 4.8

investors and raises $12.8 million. The average time difference between a startup’s founding and

an investment is 2,119 days (i.e., six years). Approximately 21 percent of investments are made in

9
  Modifications in the composition of the treatment and the control groups do not change the nature of
results. For example, if we include Biotech Research and Biotech Other in the treatment instead of the
control group our findings remain consistent. We include Medical Diagnostics in the treatment group
because these technologies, such as biomarkers, are complements to drug development. If we move them
from the treatment to control group our results remain unchanged.
10
   In addition to the OLS and the FE models we report in the paper we also report logit regressions in the
Appendix. Results remain consistent.


                                                                                                             11
early-stage start-ups; 67 percent of investors and 80 percent of startups are located in the US,

which aligns with the observation that the US has been the locus of global biopharmaceutical

research.

           To explore the timing of VC investments we construct three variables. First, we define

Early-stage as a dummy variable equal to one if VentureExpert classifies an investment as early-

stage, zero otherwise. Kaplan and Lerner (2016) note that defining what early-stage is sometimes

is not straight forward in the context of the venture investments. However, VentureExpert

captures this explicitly through a variable.11 We follow prior work (Atanasov et al (2007)) and

use this variable in our analysis.

           Second, because an early-stage investment can occur across firms of different ages we

define Time to investment that measures the time between firm founding and the investment. If

the EU-ODA causes investments to shift to early-stages, then the first variable will detect that

effect. However, if the EU-ODA simply moves investments in the early-stage back further, this

effect will be captured by our second variable. Lastly, we additionally define Time to initial

investment by restricting samples to the set of the first investment that each startup ever received.

This is to circumvent the issue of possible problems in how our data providers measure Early

Stage and our results still remain consistent.

           We control for the type of VC making the investment and categorize them as independent

venture capital (IVC), corporate venture capital (CVC), government-backed venture capital (GVC)

or an angel investor (Angel). Again, we depend on VentureExpert’s classification of VC type. We

also control for whether the start-up was based in the US (US startup) or EU (EU startup) and

whether the VC investor was based in the US (US investor) or EU (EU investor). In all cases

these variables are defined as dummies that equal one if it falls within one of these categories,

zero otherwise. In order to determine the number of VCs involved in syndication we count the

number of investors participating in a single round (Number of investors).

11
     See for a variable list: https://vx.thomsonib.com/VxComponent/vxhelp/VEglossary.htm


                                                                                                    12
        To investigate the investment performance of VCs, we define several dummy variables to

capture both startup success and failure. An investment is considered a success if it leads to a

liquidity event for the VC. We define M&A as a dummy variable that equals one if a VC-backed

investment exits through merger or acquisition, zero otherwise. We also define IPO as a dummy

variable that equals one if the VC-backed investment exits through an initial public offering, zero

otherwise. Lastly, failure is defined as bankruptcy and we define a dummy variable, Bankruptcy,

equal to one if a startup reports bankruptcy or it is defunct, zero otherwise.

        Finally, we recognize that measuring the impact of EU-ODA on performance is

challenging because startups founded prior to 2000 may continue to receive investments after

2000. To avoid any contamination we restrict our sample to startups that received an early-stage

investment in the five years prior to EU-ODA to those that received an investment in five years

after EU-ODA. Details are provided in performance analysis in Section 5.3 below.

        Identification

        Our identification strategy relies on the fact that the control group is not exposed

to treatment in either period. To formally test the parallel trend assumption we take our

pre-trend data (before 2000) and split it in half, defining the midpoint (1994) as an

arbitrary treatment event and estimate our diff-in-diffs specification. If the parallel trend

assumption is violated the coefficient 𝛽! will be statistically significant. The results for

this placebo test are reported in Table 2 for each of our three different dependent

variables. Across all models, the coefficient of interest, 𝛽! , is not statistically significant.

Hence, these placebo test results suggest that the parallel trends assumption is not

violated.

RESULTS

        Impact of EU-ODA on Likelihood, Timing and Location of VC Investments




                                                                                                   13
        Table 3 reports results related to the impact of EU-ODA on timing and location of

venture capital investments. The dependent variable is Early-stage in Models 1 and 2, Time to

investment in Models 3 and 4 and Time to initial investment in Models 5 and 6. Across all six

models our coefficient of interest is β2 or the interaction (Drug related * After ODA). Given the

number of controls in the regression we report our main independent variables in Table 3 while

the full set of estimates are reported in Appendix Table 1. Models 1 and 2 show that VCs are 3.7

to 5 percent more likely to make early-stage investments in EU-ODA-related fields. This

translates into roughly 2,000 new early-stage investments. Results in Models 3 to 6 show that

VCs shift their investments forward by 1 to 2 years.

        The coefficients from the OLS regressions in Models 1, 3 and 5 are greater than those

from the fixed effect models in Models 2, 4 and 6. Recall that the OLS model takes into account

both the change of pre-existing VCs as well as newly established VCs, while the fixed effect

models include only pre-existing VCs. Taken together, the results imply that the EU-ODA

promotes the entry of new VCs in EU-ODA-related fields, who fund much younger startups than

incumbent investors do.12

        Table 4 reports the variation of the EU-ODA impact over the location of VCs. We report

results across two different dependent variables, Early-stage and Time to investment. Our main

independent variables are displayed in Table 4 while the full set of estimates are reported in

Appendix Table 6. In Models 1 and 2 we restrict the sample to investments in EU-based startups

by EU-based VCs, while in Models 3 and 4 we restrict the sample to investments in EU-based

startups by US-based VCs.13 The results suggest that the causal impact of the EU-ODA on



12
   To ensure that our results are not sensitive to our selection of time frames we repeat the analysis in
Models 1 and 2 with three, five and seven year windows (Appendix Table 2). We repeat the same three,
five and seven years time frame for the analysis in Models 3 and 4 (Appendix Table 3). In Appendix Table
4 we replicate Table 3 using a multinomial logit regression and in Appendix Table 5 we replicate Table 3
using alternative definitions of the treatment group. Results remain robust across these specifications.
13 We did not include the regressions with the subsamples of the first investments because the number of
initial investments into EU startups made by US-based VCs is too small to run the fixed effect models.


                                                                                                       14
switching to early-stage investments is mainly driven by US-based VCs rather than EU-based

VCs.

        The fact that US-based VCs significantly increase early-stage investments in EU-based

startups implies that foreign-based VCs suffered from greater levels of information asymmetries

related to valuing EU-based startups relative to their EU-based counterparts. Geographic distance,

cultural differences, and/or a lack of understanding about the local market possibly kept US-based

VCs out of the market. The observable signals provided by the EU-ODA (directly and indirectly)

help US-based VCs overcome the “liability of foreignness” and induce cross-border investments

into EU-based startups. Consistent with prior work on signals (e.g., Conti et al., 2013a and

2013b; Higgins et al., 2011), the results in Table 4 seem to suggest that the information signaling

effects of the EU-ODA have some dynamics inherent in them.

        Relatedly, Table 5 separates the sample into VC investments made in EU-based startups

and those made in US-based startups. Again, given the number of controls in the regression we

report our main independent variables in Table 5 while the full set of estimates are reported in

Appendix Table 7. Not surprisingly, the results show that the EU-ODA caused a switch towards

younger firms in the EU (Model 2) but not in the US (Model 4). As expected, the effect is

stronger and more significant among EU-based startups since they are more likely to benefit from

orphan designation in their home market.

        Impact of ODA on Syndication of Venture Capital Investments

        Table 6 reports the changes in syndication behaviors of investors. Again, given the

number of controls in the regression we report our main independent variables in Table 6 while

the full set of estimates are reported in Appendix Table 8. Overall, Model 1 reports that VCs

increase the use of syndication after EU-ODA in drug-related fields. However, this result is

driven by late-stage investments. This can be seen when we split the sample into early- and late-




                                                                                                   15
stage deals. Results in Model 2 indicate that VCs are less likely to syndicate for early-stage deals;

while in Model 3 we see an increase in deal syndication for late-stage deals.14

         This diverging pattern suggests that the information conferred by the EU-ODA affects an

investor’s incentive for syndication differently across investment stages. A VC is likely to

syndicate early-stage deals when there is less information available to evaluate a nascent

investment opportunity. As a result, they depend on peer opinion. The signals created by the EU-

ODA appear to be sufficient enough in quality to replace the need for peer opinion. Likewise, if

the EU-ODA changes the expected profit of a start-up, they will become more valuable and

command greater valuations in later rounds of financing. For these firms, we may see the level of

syndication for late stage deals actually increase not because VCs need peer opinion but because

VCs are necessary to pool their investments to meet the size of amount sought by the late-stage

startups in pursuit of big exits.

         Results in Table 7 support this view. Again, given the number of controls in the

regression we report our main independent variables in Table 7 while the full set of estimates are

reported in Appendix Table 10. In Model 1 we find an overall increase in amounts invested after

EU-ODA. This result is completely driven by late-stage deals. In Model 3 we find that in EU-

ODA affected fields the amount invested in late-stage deals increased by $1.2 million. In Model 2

we see that the EU-ODA does not have a statistically significant impact on the amount invested in

early-stage deals. Coupled with our prior findings in Table 6, this is important because the

investment amount does not decrease on average, while investments are being shifted to an earlier

stage (i.e., back over the ‘valley of death’) and the level of syndication is declining. In the




14
   To test the sensitivity, we repeat the analysis with three, five and seven year windows, which is reported
in Appendix Table 9. The results remain robust to the modifications.


                                                                                                           16
absence of any type of risk-mitigation by the benefits of the EU-ODA we would expect to see the

values of investments decline as they are shifted to an earlier stage.15

        Impact of EU-ODA on Performance of Venture Capital Investments

        In Table 8 we compare the exit performances of startups that received early-stage

investments during the five years prior to the EU-ODA to those for the five years after the EU-

ODA. As before, given the number of controls in the regression we report our main independent

variables in Table 8 while the full set of estimates are reported in Appendix Table 11. Overall, we

see significant differential exit performance between IPOs and acquisitions for our EU-ODA

related fields. Specifically, in Model 2 we find that the rate of exit via IPO increased while in

Model 1 the rate of exit via acquisition decreased. This pattern is a reversal of the general pattern

observed by Gao et al. (2013).16 Given that biopharmaceutical IPOs tend to have higher returns

than acquisitions, this suggests that VCs are able to maximize returns to investors (Gompers et

al., 2016).

        There can be two explanations for the improved exit performances. On one hand, the

absolute values of early-stage startups funded by VCs after the EU-ODA could be greater than

those funded prior to the EU-ODA, because the policy signals help VCs identify superior deals.

On the other hand, the switch of exit mode toward IPO might suggest that those parties favoring

exit via IPO appear to be winning any underlying tension relating to mode of exit. This result is

interesting, especially given the conflict of interests between investors and startup founders

within this market. In general, founders and management teams of startups tend to have a

preference for exit via an IPO, while VCs tend to push for a timely liquidity event.17 Further,


15
   Relating back to our earlier example, E(Π) = ρ(TR – TC), if investments are shifted back in time
without any mitigation in risk, then ρ would decrease thereby decreasing the expected value of a firm.
This should lead to a lower valuation and, all else equal, a decline in investment.
16
   In Appendix Table 12 we replicate Table 8 over alternative time periods (3 and 7 years) and in Appendix
Table 13 we replicate Table 8 using multinomial logit regressions. Results remain robust.
17
   “It’s very hard as a venture capitalist, as a professional board member, to tell a management team,
‘you’re going to build this company to be acquired. When these companies get swallowed by larger
entities, the passion dies, the entrepreneurship dies,” said Ted Schlein, a managing partner of Kleiner,


                                                                                                        17
among various types of investors, CVCs are reported to be more patient investor groups than

individual VCs because CVCs are interested in the underlying technology rather than the

financial return (Ceccagnoli et al., 2018; Park and Steensma, 2013). Collectively, these results

suggest that the EU-ODA encourages management teams and investors to consider more costly

and time-consuming options for mode of exit.

        Finally, the results in Models 3 show that firms receiving early-stage investments after

the EU-ODA do not have significantly greater hazards to exit via bankruptcy than the previously

funded firms. This implies that the investment performance of VCs does not get worse as a result

of the shift toward early-stage deals. In general, a shift towards earlier stage investments should

come with increased risk. However, these results suggest that the signals and information

conferred by EU-ODA were sufficient enough to reduce risk thereby allowing for investments to

be made earlier or back across the ‘valley of death’.

CONCLUSION

        Given significant information asymmetries in early-stage investing, underinvestment can

occur. Recent research suggests that VCs may be herding into less risky, later-stage projects.

Such a shift can create funding gaps for early-stage firms. We explore the role that regulation

may be able to play in helping early-stage firms go through the so-called valley-of -death. Using

the regulatory setting of the EU and the passage of the Orphan Drug Act, we examine this

question in the biopharmaceutical industry. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first

papers to empirically demonstrate the causal impact from a reduction in information asymmetry

through governmental regulation on the investment decisions of VCs.

        We find that due to the benefits conferred by the EU-ODA VCs shift their investments

towards earlier-stages. The magnitude of the impact appears stronger among the group of US-

based VCs that previously faced greater information asymmetries in valuing EU-based startups,


Perkins, Caufield & Byers: https://www.forbes.com/2010/03/05/venture-capital-ipo-entrepreneurs-finance-
wharton.html#5765046a7137


                                                                                                      18
compared to local investors. We also find that the level of syndication decreases during this shift.

Importantly, the average amount invested per round does not change suggesting that the

information conferred by the EU-ODA replaced the need for peer evaluation. Exit performance

appears to improve with an increased probability of IPO and no greater risk of bankruptcy

resulting from the shift towards earlier stage investments. Taken together, our results appear to

demonstrate that regulation can play a significant role in mitigating valuation problems relating to

information asymmetry and, thus, helping drive private investment back across the ‘valley of

death’.

           Our findings also have important policy implications given that many countries have

made establishing a solid ecosystem for entrepreneurship a priority. Unfortunately, for some

technologies and industries, such as biopharmaceuticals, significant information asymmetries

exist making the valuation of early-stage firms difficult. If these firms are unable to communicate

the genuine value of their early-stage innovations, they may end up being disproportionately

underfinanced compared to other startups for which information is more readily available and

discernable. This could dampen the incentives of entrepreneurs and early-stage firms to pursue

high-risk, high-reward type of innovations in important science-based sectors like

biopharmaceuticals. Our results here demonstrate that policy has a role in correcting this market

failure.

           Our project, however, is not without limitations. First, we do not study systematically

how entry and exit of VCs might be driving our results, although we partly aim to address it

econometrically by using a fixed effects strategy. If it is the case that new VCs are responsible for

shifting the nature of VC activity towards early-stage startups, then future studies can build on

our intuition to investigate the moderating role of industry evolution among VCs in conjunction

with regulation, such as the EU-ODA. Second, as VCs shift their investment focus to early-stage

startups, they might need to come up with new investment strategies and/or governance structures

to manage their portfolio. While our study partly examines the changes in deal syndication


                                                                                                     19
strategies of VCs, the shift towards less syndication in early-stages and more syndication in late-

stages may cause investment patterns, due to factors such as risk, to change. To the extent this has

unintended consequences remains to be seen.

        Finally, while we do our best to tease out the causal impact of the EU-ODA, it is still

possible that the group of firms in drug-related biopharmaceutical fields may differ from the

group in non-drug-related fields in some unobservable ways. Future work could also consider

extending our findings to sectors beyond biopharmaceuticals to other emerging fields like

artificial intelligence or climate change. A cross-industry study would also be useful to help

determine if our results are generalizable or whether the biopharmaceutical industry remains a

‘black duck’. Related to this, it would be meaningful to examine what types of VC-specific

characteristics lead to the tendency toward financing younger innovations, such as the

background of partners, reputation or previous experiences in relevant markets. As always, much

remains to be done.



References

Alvarez-Garrido, E. 2015. The value translation model: A theory of venture growth and
innovation. Academy of Management Proceedings, No. 1, 17910.

Atanasov, V., Ivanov, V., & Litvak, K. 2007. The impact of litigation on venture capitalist
reputation (No. w13641). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Audretsch, D., Stephan, P. 1996. Company-scientist locational links: the case of biotechnology.
American Economic Review, 86(3), 641-652.

Auerswald, P. E., Branscomb, L. M. 2003. Valleys of death and Darwinian seas: Financing the
invention to innovation transition in the United States. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 28(3-
4), 227-239.

Brander, J. A., Amit, R., Antweiler, W. 2002. Venture-capital syndication: Improved venture
selection versus the value-added hypothesis. Journal of Economics & Management
Strategy, 11(3), 423-452.

Bruton, G. D., Ahlstrom, D. 2003. An institutional view of China’s venture capital industry:
Explaining differences between China and the West. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(2), 233–
259.



                                                                                                  20
Budish, E., Roin, B. N., Williams, H. 2015. Do firms underinvest in long-term research?
Evidence from cancer clinical trials. American Economic Review, 105(7), 2044-2085.

Casamatta, C., Haritchabalet, C. 2007. Experience, screening and syndication in venture capital
investments. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16(3), 368-398.

Ceccagnoli, M., Higgins, M.J., Kang, H. 2018. Corporate venture capital as a real option in the
market for technology. Strategic Management Journal, forthcoming.

Chemmanur, T., Tian, X. 2011. Peer monitoring, syndication, and the dynamics of venture
capitalist interactions. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1343116

Cheung, R. Y., Cohen, J. C., & Illingworth, P. 2004. Orphan drug policies: implications for the
United States, Canada, and developing countries. Health Law Journal, 12, 183.

Conti, A., Thursby, M., Rothaermel, F. T. 2013a. Show me the right stuff: Signals for high-tech
startups. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 22(2), 341-364.

Conti, A., Thursby, J., Thursby, M. 2013b. Patents as signals for startup financing. The Journal of
Industrial Economics, 61(3), 592-622.

Dai, N., Jo, H., Kassicieh, S. 2012. Cross-border venture capital investments in Asia: Selection
and exit performance. Journal of Business Venturing 27(6), 666-684.

Dimov, D., Murray, G. 2008. Determinants of the incidence and scale of seed capital investments
by venture capital firms. Small Business Economics, 30(2), 127-152.

Fuller, A.W., Rothaermel, F.T. 2012. When stars shine: The effects of faculty founders on new
technology ventures. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 6(3), 220-235.

Gans, J., Stern, S. 2003. When does funding research by smaller firms bear fruit?: Evidence from
the SBIR program. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 12(4), 361-384.

Gans, J. S., Hsu, D. H., & Stern, S. 2008. The impact of uncertain intellectual property rights on
the market for ideas: Evidence from patent grant delays. Management Science, 54(5), 982-997.

Gao, X., Ritter, J. R., Zhu, Z. 2013. Where have all the IPOs gone?. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 48(6), 1663-1692.

Globerman, S., Shapiro, D.M. 1999. The impact of government policies on foreign direct
investment: The Canadian experience. Journal of International Business Studies, 30(3), 513-532.

Gompers, P., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S. N., Strebulaev, I. A. 2016. How do venture capitalists make
decisions? National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 22587:
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22587.

Gompers, P., Lerner, J. 2000. The determinants of corporate venture capital success:
Organizational structure, incentives, and complementarities. In Concentrated Corporate
Ownership, 17-54. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.




                                                                                                   21
Gorry, P., Useche, D. 2017. Orphan Drug Designations as Valuable Intangible Assets for IPO
Investors in Pharma-Biotech Companies. In Economic Dimensions of Personalized and Precision
Medicine. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Grabowski, H. G. 2005. Increasing R&D incentives for neglected diseases: Lessons from the
Orphan Drug Act. In International Public Goods and Transfer of Technology Under a Globalized
Intellectual Property Regime. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Hall, A. K., Carlson, M. R. 2014. The current status of orphan drug development in Europe and
the US. Intractable & Rare Diseases Research, 3(1), 1-7.

Heeley, M. B., Matusik, S. F., Jain, N. 2007. Innovation, appropriability, and the underpricing of
initial public offerings. Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 209-225.

Higgins, M. J., Stephan, P. E., Thursby, J. G. 2011. Conveying quality and value in emerging
industries: Star scientists and the role of signals in biotechnology. Research Policy, 40(4), 605-
617.

Higgins, M., Gulati, R. 2003. Getting off to a good start: the effects of upper echelon affiliations
on underwriter prestige. Organization Science, 14(3), 244-263.

Hoenig, D., Henkel, J. 2015. Quality signals? The role of patents, alliances, and team experience
in venture capital financing. Research Policy, 44(5), 1049-1064.

Hsu, D., Ziedonis, R. 2013. Resources as dual sources of advantage: Implications for valuing
entprenrenueiral firm patents. Strategic Management Journal, 34(7), 761-781.

Huang, L., Knight, A. P. 2017. Resources and relationships in entrepreneurship: an exchange
theory of the development and effects of the entrepreneur-investor relationship. Academy of
Management Review, 42(1), 80-102.

Huang, L., Pearce , J.L. 2015. Managing the unknowable the effectiveness of early-stage investor
gut feel in entrepreneurial investment decisions. Administrative Science Quarterly, 60(4), 634-
670.

Hudson, J., Khazragui, H. F. 2013. Into the valley of death: research to innovation. Drug
Discovery Today, 18(13-14), 610-613.

Islam, M., Fremeth, A., Marcus, A. 2018. Signaling by early stage startups: US government
research grants and venture capital funding. Journal of Business Venturing, 33(1), 35-51.

Iriyama, A., Li, Y., Madhavan, R. 2010. Spiky globalization of venture capital investments: The
influence of prior human networks. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 4(2), 128-145.

Jääskeläinen, M., Maula, M., Murray, G. 2007. Profit distribution and compensation structures in
publicly and privately funded hybrid venture capital funds. Research Policy, 36(7), 913-929.

Kaplan, S. N., & Lerner, J. 2016. Venture capital data: Opportunities and challenges (No.
w22500). National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                                                                     22
Kerr, W. R., Nanda, R. 2011. Financing constraints and entrepreneurship. Handbook of Research
on Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 88.

Kerr, W. R., Nanda, R., Rhodes-Kropf, M. 2014. Entrepreneurship as experimentation. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 25-48.

Kim, P. H., Li, M. 2014. Injecting demand through spillovers: Foreign direct investment,
domestic socio-political conditions, and host-country entrepreneurial activity. Journal of Business
Venturing, 29(2), 210-231.

Lerner, J. 1994. The syndication of venture capital investments. Financial Management, 16-27.

Lerner, J. 2000. The government as venture capitalist: the long-run impact of the SBIR program.
The Journal of Private Equity, 55-78.

Lerner, J. 2009. Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost Entrepreneurship and
Venture Capital Have Failed--and What to Do About It. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ.

Lichtenberg, F. R., Waldfogel, J. 2003. Does misery love company? Evidence from
pharmaceutical markets before and after the Orphan Drug Act. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper No. 9750: http://www.nber.org/papers/w9750.

Long, C. 2002. Patent signals. The University of Chicago Law Review, 625-679.

Loree, D.W., Guisinger, S.E. 1995. Policy and non-policy determinants of US equity foreign
direct investment. Journal of International Business Studies, 26(2), 281-299.

Mann, R. J. 2004. Do patents facilitate financing in the software industry. Texas Law Review, 83:
961.

Meggison, W., Weisss, K. 1991. Venture capitalist certification in initial public offerings. Journal
of Finance, 46(3), 879-901.

Milanesi, G., Pesce, G., El Alabi, E. 2013. Technology-based startup valuation using real options
with Edgeworth expansion. Journal of Finance and Accounting, 1(2), 54-61.

Murray, G. 1999. Early-stage venture capital funds, scale economies and public support. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1(4), 351-384.

Myers, S. C., Majluf, N.S. 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Economics, 13(2), 187-221.

Nicholson, S., Danzon, P., & McCullough, J. 2005. Biotech-pharmaceutical alliances as a signal
of asset and firm quality. The Journal of Business, 78(4), 1433-1464.

Parhankangas, A. 2007. An overview of research on early stage venture capital: Current status
and future directions. Handbook of Research on Venture Capital 1: 253. Edward Elgar
Publishing, Northampton, MA.




                                                                                                  23
Park, H. D., Steensma, H. K. 2013. The selection and nurturing effects of corporate investors on
new venture innovativeness. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 7(4), 311-330.

Podolny, J. M. 1993. A status-based model of market competition. American Journal of
Sociology, 98(4), 829-872.

Rohde, D. D. 2000. Orphan drug act: An engine of innovation-at what cost. Food & Drug Law
Journal, 55: 125.

Samila, S., Sorenson, O. 2011. Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic growth. The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1), 338-349.

Scharfstein, D. S., Stein, J. C. 1990. Herd behavior and investment. The American Economic
Review, 465-479.

Schwienbacher, A. 2013. The entrepreneur's investor choice: The impact on later-stage firm
development. Journal of Business Venturing, 28(4), 528-545.

Smith, R., Robert, P., Vijay, S. 2011. VC fund financial performance: The relative importance of
IPO and M&A exits and exercise of abandonment options. Financial Management, 40(4), 1029-
1065.

Spence, M. 1973. Job market signaling. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87(3), 355-374.

Stockklausner, C., Lampert, A., Hoffmann, G. F., Ries, M. 2016. Novel treatments for rare
cancers: the US orphan drug act is delivering—a cross-sectional analysis. The Oncologist, 21(4),
487-493.

Stuart, T. E., Hoang, H., Hybels, R. C. 1999. Interorganizational endorsements and the
performance of entrepreneurial ventures. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(2), 315-349.

Terlaak, A., King, A.A. 2006. The effect of certification with the ISO 9000 Quality Management
Standard: A signaling approach. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 60(4), 579-602.

Useche, D. 2014. Are patents signals for the IPO market? An EU–US comparison for the
software industry. Research Policy, 43(8), 1299-1311.

Vedula, S., Matusik, S. F. 2017. Geographic, network, and competitor social cues: evidence from
US venture capitalists internationalization decisions. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 11(4),
393-421.

Wright, M., Lockett, A. 2003. The structure and management of alliances: Syndication in the
venture capital industry. Journal of Management Studies, 40(8), 2073-2102.

Wu, A. 2016. Organizational decision-making and information: Angel investments by venture
capital partners. In Academy of Management Proceedings (Vol. 2016, No. 1, p. 11043). Briarcliff
Manor, NY 10510: Academy of Management.

Yin, W. 2008. Market incentives and pharmaceutical innovation. Journal of Health Economics,
27(4), 1060-1077.



                                                                                               24
Zacharakis, A.L., McMullen, J.S., Shepherd, D.A. 2007. Venture capitalists' decision policies
across three countries: an institutional theory perspective. Journal of International Business
Studies, 38(5), 691-708.

Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R. 1997. Individual action and the demand for institutions: Star scientists
and institutional transformation. American Behavioral Scientist, 40, 502-153.

Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R., Armstrong, J. 2002. Commercializing knowledge: University science,
knowledge capture and firm performance in biotechnology. Management Science, 48, 138-153.




                                                                                                 25
Figure 1. Comparison of the EU-ODA to the US-ODA.



      Items                          EU-ODA                                       US-ODA




Timetable             Timetable published by EMA                  Any time; no defined timetable




Prevalence criteria   Disease or condition affects < 5 in         Disease or condition affects < 200,000
                      10,000 persons in the EU                    persons in the US




Sponsor criteria      Proof of establishment in EU                Not required




Key aspects of the    - Medical plausibility                      - Scientific rationale
application           - Prevalence                                - Prevalence
                      - Justification of significant benefit or
                      why other methods are not satisfactory




Benefits              - Protocol assistance (scientific advice)   - Protocol assistance
                      - 10 years of market exclusivity            - 7 years of market exclusivity
                      - Reduced regulatory fees                   - Reduced/waived regulatory fees
                      - None                                      - Tax credit on clinical trials
                      - Funding may be available from other       - Specific subsidies for clinical trials
                      sources within the EU
                      - Access to the centralized                 - None
                      authorization procedure in the EU




Harmonized            - Parallel applications for orphan designation to the EU, the US and Japan
procedure             - Parallel scientific advice from the EU EMA and the US FDA
                      - Submission of a single annual development report to the US and the EU




                                                                                                             26
Table 1. Descriptive statistics.


             Variable                             N      Mean      St. Dev. Min Max
             Round ID                           44,867 3.936         2.770     1   26
             Number of investors in a round     44,867 4.857         3.486     1   27
             Amount invested in a round ($1K)   44,867 12,843.550 10,161.580   1 32,572
             Drug-related (%)                   44,867 0.807         0.394     0    1
             After ODA                          44,867 0.742         0.437     0    1
             Time to investment                 44,867 2,119.388 1,870.077     0 15,611
             Early-stage (%)                    44,867 0.213         0.409     0    1
             Late-stage (%)                     44,867 0.566         0.496     0    1
             IVC                                44,867 0.916         0.277     0    1
             CVC                                44,867 0.055         0.229     0    1
             Angel                              44,867 0.003         0.051     0    1
             GVC                                44,867 0.007         0.081     0    1
             EU startups (%)                    44,867 0.139         0.346     0    1
             US startups (%)                    44,867 0.800         0.400     0    1
             M&A (%)                            44,867 0.342         0.474     0    1
             Bankruptcy (%)                     44,867 0.075         0.264     0    1
             IPO (%)                            44,867 0.214         0.410     0    1
             EU investor (%)                    44,867 0.144         0.351     0    1
             US investor (%)                    44,867 0.669         0.471     0    1




                                                                                          27
Table 2. Pre-trend tests. The unit of observation is at the investee-investor-round level
observations. The dependent variable is Early-stage in Models 1 and 2, Time to investment in
Models 3 and 4, and Time to initial investment in Models 5 and 6. The time period covers 1989 to
1999 with the arbitrary placebo event year of 1994. A non-significant coefficient on (Drug-
related*After 1994) would suggest that the parallel trend assumption is not violated. Standard
errors are clustered at the investing firm level. *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.

                                          Dependent variables
                 Early-stage         Time to investment         Time to initial investment
               OLS Fixed effect     OLS         Fixed effect      OLS           Fixed effect
               (1)        (2)       (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)
Drug-related 0.081***    0.036     -68.263        50.968        -577.231***     -483.121*
             (0.024)    (0.026)   (114.892)      (123.937)       (208.163)      (249.278)
After 1994     -0.044   -0.071*   329.836***     479.293***     514.454**        207.018
              (0.030)   (0.036)   (121.709)      (142.985)      (212.747)       (272.274)
Drug-related
              -0.025    -0.046     24.789         75.976         -31.372         319.798
*After 1994
             (0.027)    (0.029)   (136.772)      (164.246)      (237.975)       (347.970)

Controls       YES       YES        YES            YES             YES             YES
Category FE    YES       YES        YES            YES             YES             YES
Year FE        YES       YES        YES            YES             YES             YES
Investor FE    NO        YES        NO             YES             NO              YES
Observations 11,561     11,561     11,561         11,561          2,416           2,416
R2            0.015      0.152      0.017          0.279          0.066           0.496




                                                                                               28
Table 3. Timing of VC investments. The unit of observation is at the investee-investor-round
level. The dependent variable is Early-stage in Models 1 and 2, Time to investment in Models 3
and 4, and Time to initial investment in Models 5 and 6. The coefficients from Models 3 to 6 can
be interpreted as days. All models include our full set of controls and complete results are
reported in Appendix Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level.
*
  p<0.10, **p<0.05, and ***p<0.01.
                                             Dependent variables
                  Early-stage          Time to investment           Time to initial investment
                OLS Fixed effect       OLS        Fixed effect        OLS           Fixed effect
                (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)
Drug-related 0.057***     0.007     -360.329***       0.525        -871.868***       -256.747
             (0.015)     (0.016)     (84.805)        (99.472)       (123.561)       (162.972)
After ODA     -0.072*** -0.116***   2,220.333***   2,242.097***    2,376.560***    1,577.302***
               (0.021)   (0.024)     (107.492)      (135.589)       (215.410)       (298.998)
Drug-related
             0.050***    0.037*     -675.434***    -369.563***     -653.943***      -278.859*
*After ODA
             (0.017)     (0.020)     (94.234)        (99.074)       (134.804)       (165.085)

Controls       YES        YES          YES             YES            YES              YES
Category FE    YES        YES          YES             YES            YES              YES
Year FE        YES        YES          YES             YES            YES              YES
Investor FE    NO         YES          NO              YES            NO               YES
Observations 44,867      44,867       44,867          44,867          8,933            8,933
R2            0.020       0.131        0.099           0.363          0.134            0.548




                                                                                                   29
Table 4. Impact of EU-ODA on early-stage investment by origin of VCs. The unit of
observation is at the investee-investor-round level. This table replicates our main specification on
split samples by the origin of the VC. Models 1 and 2 include investments made by EU-based
VCs into EU-based startups while Models 3 and 4 include investments by US-based VCs into
EU-based startups. The dependent variable in Models 1 and 3 is Early-stage while the dependent
variable in Models 2 and 4 is Time to investment. All models include our full set of controls and
complete results are reported in Appendix Table 6. Standard errors are clustered at the investing
firm level. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, and ***p<0.01.


                EU-based VCs to EU-based startup          US-based VCs to EU-based startup
                                               Dependent variables
                 Early-stage       Time to inv.         Early-stage              Time to inv.
                     (1)              (2)                   (3)                     (4)
Drug-related        0.136*          -620.537*              -0.077                  2,488.061*
                   (0.080)          (347.650)             (0.048)                 (1,476.213)
After ODA           0.076          2,430.350***            -0.286                3,474.732***
                   (0.180)          (390.199)             (0.263)                (1,305.922)
Drug-related
                   -0.010            170.629              0.324***               -1,481.601**
*After ODA
                   (0.076)          (277.629)             (0.110)                  (749.362)
Investor FE         YES                YES                 YES                       YES
Category FE         YES                YES                 YES                       YES
Year FE             YES                YES                 YES                       YES
Observations        4,695             4,695                 809                       809
R2                  0.229             0.479                0.411                     0.564




                                                                                                  30
Table 5. Impact of EU-ODA on early-stage investment by origin of startups. The unit of
observation is at the investee-investor-round level. This table replicates our main specification on
split samples by the origin of the start-up. Models 1 and 2 include investments in EU-based
startups while Models 3 and 4 include those in US-based startups. The dependent variable in
Models 1 and 3 is Early-stage while the dependent variable in Models 2 and 4 is Time to
investment. All models include our full set of controls and complete results are reported in
Appendix Table 7. Standard errors are clustered at the industry category level. *p<0.10, **p<0.05,
and ***p<0.01.


                            EU-based startups only                          US-based startups only
                                                      Dependent variables
                     Early stage          Time to inv.        Early stage               Time to inv.
                       (1)                (2)                     (3)                      (4)
Drug-related         0.168**          -1,170.304***              0.042*                   -272.758
                     (0.080)            (207.057)               (0.025)                  (257.074)
After ODA             -0.120          2,545.285***               -0.063                 2,133.798***
                     (0.234)           (467.040)                (0.042)                  (441.487)
Drug-related
                      0.087            -522.078**                0.037                   -596.852
*After ODA
                     (0.065)           (252.448)                (0.032)                  (428.999)
Controls              YES                 YES                    YES                       YES
Category FE           YES                 YES                    YES                       YES
Year FE               YES                 YES                    YES                       YES
Observations          6,223              6,223                  35,876                    35,876
R2                    0.054              0.175                   0.020                     0.090




                                                                                                       31
Table 6. Changes in the VC investment syndication after EU-ODA. The unit of observation is
at the investee-investor-round level. The dependent variable across all Models is Number of
investors. Model 1 includes our full sample while Models 2 and 3 split the sample into early- and
late-stage, respectively. All models include our full set of controls and complete results are
reported in Appendix Table 8. Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level.
*
  p<0.10, **p<0.05, and ***p<0.01.


                                                 Dependent variable
                                                 Number of investors
                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)
                                    Total            Early-stage         Late-stage
                                           ***                 ***
          Drug-related             0.468              0.954               0.658***
                                   (0.160)             (0.247)            (0.195)
                                           ***                 ***
          After ODA               -1.356              -2.990              -0.580*
                                   (0.250)             (0.490)            (0.313)
          Drug-related*After
                                   0.454***           -0.475**            0.606***
          ODA
                                   (0.136)             (0.237)            (0.186)
          Controls                  YES                 YES                YES
          Category FE               YES                 YES                YES
          Year FE                   YES                 YES                YES
          Investor FE               YES                 YES                YES
          Observations             44,867              9,547              25,375
              2
          R                         0.265              0.369               0.354




                                                                                               32
Table 7. Changes in the invested amount after EU-ODA. The level of observation is at the
investee-round level. The dependent variable across all models is Invested amount in round ($1k).
Model 1 includes our full sample while Models 2 and 3 split the sample into early- and late-stage,
respectively. All models include our full set of controls and complete results are reported in
Appendix Table 10. Standard errors are clustered at the investee firm level. *p<0.10, **p<0.05,
and ***p<0.01.

                                                          Dependent variable
                                                   Investment amount in a round ($1K)
                                    (1)                  (2)                       (3)
                                   Total             Early-stage                Late-stage
Drug-related                    2,145.008***         2,100.302**                2,461.805***
                                 (393.253)             (882.699)                 (515.129)
After ODA                      -4,268.836***          -2,301.149               -3,338.689***
                                 (691.035)           (1,411.083)                 (999.937)
Drug-related*After ODA            791.456*           -1,153.093                1,198.666**
                                 (434.347)            (923.312)                 (562.095)
Controls                           YES                  YES                        YES
Category FE                        YES                  YES                        YES
Year FE                            YES                  YES                        YES
Observations                      20,386                4,399                     10,479
R2                                 0.040                0.025                      0.056




                                                                                               33
Table 8. Exit performance of early-stage startups. The level of observation is at the investee-
investor-round level. Models 1-3 are run utilizing fixed effects. The dependent variable in Model
1 is defined as M&A. The dependent variable in Model 2 is defined as IPO and the dependent
variable in Model 3 is defined as Bankruptcy. All models include our full set of controls and
complete results are reported in Appendix Table 11. Standard errors are clustered at the investing
firm level. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, and ***p<0.01.

                                      M&A               IPO          Bankruptcy
                                       (1)               (2)            (3)
                Drug-related          0.043            -0.017          -0.093
                                     (0.073)          (0.054)         (0.074)
                After ODA             0.086          -0.316***        -0.139**
                                     (0.076)          (0.070)         (0.066)
                Drug-related*
                                     -0.132*          0.136**           0.020
                After ODA
                                     (0.068)          (0.053)          (0.062)
                Controls              YES              YES              YES
                Category FE           YES              YES              YES
                Year FE               YES              YES              YES
                Investor FE           YES              YES              YES
                Observations          4,291            4,291            4,291
                R2                    0.331            0.346            0.296




                                                                                                34
Appendix Figure 1. Time Trend of VC Investment in the Biopharmaceutical Industry.




                                                                                    35
Appendix Table 1. VCs switch to Early Stage Investments with EU-ODA – All Controls.
This table replicates Table 3 reporting the coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed effects at
the technology category and year level. In addition this table reports coefficient estimates for all
our controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level.
*p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.

                                              Dependent variables
                                                 Time to
                       Early-stage                                 Time to initial investment
                                               investment
                   OLS       Fixed effect      OLS       Fixed effect     OLS        Fixed effect
                   (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
 Drug-related     0.057***      0.007       -360.329***       0.525         -871.868***      -256.747
                  (0.015)      (0.016)       (84.805)        (99.472)        (123.561)      (162.972)
  After ODA      -0.072***    -0.116***     2,220.333*** 2,242.097*** 2,376.560*** 1,577.302***
                  (0.021)      (0.024)       (107.492) (135.589) (215.410) (298.998)
 Drug-related
                  0.050***     0.037*       -675.434*** -369.563*** -653.943***             -278.859*
 *After ODA
                  (0.017)      (0.020)        (94.234)        (99.074)      (134.804)        (165.085)
 EU startups       0.020       0.059**        -148.278      -598.053***      -155.895       -755.547***
                  (0.017)      (0.024)       (106.762)       (119.565)      (127.689)        (235.317)
  US startups      0.002        0.017       -270.107** -406.150*** -532.089*** -626.768***
                  (0.015)      (0.021)      (106.040) (125.464) (119.955) (212.098)
                                                 -                        -
  Biosensors      0.182***    0.092***                   -724.875***              -489.056*
                                            1,509.644***             1,828.669***
                  (0.030)      (0.033)       (142.160) (163.061) (193.149) (251.220)
   Biotech                                                                 -
                  0.094***      0.016       -883.017*** -256.320**                 -154.741
  Equipment                                                           1,342.040***
                  (0.016)      (0.019)       (109.594)      (121.448) (179.090) (218.316)
                                                 -                      -
Biotech Other     0.401***    0.262***                   -628.857*              -384.756
                                            1,625.864***           1,858.277***
                  (0.078)      (0.075)       (312.288) (344.637) (278.037) (328.909)
   Biotech                                       -                        -
                  0.137***    0.069***                   -666.304***              -742.286***
   Research                                 1,284.648***             1,595.982***
                  (0.020)      (0.021)       (106.418) (122.082) (159.595) (198.993)
                                                                           -
Biotech-Animal 0.174***       0.107***      -871.073*** -447.534***                -867.157***
                                                                      1,461.492***
                  (0.026)      (0.031)       (123.270)      (154.125) (187.515) (265.695)
   Biotech-                                                                -
                  0.116***      0.027       -968.685***     -263.135*              -53.501
  Industrial                                                          1,176.827***
                  (0.019)      (0.022)       (150.518)      (155.846) (206.588) (262.977)
   Biotech-
                  0.075***    0.059***      -303.108*** -214.279*** -620.636*** -235.312***
   Human
                  (0.009)      (0.011)       (42.091)        (40.890)        (56.239)        (62.441)
                                                      ***             ***             ***
 Med/Health       -0.007       -0.005       510.341         438.911         863.768         738.490***



                                                                                                          36
  Products
               (0.009)     (0.010)      (75.180)       (68.772)      (127.422)    (148.625)
                     ***         ***            ***            ***
Pharmaceutical 0.032       0.036       -239.392       -309.493
               (0.010)     (0.010)      (54.964)       (53.759)
    1990       -0.061**    -0.062**    240.268***     298.041***      -50.232      179.576
               (0.027)     (0.031)      (73.389)       (73.221)      (189.587)    (237.435)
    1991       -0.076***   -0.071**    394.401***     479.515***      58.525       81.064
                (0.025)    (0.028)      (77.118)       (76.836)      (192.958)    (223.908)
    1992       -0.112***   -0.111***   283.625***     315.994***     426.661**     258.651
                (0.023)     (0.026)     (63.111)       (67.918)      (177.162)    (226.801)
    1993       -0.086***   -0.088***    161.936**     226.319***      139.092      341.908
                (0.023)     (0.026)     (81.108)       (82.587)      (174.092)    (218.337)
    1994       -0.115***   -0.121***   255.323***     320.095***      320.772*     314.801
                (0.023)     (0.026)     (70.001)       (79.892)      (163.977)    (205.607)
    1995       -0.090***   -0.107***   335.524***     416.237***      194.035      158.840
                (0.027)     (0.030)     (82.233)       (94.113)      (174.376)    (227.449)
    1996       -0.122***   -0.141***   232.463***     302.620***      281.867      288.343
                (0.021)     (0.024)     (79.219)       (94.263)      (184.265)    (244.443)
    1997       -0.072***   -0.080***   367.264***     382.142***     543.426***    236.390
                (0.021)     (0.023)     (73.857)       (94.630)      (161.795)    (201.599)
    1998       -0.063***   -0.082***   276.953***     333.154***     419.375***   396.722**
                (0.023)     (0.026)     (78.401)       (90.144)      (139.100)    (181.003)
    1999       -0.054**    -0.071***   398.264***     449.971***     616.923***   634.271***
               (0.021)      (0.025)     (81.548)      (103.528)      (182.828)    (242.226)
                                             -            -           -
    2000       -0.043**     -0.017                                            -922.487***
                                       1,248.739*** 1,467.519*** 1,438.575***
               (0.018)     (0.021)       (68.552)     (79.850)    (166.963) (233.967)
                                             -            -           -
    2001       -0.077***   -0.047**                                           -751.852***
                                       1,014.967*** 1,213.383*** 1,279.629***
               (0.017)     (0.020)       (70.693)     (77.688)    (163.862) (218.396)
                                             -            -           -
    2002       -0.065***   -0.033*                                            -877.030***
                                       1,138.517*** 1,348.966*** 1,143.860***
               (0.016)     (0.018)       (64.839)     (71.778)    (172.741) (228.864)
                                                            -
    2003       -0.072***   -0.046**    -890.307***                 -821.901***    -383.885
                                                      1,050.505***
               (0.016)     (0.018)      (64.416)        (66.750)    (190.067)     (234.497)
    2004       -0.100***   -0.072***   -822.266*** -991.764*** -917.963*** -644.753***
                (0.014)     (0.016)     (61.971)    (62.230)    (174.845) (215.054)
    2005       -0.084***   -0.055***   -645.104*** -773.974*** -737.285***        -406.094*
                (0.015)     (0.015)     (69.931)    (67.558)    (191.669)         (233.812)
    2006       -0.096***   -0.076***   -766.737*** -864.926*** -945.555*** -610.640***



                                                                                               37
               (0.014)     (0.015)      (58.774)      (57.192)    (171.336)     (217.663)
   2007        -0.067***   -0.049***   -414.369*** -544.313*** -489.551***       -179.454
                (0.012)     (0.013)     (61.747)    (59.233)    (176.770)       (211.559)
   2008        -0.053***   -0.044***   -379.554*** -475.508*** -523.703***       -166.573
                (0.012)     (0.013)     (64.613)    (59.472)    (174.057)       (201.293)
   2009        -0.028**     -0.021     -255.605*** -291.237*** -594.630***      -366.876*
               (0.014)     (0.014)      (63.156)    (59.534)    (188.739)       (219.754)
   2010        -0.050***   -0.042***     -58.338      -95.350*     -115.394      105.703
                (0.011)     (0.012)     (57.373)      (53.554)    (196.669)     (225.655)
 Constant      0.209***                1,988.813***              2,071.478***
               (0.025)                  (134.174)                 (200.713)

Observations    44,867      44,867       44,867       44,867        8,933        8,933
    R2           0.020       0.131        0.099        0.363        0.134        0.548




                                                                                            38
Appendix Table 2. VCs switching to Early-Stage Investments with EU-ODA Given
Alternative Time Periods Before/After EU-ODA This table replicates Model (1) of Table 3 by
restricting the sample to three different time periods in our analysis, 3, 5, and 7 years before and
after EU-ODA. We also report here the coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed effects at the
technology category and year level. In addition, this table reports coefficient estimates for all our
controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level.
*p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.


                                    Dependent variables
                      Investment into early-stage startups (binary)
                         3 years        5 years         7 years
                       before/after before/after before/after
                           (1)             (2)            (3)
    Drug-related         0.095***        0.062***         0.058***
                         (0.016)         (0.013)          (0.011)
     After ODA            -0.024           -0.010         -0.038**
                         (0.019)          (0.016)         (0.019)
    Drug-related
                          -0.022          0.004           0.027**
    *After ODA
                         (0.018)          (0.014)         (0.013)
    EU startups           -0.026           -0.024          -0.022
                         (0.020)          (0.016)         (0.013)
    US startups         -0.052***        -0.035**         -0.032***
                         (0.018)         (0.015)           (0.012)
        IVC             -0.065***        -0.038**          -0.025
                         (0.022)         (0.018)          (0.016)
        CVC              -0.045*           -0.017          -0.016
                         (0.026)          (0.021)         (0.018)
       Angel              0.032            0.088          0.118**
                         (0.072)          (0.055)         (0.048)
        GVC             -0.212***        -0.169***        -0.135***
                         (0.048)          (0.040)          (0.034)
     Biosensors          0.347***        0.210***         0.210***
                         (0.055)         (0.038)          (0.031)
 Biotech Equipment       0.082***        0.070***         0.073***
                         (0.022)         (0.017)          (0.015)
   Biotech Other         0.444***        0.381***         0.399***
                         (0.069)         (0.060)          (0.057)
  Biotech Research       0.136***        0.119***         0.130***
                         (0.021)         (0.017)          (0.015)
  Biotech-Animal         0.280***        0.214***         0.199***
                         (0.026)         (0.023)          (0.020)


                                                                                                   39
 Biotech-Industrial    0.057*    0.092***   0.124***
                      (0.033)    (0.026)    (0.020)
  Biotech-Human       0.053***   0.040***   0.048***
                      (0.009)    (0.007)    (0.006)
Med/Health Products   -0.032**    -0.014     -0.008
                      (0.014)    (0.011)    (0.009)
  Pharmaceutical      0.056***   0.047***   0.039***
                      (0.012)    (0.009)    (0.008)
       1994                                  -0.029
                                            (0.019)
       1995                                  -0.007
                                            (0.019)
       1996                                 -0.039**
                                            (0.018)
       1997                      0.035**     0.010
                                 (0.014)    (0.018)
       1998            0.007     0.044***    0.020
                      (0.015)    (0.013)    (0.017)
       1999            0.014     0.053***    0.028*
                      (0.015)    (0.013)    (0.017)
       2000           0.030**    0.038***   0.024**
                      (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.011)
       2001            -0.005     0.004      -0.010
                      (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.011)
       2002            0.009      0.017      0.002
                      (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.011)
       2003                       0.010      -0.005
                                 (0.011)    (0.011)
       2004                       -0.016    -0.031***
                                 (0.010)     (0.010)
       2005                                  -0.015
                                            (0.010)
       2006                                 -0.029***
                                             (0.010)
     Constant         0.233***   0.182***    0.191***
                      (0.032)    (0.026)     (0.026)

   Observations       13,855     21,930      29,981
       R2              0.025      0.015       0.015




                                                        40
Appendix Table 3. VC time to investment in Early-Stage Investments with EU-ODA Given
Alternative Time Periods Before/After EU-ODA. This table replicates Models (3) and (5) of
Table 3 by restricting the sample to three different time periods in our analysis, 3, 5, and 7 years
before and after EU-ODA. We also report here the coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed
effects at the technology category and year level. In addition this table reports coefficient
estimates for all our controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are clustered at the
investing firm level. *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.


                                                      Dependent variables
                               Time to investment (days)            Time to initial investment (days)
                       3 years      5 years       7 years     3 years       5 years         7 years
                     before/after before/after before/after before/after before/after     before/after
                         (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)             (6)
                                                                      -
   Drug-related      -425.747*** -302.884*** -364.274***                        -937.633***    -915.412***
                                                                 1,378.040***
                      (62.806)      (52.577)       (49.090)       (153.970)      (129.447)      (121.481)
                             ***            ***            ***           ***             ***
    After ODA         675.209      1,126.854      1,608.887      619.480        1,261.105      1,757.605***
                       (77.404)      (67.309)       (81.713)     (179.645)       (161.278)      (212.752)
   Drug-related
                     -282.254*** -466.418*** -618.438***           -83.539      -490.649***    -653.891***
   *After ODA
                      (71.562)      (59.982)       (54.914)       (162.655)      (141.619)      (130.714)
    EU startups        -24.096       -40.025        11.172         -136.523       -31.997         0.165
                      (78.986)      (65.974)       (57.472)       (134.323)      (121.374)      (105.318)
    US startups        93.766        -80.699        -86.477      -365.789***    -412.088***    -424.382***
                      (71.602)      (60.889)       (52.668)       (123.631)      (112.134)      (96.107)
       IVC           -269.426*** -216.313*** -219.977***         -630.519***      -302.744       -300.620
                      (88.645)    (74.577)    (67.659)            (219.661)      (195.784)      (184.660)
       CVC            -195.036*    -205.739**     -196.294**     -687.817***      -351.194      -346.014*
                      (105.175)     (87.544)       (78.726)       (251.297)      (224.479)      (210.006)
       Angel          -587.508**   -687.746*** -845.692***         -612.953       -386.087       -501.253
                      (290.691)     (229.042)   (205.349)         (467.074)      (431.682)      (411.769)
       GVC            523.677***     260.824        248.004*       260.894        297.422        355.752
                      (195.011)     (166.386)      (144.253)      (404.669)      (365.490)      (336.691)
                          -            -            -            -
    Biosensors                                                           -1,565.705*** -1,784.377***
                     1,190.555*** 1,271.552*** 1,462.422*** 1,486.766***
                      (223.440)    (156.659)    (134.449)    (355.829)     (319.985)     (291.707)
                                                                      -
Biotech Equipment -659.955*** -700.619*** -776.917***                         -1,217.484*** -1,315.571***
                                                                 1,331.983***
                      (86.741)      (72.735)       (64.720)       (203.583)     (179.094)     (162.099)
                          -            -            -            -
  Biotech Other                                                          -1,830.450*** -1,960.427***
                     1,068.226*** 1,343.374*** 1,523.949*** 1,742.743***
                      (279.629)    (249.764)    (244.078)    (402.753)     (370.177)     (375.310)




                                                                                                            41
                           -            -            -           -
Biotech Research                                                         -1,825.119*** -1,726.026***
                     1,264.221*** 1,254.869*** 1,311.936*** 2,055.813***
                       (82.842)     (69.927)     (63.877)    (182.107)     (165.028)     (154.856)
                                                                    -
 Biotech-Animal      -995.521*** -839.483*** -907.199***                    -1,227.616*** -1,449.993***
                                                               1,622.910***
                      (106.775)     (93.886)      (84.623)      (227.445)     (217.478)     (197.059)
                                                                    -
Biotech-Industrial   -662.265*** -440.680*** -764.712***                      -807.175***   -1,043.802***
                                                               1,516.732***
                      (131.222)    (106.640)      (85.278)      (272.614)     (230.565)      (192.493)
                             ***           ***           ***            ***           ***
 Biotech-Human       -205.072      -194.181      -228.396      -423.652       -453.756      -510.850***
                      (37.536)      (29.923)      (25.792)      (95.496)       (82.301)      (71.273)
   Med/Health
                     509.458***    608.017***    578.828***    615.852***     821.750***     751.838***
    Products
                      (55.682)      (46.034)      (40.552)      (135.801)     (116.482)       (99.945)
                             ***           ***           ***
 Pharmaceutical      -159.271      -247.479      -252.772        -19.206        -25.876        -95.660
                      (48.390)      (38.145)      (33.432)      (112.186)      (97.304)       (85.237)
      1994                                         92.645                                     172.520
                                                  (82.814)                                   (224.900)
      1995                                       180.442**                                    50.029
                                                 (82.275)                                    (224.424)
      1996                                         80.695                                     156.631
                                                  (78.655)                                   (210.703)
      1997                           89.082      212.919***                   284.806**      403.682**
                                    (57.505)      (75.473)                    (143.923)      (199.509)
      1998             -90.043       -1.508       121.217        -123.609      139.682        261.559
                      (60.006)      (55.753)      (74.023)      (139.267)     (139.136)      (194.998)
      1999             42.055      120.179**     244.927***      145.386      362.988***     481.499**
                      (59.593)     (55.188)       (73.490)      (139.571)     (139.705)      (195.245)
      2000           -349.795*** -594.514*** -828.987***       -587.390***    -687.652***   -943.769***
                      (47.523)    (45.394)    (45.523)          (117.279)      (120.464)     (115.534)
      2001           -120.269**    -359.125*** -594.246***     -414.932***    -533.007***   -800.734***
                      (47.836)      (45.761)    (45.909)        (121.081)      (124.384)     (119.894)
      2002           -264.022*** -495.211*** -723.912***       -344.840***    -418.476***   -662.633***
                      (48.952)    (46.898)    (47.110)          (121.582)      (125.244)     (121.054)
      2003                         -237.058*** -471.369***                     -75.791      -328.448***
                                    (45.361)    (45.527)                      (124.071)      (119.983)
      2004                         -180.900*** -406.714***                     -198.330     -439.365***
                                    (43.023)    (43.193)                      (121.770)      (117.455)
      2005                                       -229.149***                                 -254.660**
                                                  (42.304)                                   (116.097)
      2006                                       -352.658***                                -455.131***



                                                                                                         42
                                          (42.859)                                 (111.229)
 Constant      2,274.862*** 2,201.297*** 2,149.136*** 3,444.469*** 2,511.691***   2,418.595***
                (128.740)    (108.820)    (111.363)    (288.195)    (255.203)      (283.611)

Observations     13,855       21,930       29,981       3,218         4,752          6,455
    R2            0.044        0.052        0.069       0.096         0.094          0.109




                                                                                               43
Appendix Table 4. Replication of Table 3 with Multinomial Logit Models. We report here
Table 3 results with multinomial logit models, taking into account that the dependent variable is
binary. Model (1) takes full samples to replicate Table 3 and Models (2), (3) and (4) replicate
Appendix Table 2, restricting sample periods to 3 years, 5 years, and 7 years before and after EU-
ODA, respectively. Results are consistent. We also report here the coefficient estimates for our
full set of fixed effects at the technology category and year level. In addition this table reports
coefficient estimates for all our controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are
clustered at the investing firm level. *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01


                                      Dependent variables
                           Investment into early-stage startups (binary)
                                       3 years       5 years        7 years
                      All samples
                                    before/after before/after before/after
                           (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
    Drug-related        0.495***      0.700***     0.467***      0.477***
                        (0.069)       (0.108)      (0.087)       (0.080)
     After ODA          -0.506***      -0.170        -0.082      -0.290**
                         (0.105)      (0.123)       (0.106)      (0.123)
    Drug-related
                        0.380***       -0.102        0.055       0.221***
    *After ODA
                         (0.072)      (0.113)       (0.093)      (0.085)
                              *
    EU startups           0.126        -0.138        -0.133       -0.129
                         (0.066)      (0.111)       (0.093)      (0.081)
    US startups           0.018      -0.286***     -0.197**      -0.187**
                         (0.060)      (0.100)      (0.086)       (0.074)
        IVC               -0.127     -0.344***     -0.214**       -0.147
                         (0.082)      (0.119)      (0.103)       (0.094)
        CVC               -0.061       -0.233        -0.093       -0.094
                         (0.094)      (0.144)       (0.122)      (0.110)
       Angel            0.701***       0.148         0.436       0.583**
                        (0.208)       (0.383)       (0.297)      (0.259)
        GVC             -1.067***    -1.988***     -1.484***    -1.112***
                         (0.216)      (0.527)       (0.381)      (0.286)
     Biosensors         1.293***      1.926***     1.307***      1.399***
                        (0.143)       (0.284)      (0.209)       (0.180)
 Biotech Equipment      0.766***      0.650***     0.537***      0.597***
                        (0.089)       (0.143)      (0.117)       (0.105)
   Biotech Other        2.210***      2.265***     1.964***      2.131***
                        (0.267)       (0.355)      (0.307)       (0.293)
  Biotech Research      1.042***      0.964***     0.831***      0.962***
                        (0.087)       (0.131)      (0.108)       (0.099)
  Biotech-Animal        1.203***      1.618***     1.277***      1.286***


                                                                                                 44
                      (0.100)     (0.149)    (0.129)    (0.117)
 Biotech-Industrial   0.917***    0.489**    0.677***   0.923***
                      (0.099)     (0.215)    (0.161)    (0.127)
  Biotech-Human       0.433***    0.311***   0.248***   0.298***
                      (0.030)     (0.056)    (0.045)    (0.038)
Med/Health Products    -0.043     -0.216**    -0.094     -0.055
                      (0.050)     (0.091)    (0.073)    (0.062)
  Pharmaceutical      0.202***    0.328***   0.290***   0.242***
                      (0.041)     (0.071)    (0.056)    (0.049)
       1990           -0.324***
                       (0.115)
       1991           -0.416***
                       (0.126)
       1992           -0.634***
                       (0.115)
       1993           -0.470***
                       (0.116)
       1994           -0.661***                          -0.184
                       (0.115)                          (0.123)
       1995           -0.508***                          -0.046
                       (0.112)                          (0.121)
       1996           -0.730***                         -0.266**
                       (0.110)                          (0.119)
       1997           -0.393***              0.223**     0.060
                       (0.100)               (0.087)    (0.110)
       1998           -0.342***    0.041     0.276***    0.115
                       (0.097)    (0.090)    (0.084)    (0.107)
       1999           -0.298***    0.080     0.321***    0.159
                       (0.096)    (0.088)    (0.082)    (0.106)
       2000           -0.236***   0.178**    0.231***   0.140**
                       (0.065)    (0.071)    (0.067)    (0.065)
       2001           -0.441***    -0.031     0.025      -0.064
                       (0.068)    (0.074)    (0.070)    (0.068)
       2002           -0.368***    0.055      0.105      0.013
                       (0.069)    (0.075)    (0.071)    (0.069)
       2003           -0.410***               0.061      -0.029
                       (0.067)               (0.069)    (0.067)
       2004           -0.595***               -0.107    -0.202***
                       (0.065)               (0.067)     (0.065)
       2005           -0.484***                          -0.095



                                                                    45
                   (0.063)                              (0.063)
    2006          -0.571***                            -0.193***
                   (0.065)                              (0.065)
    2007          -0.381***
                   (0.060)
    2008          -0.295***
                   (0.060)
    2009          -0.152**
                  (0.063)
    2010          -0.272***
                   (0.061)
  Constant        -1.407***    -1.406***   -1.636***   -1.578***
                   (0.138)      (0.188)     (0.160)     (0.163)

 Observations      44,867        13,855     21,930      29,981
Log Likelihood   -22,729.940   -7,046.800 -10,929.760 -14,805.760




                                                                    46
Appendix Table 5. Replication of Table 3 with Alternative Definitions of the Treatment
Group. We report here Table 3 results using alternative definitions of the treatment group. In
Panel 1, we include Biotech Research and Biotech Other in the treatment group instead of the
control group. In Panel 2, we switch Medical Diagnostics from the treatment group to the control
group. Results across all the robustness checks remain consistent. We also report here the
coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed effects at the technology category and year level. In
addition this table reports coefficient estimates for all our controls in the baseline specification.
Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level. *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01


          Appendix Table 5 Panel 1. Table 3 with inclusion of Biotech Research and
                           Biotech Other in the treatment group

                                                   Dependent variables
                          Early-stage         Time to investment        Time to initial investment
                        OLS Fixed effect         OLS          Fixed effect     OLS         Fixed effect
                        (1)        (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)            (6)
    Drug-related      0.056***    0.008        -312.779***       17.326      -778.783***     -178.912
                      (0.014)    (0.016)        (84.273)        (99.479)      (124.670)     (166.441)
     After ODA        -0.075*** -0.116***     2,293.556***    2,274.519*** 2,509.393*** 1,691.773***
                       (0.022)   (0.025)       (113.563)       (141.355)    (219.370)    (308.793)
    Drug-related
                      0.053***    0.037*       -757.265***     -402.161***   -793.751***   -406.200**
    *After ODA
                       (0.016)   (0.020)        (99.653)        (105.921)     (144.949)     (183.928)
    EU startups         0.020    0.059**        -149.545       -597.611***     -160.572    -754.347***
                       (0.017)   (0.024)       (106.558)        (119.747)     (127.460)     (235.583)
    US startups         0.002     0.017        -271.828**      -406.244***   -536.238*** -626.126***
                       (0.015)   (0.021)       (105.962)        (125.473)     (119.834)   (211.862)
     Biosensors       0.183***   0.092***     -1,536.988***    -736.811*** -1,861.929*** -523.126**
                      (0.030)    (0.032)        (144.341)       (164.369)    (194.609)   (253.857)
 Biotech Equipment 0.094***       0.016        -894.173***     -262.330** -1,346.132*** -163.319
                   (0.016)       (0.019)        (110.776)      (122.455)    (179.273)   (218.993)
   Biotech Other      0.307***   0.227***      -770.754***       -359.044     -511.330**     72.284
                      (0.075)    (0.072)        (269.496)       (317.404)     (228.531)     (281.505)
  Biotech Research     0.037**    0.030        -348.893***     -354.192***     -202.670     -273.503*
                       (0.018)   (0.018)        (69.850)        (74.405)      (126.759)     (143.721)
  Biotech-Animal      0.175***   0.107***      -875.844***     -450.302*** -1,460.956*** -873.056***
                      (0.026)    (0.031)        (124.130)       (154.513)    (187.701)    (266.431)
 Biotech-Industrial   0.116***    0.027        -991.489***      -272.467*    -1,203.981*** -77.704
                      (0.019)    (0.022)        (151.421)       (156.720)      (207.346)   (264.946)
  Biotech-Human       0.075***   0.059***      -303.115***     -214.179***   -620.449*** -235.230***
                      (0.009)    (0.011)        (42.151)        (40.910)      (56.208)    (62.376)
Med/Health Products -0.007        -0.005       510.376***      439.617***     863.342***   737.870***



                                                                                                        47
                 (0.009)     (0.010)       (75.145)        (68.739)     (127.409)    (148.626)
Pharmaceutical   0.032***    0.036***    -239.404***     -309.262***
                 (0.010)     (0.010)      (55.149)        (53.848)
    1990         -0.061**    -0.062**     239.449***      297.801***     -44.882      181.508
                 (0.027)     (0.031)       (72.575)        (72.985)     (188.928)    (238.956)
    1991         -0.075***   -0.071**     385.126***      475.695***     78.772       88.367
                  (0.025)    (0.028)       (76.545)        (76.851)     (190.482)    (224.250)
    1992         -0.113*** -0.112***      281.881***      316.225***    424.714**     255.043
                  (0.023)   (0.025)        (62.470)        (67.524)     (174.903)    (226.023)
    1993         -0.086*** -0.089***      159.773**       226.022***     143.177      341.900
                  (0.023)   (0.026)       (80.793)         (82.394)     (173.955)    (218.602)
    1994         -0.115*** -0.122***      254.024***      320.476***    334.391**     321.836
                  (0.023)   (0.026)        (69.796)        (79.753)     (163.161)    (205.295)
    1995         -0.090*** -0.107***      333.065***      416.275***     210.492      167.576
                  (0.027)   (0.030)        (81.727)        (93.985)     (172.255)    (225.928)
    1996         -0.122*** -0.140***      225.681***      299.215***     282.797      292.208
                  (0.021)   (0.024)        (78.902)        (94.639)     (183.840)    (245.026)
    1997         -0.071*** -0.080***      360.057***      378.490***    553.665***    243.451
                  (0.020)   (0.023)        (73.827)        (94.966)     (161.489)    (202.059)
    1998         -0.062*** -0.082***      269.721***      329.730***    416.988***   397.139**
                  (0.023)   (0.026)        (79.394)        (90.948)     (140.065)    (181.322)
    1999         -0.053**    -0.070***    382.071***      442.144***    610.234***   630.942***
                 (0.021)      (0.025)      (81.875)       (104.257)     (181.512)    (241.640)
    2000         -0.043**     -0.017     -1,244.071***   -1,465.666*** -1,426.823*** -919.971***
                 (0.018)     (0.021)       (68.490)        (79.789)      (166.956)    (233.906)
    2001         -0.077***   -0.047**    -1,011.084***   -1,212.168*** -1,267.954*** -748.941***
                  (0.017)    (0.020)       (70.668)        (77.645)      (163.839)    (218.419)
    2002         -0.065***   -0.033*     -1,135.153***   -1,347.862*** -1,142.195*** -878.434***
                  (0.016)    (0.018)       (64.856)        (71.776)      (172.779)    (228.860)
    2003         -0.072***   -0.047**    -886.222***     -1,048.614*** -815.153***    -381.346
                  (0.016)    (0.018)      (64.461)         (66.795)     (190.000)    (234.444)
    2004         -0.100*** -0.072***     -819.154***     -990.645***   -915.231*** -645.245***
                  (0.014)   (0.016)       (61.903)        (62.193)      (174.689)   (214.857)
    2005         -0.084*** -0.055***     -642.311***     -772.700***   -736.124***   -406.217*
                  (0.015)   (0.015)       (70.014)        (67.602)      (191.750)    (233.986)
    2006         -0.097*** -0.077***     -765.002***     -864.378***   -944.512*** -610.897***
                  (0.014)   (0.015)       (58.857)        (57.225)      (171.303)   (217.582)
    2007         -0.067*** -0.049***     -413.704***     -543.976***   -489.795***    -179.271
                  (0.012)   (0.013)       (61.778)        (59.247)      (176.854)    (211.614)
    2008         -0.053*** -0.044***     -377.526***     -474.712***   -516.732***    -163.069



                                                                                                  48
               (0.012)    (0.013)     (64.615)       (59.484)      (174.014)     (201.457)
   2009        -0.028**    -0.021    -253.939***    -290.822***   -592.561***    -366.605*
               (0.014)    (0.014)     (63.201)       (59.559)      (189.035)     (219.854)
   2010        -0.050*** -0.042***     -58.005       -95.280*       -116.299      105.633
                (0.011)   (0.012)     (57.365)       (53.558)      (196.637)     (225.678)
 Constant      0.210***              1,949.102***                 1,983.853***
               (0.025)                (135.244)                    (201.433)

Observations   44,867     44,867       44,867         44,867         8,933        8,933
    R2          0.020      0.131        0.100          0.363         0.135        0.548




                                                                                             49
  Appendix Table 5 Panel 2. Table 3 results with Medical Diagnostics in the control group

                                                   Dependent variable:
                          Early-stage       Time to investment       Time to initial investment
                         (1)       (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
   Drug-related       0.042*** 0.015        -340.777***      -125.661*    -614.126***    -139.309
                      (0.013) (0.017)        (62.548)         (76.046)     (99.115)     (129.097)
    After ODA         -0.065*** -0.117***   2,050.084***    2,159.881*** 2,310.335*** 1,463.176***
                       (0.020) (0.023)        (88.317)       (128.323)    (203.832)    (280.869)
   Drug-related
                      0.042*** 0.039**      -473.260***     -267.004***   -418.754***    -99.110
   *After ODA
                      (0.015) (0.018)         (75.367)        (86.862)    (119.833)      (146.340)
    EU startups        0.016 0.054**          -109.155      -567.904***    -106.654     -748.148***
                      (0.017) (0.023)        (107.039)       (117.722)    (130.727)      (237.537)
    US startups        -0.003 0.013          -225.133**     -375.243***   -465.422*** -613.098***
                      (0.015) (0.021)        (105.900)       (124.559)     (121.366)   (213.561)
    Biosensors        0.148*** 0.090***     -1,199.475***   -677.089*** -1,319.412*** -199.567
                      (0.029) (0.031)         (119.061)      (131.728)    (177.528)   (216.010)
Biotech Equipment 0.063*** 0.014            -611.033***     -227.102***   -876.287***    90.527
                  (0.015) (0.017)            (81.543)        (84.891)      (163.053)    (189.521)
   Biotech Other      0.367*** 0.260***     -1,336.215***    -596.631* -1,355.097*** -137.702
                      (0.077) (0.074)         (292.791)      (330.905)   (251.760)   (296.375)
 Biotech Research     0.104*** 0.066***     -985.208***     -620.506*** -1,108.393*** -492.335***
                      (0.019) (0.019)        (80.771)        (88.815)     (140.931)    (162.858)
  Biotech-Animal      0.143*** 0.105***     -612.302***     -425.261*** -1,000.530*** -625.889***
                      (0.025) (0.029)        (99.863)        (120.502)    (171.358)    (232.400)
 Biotech-Industrial   0.083*** 0.025        -667.111***      -221.800*    -671.452***    204.700
                      (0.018) (0.020)        (130.471)       (127.649)     (193.222)    (232.490)
  Biotech-Human       0.065*** 0.048***     -196.342***     -133.441***   -578.633*** -231.471***
                      (0.010) (0.012)        (47.117)        (45.486)      (60.377)    (62.104)
Med/Health Products -0.018* -0.016           618.441***      516.409***   907.257***    728.995***
                    (0.010) (0.011)           (77.430)        (71.101)    (128.863)     (148.116)
  Pharmaceutical      0.022** 0.024**        -131.126**     -228.570***
                      (0.010) (0.011)         (58.625)       (57.867)
       1990           -0.061** -0.062**      244.627***      303.087***    20.816        191.893
                      (0.027) (0.031)         (72.109)        (72.873)    (191.659)     (238.740)
       1991           -0.074*** -0.071**     387.360***      483.632***    113.779       112.297
                       (0.025) (0.028)        (75.924)        (76.861)    (188.456)     (223.090)
       1992           -0.112*** -0.111***    283.719***      320.771***   521.940***     287.189
                       (0.023) (0.025)        (61.525)        (67.857)    (172.286)     (223.176)
       1993           -0.086*** -0.089***    174.989**       235.085***    221.716       365.212*


                                                                                                      50
               (0.023) (0.026)         (79.563)        (82.479)     (175.990)     (215.278)
   1994        -0.115*** -0.122***    265.532***      328.455***    393.571**      335.397
                (0.023) (0.026)        (68.983)        (79.325)     (162.935)     (208.205)
   1995        -0.090*** -0.107***    345.382***      424.029***     315.931*      199.536
                (0.027) (0.030)        (80.155)        (94.239)     (168.629)     (220.986)
   1996        -0.125*** -0.141***    250.309***      302.230***    385.265**      308.963
                (0.021) (0.024)        (77.691)        (94.984)     (186.850)     (241.198)
   1997        -0.075*** -0.081***    388.868***      384.035***   667.352***      275.009
                (0.020) (0.023)        (72.752)        (94.734)    (161.392)      (197.270)
   1998        -0.066*** -0.083***    300.085***      337.408***   492.394***     415.922**
                (0.023) (0.026)        (78.661)        (90.444)    (140.127)      (180.262)
   1999        -0.057*** -0.072***    422.997***      461.207***   704.544***     661.163***
                (0.022) (0.025)        (81.376)       (103.010)    (182.821)      (239.409)
   2000        -0.041** -0.015       -1,269.187***   -1,478.420*** -1,522.271*** -926.784***
               (0.018) (0.021)         (69.595)        (80.247)      (169.333)    (234.372)
   2001        -0.074*** -0.045**    -1,041.225***   -1,227.253*** -1,333.611*** -752.136***
                (0.017) (0.020)        (71.556)        (77.934)      (165.318)    (219.987)
   2002        -0.064*** -0.032*     -1,150.879***   -1,355.153*** -1,204.076*** -886.483***
                (0.016) (0.018)        (64.895)        (71.754)      (174.387)    (229.072)
   2003        -0.072*** -0.046**    -888.988***     -1,052.152*** -874.287***    -389.783*
                (0.016) (0.018)       (64.928)         (67.017)     (193.028)     (235.128)
   2004        -0.098*** -0.071***   -841.970***     -1,002.528*** -983.238*** -660.701***
                (0.014) (0.016)       (62.094)         (62.076)     (177.457)   (215.689)
   2005        -0.082*** -0.054***   -664.132***     -784.712***   -824.044***    -425.167*
                (0.015) (0.015)       (69.039)        (67.299)      (193.099)     (233.082)
   2006        -0.096*** -0.076***   -770.410***     -870.045*** -1,012.836*** -627.540***
                (0.014) (0.015)       (59.123)        (57.382)     (176.207)    (218.963)
   2007        -0.066*** -0.048***   -424.819***     -550.857***   -539.312***     -189.100
                (0.012) (0.013)       (61.829)        (59.097)      (179.406)     (211.091)
   2008        -0.052*** -0.043***   -389.200***     -480.176***   -577.387***     -173.328
                (0.013) (0.013)       (64.839)        (59.321)      (177.067)     (201.554)
   2009        -0.027** -0.020       -264.325***     -296.491***   -668.495***    -384.623*
               (0.014) (0.014)        (63.731)        (59.563)      (189.905)     (219.347)
   2010        -0.049*** -0.041***      -61.464        -98.996*      -131.445      102.480
                (0.011) (0.012)        (57.820)        (53.655)     (199.365)     (226.611)
 Constant      0.240***              1,800.541***                  1,608.348***
               (0.023)                (120.870)                     (174.677)

Observations    44,867    44,867        44,867          44,867        8,933         8,933
    R2           0.019     0.132         0.097           0.364        0.121         0.547




                                                                                               51
Appendix Table 6. Impact of EU-ODA on Early-stage Investment by Origin of VCs –
Results with All Controls. This table replicates Table 4 reporting the coefficient estimates for
our full set of fixed effects at the technology category and year level. In addition this table reports
coefficient estimates for all our controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are
clustered at the investing firm level. *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.

                                     Dependent variables
                      Early-stage Time to inv. Early-stage Time to inv.
                          (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)
    Drug-related         0.136*     -620.537*      -0.077     2,488.061*
                        (0.080)     (347.650)     (0.048)    (1,476.213)
     After ODA           0.076     2,430.350***    -0.286    3,474.732***
                        (0.180)     (390.199)     (0.263)    (1,305.922)
    Drug-related
                         -0.010     170.629       0.324***   -1,481.601**
    *After ODA
                        (0.076)     (277.629)     (0.110)     (749.362)
     Biosensors          0.136*      -125.233      0.158     -1,493.060
                        (0.076)     (524.991)     (0.161)     (987.439)
 Biotech Equipment      0.145**      -131.030      0.155       480.606
                        (0.061)     (463.175)     (0.116)    (1,128.133)
   Biotech Other        0.327***     -950.853
                        (0.115)     (839.002)     (0.000)     (0.00000)
                                              *
  Biotech Research       0.008      -718.222       0.001      -1,552.957
                        (0.039)     (384.610)     (0.167)    (1,590.125)
  Biotech-Animal         0.081     -944.741**      0.154      -114.051
                        (0.076)    (428.242)      (0.399)    (1,003.338)
 Biotech-Industrial      0.019       383.540       0.331*     2,699.118*
                        (0.062)     (518.706)     (0.180)    (1,513.765)
  Biotech-Human          -0.046      -67.169      -0.204*     -1,300.283
                        (0.029)     (117.156)     (0.114)    (1,040.984)
Med/Health Products     -0.074*    1,107.010***    -0.069      246.025
                        (0.039)     (314.097)     (0.126)     (992.916)
  Pharmaceutical         -0.017      -149.897      -0.151     -2,110.340
                        (0.032)     (127.263)     (0.111)    (1,406.311)
        1990             0.259       82.346       -0.378*      474.536
                        (0.167)     (372.270)     (0.203)     (564.374)
        1991             -0.004      229.597       -0.280    798.252***
                        (0.115)     (377.699)     (0.369)    (160.137)
        1992             -0.026    1,108.321***   -0.516**    930.168**
                        (0.159)     (412.440)     (0.215)     (468.671)
        1993             0.315     834.142***      -0.106      224.921
                        (0.251)    (207.546)      (0.240)     (421.310)


                                                                                                     52
   1994         -0.026     1,226.351***     -0.315     147.347
               (0.156)      (461.322)      (0.246)    (361.990)
   1995         -0.146     1,196.773**      -0.265     249.125
               (0.165)      (600.766)      (0.232)    (649.679)
   1996         0.053      1,247.267***    -0.442**    -36.486
               (0.238)      (247.611)      (0.217)    (656.135)
   1997         0.080       712.605***      -0.233     251.062
               (0.194)      (239.981)      (0.253)    (303.955)
   1998         0.147       574.480**       -0.235     539.442
               (0.183)      (246.881)      (0.222)    (533.520)
   1999         0.157       453.774**       -0.059     1,714.879
               (0.156)      (228.948)      (0.245)    (1,112.123)
   2000         0.023      -1,894.845***    0.033      -930.940
               (0.047)       (193.061)     (0.152)    (1,306.377)
   2001        -0.100** -1,739.647***      -0.265*     -1,225.566
               (0.045)    (225.597)        (0.140)    (1,131.532)
   2002         -0.067     -1,681.353***    -0.222    -1,442.428
               (0.051)       (201.654)     (0.141)     (946.704)
   2003         -0.059     -1,039.189***    -0.197     -822.910
               (0.047)       (206.610)     (0.174)    (1,112.675)
   2004        -0.118*** -1,077.749***      -0.199     -849.614
                (0.042)    (189.246)       (0.162)    (1,110.303)
   2005        -0.114***   -769.945***     -0.293**    -540.012
                (0.040)     (204.820)      (0.135)    (1,067.378)
   2006        -0.178***   -926.750***     -0.236*     -716.939
                (0.046)     (182.213)      (0.137)    (869.076)
   2007         -0.067     -591.240***      -0.183     -192.114
               (0.046)      (193.899)      (0.134)    (700.082)
   2008        -0.090**    -766.370***      -0.132     -356.277
               (0.046)      (176.352)      (0.107)    (645.989)
   2009         -0.056       -182.448       -0.085     -383.851
               (0.044)      (182.520)      (0.114)    (696.617)
   2010        -0.077**      -86.137        -0.119     71.672
               (0.037)      (191.167)      (0.113)    (729.395)
Observations    4,695         4,695          809         809
    R2          0.229         0.479         0.411       0.564




                                                                    53
Appendix Table 7. Impact of EU-ODA on Early-stage Investment by Origin of Startups –
Results with All Controls. This table replicates Table 5 reporting the coefficient estimates for
our full set of fixed effects at the technology category and year level. In addition this table reports
coefficient estimates for all our controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are
clustered at the industry category level. *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.

                                      Dependent variables
                      Early-stage Time to inv. Early-stage Time to inv.
                          (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)
    Drug-related        0.168**    -1,170.304***    0.042*       -272.758
                        (0.080)      (207.057)     (0.025)      (257.074)
     After ODA           -0.120    2,545.285***     -0.063     2,133.798***
                        (0.234)     (467.040)      (0.042)      (441.487)
    Drug-related
                         0.087      -522.078**      0.037       -596.852
    *After ODA
                        (0.065)     (252.448)      (0.032)      (428.999)
                              **
        IVC             -0.056       75.721         -0.007     -329.572***
                        (0.025)     (135.031)      (0.019)      (125.686)
        CVC              -0.020      -287.142       -0.018     -222.450**
                        (0.028)     (247.242)      (0.020)      (97.091)
        Angel            -0.061    -1,199.091*** 0.212*** -1,044.120***
                        (0.109)      (298.516)   (0.047)    (163.435)
        GVC            -0.130***     -189.324      -0.115***     304.424*
                        (0.048)     (486.885)       (0.022)     (183.948)
     Biosensors         0.328*** -2,259.497*** 0.124*** -1,278.121***
                        (0.008)    (42.822)    (0.006)    (168.290)
 Biotech Equipment      0.307*** -1,754.652*** 0.061***        -718.518***
                        (0.006)    (20.574)    (0.003)          (68.549)
   Biotech Other        0.498*** -2,900.437*** 0.182***        -665.090***
                        (0.025)    (48.122)    (0.008)          (30.396)
  Biotech Research      0.133*** -2,181.161*** 0.137*** -1,074.498***
                        (0.008)    (30.807)    (0.005)    (128.821)
  Biotech-Animal        0.216*** -1,951.783*** 0.120***        -691.518***
                        (0.010)    (38.566)    (0.005)          (26.941)
 Biotech-Industrial     0.195***   -979.770***     0.106*** -1,103.308***
                        (0.006)     (26.339)       (0.009)    (146.589)
  Biotech-Human          -0.009    -569.946***     0.085***    -253.303**
                        (0.043)     (20.054)       (0.007)      (98.708)
Med/Health Products -0.108**       1,119.782***     0.008      455.195***
                    (0.046)          (20.604)      (0.008)     (104.020)
  Pharmaceutical         -0.015    -526.521***     0.035***    -215.825**



                                                                                                     54
       (0.043)       (23.580)      (0.006)      (104.356)
1990    -0.044       240.926        -0.063      245.165***
       (0.296)      (651.475)      (0.050)       (59.962)
1991    -0.110       851.367*      -0.080***    383.353***
       (0.312)      (496.534)       (0.018)      (57.253)
1992    -0.315     1,757.127*** -0.108***       225.856**
       (0.230)      (446.768)    (0.017)        (113.204)
1993    -0.040       561.157*      -0.095***     143.552
       (0.288)      (302.910)       (0.029)      (88.920)
1994    -0.275     1,422.982*** -0.122***       200.447**
       (0.253)      (265.656)    (0.028)        (85.484)
1995    -0.281     1,417.179*** -0.096***       307.344***
       (0.241)      (511.375)    (0.035)         (71.997)
1996    -0.271      865.367***     -0.128***    217.417***
       (0.238)      (100.211)       (0.038)      (74.693)
1997    -0.170      828.385**      -0.082**     387.355***
       (0.246)      (339.019)      (0.035)      (140.073)
1998    -0.095       463.708*      -0.077**     287.091***
       (0.258)      (260.247)      (0.030)      (109.080)
1999    -0.052      787.726**      -0.068**     392.648***
       (0.222)      (365.601)      (0.031)      (139.374)
2000    -0.058     -1,186.895***   -0.081*     -1,177.574***
       (0.037)       (187.329)     (0.044)       (151.716)
2001   -0.175*** -1,220.529***      -0.086     -888.220***
        (0.047)    (147.386)       (0.053)      (119.905)
2002   -0.172*** -1,088.862***      -0.060     -1,090.565***
        (0.022)    (121.741)       (0.043)       (100.517)
2003   -0.117***   -673.680***     -0.083*     -868.121***
        (0.033)     (142.806)      (0.048)      (81.612)
2004   -0.182***    -538.447**     -0.094*     -865.830***
        (0.062)     (240.855)      (0.052)      (107.884)
2005   -0.177***    -441.240*       -0.072     -689.006***
        (0.060)     (259.099)      (0.053)      (130.341)
2006   -0.196***   -650.912***     -0.087*     -791.336***
        (0.050)     (226.903)      (0.049)      (85.189)
2007   -0.112***     -125.999      -0.074**    -409.165***
        (0.037)     (277.044)      (0.031)      (57.700)
2008   -0.102***     -434.211      -0.057**    -355.808***
        (0.039)     (265.478)      (0.027)      (67.925)
2009   -0.060*       -16.066        -0.029     -296.128***



                                                               55
               (0.034)     (164.975)     (0.039)     (80.077)
   2010        -0.092**      74.052      -0.044**     -119.386
               (0.043)     (154.295)     (0.021)      (76.092)
 Constant       0.310     2,084.532***   0.230***   1,939.239***
               (0.228)     (361.555)     (0.023)     (191.657)

Observations    6,223        6,223       35,876       35,876
    R2          0.054        0.175        0.020        0.090




                                                                   56
Appendix Table 8. Syndication of VC Investments – Results with All Controls. This table
replicates Table 6 reporting the coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed effects at the
technology category and year level. In addition this table reports coefficient estimates for all our
controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level.
*p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.


                           Dependent variables
                            Number of investors
                         (1)      (2)         (3)
                        Total Early-stage Late-stage
    Drug-related      0.468***   0.954***    0.658***
                      (0.160)    (0.247)     (0.195)
     After ODA        -1.356*** -2.990***    -0.580*
                       (0.250) (0.490)       (0.313)
    Drug-related
                      0.454***   -0.475**    0.606***
    *After ODA
                       (0.136)   (0.237)     (0.186)
    EU startups         0.376*    0.333       0.225
                       (0.200)   (0.349)     (0.251)
    US startups       1.666***   0.659**     2.137***
                      (0.168)    (0.320)     (0.216)
     Biosensors       0.629***    0.322      0.710**
                      (0.241)    (0.357)     (0.336)
 Biotech Equipment 0.677***       0.167      1.039***
                   (0.196)       (0.300)     (0.246)
   Biotech Other        -0.314    -0.070      -0.324
                       (0.436)   (0.450)     (0.724)
  Biotech Research    1.131***   1.283***    1.756***
                      (0.168)    (0.343)     (0.203)
  Biotech-Animal      1.044***   1.211***    1.345***
                      (0.214)    (0.403)     (0.310)
 Biotech-Industrial   0.852***   0.667**     1.325***
                      (0.229)    (0.307)     (0.288)
  Biotech-Human       0.656***   0.698***    1.223***
                      (0.077)    (0.115)     (0.116)
Med/Health Products -0.098       -0.435***    -0.002
                    (0.106)       (0.162)    (0.149)
  Pharmaceutical      0.399***    0.235*     0.783***
                      (0.089)    (0.122)     (0.126)
        1990          -0.575** -3.433***     0.624**
                      (0.238) (0.516)        (0.306)



                                                                                                   57
1991   -1.733*** -3.946***   -1.126***
        (0.194) (0.508)       (0.303)
1992   -0.822*** -3.479***    -0.077
        (0.216) (0.487)      (0.310)
1993   -1.114*** -2.999***    -0.142
        (0.238) (0.473)      (0.362)
1994   -0.903*** -1.744***    0.068
        (0.245) (0.554)      (0.308)
1995   -0.983*** -3.722***    0.098
        (0.242) (0.456)      (0.305)
1996   -1.417*** -3.653***   -0.642**
        (0.220) (0.469)      (0.284)
1997   -0.711*** -3.778***    0.522*
        (0.236) (0.486)      (0.288)
1998   -0.875*** -3.993***    0.394
        (0.220) (0.472)      (0.285)
1999   -0.928*** -3.947***    -0.227
        (0.226) (0.462)      (0.262)
2000   0.677***     -0.354   0.604***
       (0.142)     (0.240)   (0.183)
2001   1.228***     0.090    1.239***
       (0.142)     (0.235)   (0.193)
2002   1.218***     0.224    1.150***
       (0.145)     (0.224)   (0.182)
2003   0.913***     -0.188   0.850***
       (0.140)     (0.198)   (0.198)
2004   1.010***     -0.059   0.882***
       (0.125)     (0.163)   (0.156)
2005   1.113***    0.405**   0.852***
       (0.104)     (0.182)   (0.144)
2006   0.822***    -0.282*   0.751***
       (0.103)     (0.171)   (0.151)
2007   0.863***     0.063    0.873***
       (0.106)     (0.148)   (0.159)
2008   0.517***     0.036    0.551***
       (0.096)     (0.126)   (0.135)
2009    -0.099      0.035    -0.254**
       (0.076)     (0.148)   (0.123)
2010   -0.249***    -0.163   -0.294**
        (0.075)    (0.138)   (0.132)



                                         58
Observations   44,867   9,547   25,375
    R2          0.265   0.369    0.354




                                         59
Appendix Table 9. Syndication of VC Investments with Alternative Time Periods Before
and After EU-ODA. This table replicates Model (2) and Model (3) of Table 6 by restricting the
sample to three different time periods in our analysis, 3, 5, and 7 years before and after EU-ODA.
Model (1) to Model (3) restrict samples to investments made in early round only and report the
Table 6 results with the alternative sample periods, while Model (4) to (6) repeat the process with
investments made in late rounds only. Results remain consistent. We also report here the
coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed effects at the technology category and year level. In
addition this table reports coefficient estimates for all our controls in the baseline specification.
Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level. *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.


                                          Dependent variables
                                       Number of investors
                              Early-stage                Late-stage
                       3 years 5 years 7 years 3 years 5 years 7 years
                         (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)       (5)    (6)
    Drug-related        0.386   0.382 0.528* 0.912*** 0.665*** 0.717***
                       (0.357) (0.277) (0.285) (0.265) (0.235) (0.219)
     After ODA         0.862** 1.466*** 0.084   0.108   0.272 0.521
                       (0.439) (0.386) (0.411) (0.310) (0.333) (0.410)
    Drug-related
                      -0.944*** -0.515*     -0.461   0.470* 0.719*** 0.719***
    *After ODA
                       (0.362) (0.305) (0.285) (0.268) (0.227) (0.211)
    EU startups         -0.877 -0.103 0.005 -0.318 -0.117 0.029
                       (0.827) (0.572) (0.429) (0.603) (0.455) (0.354)
    US startups         -0.530 0.114    0.485 2.059*** 1.799*** 2.064***
                       (0.790) (0.528) (0.390) (0.540) (0.408) (0.317)
     Biosensors         -0.798 0.219    0.185 -0.835 0.130 0.855**
                       (0.872) (0.606) (0.553) (0.604) (0.400) (0.400)
 Biotech Equipment      -0.067 0.220 -0.027 1.276*** 1.158*** 1.521***
                       (0.545) (0.423) (0.405) (0.356) (0.286) (0.292)
   Biotech Other        -0.367 -0.032 -0.092 -0.470 -0.215 -0.059
                       (0.567) (0.486) (0.486) (0.713) (1.003) (0.891)
  Biotech Research      0.824 1.187** 1.088** 1.811*** 2.248*** 2.230***
                       (0.639) (0.476) (0.428) (0.323) (0.262) (0.256)
  Biotech-Animal        0.684 0.999* 1.116** 1.472*** 1.292*** 1.776***
                       (0.586) (0.524) (0.519) (0.561) (0.426) (0.451)
 Biotech-Industrial     -0.066 0.244    0.261 2.100*** 1.382*** 1.384***
                       (0.667) (0.487) (0.414) (0.558) (0.448) (0.353)
  Biotech-Human       0.738*** 0.858*** 0.850*** 1.686*** 1.522*** 1.447***
                      (0.210) (0.172) (0.144) (0.215) (0.159) (0.134)
Med/Health Products 0.320 0.382* 0.023       0.328   0.217 0.190
                    (0.361) (0.228) (0.195) (0.294) (0.215) (0.185)



                                                                                                   60
Pharmaceutical   0.510** 0.652*** 0.504*** 0.937*** 1.041*** 1.029***
                 (0.217) (0.171) (0.141) (0.268) (0.172) (0.147)
    1994                          1.259***                     0.179
                                  (0.406)                     (0.321)
    1995                          -0.782**                     0.229
                                  (0.325)                     (0.349)
    1996                  0.032 -0.758**             -0.628*** -0.408
                         (0.283) (0.297)              (0.238) (0.332)
    1997                  0.124 -0.847***             0.452 0.702*
                         (0.262) (0.314)             (0.303) (0.364)
    1998          -0.246 -0.083 -1.047*** 0.075   0.462 0.630*
                 (0.274) (0.270) (0.315) (0.215) (0.302) (0.364)
    1999          -0.271 -0.090 -0.969*** -0.619*** -0.215 -0.009
                 (0.296) (0.281) (0.289) (0.207) (0.284) (0.355)
    2000          -0.008 -0.812*** -0.456 -0.321 -0.296 -0.350*
                 (0.255) (0.228) (0.285) (0.214) (0.186) (0.203)
    2001          0.427* -0.398** 0.002 0.352* 0.344* 0.283
                 (0.241) (0.201) (0.263) (0.195) (0.207) (0.205)
    2002         0.486** -0.357** 0.117 0.346* 0.299 0.227
                 (0.189) (0.175) (0.257) (0.210) (0.186) (0.194)
    2003                 -0.764*** -0.261             -0.016 -0.098
                          (0.189) (0.248)            (0.192) (0.171)
    2004                 -0.555*** -0.167             0.003 -0.050
                          (0.187) (0.211)            (0.141) (0.158)
    2005                            0.300                      -0.060
                                   (0.207)                    (0.146)
    2006                          -0.370**                     -0.142
                                  (0.172)                     (0.147)
 Observations    2,987    4,475    6,019     8,431   13,354 18,046
     R2          0.400    0.388    0.378     0.367    0.360 0.356




                                                                        61
Appendix Table 10. Changes in the Invested Amount After EU-ODA – Results with All
Controls. This table replicates Table 7 reporting the coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed
effects at the technology category and year level. In addition this table reports coefficient
estimates for all our controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are clustered at the
investee firm level. *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.


                                Dependent variables
                         Investment amount in a round ($1K)
                          Total      Early-stage Late-stage
                           (1)           (2)           (3)
    Drug-related       2,145.008*** 2,100.302** 2,461.805***
                        (393.253)    (882.699)   (515.129)
     After ODA        -4,268.836*** -2,301.149 -3,338.689***
                        (691.035) (1,411.083)    (999.937)
    Drug-related
                        791.456*     -1,153.093    1,198.666**
    *After ODA
                        (434.347)    (923.312)     (562.095)
    EU startups       -2,551.749*** -1,542.173** -2,840.175***
                        (335.679)    (673.601)     (449.654)
    US startups           3.242       985.390*       525.338
                        (285.859)    (560.646)      (385.857)
     Biosensors        4,130.691*** 1,532.503 5,093.397***
                       (1,102.213) (1,752.065) (1,800.780)
 Biotech Equipment     2,466.092*** 783.661   3,924.986***
                        (573.054) (1,222.967)  (702.851)
   Biotech Other        1,511.043     -2,302.838 8,689.796***
                       (1,598.675)   (2,250.252) (2,114.508)
  Biotech Research     2,465.752*** 1,130.974 2,638.681***
                        (513.270) (1,216.597)  (663.861)
  Biotech-Animal       2,659.132*** 1,760.499 2,704.817***
                        (572.080) (1,238.839)  (744.264)
 Biotech-Industrial    2,938.236*** 767.816   2,943.302***
                        (623.828) (1,216.158)  (766.344)
  Biotech-Human          405.177*     -388.297      727.518**
                        (220.311)    (406.725)      (314.305)
Med/Health Products -763.325**        -170.096     -1,284.119***
                    (330.585)        (651.716)       (442.138)
  Pharmaceutical         -251.079     -140.041       -565.373
                        (289.724)    (553.210)      (398.834)
        1990             212.718      -849.350       213.563
                        (751.110)    (1,507.158)   (1,111.633)



                                                                                                   62
1991     -501.894      -3,907.433**  106.906
        (761.410)      (1,634.098) (1,126.514)
1992     161.047        -1,106.563     620.280
        (710.295)      (1,455.640)   (1,127.009)
1993     26.050          297.592      1,278.688
        (763.994)      (1,688.996)   (1,260.407)
1994   -1,575.864** -4,186.417*** -330.907
        (731.730) (1,611.474) (1,239.798)
1995     402.156        -491.687       223.699
        (708.900)      (1,449.368)   (1,146.634)
1996     -146.835       -117.901      1,060.302
        (704.365)      (1,374.477)   (1,077.165)
1997     -373.902       -737.847       576.656
        (683.689)      (1,295.385)   (1,049.093)
1998     -591.294       -921.102       490.243
        (656.107)      (1,272.635)   (1,000.655)
1999     36.978         -648.320      575.100
        (655.700)      (1,257.455)   (992.978)
2000   2,887.323*** 2,493.977*** 2,571.430***
        (439.056)    (835.192)    (597.481)
2001   3,351.524*** 2,105.606** 2,895.344***
        (451.270)    (915.413)   (595.397)
2002   2,367.244***     1,425.656    1,525.599**
        (459.838)       (932.880)     (603.084)
2003   1,231.415***      426.717      985.023
        (454.919)       (862.149)    (602.404)
2004     339.831         84.785       246.852
        (437.383)       (893.044)    (574.404)
2005   1,666.976*** 1,922.833**       616.192
        (427.560)    (882.805)       (551.043)
2006   2,337.128***     1,343.976    1,278.055**
        (420.867)       (860.437)     (567.027)
2007   1,055.060***      847.146      -79.879
        (398.707)       (809.494)    (524.966)
2008     710.963*        986.504      -133.385
        (404.000)       (821.430)    (555.529)
2009     139.433         677.565      -68.125
        (418.439)       (820.048)    (584.446)
2010   -1,169.398***     -487.439     -493.488
         (394.863)      (816.086)    (553.834)



                                                   63
 Constant      12,462.750*** 14,103.110*** 11,427.010***
                 (676.400) (1,399.406)       (982.889)

Observations      20,386        4,399         10,479
    R2             0.040        0.025          0.056




                                                           64
Appendix Table 11. Exit Performance of Early-stage Startups – Results with All Controls.
This table replicates Table 8 reporting the coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed effects at
the technology category and year level. In addition this table reports coefficient estimates for all
our controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level.
*p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.

                           Dependent variables
                       M&A       IPO       Bankruptcy
                        (1)       (2)         (3)
    Drug-related        0.043 -0.017         -0.093
                       (0.073) (0.054)      (0.074)
     After ODA          0.086 -0.316***     -0.139**
                       (0.076) (0.070)      (0.066)
    Drug-related
                       -0.132* 0.136**       0.020
    *After ODA
                       (0.068) (0.053)      (0.062)
    EU startups         0.102 -0.086         0.101
                       (0.108) (0.121)      (0.111)
    US startups         0.100 -0.107         0.118
                       (0.097) (0.110)      (0.106)
     Biosensors         0.134 -0.093         -0.137
                       (0.185) (0.083)      (0.091)
 Biotech Equipment      0.051 0.103         -0.137*
                       (0.100) (0.065)      (0.082)
   Biotech Other        -0.092 0.044         0.092
                       (0.128) (0.075)      (0.161)
  Biotech Research      -0.109 0.010         -0.003
                       (0.107) (0.059)      (0.092)
  Biotech-Animal        -0.066 0.239**       -0.016
                       (0.115) (0.101)      (0.102)
 Biotech-Industrial     -0.114 0.298***     -0.181**
                       (0.103) (0.092)      (0.072)
  Biotech-Human         -0.003 0.139***     -0.076***
                       (0.035) (0.036)       (0.026)
Med/Health Products -0.057 0.035             0.045
                    (0.061) (0.069)         (0.054)
  Pharmaceutical       0.099** 0.050         -0.032
                       (0.040) (0.039)      (0.031)
        1997           0.127** -0.220***     0.068
                       (0.050) (0.051)      (0.047)
        1998            0.003 -0.118**       -0.006
                       (0.053) (0.060)      (0.049)


                                                                                                    65
   1999        0.192*** -0.279***    0.022
               (0.055) (0.053)      (0.055)
   2000        0.085** -0.007       0.106***
               (0.040) (0.035)      (0.029)
   2001         0.027 -0.043        0.075***
               (0.042) (0.035)      (0.024)
   2002         0.007 0.010         0.048**
               (0.040) (0.034)      (0.021)
   2003        0.0002 -0.012        0.057***
               (0.037) (0.034)      (0.020)
   2004         0.001 0.023          0.021
               (0.034) (0.027)      (0.019)

Observations    4,291    4,291       4,291
    R2          0.331    0.346       0.296




                                               66
Appendix Table 12. Exit performance of early-stage startups given Alternative Time
Periods Before/After EU-ODA. This table replicates Table 8 by restricting the sample to two
different time periods in our analysis, 3 and 7 years before and after EU-ODA. We also report
here the coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed effects at the technology category and year
level. In addition this table reports coefficient estimates for all our controls in the baseline
specification. Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level.
*p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.

                                          Dependent variables
                       M&A       IPO Bankruptcy M&A      IPO Bankruptcy
                        (1)       (2)        (3) (4)      (5)         (6)
                                 3 years                 7 years
                             Before and after        Before and after
    Drug-related        -0.010 0.035       -0.086     0.054 -0.063        -0.091
                       (0.099) (0.066)    (0.089)    (0.068) (0.051)     (0.057)
     After ODA          -0.057 -0.074     -0.153**    -0.043 -0.288***    -0.046
                       (0.082) (0.061)    (0.076)    (0.087) (0.075)     (0.056)
    Drug-related
                       -0.096   0.111*     0.036     -0.145** 0.161***    0.003
    *After ODA
                       (0.083) (0.060)    (0.073)    (0.063) (0.045)     (0.052)
    EU startups         0.119 -0.148       0.236*     0.107 -0.100        0.067
                       (0.113) (0.162)    (0.135)    (0.083) (0.088)     (0.089)
    US startups         0.198* -0.207      0.254*      0.085 -0.071       0.088
                       (0.103) (0.155)    (0.132)    (0.077) (0.079)     (0.084)
     Biosensors         0.009 0.063       -0.186**    -0.052 -0.089      -0.116*
                       (0.246) (0.092)    (0.091)    (0.166) (0.074)     (0.069)
 Biotech Equipment      0.054 0.054        -0.110     0.059   0.042      -0.136*
                       (0.132) (0.074)    (0.101)    (0.087) (0.058)     (0.070)
   Biotech Other        -0.197 0.078       0.165      -0.080 0.017        0.029
                       (0.161) (0.091)    (0.203)    (0.111) (0.065)     (0.147)
  Biotech Research      -0.175 0.050       0.019      -0.086 -0.021       -0.006
                       (0.137) (0.069)    (0.119)    (0.095) (0.057)     (0.076)
  Biotech-Animal        -0.114 0.279**     -0.023     -0.039 0.214**      -0.025
                       (0.145) (0.120)    (0.121)    (0.103) (0.092)     (0.090)
 Biotech-Industrial    -0.254* 0.515***   -0.195*     -0.082 0.215***    -0.171***
                       (0.137) (0.124)    (0.103)    (0.089) (0.074)      (0.058)
  Biotech-Human         -0.025 0.125***   -0.089**    0.022 0.106***     -0.048***
                       (0.042) (0.041)    (0.037)    (0.027) (0.025)      (0.018)
Med/Health Products -0.071 0.082           0.036      -0.041 -0.002       0.066
                    (0.075) (0.091)       (0.070)    (0.047) (0.050)     (0.041)
  Pharmaceutical        0.066 0.002        -0.043    0.069** 0.065**      -0.029
                       (0.050) (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.034) (0.033)     (0.023)
        1994                                         -0.052     0.011     0.073*


                                                                                                   67
                                             (0.072) (0.071)      (0.042)
   1995                                       -0.114 0.165**       0.078*
                                             (0.073) (0.074)      (0.047)
   1996                                       -0.097 0.110        0.094**
                                             (0.070) (0.075)      (0.045)
   1997                                       0.027 -0.114*       0.161***
                                             (0.066) (0.064)      (0.042)
   1998        -0.127*** 0.111**   -0.066*    -0.102 -0.012       0.088**
                (0.047) (0.044)    (0.039)   (0.069) (0.065)      (0.044)
   1999         0.073 -0.060*       -0.042    0.079 -0.161***     0.114**
               (0.050) (0.036)     (0.043)   (0.065) (0.057)      (0.044)
   2000         0.079* -0.010       0.043    0.114*** 0.063**     0.116***
               (0.048) (0.032)     (0.028)   (0.040) (0.031)      (0.026)
   2001         0.019 -0.036        0.016     0.056   0.028       0.089***
               (0.050) (0.030)     (0.026)   (0.040) (0.033)      (0.021)
   2002                                       0.039 0.084**       0.060***
                                             (0.043) (0.034)      (0.023)
   2003                                       0.033 0.070**       0.064***
                                             (0.042) (0.033)      (0.020)
   2004                                       0.041 0.089***       0.031*
                                             (0.036) (0.027)      (0.018)
   2005                                       0.037 0.065**        0.007
                                             (0.030) (0.029)      (0.015)
   2006                                      -0.081*** 0.086***    -0.002
                                              (0.027) (0.030)     (0.012)
Observations    2,987    2,987     2,987      6,019     6,019      6,019
    R2          0.364    0.379     0.315      0.309     0.315      0.291




                                                                             68
Appendix Table 13. Replication of Table 8 with multinomial logit regressions. We report
here Table 8 results with multinomial logit models, taking into account that the dependent
variable is binary. We also report here the coefficient estimates for our full set of fixed effects at
the technology category and year level. In addition this table reports coefficient estimates for all
our controls in the baseline specification. Standard errors are clustered at the investing firm level.
*p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01



                                Dependent variables
                        M&A             IPO          Bankruptcy
                          (1)            (2)             (3)
    Drug-related         0.069          0.122         -0.383*
                        (0.176)        (0.260)        (0.200)
     After ODA           0.333        -2.649***       -2.148***
                        (0.232)        (0.312)         (0.346)
    Drug-related
                       -0.491***      1.557***         0.337
    *After ODA
                        (0.184)        (0.275)        (0.245)
                                ***            ***
    EU startups        1.423          -0.526          1.158***
                       (0.251)         (0.203)        (0.400)
    US startups        1.612***       -0.568***       1.362***
                       (0.242)         (0.188)        (0.383)
        IVC              -0.023         0.398          0.063
                        (0.193)        (0.249)        (0.292)
        CVC              0.041          0.244          -0.277
                        (0.235)        (0.294)        (0.376)
       Angel             0.317         -14.702         -0.872
                        (0.500)       (505.544)       (1.084)
        GVC              -0.398        -14.342         0.417
                        (0.863)       (787.739)       (1.175)
     Biosensors          -0.527        -13.629        -1.813*
                        (0.390)       (352.373)       (1.037)
 Biotech Equipment       0.046        1.279***        -0.734**
                        (0.230)       (0.360)         (0.345)
   Biotech Other         -1.037        -13.075        1.561***
                        (0.660)       (486.237)       (0.576)
  Biotech Research     -0.635***        0.307          0.247
                        (0.215)        (0.407)        (0.262)
  Biotech-Animal         -0.110       1.822***         -0.266
                        (0.238)       (0.337)         (0.313)
 Biotech-Industrial    -1.176***      1.962***        -2.283**
                        (0.380)       (0.439)         (1.031)



                                                                                                    69
  Biotech-Human         -0.129    1.076***    -0.660***
                       (0.089)    (0.113)      (0.137)
Med/Health Products     -0.241     0.054      0.370**
                       (0.150)    (0.213)     (0.182)
  Pharmaceutical       0.292***   0.682***     -0.217
                       (0.106)    (0.137)     (0.159)
       1997            0.522***   -1.300***    0.251
                       (0.196)     (0.229)    (0.223)
       1998             -0.108    -0.599***    -0.056
                       (0.197)     (0.204)    (0.229)
       1999            0.786***   -1.755***    -0.019
                       (0.190)     (0.233)    (0.224)
       2000            0.364***    -0.024     1.550***
                       (0.130)    (0.157)     (0.254)
       2001             0.244*     -0.233     1.228***
                       (0.137)    (0.174)     (0.269)
       2002             0.089      0.139      0.939***
                       (0.138)    (0.163)     (0.279)
       2003             0.054      -0.126     0.969***
                       (0.135)    (0.165)     (0.273)
       2004             -0.023     0.139       0.445
                       (0.133)    (0.155)     (0.294)
     Constant         -2.295***   -0.865**    -2.206***
                       (0.373)    (0.405)      (0.536)

   Observations          4,291      4,291      4,291
  Log Likelihood      -2,662.721 -1,938.768 -1,454.589




                                                          70
