NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MOBILITY AND CONGESTION IN URBAN INDIA
Prottoy A. Akbar
Victor Couture
Gilles Duranton
Adam Storeygard
Working Paper 25218
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25218

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

This work is supported by the World Bank, the Zell Lurie Center for Real Estate at the
Wharton School, the Fisher Center for Urban and Real Estate Economics at Berkeley Haas,
and we also gratefully acknowledge the support of the Global Research Program on Spatial
Development of Cities at lse and Oxford funded by the Multi Donor Trust Fund on
Sustainable Urbanization of the World Bank and supported by the UK Department for
International Development. We appreciate the comments from Leah Brooks, Ben Faber,
Michael Gechter, Ejaz Ghani, Ed Glaeser, Vernon Henderson, KiJoon Kim, Gabriel
Kreindler, Emile Quinet, Christopher Severen, Kate Vyborny, and participants at conferences
and seminars. Hero Ashman, Xinzhu Chen, Allison Green, Xinyu Ma, Gao Xian Peh, and
Jungsoo Yoo provided us with excellent research assistance. We are immensely grateful to Sam
Asher, Geoff Boeing, Arti Grover, Nina Harari, and Yue Li for their help with the data. The
views expressed here are those of the authors and not of any institution they may be associated
with, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Prottoy A. Akbar, Victor Couture, Gilles Duranton, and Adam Storeygard. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mobility and Congestion in Urban India
Prottoy A. Akbar, Victor Couture, Gilles Duranton, and Adam Storeygard
NBER Working Paper No. 25218
November 2018
JEL No. R41
ABSTRACT
We develop a methodology to estimate robust city level vehicular mobility indices, and apply it
to 154 Indian cities using 22 million counterfactual trips measured by a web mapping service.
There is wide variation in mobility across cities. An exact decomposition shows this variation is
driven more by differences in uncongested mobility than congestion. Under plausible
assumptions, a one standard deviation improvement in uncongested speed creates much more
mobility than optimal congestion pricing. Denser and more populated cities are slower, only in
part because of congestion. Urban economic development is correlated with better (uncongested
and overall) mobility despite worse congestion.
Prottoy A. Akbar
University of Pittsburgh
Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences
Department of Economics
4901 Wesley W. Posvar Hall
230 South Bouquet Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
prottoyamanakbar@pitt.edu
Victor Couture
University of California, Berkeley
Haas School of Business
2220 Piedmont Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
couture@berkeley.edu

Gilles Duranton
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
duranton@wharton.upenn.edu
Adam Storeygard
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02155
adam.storeygard@tufts.edu

1. Introduction
Using a popular web mapping and transportation service, we generate information for more
than 22 million counterfactual trip instances in 154 large Indian cities.1 We then use this
information to estimate indices of mobility (speed) of motorized vehicle travel in these cities.
We first assess the robustness of our indices to a wide variety of methodological choices.
Second, we provide a novel decomposition of overall mobility into uncongested mobility
and the congestion delays caused by traffic. This decomposition allows us to perform a
simple welfare analysis that compares the gains from improving uncongested mobility with
the gains from introducing optimal congestion pricing. Third, we examine how indicators of
urban economic development and other city characteristics correlate with mobility, uncongested mobility, and congestion delays. Finally, we provide additional mobility indices for
walking and transit trips.
To the best of our knowledge, our paper provides the first systematic investigation of
urban mobility across cities in a developing country.2 Our main substantive findings are the
following. First, there are large differences in mobility across Indian cities. A factor of nearly
two separates the fastest and slowest cities. To illustrate this, figure 1 plots the speed of travel
by motorized vehicles throughout the day in a particularly fast Indian city, Chandigarh, and
in a particularly slow city, Kolkota.
Second, variation in mobility across cities is driven primarily by uncongested mobility,
not by congestion delays. In figure 2, there is on average little variation across hours of the
day for our sample of 154 cities. Due to slow uncongested mobility, a very poor city like
Varanasi (Benares) is slower than average at all times, even at night in the absence of traffic.
We see much greater intra-day differences in mobility in large cities, particularly the largest
ones close to their center, as illustrated by Delhi in the figure. More generally, an index
of uncongested mobility explains more than 50% of the variance in overall mobility across
cities. A simple welfare analysis also suggests much larger gains from a 10% improvement
in uncongested mobility than from implementing optimal congestion pricing in all of urban
1 By

counterfactual, we mean trip instances that have not been actually taken by a household. As we show
below, these trips were selected to mimic some characteristics of trips that are taken by households in other
contexts.
2 Two new studies focusing on a single developing city complement our cross-city investigation: Kreindler
(2018) studies the welfare impact of congestion pricing in Bangalore, and Akbar and Duranton (2018) measure
the cost of congestion in Bogotá.

1

Figure 1: Mobility throughout the day, two select Indian vs. two us cities

50

Speed (km/hr)

40

30

20

Grand Rapids
Central Chicago
Chandigarh
Central Kolkota

Hour of day

10

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Mean speed for trips with length between 5 and 10 kilometers. We consider trips in the same length range
for reasons made clear below. Central Kolkota and Chicago refer to trips that take place on average within 5
kilometers of the center of their city. See section 2 for further details.

Figure 2: Mobility throughout the day in India
Speed (km/hr)

25

20

15

154 Cities

Delhi

20 Largest cities

Central Delhi

Hour of day

Varanasi

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
10 trips with length between 5 and 10 kilometers. Central Delhi refers to trips that take place on
Mean speed for
average within 5 kilometers of the center of Delhi. See section 2 for further details.

2

India, even after accounting for the potential of congestion pricing to reduce the significant
level of travel time unreliability that we document. These findings challenge the conventional
wisdom that traffic congestion is the main reason why some cities are slow and some are fast.
To take one prominent example, a recent report by the Boston Consulting Group (bcg, 2018)
claims that Kolkota has the most traffic congestion among the four largest Indian cities. We
find that Kolkota is in fact the least congested of the four, but the slowest because of low uncongested mobility. This distinction has important policy implications, because uncongested
speed cannot be improved by congestion pricing, ride-sharing promotion or restriction, or
other policies often proposed to combat congestion.
Third, travel is generally slow in Indian cities, even outside peak hours. In addition to
Chandigarh and Kolkota, figure 1 also plots comparable speed data for a fast us city, Grand
Rapids, and a slow one, Chicago.3 Even the central part of Chicago, one of the most congested
locations in the us, is generally faster than one of the fastest Indian cities, Chandigarh.
Finally, we find that denser, more populated cities are slower, that there is a hill-shaped
relationship between city per capita income and mobility, and that a city’s mobility is related
to characteristics of its road network.
This investigation is important for three reasons. First, there is an extreme paucity of useful
knowledge about urban transportation, especially in developing countries. As a first building
block towards a more serious knowledge base on urban transportation, some stylized facts
are needed.4 For instance, we need to know how slow travel is in developing cities beyond
the anecdotal evidence offered by disgruntled travelers. Equally important objects of interest
are the differences between cities, between different parts of the same city, and across times
of day within the same city.5 We hope that our results, methodology, and data sources can
3 Couture, Duranton, and Turner (2018) rank Grand Rapids and Chicago as the second slowest and second
fastest cities among the 50 largest metropolitan areas in the us. In the ranking below, Chandigarh is among
the fastest cities in India and a natural counterpart of Grand Rapids in terms of population. Kolkota, the third
largest city in India, is the natural counterpart to Chicago. It is also the slowest city in India.
4 In richer countries, much of our knowledge stems from representative surveys of household travel behavior.
These surveys nonetheless have clear limitations, including a lack of precision in what travelers report. They are
also prohibitively expensive to carry out broadly in developing countries. For the us, the Bureau of Transportation Statistics reports a cost per household of perhaps $300 to produce the National Household Transportation
Survey or about $40 million in total (see http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/reports/nhts.pdf, last
accessed, 6 September 2018.)
5 Several software and data services such as Inrix and TomTom propose popular measures of congestion for
a large sample of world cities. These services do not make the details of their methodology public. It seems that
they monitor either specific roads or average traffic speed. We show below that measures of average speed are
problematic and perform poorly. Uber Mobility also provides data, including travel times for four Indian cities
that, we argue below, lead to substantial overestimates of mobility.

3

help guide policy and future research on urban transportation in developing countries. We
devote much of the last section of our paper to providing such guidance.
Second, there is a popular view that urbanization and economic development lead to ever
larger cities and increased rates of motorization. According to this view, these two features
will eventually lead to complete gridlock. We do find evidence of congestion in the largest
Indian cities and a strong association between congestion and household access to motorized
vehicles. However, economic development also brings about better travel infrastructure
which facilitates uncongested mobility. In fact, indicators of urban economic development
such as faster recent population growth, higher income levels (except at the very top), and
higher motorization rates are generally associated with better overall mobility despite worse
congestion.
Third, urban transportation in developing countries is prioritized for massive investments.
For instance, transportation is the largest sector of lending by the World Bank and represents
more than 20% of its net commitments as of 2016. Among the many problems that these
investments are trying to remedy, the lack of urban land devoted to the roadway is widely
perceived to be a chief cause behind slow mobility and urban congestion. Providing an
assessment of the determinants of mobility to guide policy is thus fundamental. For instance,
we find suggestive evidence that better mobility is associated with a more regular grid
network and more primary roads.
Our investigation raises three challenges. The first is methodological. We propose a new
approach to measure various forms of mobility from trip information, and to decompose
them into uncongested mobility and delays caused by congestion. The second is a travel
data challenge. There is no comprehensive source of data about urban transportation in
Indian cities. Our approach is to collect data on predicted travel time from a popular website,
Google Maps (gm).6 For each city, we designed a sample of trips and sampled each trip at
different times on different days. Our main worry is that these counterfactual trips may
not be representative of the actual travel conditions faced by city residents. To address this
worry, we use four different trip design strategies. These strategies aim to replicate some
characteristics of actual trips taken by urban households in other countries. We show that our
6 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Maps,

last accessed, 6 September 2018. A number of new studies, which we discuss later in the paper, also use Google Maps to measure traffic in a developing city, notably
Kreindler (2016), Hanna, Kreindler, and Olken (2017), and Akbar and Duranton (2018). Alternative approaches
include direct gps records for particular vehicles such as taxis (Mangrum and Molnar, 2017) or sensors, which
usually track traffic only on the most important arteries (Geroliminis and Daganzo, 2008).

4

city mobility indices vary little across sampling strategies, type of trip destinations, origin and
direction of travel, or time of day. Finally, we face the challenge of consistently defining and
measuring the cities in which we sample counterfactual trips. To answer this challenge, we
rely on a wide variety of sources including the census of India, OpenStreetMap, and satellite
imagery.

2. Data collection
In this section we provide an overview of our data. Further details are available in Appendix
A.
2.1 City sample
United Nations (2015) reports the names and locations of 166 cities in India that reached a
population of 300,000 by 2014. Following Harari (2016) and Ch, Martin, and Vargas (2018),
we initially define the spatial extent of these cities using nightlights. Within these light
boundaries, we restrict attention to 40-meter pixels defined as built-up in 2014 according
to the Global Human Settlements Layer (ghsl) of the European Commission’s Joint Research
Centre (jrc). After dropping cities for which no appropriate light exists, aggregating multiple
cities within the same contiguous light, and dropping cities for which the relevant ghsl data
are missing, we are left with an estimation sample of 154 cities.
2.2 Trips data
We define a trip as an ordered pair of points (origin and destination) within the same city as
defined above. A trip instance is a trip taken at a specific time. Our target sample for city c
p
is 15 Popc trips, where Popc is the projected 2015 population of city c from United Nations
(2015), and 10 trip instances per trip, to ensure variation across times of day. For a city of
population, say, one million, our sampling strategy thus targets 15,000 trips (7,500 in each
direction between the trips’ endpoints) and 150,000 trip instances. All trips are restricted
to be at least one kilometer between origin and destination because Google results are less
reliable for very short trips, few of which we expect to be motorized anyway. We sample
across times of day to roughly match the weekday distribution of actual trips in Bogotá from
Akbar and Duranton (2018). We oversample sparse overnight periods, and sample weekends
at half the rate of weekdays.
5

We sample across four broad classes of trips, each designed to reflect key aspects of urban
travel: radial, circumferential, gravity, and amenity trips.
Radial trips join a randomly located point within 1.5 kilometers of a city’s center (as defined by United Nations, 2015) with another point in the city, either approximately 2, 5, 10, or
15 kilometers away, or at a distance percentile drawn from a uniform distribution. These trips
are those predicted by the standard monocentric model of cities (Alonso, 1964, Mills, 1967,
Muth, 1969). The monocentric model provides a reasonable first-order characterization of the
distribution of population, density, and land and house prices in cities of many countries (see
Duranton and Puga, 2015, for a survey).
Circumferential trips, orthogonal to radial trips, join a randomly located origin at least
2 kilometers from the city center with a destination at approximately the same radius but
displaced approximately 30 degrees clockwise or counterclockwise.
Gravity trips join a random origin with a destination in a random direction, at a distance
that is drawn from a truncated Pareto distribution with shape parameter 1 and support
between one kilometers and 250 kilometers. Both commutes and city trips in general have
been shown to reflect this distribution in many contexts (Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf,
2015, Akbar and Duranton, 2018).
Amenity trips join a random origin with an instance of one of 17 amenities (e.g. shopping
malls, schools, train stations) as recorded in Google Places. The particular establishment
selected is based on a combination of proximity and “prominence” assigned by Google. The
weighting across these amenity types is based on a mapping of amenities to trip purposes
whose share we draw from the 2008 us National Household Transportation Survey (nhts)
(Couture et al., 2018).
Using the sampling scheme above, we simulated 22,661,818 trip instances in Google Maps,
covering 1,166,738 locations pairs and, hence, 2,333,476 trips across all cities and strategies,
over 40 days between September and November of 2016. For each trip, we record origin,
destination, trip type, length in hundreds of meters, and estimated duration in minutes of
Google’s recommended route under current traffic conditions (which we sometimes refer to
as real-time travel time), as well as the time required for the same route without traffic.
We collected a second sample, 2,115,275 instances of 97,212 trips, in August–September
2018, with several key differences to focus on assessing data quality and measuring travel

6

time unreliability.7 Each trip was collected on at least ten different weekdays in the same
5-minute time-of-day window, in the morning (9 a.m. - 12 p.m.) and/or evening (5 p.m. - 9
p.m.) peak, with durations and distances reported in seconds and meters.
Google’s route selection and speed estimates are based on the location and speed of mobile phones using the Android operating system, as well as other phones running Google
software, especially Google Maps. Accurate measurement thus requires that drivers are
providing information. Kreindler (2018) shows that trip speeds from Google Maps are very
close to speeds for actual trips of both cars and motorcycles in Bangalore, measured with a
custom-designed smartphone app.
In Appendix A, we also provide a comparison between our data and information provided
by Uber Movement about travel speeds in four large cities in our sample. This comparison is
complicated by the manner in which Uber Movement aggregates its information. Instead of
travel times of actual trips, Uber Movement reports times between zones by averaging travel
times from Uber trips that pass through these zones. As we show, this greatly undersamples
the beginnings and ends of trips, and these beginnings and ends are considerably slower
than the middle parts. Because of this, Uber Movement reports speeds that are substantially
faster than our trips. We show that we can nonetheless closely approximate the speed figures
obtained from Uber Movement data once we appropriately distort our treatment of Google
Maps trip instances and, in particular, focus on travel speeds for their middle parts.
It is however possible that travel times predictions are worse in cities with lower mobile
phone penetration. This is unlikely to affect our results. There were 300 million smartphone
users in India as of the 4th quarter of 2016 (see Appendix A for details of all web-based
sources). In December of 2015, 71% of mobile internet users were urban. Given a 1.324
Billion population of India in 2016, and a 31% urbanization rate from the 2011 Census, a
naive calculation implies that 52% of urban residents, including residents of smaller cities,
and children, have smartphones. In setting up their phones, users may choose to opt out of
sending information to Google. However, the opt-out rate, which Google does not publish,
would have to be extremely high to affect our results. Crucially, to estimate slowed traffic
on a block, Google only needs one vehicle with a phone, and by definition, time-varying
7 We

collected a further 115,733 trip instances for Bokaro Steel City in December 2017 as the un database
initially reported its location incorrectly. However, we exclude Bokaro Steel City from all results in section 6.
In August 2018, we also collected 250,307 trip instances for two American cities, Chicago and Grand Rapids,
to produce figure 1 and 526,360 trip instances for four large Indian cities to help compare counterfactual trips
from Google Maps to actual trips from Uber rideshares. Finally, we collected data on transit and walking trips
in January 2018. We describe them in section 7.

7

congestion implies many vehicles. Put together, this suggests that all cities have enough
phones to generate high-quality speed estimates.
Even if Google has access to all of these data, it might not use them to provide real-time
traffic data, reporting instead modeled averages, perhaps especially in smaller cities. In order
to test for this, we looked for variation in trip duration (reported in minutes) and trip length
(reported in hundreds of meters) across instances of the same trip occurring at the same time
of day (within a 10-minute band) on different days, using our main sample. We find that
on average 76% of these pairs of trip instances have some variation in either duration or
length. Interestingly, this percentage has a correlation across cities of 0.72 with our preferred
congestion index. In Bangalore, the most congested city in India, 91% of pairs of trip instances
taking place within 10 minutes of each other on different days exhibit variation in either
travel time or trip length. This percentage is the lowest in small cities, where we expect trips
experiencing little traffic to be especially common and our preferred index of congestion is
the lowest. However, even for these cities, we still find substantial variation in the travel
times and travel routes suggested by Google Maps. In all cities, at least 60% of pairs of trip
instances taking place within 10 minutes of each other on different days exhibit variation in
either travel time or trip length.
We believe that this is strong evidence that Google is using real-time traffic information to
calculate travel speed, even in small and poor cities. If trips with zero variance reflect bad
data, we can also calculate a mobility index on a sample that discards them. The correlation
with our preferred mobility index below is 0.998. The trips with no time variation are clearly
not driving our results. The 2018 sample, with more precise resolution in meters and seconds,
shows this even more clearly. Over 98% of trips in the average city show variation across
instances on different days within a 5-minute time-of-day window in evening peak, morning
peak, or both. In no city does this value fall below 83% (and 91% excluding Jammu and
Srinagar).
Finally, we also estimate differences in travel speed during public holidays that take
place in some Indian states during weekdays of our main data collection period from midSeptember to early November 2016. This includes, for instance, the Onam (harvest) festival
celebrated in Kerala, and Diwali (festival of lights) celebrated in several states at slightly
different dates. We find evidence of modestly faster mobility in a large majority of cases and
evidence of slower mobility for festivals with major outdoor celebrations drawing a large
number of visitors. For instance, a public holiday in Punjab celebrating Guru Ram Das, a
8

major figure of Sikhism, is associated with modestly faster mobility in Punjabi cities except
in Amritsar, which experiences slower mobility. Guru Ram Das is the founder of Amritsar
and major celebrations take place in this city during this public holiday. Importantly, we find
evidence of mobility effects during public holidays even in smaller cities with a population
below half a million. We provide further details of our holiday analysis in Appendix A.
2.3 City-level data
Several pieces of information were derived from administrative data. Daily labor earnings
by district and gender are from the Employment and Unemployment Survey of the National
Sample Survey (nss-eue) 2011–12. Population, and share of population with access to a car
or motorcycle by “town” (fourth administrative level), and average commute distance for
urban non-agricultural workers by mode and district, are from the 2011 Census. We assign
city populations as follows. The population of those towns falling completely within a city
light are fully included. Towns falling partially within a city light contribute a share of their
population defined by the share of the town’s land area falling in the light. The other census
variables (earnings, commutes, share of households with access to a car, motorcycle) are
analogously aggregated using the resulting town population shares.
Weather data are from Weather Underground. Data were available for 112 of 154 cities,
for a median of eight periods per day. Population growth from 1990 to 2015 is from United
Nations (2015). We also use variables that characterize ‘urban shape’ computed by Harari
(2016). Data on characteristics of the road network within a (lights-based) city are from
OpenStreetMap via GeoFabrik, and processed through OSMnx.

3. A methodology for measuring mobility
3.1 A general conceptual framework
Consider the following general travel problem faced by a household. Its members work
and conduct errands at several destinations, selected from a potentially large choice set.
Potential destinations are costly to reach. To maximize utility, the household will choose
to undertake some trips and not others. Some important decisions like household location
and car purchases may also be made simultaneously with local mobility and accessibility.
Fully modeling this presents overwhelming theoretical challenges and data requirements.

9

This travel problem is clearly not tractable unless we drastically simplify it. As a starting
point, we note that the household travel problem is not unlike the standard consumption
problem where consumers choose their basket from a large number of goods. We often
simplify this consumption problem by considering a price index. We can do the same thing
for the choice of destinations made by households. In each city, we can consider a number of
residential locations and attempt to measure the cost of a ‘typical’ trip. The data requirements
are still considerable but no longer overwhelming. The pitfalls of this approach are the same
as those associated with typical price indices. Not knowing the preferences of households,
it is unclear how travel costs (i.e., the prices) should be aggregated, keeping in mind that
different households with different preferences face different price indices.
To minimize these pitfalls, we show that our mobility indices do not depend on how we
weight different kinds of trips. In particular, our indices vary little by sampling strategies,
type of trip destinations, origin and direction of travel, or time of day. This is because slower
cities are often slower at all times, for all types of trips, and throughout the city. As a result,
we need not rely on a particular utility specification to tell us how to weight, say, a trip to
the train station at peak hour on a weekday relative to a trip to a shopping destination on the
weekend.8
3.2 Measuring mobility
We want to measure the ease of going from an origin to a destination in cities. We focus
on the speed of road travel using a motorized vehicle. Data from the 2011 Indian census
suggests that 46% of urban commutes, and 55% of urban commutes longer than 1 kilometer,
are by motorized road transport. Measuring the speed of travel in a city raises a number of
challenges since trips differ considerably in their length, location of origin and destination,
time and day of departure, and mode.
The simplest approach is to compute a measure of mean speed for a given city:
Scm =

∑ i ∈ c Di
,
∑i∈c Ti

8 While

(1)

generalized transportation costs involve money, time, and several dimensions of travel comfort and
travel conditions (Small and Verhoef, 2007), here we focus on travel time and reliability. This generalization is
not as extreme as it seems. First, if we think of travel time as home production and value it at half the wage
as is customary in the literature, it represents a large share of the overall cost of travel. Second, many other
components of travel costs such as gas consumption and vehicle depreciation are also correlated with travel
distance and thus with travel time.

10

where c denotes a city and i is a trip instance. Because we sum the length Di of all trip
instances in city c and divide by the sum of trip durations Ti , the ratio Scm is a length-weighted
measure of travel speed. It is straightforward to define the corresponding unweighted mean.
Means are attractive because of their simplicity and ease of computation. However, in our
case means may not be comparable across cities. Most importantly, trip length and distance
to the center differ systematically across cities. As we show below, these characteristics are
important determinants of trip speed. We can condition them out by estimating the following
type of regression:
fe

log Si = αXi0 + sc(i) + ei ,

(2)

where the dependent variable is log trip speed (Si = Di /Ti ), Xi is a vector of characteristics
fe

for trip instance i, sc(i) is a fixed effect for city c, and ei is an error term.
If trip characteristics are appropriately centered and the errors are normally distributed,


fe
fe
Ŝc = exp ŝc + φ̂2 /2 is a measure of predicted speed for a typical trip in city c where φ̂ is
the estimator of the standard deviation of the error term e. Note that for simplicity we can
fe

directly use the estimated city fixed effects, ŝc , as an index of mobility.
Equation (2) does not specify the exact content of the vector of characteristics X. In addition to the city within which a trip takes place, we expect the main variables that determine
the speed of a motorized trip in our data to be its length, time of departure, distance to the
center, and perhaps the type of the trip. We also expect trip speed to be affected by weather
conditions. We derive our benchmark index from equation (2) and we will test the robustness
of our estimates of the city fixed effects with respect to which variables are included in the
regression and how.
Travel conditions may also vary across cities in ways that may not be well captured by
equation (2). For instance, we find below that peak hours are relatively slower and last longer
in more congested cities. To capture this, we also estimate a more flexible version of equation
(2) where we allow both the constant and the vector of coefficients to vary across cities:
log Si = αc(i) Xi0 + sc(i) + ei .

(3)

Equation (3) includes many coefficients for each city. Comparing for instance the time of day
effect for traffic between 9.30 and 10 p.m. across 154 cities will not be insightful. Rather than
keep all these coefficients separate, we aggregate them into index measures of mobility for
each city.

11

More specifically, we proceed as follows. We first estimate equation (3) for each city separately. Each of these 154 regressions can be used to generate a predicted speed for all trips in

the data, telling us how fast trip i would be if it were taken in city c: Ŝci = exp α̂c Xi0 + φ̂c2 /2 .
We also predict speeds from an analogous ‘national’ regression using all trip instances by

imposing common coefficients regardless of the city of travel: Ŝi = exp α̂Xi0 + φ̂2 /2 .
Then, we compute a predicted duration for each trip i if it were to take place in city c
(T̂ci = Di /Ŝci ) or ‘nationally’ (T̂i = Di /Ŝi ). Finally we can compute a relative speed index for
each city:
∑i T̂i
.
(4)
∑i T̂ci
The index Lc represents the time it would take to conduct all trip instances in the data at the
Lc =

estimated speed for city c relative to the predicted time it would take to conduct these trips
at the average estimated ‘national’ speed. Lc is a unitless scalar, but we can multiply it by
∑i Di / ∑i T̂i , the average national speed, to transform it into a predicted speed for city i.
We note that the index Lc defined in equation (4) resembles a Laspeyres price index in the
sense that we compare the speed of trips across Indian cities for the same national bundle of
trip instances. Like a standard Laspeyres index, Lc may be sensitive to sampling error or to
out-of-sample predictions.
Alternatively, we can compute the predicted time it takes to undertake all city c trips in city
c relative to the predicted time it takes to undertake all city c trips from a national regression.
That is, we can compute:
∑i∈c T̂i
.
(5)
∑i∈c T̂ci
This alternative speed index is analogous to a Paasche price index. Because we compare city
Pc =

trips at predicted city speed to city trips at predicted national speed, this Paasche index will
be less sensitive to the problems of out-of-sample predictions that may afflict the Laspeyres
index above. It is also straightforward to compute the corresponding Fisher index: Fc =
√
Lc × Pc .
Finally, we can compute a broad class of mobility indices derived from logit or ces utility
specifications. In the logit case of Ben-Akiva and Lerman (1985), the travel decision is a
discrete choice over a set of trip destinations. In Appendix B, we derive the following
mobility index, which resembles the (inverse of) the familiar ces price index:
Gc =

∑i∈c bci Tci1−σ
1− σ

∑i∈c bci T i
12

!1/(σ−1)
,

(6)

where bci is a quality parameter for the destination of trip i in city c, and σ is an elasticity
of substitution between trip destinations. In this standard utility maximization framework,
cheaper (shorter) trips receive more weight, with the strength of that relationship governed
by the elasticity of substitution σ. To construct the denominator of Gc , we use a nonparametric procedure to compute, from the national sample, the average duration T i of trips
with approximately the same length as trip i in city c. This procedure delivers a pure mobility
index that depends only on speed differences across cities.9
Instead of tackling the difficult problem of estimating the parameters of Gc , we show that
for a wide range of values of σ and bci , Gc is highly correlated with our benchmark index
from equation (2). We also experiment with richer nesting structures, in which trips to similar
destination types (e.g., work, shopping, medical/dental, etc) are more substitutable.10
It is important to keep in mind that the observations used to estimate equations (2) and (3)
and to compute the indices in equations (4), (5), and (6) are counterfactual trips, not actual
trips. This presents both benefits and costs. The main advantage of our approach is that trips
are exogenously chosen. Unlike Couture et al. (2018), we do not need to worry about the
simultaneous determination of some variables such as trip length and speed, which could
affect the estimates of city fixed effects in equations (2) and (3).11 Conceptually, our approach
is similar to measuring price indices from store price tags instead of from consumers’ transactions.
This exogeneity is also a potential limitation of our method. The trip instances that we
query do not correspond to actual trips and may not be representative of the travel conditions
faced by urban travelers when they demand to travel. If our trips are far enough from
representative, and if the relative speed of various types of trips varies across cities, then
our mobility indices will be mismeasured.
To this criticism, we have four answers. The first is that some of the trips we created
were designed to resemble actual trips in other cities, with respect to either their direction
and length, or their destination type and frequency. Second, we show below that when
9 To

see this, note that both the city-level numerator and the national-level denominator of Gc have the same
number of trips, and the same distribution of trip lengths. The index in each city is therefore free of gains
from variety and gains from closer proximity to travel destinations, and determined only by speed differences
relative to a national sample.
10 As another example, consider a utility function with limited scheduling flexibility, as in Kreindler (2018).
Such a function would increase the weight of trips during peak time. Our approach is to show that mobility
indices based on only peak time trips are highly correlated with those based on all trips.
11 For instance, as mobility gets better travelers may choose to travel to further destinations. In addition, the
(counterfactual) trip instances that we query do not affect real traffic conditions.

13

we introduce a comprehensive set of controls for other trip characteristics, the economic
significance of the trip type indicators in equation (2) is small. Third and most important,
our large sample allows us to estimate mobility indices for each trip type, destination, time
of day, distance to city center, and various other subsamples. These indices are all highly
correlated with our baseline index. As argued earlier, this result implies that our indices do
not depend in an important way on the particular utility weight that each counterfactual trip
could receive. Finally, Akbar and Duranton (2018) use Google Maps in Bogotá to measure the
speed of actual trips reported in a transportation survey and counterfactual trips designed
using the same strategy as here. Within short time intervals within days, the speeds of the
two types of trips are virtually indistinguishable.
3.3 Disentangling two sources of mobility: uncongested mobility and congestion.
Mobility can naturally be decomposed into two components: an uncongested or “free flow”
speed, and a congestion factor. To separate the “intrinsic” slowness of a city from its congestion, we can adapt the approach proposed above. To measure mobility, we use as dependent
fe

variable in equation (2) the log of actual trip speed and estimate city fixed effects ŝc that we
can interpret as an index of mobility. To measure mobility in the absence of traffic, we repeat
the same estimation as with actual speed but use as dependent variable the log of speed in
the absence of traffic returned by Google Maps for each query. The resulting city fixed effects
ˆ cf e are our index of uncongested mobility.12
nt
To measure congestion, we repeat the same estimation using the difference between log
trip duration with traffic and log trip duration without traffic, log Ti − log Tint = log( Ti /Tint ),
fe
as the dependent variable. While strictly speaking, the city fixed effects, fˆc , that we estimate
are a measure of delay, we can interpret them as a broad index of congestion, which we refer
to as the congestion factor.
The dependent variable when estimating mobility is log Si = log Di − log Ti . The dependent variable when estimating mobility in the absence of traffic is log Sint = log Di − log Tint .
It then follows that when estimating the congestion factor we have log Ti − log Tint =

−(log Sint − log Si ). Our third regression thus uses as dependent variable the difference
between the dependent variables of the first two regressions. Because we estimate these
12 Alternatively, recall that we observe each trip an average of ten times and oversample times in the middle
of the night when we expect very little traffic. We can treat the speed of the fastest trip instance as an estimate
of uncongested speed. In practice, these two methods yield city congestion indices with a Spearman correlation
coefficient of 0.96.

14

three regressions for the same trip instances using the same set of covariates, it follows
directly from simple econometrics that a city’s congestion factor is the difference between
its uncongested mobility factor and its overall mobility factor:
fe
ˆ cf e − ŝcf e .
fˆc = nt

(7)

This result is useful on two counts. First, it provides us with an exact decomposition which
we exploit below. Second, when we regress these three city fixed effects on the same set of city
determinants below, the estimated coefficients will also conveniently add up. For instance,
the estimated effect of city population on mobility will be equal to the estimated effect of city
population on mobility in the absence of traffic minus the estimated effect of city population
on the congestion factor.
3.4 Measuring travel time unreliability
Empirical studies in other contexts find that travelers care not only about travel speed, but
also about reliable travel times (Brownstone and Small, 2005). For example, unexpected late
arrival at work has a cost distinct from that of a predictably long commute. Measuring
unreliability for a large sample of trips over many routes is challenging using traditional
methods (loop detectors, gps devices, or recall diaries). Our empirical design using Google
Maps is uniquely well-suited for this exercise, because we can query the same trip at the same
time (within a five minute time window) on different weekdays.
As in Brownstone and Small (2005), we measure unreliability for a given trip departing at
a given time using the percentiles of the travel time distribution across different weekdays. In
particular, we compute the unreliability of a trip as the ratio of the 90th to the 50th percentile
of its travel time distribution net of city-specific effects for each weekday, to account for, say,
systematically faster Thursdays in one city and Mondays in another.13 We then compute
unreliability indices for each city, using the unreliability ratio of each trip as a dependent
variable in the regression in equation (2) with all other controls except weather (which is part
of what we want to capture in measuring unreliability). We perform this analysis using our
August-September 2018 sample of morning and evening peak trips, collected specifically for
the purpose of this unreliability analysis. The scope of our unreliability analysis is broader
13 The

standard deviation of arrival times is also a common measure of unreliability. Using a high percentile
of the trip time distribution has the advantage of capturing travelers’ special aversion to being very late
(Brownstone and Small, 2005).

15

than any previous attempts in the literature, and offers the first cross-city evidence on travel
time unreliability.

4. Trip-level results
4.1 Descriptive statistics
We queried 22,777,551 unique trip instances. After eliminating a small fraction of trips for
which trip length is not well measured or larger than the haversine distance between origin
and destination by more than 50 kilometers, we are left with 22,744,156 observations, 14.8%
of which are weekend trips.14
Some basic trip statistics are reported in table 1. Average travel speed is 22 kilometers per
hour. While the interquartile range is fairly small at only about 8 kilometers per hour, the
tails of the distribution are quite long. Similar observations can be made for trip duration
and length. The average trip under actual traffic conditions lasts about 13% longer than its
counterpart without traffic. Keeping in mind that we oversampled trips taken at night, we
return to this issue below. Finally, the average trip is about 50% longer than its “effective”
(haversine) length.
Table 2 reports summary statistics for the 154 cities in our sample. They are on average large, with a mean population above 1.3 million, and fast growing, having doubled
in population since 1990.15 Variation across cities in rates of access to personal motorized
transportation and road infrastructure stocks is substantial.
Table 3 reports descriptive statistics for various naive measures of mean city travel speed.
Mean travel speed across cities is 24.4 kilometers per hour, which is rather slow in light of
the speeds reported for Central Chicago and Grand Rapids in figure 1.16 This said, 24.4
14 Google

Maps often provides problematic routes for motorized travel on short trips. Furthermore, Google
Maps rounds trip lengths, and moves our origin and destination points to the nearest road. In extreme cases,
such as when a sampled origin is in the middle of a large park, this can lead to routes that are shorter than the
haversine distance between the sampled origin and destination. To limit these problems we query only trips
longer than one kilometer. These problems still sometimes arise beyond one kilometer.
15 The two sources of population differ both because of the target year and because they are based on slightly
different boundaries. In most cases differences are small, but a few cities in Kerala are substantially smaller
using our lights-based definition than in the un database. These cities appear to have a particularly expansive
urban agglomeration as defined by the Indian census.
16 This cross-city mean is slightly larger than the overall population mean of 22.1 kilometers per hour reported
in table 1 because travel speed is faster in smaller cities for which we have fewer observations.

16

Table 1: Trip statistics

Mean
Speed
Duration
Duration (no traffic)
Trip length
Effective length

22.1
20.0
17.2
8.2
5.4

St. dev.

percentile:
10
25

1

50

75

90

99

7.1 11.5 14.7 17.1 20.6 25.4 31.6 45.8
17.6
4
7
9
14
23
40
93
14
4
6
9
13
20
33
76
10 1.3 1.9 2.9 4.7 8.9 17.9 54.1
7.0 1.0 1.2 1.8 2.9 5.5 11.9 39.6

Note: 22,744,156 observations. Durations are in minutes, lengths in kilometers; and speeds in
kilometers per hour.
Table 2: Summary statistics for Indian cities

Population (’000, Census/lights, 2011)
Population (’000; UN, 2015)
Population growth 1900-2015 (%)
Total area (km2 )
Total roads length (km)
Motorways (km)
Primary roads (km)
Share households with car access (%)
Share households with motorcycle access (%)
Mean daily earnings ($)

Mean

St. dev.

1,328
1,545
106
238
1,421
66.7
56.1
9.99
41.3
4.91

3,031
3,179
65
414
3,519
118
114
5.78
11.7
1.93

Min.

Max.

19 23,889
307 25,703
31
399
5.91 3,569
10 33,120
0
800
0
687
2.33
31.5
5.83
73.4
2.00 12.28

Notes: Cross-city averages not weighted by population. 153 cities except for vehicle registrations for
which one city is missing.
Table 3: Summary statistics for travel speed in Indian cities

All trips
Radial trips
Circumferential trips
Gravity trips
Amenity trips
All trips, unweighted by length
All trips, in absence of traffic
All trips, effective speed
Notes: 154 cities. Speed in kilometers per hour.

17

Mean

St. dev.

Min.

Max.

24.4
22.2
20.6
22.6
26.9
21.8
26.8
16.4

3.79
3.79
3.23
3.42
6.08
2.90
4.49
2.77

16.2
14.8
14.3
14.7
16.6
15.7
16.3
11.6

34.9
32.8
29.5
30.9
42.0
31.4
38.1
24.0

kilometers per hour is higher than the sometimes apocalyptic descriptions found in the
popular press.
We note considerable differences in mean speed across cities. The standard deviation
across cities is 3.8 kilometers per hour, more than half the standard deviation of 7.2 across
trips in table 1. Mean speed for the slowest city is 16.2 kilometers per hour whereas it is
more than twice as high for the fastest city at 34.9. We show below that these wide raw speed
differences remain once we adequately control for features of our sampling strategy.
The second to the fifth rows of table 3 report mean speed for each type of trip separately.
Circumferential trips are slower whereas amenity trips are faster. As we show below, these
differences are mostly caused by differences in the length and location of these trips.
The sixth row of table 3 reports a measure of mean speed by city, which, unlike the other
rows, is not weighted by trip length. Because this increases the influence of shorter trips that
are also slower, this unweighted mean of 21.8 kilometers per hour is slightly lower than the
length-weighted mean of 24.4 reported in the first row.
The seventh row of table 3 exploits the information provided by Google Maps regarding
trip duration in the absence of traffic. As expected, mean speed in the absence of traffic is
higher but the difference is small. At 26.8 kilometers per hour, mean speed in the absence of
traffic is only about 10% above the mean of actual speed reported in the first row. Interestingly, the variation across cities is not smaller for mean speed in the absence of traffic than
for actual mean speed. If anything, it becomes slightly larger. We return to this intriguing
finding below.
Finally, the last row of table 3 reports a measure of mean effective speed. Rather than trip
length, we use the haversine distance between the origin and destination. Since the ratio
between mean trip length and effective trip length is about 1.5 in table 1, we unsurprisingly
find a roughly similar ratio between actual and effective trip speed.
4.2 Trip regressions
Before an in-depth analysis of mobility indices and their correlates, we first estimate a number
of variants of the generic regression described by equation (2).
A first series of results is reported in table 4. Column 1 regresses log trip speed on city
fixed effects controlling for log trip length, an indicator for each type of trip, each day of the
week, and each thirty-minute period during the day. Column 2 introduces further controls:

18

Table 4: Determinants of log trip speed

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

log trip length

0.24a

0.14a

0.14a

0.24a

0.14a

0.14a

Observations
R-squared
Cities

22,744,156

0.53
154

19,385,656
0.53
0.48
0.53
154
154
154

(7)

0.13a
(0.0036) (0.012) (0.012) (0.0036) (0.012) (0.012) (0.015)
2
log trip length
0.014a 0.014a
0.014a 0.014a 0.016a
(0.0034) (0.0035)
(0.0034) (0.0034) (0.0045)
a
a
log distance to center
0.15
0.15
0.14a 0.14a
0.098
(0.042) (0.042)
(0.041) (0.041) (0.063)
2
log distance to center
0.025 0.025
0.031 0.031 0.041
(0.023) (0.023)
(0.022) (0.022) (0.034)
Type: circumferential -0.015a -0.0039b -0.0040b -0.015a -0.0037b -0.0038b -0.0017
(0.0020) (0.0016) (0.0016) (0.0020) (0.0016) (0.0016) (0.0019)
Type: gravity
0.077a -0.0032 -0.0032 0.079a -0.0027 -0.0027 0.00098
(0.0065) (0.0032) (0.0032) (0.0066) (0.0032) (0.0033) (0.0043)
Type: amenity
0.082a 0.0064c 0.0063c 0.083a 0.0066c 0.0065c 0.0087
(0.0058) (0.0036) (0.0036) (0.0057) (0.0036) (0.0036) (0.0054)
City effect
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Day effect
Y
Y
Y
weekd. weekd. weekd.
Y
Time effect
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Weather
N
N
Y
N
N
Y
only
0.48
154

10,319,939
0.53
0.51
154
107

Notes: OLS regressions with city, day, and time of day (for each 30 minute period) indicators. Log
speed is the dependent variable in all columns. Robust standard errors in parentheses. a, b, c:
significant at 1%, 5%, 10%. All trip instances in columns 1-3. Only weekday trip instances in columns
4-6. Sample sizes for columns 1 and 4 apply to columns 1–3 and 4–6, respectively. Only weekday trip
instances for which we have weather information in column 7. Weather in column 3 and 6 consists of
indicators for rain (yes, no, missing), thunderstorms (yes, no, missing), wind speed (13 indicator
variables), humidity (12 indicator variables), and temperature (8 indicator variables). These variables
are introduced as continuous variables in column 7.

the square of the log trip length, log distance to the center (defining a trip’s location as the
midpoint between its origin and destination), and its square. Column 3 further adds weather
variables (and indicators for missing weather data). Columns 4 to 6 repeat the specifications
of columns 1 to 3 on a sample of only weekday trips. Column 7 is restricted to observations
with non-missing weather data.
Table 4 reports selected coefficients. Longer trips are faster: the elasticity of trip speed
with respect to trip length is 0.24 in columns 1 and 4, and larger for longer trips in the
other columns where we introduce a quadratic term. This is a prominent feature of urban
19

transportation data in other contexts.17 Regressing log trip speed on log trip length without
any further control yields an R2 of 0.40.
Unsurprisingly, trips further from the center are also faster. The elasticity of trip speed with
respect to distance from the center of 0.15 is quite large, implying that a trip at 10 kilometers
from the center of a city is about 40% faster than one a kilometer away.
In column 1, we find fairly large differences of up to 10% in speed between different types
of trips. These differences become mostly insignificant and economically small when controls
for trip location are added in column 2. In the end, amenity trips are slightly faster while
circumferential trips are slower but the speed difference between them is only about 1%. We
also note that regressing log trip speed solely on trip type indicators yields an R2 of only
about 0.003. These two results are reassuring, and suggest that the design of our hypothetical
trips is not driving our results. In Appendix D, we report versions of table 4 for each type of
trip. While the non-linearities for the effect of trip length and distance to the center slightly
differ, the results overall are similar to those in table 4, suggesting that the simple additive
specification of table 4 is not obscuring deeper differences between trip types.
We now turn to the regression coefficients not reported in table 4. Starting with the
weather, we find that characteristics associated with bad weather such as rain, high levels of
humidity, high temperatures, and more windy conditions tend to be associated with slightly
higher travel speeds. For instance, in columns 3 and 6, trips in rain are 2–3% faster.
To explain this contrast, we conjecture that roads in many Indian cities are ‘multi-purpose’
public goods used by various classes of motorized and non-motorized vehicles to travel
and park as well as a wide variety of other users such as street-sellers, animals, or children
playing. Non-transportation uses of the roadway arguably slow down motorized vehicles.
Worse weather may reduce these activities and thus make travel faster. We provide further
indirect evidence for this conjecture below.18
As expected, we also observe fluctuations in travel speed across times of day. In figure
3, which mirrors figure 2 but isolates hour effects, the dark continuous line plots the speed
relative to 3 - 3.30 a.m. for each thirty-minute period estimated in column 5 of table 4 for all
17 Couture et al. (2018) estimate a larger elasticity close to 0.40 using self-reported us data where the measure of
trip duration also includes a fixed cost of getting into one’s vehicle and getting into traffic. Using self-reported
data, Akbar and Duranton (2018) find an even larger elasticity for Bogotá travelers, because their sample also
includes transit trips, with even larger fixed costs. Using analogous Google Maps data for the same Bogotá
trips, Akbar and Duranton (2018) find an elasticity of 0.21, very close to the elasticity estimated here.
18 However, it is important to note that our data collection period did not include monsoon season. Extreme
weather conditions may affect mobility negatively, including for a period of time after they end.

20

Figure 3: Estimated time effects for weekday travel

Estimated time effect
0%

-10%

-20%

-30%

-40%

154 Cities
20 Largest cities
Varanasi
Delhi
Central Delhi

Hour of day

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
-50%
Time effects (in
percentages, relative to 3 - 3.30 a.m.) as estimated in column 5 of table 4. All the coefficients
from 7am to midnight are significant at 1%.

cities. The gap between the fastest time in the middle of the night and the slowest at 6.30 p.m.
- 7 p.m. is just 13%. We also note that morning peak hours are more muted than the evening
peak hours.19 The figure also plots the same time profile estimated only on the twenty largest
cities. The patterns are much more marked. The slowest periods in the evening are now
more than 25% slower than the fastest in middle of the night. In addition, travel speed starts
declining earlier in the morning and recovers later in the evening.
While larger, this difference remains less important than that estimated by Akbar and
Duranton (2018) for Bogotá where the slowest period is about half as fast as the fastest.
These mild within-day fluctuations may mask a lot of heterogeneity across Indian cities. To
investigate this, we repeat the same exercise using only observations from the city of Delhi.
Although Delhi is slow, we purposefully do not take the slowest city or a pathological case.
The pattern is the same as for the 20 largest cities but more pronounced. The slowest time is
now 35% slower than the fastest. Restricting attention further to trips taking place on average
within five kilometers of the center of Delhi generates even more extreme patterns with the
19 Although

we do not report the results here, we can also estimate time of day effects more accurately using
trip fixed effects. The resulting estimates for time of day effects are virtually indistinguishable.

21

Figure 4: Kernel density for estimated city effects

4

Density

3

2

1

Fixed
effect
estimates

0
-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

The city effects are as estimated in column 5 of table 4 for all 154 cities. Epanechnikov kernel with bandwidth
of 0.031.

slowest time now being more than 40% slower than the fastest.20
If we take the difference between the fastest and slowest time as a summary measure of
congestion, we can draw several lessons from figure 3. First, in many cities, there may not be
that much congestion. Travel speed is slow and does not vary much throughout the day as
the demand for travel changes. It is only in the largest cities and more particularly in their
centers that travel speed experiences considerable variation during the day. We return to this
below. Second, the evolution of travel speeds during the day reflects more than standard
commuting patterns. Travel speed declines from roughly 5.30 a.m. to midday, the lowest
speed are observed around 6.30 - 7 p.m., and only slowly recover late into the evening. This
is consistent with the conjecture raised above that the roadway is used for multiple purposes
from late in the morning until well into the evening.
We finally turn to city effects. As argued above, we can interpret them as mobility index
values. They measure (log) trip speed in cities after conditioning out log trip length and its
square, log trip distance to the center and its square, and day and time of day effects. Figure
20 Since India is a vast country with a single time-zone,

attenuated within-day fluctuations could be due to the
timing of sunrise and sunset, which differs across cities. Within our sample, there is range of up to a 98 minutes
in sunrise and 126 minutes in sunset. To assess whether cities experience peak hours at different official hours,
we produced a variant of figure 3 that defines the time of each trip as a fraction of the time between local sunrise
and sunset (or between local sunset and sunrise). It is virtually indistinguishable from figure 3.

22

4 represents a kernel density estimate of the distribution of city fixed effects from column 5
of table 4. The standard deviation is 0.106. The slowest city is 28% slower than the mean
while the fastest city is 42% faster. This gap of a factor of two between the slowest and fastest
city is extremely large. Using traveler-reported data and a different methodology, Couture
et al. (2018) find that among the largest 50 us metropolitan areas, the fastest is less than 40%
faster than the slowest. The analogous difference for the largest 50 cities in India is 80%.
These large differences are unlikely to be due to sampling bias. All cities have at least 70,000
observations, and the largest cities have more than half a million.
Table 5 reports the 20 slowest and 20 most congested cities. First, we note that seven of
the 10 largest cities by population in 2015 are among the 20 slowest. The three exceptions
are Ahmadabad and Surat in Gujarat and Jaipur in Rajasthan. The state of Gujarat stands
out in India for its innovative and more efficient urban planning practices (Annez, Bertaud,
Bertaud, Bhatt, Bhatt, Patel, and Phata, 2016). The list of the 20 slowest cities also contains 6
cities from the state of Bihar (among 8 in our data). Bihar is the poorest state in India. Most of
the other slow cities are from the neighboring states of Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh, which
are also among the five poorest states in India.
For the 20 most congested cities, two key attributes stand out. First, there are only seven
cities with a congestion factor of more than 20%; that is, cities for which the trips we queried
were on average slower by 20% or more relative to their speed in the absence of traffic. These
cities are all among the largest cities of India. Second, the correlation between congested and
slow appears fairly low. Only 9 of the twenty most congested cities are among the twenty
slowest, and one is actually among the ten fastest.
The list of the fastest cities is more heterogeneous. Many are small and in more developed parts of India. Others are exceptional in different ways. The fastest, Ranipet, is an
independent city based on our delineation procedure. However, it may be viewed more
meaningfully for our purposes as a suburb of the city of Vellore, located about 20 kilometers
away. Chandigarh hosts a population above a million, but unlike most Indian cities, it is
a planned city characterized by a regular grid pattern laid out by the French architect Le
Corbusier.21 Srinagar and Jammu are both in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir.
While they were among the fastest cities in 2016, our second data collection reveals that they
were among the 20 slowest in 2018. We believe that the high levels of mobility we observe for
21 Figure

A.5 in appendix shows Chandigarh’s road network, which has the most regular grid of all Indian
cities in our sample.

23

Table 5: Ranking of the 20 slowest and 20 most congested cities, slowest and most congested at top

Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Slowest
City
Kolkata
Bangalore
Hyderabad
Mumbai
Varanasi
Patna
Delhi
Bhagalpur
Bihar Sharif
Chennai
Muzaffarpur
Aligarh
Darbhanga
English Bazar
Gaya
Allahabad
Ranchi
Dhanbad
Akola
Pune

State

Most congested
City

Index

West Bengal
Karnataka
Andhra Pradesh
Maharashtra
Uttar Pradesh
Bihar
Delhi
Bihar
Bihar
Tamil Nadu
Bihar
Uttar Pradesh
Bihar
West Bengal
Bihar
Uttar Pradesh
Jharkhand
Jharkhand
Maharashtra
Maharashtra

State

-0.33
Bangalore
Karnataka
-0.25
Mumbai
Maharashtra
-0.25
Delhi
Delhi
-0.24
Chennai
Tamil Nadu
-0.23
Kolkata
West Bengal
-0.22
Hyderabad
Andhra Pradesh
Pune
Maharashtra
-0.22
-0.22
Jaipur
Rajasthan
-0.19
Coimbatore
Tamil Nadu
-0.17
Ahmadabad
Gujarat
-0.16
Patna
Bihar
-0.15
Chandigarh
Chandigarh
-0.14
Kochi
Kerala
-0.14 Thiruvananthapuram
Kerala
-0.13
Begusarai
Bihar
-0.13
Kozhikode
Kerala
-0.12
Nagpur
Maharashtra
-0.12
Ranchi
Jharkhand
-0.12
Vijayawada
Andhra Pradesh
-0.11
Bhopal
Madhya Pradesh

Index
0.33
0.30
0.30
0.27
0.27
0.24
0.23
0.19
0.18
0.17
0.16
0.16
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.14

Notes: Mobility index is measured by the city effect estimated in column 5 of table 4 and is centered
around its mean. Congestion factor is measured from a similar regression using log trip duration
minus log trip duration in absence of traffic as dependent variable, and scaled to reflect log deviation
from uncongested speed.

Table 6: Ranking of the 10 fastest cities, fastest at top
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

City

State

Ranipet
Tamil Nadu
Srinagar
Jammu and Kashmir
Kayamkulam
Kerala
Jammu
Jammu and Kashmir
Thrissur
Kerala
Palakkad
Kerala
Chandigarh
Chandigarh
Alwar
Rajasthan
Thoothukkudi
Tamil Nadu
Panipat
Haryana

Index
0.35
0.26
0.24
0.23
0.19
0.16
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.15

Notes: Mobility index is measured by the city effect estimated in column 5 of table 4.

24

2016 are an indirect consequence of the 2016-17 unrest in Kashmir which occurred following
the killing of the commander of a militant organization. Most of the state remained under
shutdown, curfew, and/or heavy police surveillance during our main data collection.
Table 7 reports a number of variants of our benchmark specification in table 4 column
5. Column 1 uses log effective speed (haversine length divided by time) instead of actual
speed as dependent variable. The increase in effective speed with trip length and with trip
distance to the center is even more pronounced than the increase in actual speed. This is consistent with shorter and more central trips being more tortuous. Column 2 uses speed under
“typical” traffic conditions at the time of day of the request (also provided by Google Maps)
as dependent variable. Results are very similar to those for the corresponding specification
using actual speed in column 5 of table 4. Column 3 uses the same specification to predict
speed with no traffic. Interestingly, trips taking place further from the center remain faster.
While figure 3 above suggests that central parts of Delhi are more congestible, the bulk of the
difference in speed between more central and more peripheral trips remains in the absence of
traffic. This is plausibly caused by the expected greater density of intersections and narrower
streets in more central parts of cities in India (and many other countries).
The second part of table 7 reports our preferred specification of table 4 for different times
of day: off peak in column 4, low peak in column 5, high peak in column 6, and radial trips
at peak hours going towards the center in the morning and back towards the periphery in
the evening in column 7. This last specification is meant to mimic archetypal commuting
patterns. While again the curvature of the effect of trip length and distance to the center
varies slightly, the results are generally very similar to those we obtained before.
4.3 Comparing mobility indices
We now turn to comparing mobility indices. Because many different variants of equations
(2) and (3) are available and many different samples of trips can be selected, many mobility
indices are possible. To explore these possibilities, we compute a wide variety of such indices.
To avoid hard-to-digest matrices of pairwise correlations, we form our benchmark mobility
index from the city fixed effects estimated from the specification reported in column 5 of
table 4, and compare all our other indices to this one. We also report the standard deviation,
maximum and minimum of each variant. Standard deviations vary very little, except for the

25

Table 7: Determinants of log trip speed, variants

(1)
(2)
effective typical
length traffic
-0.18a
(0.012)
2
log trip length
0.085a
(0.0031)
log distance to center 0.57a
(0.036)
2
log distance to center -0.13a
(0.015)
City effect
Y
Day effect
weekd.
Time effect
Y
Weather
N

log trip length

Observations
R-squared
Cities

(3)
no
traffic

0.13a
(0.012)
0.017a
(0.0039)
0.16a
(0.046)
0.014
(0.026)
Y
weekd.
Y
N

(4)
off
peak

(5)
low
peak

(6)
high
peak

(7)
peak
radial

0.16a
0.14a
0.13a
0.13a 0.040
(0.012) (0.011) (0.013) (0.012) (0.030)
0.019a 0.019a 0.013a 0.0098a 0.065a
(0.0032) (0.0031) (0.0039) (0.0034) (0.010)
0.22a
0.23a
0.12a 0.087b 0.15a
(0.046) (0.048) (0.042) (0.036) (0.051)
-0.037 -0.047c 0.054b 0.083a -0.12a
(0.025) (0.027) (0.023) (0.019) (0.044)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
weekd. weekd. weekd. weekd. weekd.
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N

19,385,656 19,385,656 19,385,656 4,910,731 10,469,622 2,375,960 826,539

0.34
154

0.56
154

0.54
154

0.54
154

0.54
154

0.53
154

0.54
154

Notes: OLS regressions with city, day, and time of day (for each 30 minute period) indicators. Log
effective speed is the dependent variable in column 1. Log speed under “typical” traffic conditions is
the dependent variable in column 2. Log speed under ‘no traffic’ is the dependent variable in column
3. Log speed is the dependent variable in all subsequent columns. All columns only consider
weekday observations. Column 4 considers observation from only off-peak hours (before 7.30 a.m.
and after 10.30 p.m.). Column 5 considers observation from only low peak hours (from 8.30 a.m. to
5.30 p.m. and from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m.). Column 6 considers observations from only high peak hours
(from 5.30 p.m. to 8 p.m.). Finally, column 7 considers only radial observation (going towards the city
center in the morning and back in the evening) from peak hours (both low and high peak). Robust
standard errors in parentheses. a, b, c: significant at 1%, 5%, 10%.

mean speed indices, which are constructed on a different (linear) scale.
The results are reported in table 8. Panel a compares our benchmark mobility index to the
analogous indices estimated in the other columns of table 4 that includes various trip level
controls. All these correlations are above 0.98 when we include the square of trip length and
distance to center and fall to about 0.92 when we do not.
Panel b compares our benchmark index to the analogous indices estimated using the same
specification but considering different types of trips separately. The correlations are again
high. The lowest at 0.90 is with perhaps our most artificial type of trips, circumferential trips,
and the highest is with perhaps our most realistic, amenity trips. In results not reported here,

26

Table 8: Pairwise Spearman rank correlations with our benchmark mobility index
Index

Corr. Std. Dev. Min

Max

Panel A: Columns from table 4
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(6)
(7)

0.916
>0.999
0.992
0.918
0.991
0.983

0.100
0.105
0.108
0.101
0.109
0.115

-0.232
-0.321
-0.337
-0.240
-0.347
-0.329

0.332
0.347
0.355
0.332
0.356
0.374

Panel B: Trip subsamples
Radial
Circumferential
Gravity
Amenities
Interact time/day with trip type

0.926
0.900
0.966
0.966
>0.999

0.117
0.113
0.112
0.107
0.105

-0.318
-0.286
-0.375
-0.345
-0.322

0.373
0.330
0.308
0.373
0.347

Panel C: Mean speeds
Simple mean
Mean unweighted by length
Mean of “typical” traffic speed
Mean of uncongested speed
Mean effective speed

0.476
0.619
0.452
0.340
0.410

3.790
2.899
3.814
4.494
2.768

16.212
15.7
16.2
16.3
11.6

34.903
31.4
35.1
38.1
24.0

Panel D: Table 7 variants
Effective speed
“Typical” traffic
No traffic
Fastest trip instance
Off peak
Low peak
High peak
Peak radial

0.864
0.997
0.850
0.851
0.881
0.991
0.948
0.915

0.118
0.102
0.100
0.101
0.099
0.113
0.130
0.133

-0.430
-0.301
-0.242
-0.261
-0.255
-0.388
-0.430
-0.450

0.392
0.345
0.339
0.298
0.316
0.361
0.367
0.405

Panel E: Full indices
Laspeyres
Paasche
Fisher
Logit/CES (σ = 0)
Logit/CES (σ = 2)
Logit/CES (σ = 4)

0.794
0.941
0.910
0.923
0.836
0.687

0.151
0.107
0.126
0.107
0.113
0.142

0.105
0.767
0.322
0.797
0.819
0.846

1.478
1.478
1.478
1.482
1.441
1.542

Panel F: Distance to center
Trips within 5 km of center
Trips within 3 km of center
Trips within 2 km of center
Weight by inverse dist. to center

0.970
0.918
0.827
0.959

0.108
0.111
0.116
0.106

-0.278
-0.268
-0.261
-0.293

0.350
0.356
0.336
0.341

Panel G: Weight by powered congestion factor
λ = 0.2
0.910
0.137
λ = 0.3
0.927
0.123

-0.533 0.378
-0.396 0.373

Panel H: 2018 data
Baseline index for 2018
0.817
Baseline index for 2018 (152 cities) 0.933

-0.334 0.329
-0.334 0.329

0.119
0.118

Notes: 154 cities in all rows except in the last row of panel A which uses 107 and the last row of panel
H which uses 152. The first column reports the Spearman rank correlation between the index at hand
and our preferred index from column 5 of table 4. The second column reports the standard deviation.
The third and fourth column report the maximum and minimum respectively.

27

we note that even indices computed separately for each of our 17 individual amenity classes,
which represent less than 3% of a city’s trips in nearly all cases, are highly correlated. Fifteen
of them are correlated with the baseline index at 0.87 or higher. Finally, allowing time of day
and weekend indicators to vary by trip type (radial inward, radial outward, circumferential,
gravity, and 17 amenity types), so that, for example, trips to a temple on the weekend might
be different than those on a weekday, also makes essentially no difference in rankings.
Next, panel c compares our benchmark index to various measures of mean speed computed above. The correlations are much lower than in the previous two panels. For instance,
the correlation between our benchmark mobility index and mean speed computed as total
travel length divided by total travel time is only 0.48. As noted in Couture et al. (2018)
for us metropolitan areas, means of speed do not provide good descriptions of mobility
in cities. This is because trip length, which varies systematically across locations, has a
large explanatory power on trip speed. As a result, mean speeds are sensitive to sampling
strategies, unlike our preferred mobility indices that control for trip length.
Panel d reports correlations between our benchmark mobility index and mobility indices
computed from the estimations reported in table 7. The correlation of our benchmark
mobility index with an index that measures speed using effective (haversine) rather than
traveled trip length is 0.87. The 20 slowest cities reported in table 5 using our benchmark
mobility index are all among the 30 slowest cities by effective speed. We can thus rule out
the possibility that slow cities are more efficient at transporting travelers farther for the same
number of straight line kilometers traveled. Slow cities are just slow.
Still in panel d, the correlation of our benchmark index with an uncongested mobility
index, computed using travel times in the absence of traffic, is also relatively high at 0.85. This
strongly suggests again that poor mobility is largely the outcome of generally slow travel.
While congestion plays a role, it may not be the main driver of poor mobility in Indian cities.
We return to this issue below. Interestingly, when ranking cities by uncongested mobility, we
find that the five slowest cities in the absence of traffic are all in Bihar and 17 of the 20 slowest
cities are in the poor northeastern part of India. Except for Kolkata which also ranks among
the cities that are slow in the absence of traffic, most major Indian cities are in the middle of
the distribution of uncongested mobility indices. For these cities, congestion is arguably an
important determinant of why they are slow. Eight of the 10 fastest cities reported in table 6
are also among the 10 fastest cities in the absence of traffic.
The second part of panel d reports correlations between our benchmark index and mobility
28

indices computed in the same manner as our benchmark but from observations taken at
specific hours of the day. The correlation of our benchmark index with an index of low
peak hour trips, taken between 8.30 a.m. and 5.30 p.m. and between 8 p.m. and 10 p.m.,
is extremely high. It is still high with an index computed only during the most extreme
hours of the early evening, between 5.30 and 8 p.m., when traffic is generally at its slowest.
The correlation is still 0.92 with an index computed using only the 5% of sample composed
of radial trips at peak hours that go towards the center in the morning and away from the
center in the evening.
Panel e reports correlations between our benchmark index and more sophisticated
Laspeyres, Paasche, Fisher, and logit/ces indices computed as described by equations (3),
(4), (5), and (6). Row 1 uses a Laspeyres index computed from the same specification as for
our benchmark index which allows all 58 regression coefficients to vary across cities. The
correlation is still fair at 0.79. It jumps to 0.89 when we focus only on the 50 largest cities.
The lower full-sample correlation is due to flawed out-of-sample predictions in small cities
for long trips far from the center. The Paasche index in row 2, which does not suffer from the
same problem, has a much higher correlation with our benchmark index.
Rows 4 to 6 of panel e report correlations with the logit/ces index for different values
of the elasticity of substitution σ. The correlation for σ = 0, the perfect complement case
for which all trips receive equal weight, is very high at 0.92, and only declines slightly to
0.84 for σ = 2. The correlation with our benchmark index remains relatively high at 0.69
even for an extreme value of σ = 4, which gives a two-kilometer trip about 400 times the
weight of a longer 15-kilometer trip.22 In Appendix B, we describe simulations showing
that correlations remain invariably high across a wide range of random quality draws bci .
In the same appendix, we describe mobility indices from models of travel demand with
richer substitution patterns. These nested indices put less weight on destination types (e.g.,
shopping trips) that are relatively slower in a given city, because they allow travelers in each
city to substitute away from costlier travel destination types. We find that such nested indices
are highly correlated with our benchmark index. This finding further confirms that our
benchmark index provides a robust characterization of travel cost differences across cities,
because slow cities tend to be slow at all times, for all types of trip destinations, and across
the city.
22 Atkin,

Faber, and Gonzalez-Navarro (2018) estimate an elasticity of substitution across retail stores slightly
smaller than 4 for poor Mexican households. This is almost certainly an upper bound: the index considered
here covers a much broader set of destinations that are unlikely to be as substitutable as retail stores.

29

Panel f considers indices based on trips progressively closer to the center of the city.
Correlations fall as expected, but even limiting to trips centered within 2 kilometers of the
center, the correlation is still 0.83. Using an index that weights trips close to the center more
heavily, while still including more peripheral trips, yields an index much more similar to the
benchmark.
In panel g we try to weight each trip by how likely it is to be taken. Although this
information is not directly available to us, we can use the implicit density of vehicles along
the route as a proxy. To do so, we assume that (i) the speed of a trip instance is reduced from
the maximum for that trip solely by vehicle congestion, (ii) the elasticity of trip speed with
respect to the density of vehicles, λ, is constant, and (iii) the density of vehicles is constant
along the route. Under these assumptions, we can weight each trip i by its length, Di , times
the implicit density of vehicles, ( Ti /Tint )1/λ . While these assumptions are unlikely to be
strictly true, they manage to capture the fact that more vehicles slow down traffic and thus
slower trip instances should receive a higher weight given that they represent more travelers.
The question is of course which value to use for λ. We use λ = 0.2 and λ = 0.3. The value
λ = 0.2 is a standard value in the traffic modelling literature (Small and Verhoef, 2007). The
higher value λ = 0.3 reduces the weight put on slow trips since slower speeds in India may
not be caused only by more vehicle traffic. With both values, the indices are highly correlated
with our benchmark index.
Finally, in panel h, we re-estimate our baseline index using the data we collected in the
Summer of 2018. Although we collected these data with a different set of questions in mind,
we can, with minor caveats, use them to estimate our preferred mobility index. Overall, the
correlation between our baseline index for 2016 and 2018 is 0.82. This correlation jumps
to 0.93 if we discard Srinagar and Jammu which experienced a large change in mobility,
arguably due to changes in their security situation as suggested above. We also find minor
discrepancies for a number of cities in Kerala that were subject to flooding during our data
collection in August 2018. We also note that these results are not sensitive to the exact samples
used to compare the datasets but leave further longitudinal analysis to future work.
We draw two important conclusions from this analysis. First, because trip length is such
an important determinant of trip speed, and because trip length varies across cities of different sizes, appropriately estimating a city mobility index requires accounting for trip-length
differences. This finding highlights the importance of using entire trip instances as units of
analysis, instead of trip segments or travel speed at discrete locations. Second, we find that
30

once trip length is conditioned out, the mobility indices that we estimate for each city are not
sensitive to the exact sample being used, and therefore to the weight that different kinds of
trips receive. Although we use a variety of trips that reflect important differences in traveler
behavior, these differences do not appear to matter when estimating city mobility.
4.4 Unreliability results
To complete our description of trip-level results, we document significant unreliability in
travel time across urban India. Across different weekdays, trip times at the 90th percentile
are on average 6% slower than median trip times. In more than 80% of cities in our sample,
average unreliability is between 4% and 7%. Trip time is more unreliable in larger cities, with
an average unreliability of 9% in the 20 largest cities.23 The most congested cities are also
the most unreliable, with a correlation between our congestion and unreliability indices of
0.84. Evening peak trips are 1 percentage point more unreliable than morning peak trips, and
we do not find evidence that trips closer to the city center are more unreliable. Unreliability
is uncorrelated with uncongested mobility. We note that our unreliability estimates from
Google Maps assume optimal re-routing depending on road conditions, and Indian travelers
without the benefit of information on current traffic or unwilling to re-route may face even
more unreliable travel times. In the welfare analysis below, we interpret these results using
existing empirical evidence on how individuals value reliable travel time.

5. Decomposition: uncongested mobility and congestion
In this section, we decompose our indices of mobility into mobility in the absence of traffic
(uncongested mobility) and the congestion factor following equation (7). This relationship
allows us to perform two useful exercises: first, an exact decomposition of the variance in
our mobility index, and second, a simple analysis to compare the welfare gains from faster
uncongested mobility with those from reduced congestion and reduced unreliability.
23 Four of the five most unreliable cities are in Kerala, likely due to severe flooding (the state’s worst since 1924)

during our sampling period. The most unreliable city outside of Kerala is Mumbai with an average 90th /50th
percentile ratio of 12%. Removing the least or most reliable cities has little impact on average unreliability.

31

5.1 Variance decomposition
The variance of the mobility index is equal to the sum of three terms: the variance of the
index of uncongested mobility, the variance of the congestion factor, and minus twice the
covariance between the index of uncongested mobility and the congestion factor. As shown
in the first row of Table 9 Panel a, the variance of the uncongested mobility index accounts
for 88% of the variance of our benchmark mobility index while that of the congestion factor
accounts for only 32%. This is a striking finding. Differences in mobility between Indian cities
are mostly driven by differences in their uncongested mobility, not by differences in how
congested they are. As we show in the rest of this section, this finding is explained by both
pervasive differences in uncongested mobility between cities and the fact that congestion
remains modest in most cities. However, the finding is different when we focus on the largest
cities. These cities face more similar uncongested mobility but are congested to different
degrees.
This said, a possible caveat here is that our data collection oversamples trips at night and
this may bias our mobility index towards uncongested mobility. Performing the same exercise with indices computed only from trips taken at peak hours, we find that the uncongested
mobility index still represents 75% of the variance of the mobility index during peak hours
whereas the congestion factor represents only 48%.
We repeat the same exercise focusing on cities with population above the median. For these
cities, the role of uncongested mobility falls, but remains larger than the congestion factor,
and the covariance term essentially goes to zero. For cities below the median population,
the explanatory power of the congestion factor is very low. For cities in the top population
quartile, the covariance term becomes negative, but the uncongested mobility still represents
a larger share of the variance. Only in the top decile do the two factors have approximately
even shares.
In the next two panels of Table 9, the role of congestion expands as we limit attention to
city centers, especially at peak hours and in larger cities. Variance in uncongested mobility
still however represents a substantial share of overall variance across cities in all samples. In
the final panel, we repeat the same decomposition for each type of trip separately and find
roughly similar results for the respective roles of uncongested mobility and congestion.

32

Table 9: Variance decompositions of our baseline mobility index

Sample

Cities

All trips

Peak trips

UncongestedCongestionCovariance UncongestedCongestionCovariance
mobility
factor
mobility
factor
Panel A: Full trip sample
All
154
Largest 50%
77
Smallest 50%
77
Largest 25%
38
Largest 10%
15

0.884
0.646
1.305
0.526
0.357

0.101
-0.004
0.215
-0.093
-0.134

0.745
0.515
1.348
0.414
0.262

0.479
0.508
0.178
0.415
0.497

0.112
0.012
0.263
-0.085
-0.121

Panel B: Distance to city center less than 5 km
All
154
0.946
0.387
Largest 50%
77
0.725
0.449
Smallest 50%
77
1.300
0.127
Largest 25%
38
0.558
0.459
Largest 10%
15
0.452
0.784

0.167
0.087
0.213
0.009
0.118

0.788
0.566
1.336
0.412
0.295

0.578
0.645
0.178
0.623
0.920

0.183
0.105
0.257
0.017
0.107

Panel C: Distance to city center less than 3 km
All
154
1.027
0.407
Largest 50%
77
0.809
0.447
Smallest 50%
77
1.306
0.133
Largest 25%
38
0.583
0.513
Largest 10%
15
0.595
0.922

0.217
0.128
0.220
0.048
0.258

0.872
0.646
1.345
0.425
0.383

0.618
0.656
0.186
0.685
1.078

0.245
0.151
0.266
0.055
0.231

Panel D: By trip type
Radial
154
Circumferential 154
Gravity
154
Amenities
154

0.164
0.216
0.006
0.071

0.803
0.879
0.678
0.705

0.560
0.604
0.334
0.448

0.181
0.241
0.006
0.076

0.960
1.034
0.789
0.841

0.318
0.346
0.126
0.287
0.376

0.369
0.397
0.223
0.302

Note: 154 cities. Peak hours as in table 7.

5.2 Valuing improvements in mobility and congestion.
We now use economic theory to guide our valuation of faster uncongested mobility and
reduced congestion in urban India. In particular, we model inverse travel speed as the price
of travel distance, which has a downward sloping aggregate demand curve. The congestion
externality drives a wedge between equilibrium travel where demand intersects the average
travel cost curve, and optimal travel where demand intersects the marginal travel cost curve.
Figure C.1 illustrates this model for the purpose of motivating our valuation exercise, and
Appendix C contains detailed derivations of the results below.
33

We first discuss how to value faster uncongested mobility. To fix ideas, consider first the
case without any congestion externality. An uncongested speed improvement corresponds
to a downward shift of a flat average cost curve. The product of total distance traveled
and the decline in travel price (inverse speed) is a lower bound for the consumer surplus
created, since additional gains from induced travel demand are ignored.24 Panel a of figure
C.1 illustrates this case.
Now consider the case with rising average cost. In this case, an increase in uncongested
mobility generates a proportionally smaller peak hour speed improvement, because of congestion. Panel b of figure C.1 illustrates this. This crowding out effect is large when the
average travel cost curve is steep or when the demand curve is flat. Our empirical results,
however, suggest that this is not the case. In a bivariate cross-city regression, a 1% increase in
uncongested mobility is associated with a 0.85% increase in peak-hour mobility, with a standard error of 0.05% and an R2 of 0.54. In other words, 1 - 0.85=15% of any given uncongested
speed improvement is crowded out by congestion at peak travel demand.25 Hence, ignoring
all gains from induced demand, a 10% improvement in uncongested mobility (approximately
one standard deviation) implies time saving gains on the order of 8.5% of the cost of travel.
As an example, uncongested travel in Delhi is 15% faster than in Kolkota, and both cities
experience considerable peak travel delay. However, peak travel speed remains 10% faster in
Delhi than in Kolkota.26
We next value the deadweight loss from congestion, shown in panel c of figure C.1 as the
loss in consumer surplus from the wedge between the marginal and average cost of travel.
(Not all congestion is a deadweight loss, so there can be considerable travel delay at peak
hours even at a social optimum.) Our finding that peak demand congestion crowds out only
15% of uncongested mobility implies that the slope of the average cost curve is much flatter
than that of the demand curve, and therefore that the deadweight loss triangle is small. A
more precise statement requires an estimate of the price elasticity of travel demand, which
24 The

same argument holds in discrete choice models like the one in Appendix B, which we can make more
general by adding a nest for all non-travel consumption.
25 Both Akbar and Duranton (2018) and Kreindler (2018) find that the road network is modestly congestible.
These results, amounting to a modestly increasing average travel cost curve, are consistent with our key
empirical result here that differences in uncongested mobility are reflected in overall mobility.
26 In fact, keeping only the largest cities or weighting our regression by population makes our estimate larger
than 1% but more imprecise, suggesting that even in the largest cities, uncongested speed advantages are mostly
preserved at peak travel demand. Our 0.85% estimate is biased downward if cities with higher uncongested
speed also experience higher travel demand. We do find a correlation of 0.2 between uncongested speed and
peak travel congestion. We ignore this correlation in our computation, because it is small and because we prefer
to obtain a conservative lower bound.

34

we lack in our context. In Appendix C, we show that assuming a unit elasticity at equilibrium
implies a deadweight loss from congestion that represents about 1% of travel costs. This is
similar to what Couture et al. (2018) find in the United States for a unit elasticity. Akbar and
Duranton (2018) and Kreindler (2018) find a deadweight loss from congestion that is smaller
than 1% of travel costs in two highly congested developing cities, Bogotá and Bangalore. As
a comparison, our computations above suggests that a lower bound for the gains from a 10%
improvement in uncongested mobility is on the order of 8.5% of travel time costs.
Our data show that congested networks are also more unreliable. We may therefore underestimate the gains from optimal congestion pricing if we ignore the fact that unreliable travel
also contributes to a rising average cost curve. The most authoritative empirical evidence on
how travelers value unreliability comes from Brownstone and Small (2005). They conclude
that Californian morning commuters value the 90th to 50th percentile difference in travel time
95% to 140% as highly as they value median travel time. Here we use a value of unreliability
equal to 100% of the value of travel time.
We can now evaluate the contribution of unreliability to the average cost of travel. In our
data, the population-weighted average peak travel delay is 20%, and average unreliability is
8%. This suggests that the cost of unreliability is 40% of that of travel delay in equilibrium,
so the average cost curve is 40% steeper when accounting for unreliability.27 With this at
hand, we can correct the bias in our welfare estimates above due to ignoring unreliability.
Appendix C shows that the gains from a 10% uncongested speed improvement decline to
7.9% of travel cost, and the deadweight loss eliminated by optimal congestion pricing rises
to 2.3% of travel costs.28 Although taking unreliability into account raised our estimated
gains from congestion pricing, these gains remain small. Clearly, our exact numbers here
are tentative. However, as long as the optimal quantity of travel is close to the equilibrium
quantity—which is what Kreindler (2018) and Akbar and Duranton (2018) also find—our
conclusion that congestion pricing generates relatively small reductions in unreliability and
travel delay is likely to hold. Overall, we conclude that the gains from achieving a one
standard deviation improvement in uncongested mobility are many times larger than the
gains from introducing optimal congestion pricing in urban India.
27 This

assumes that unreliability rises linearly with the quantity of travel. This is conservative because
unreliability rises somewhat less than proportionally with travel delay in our data.
28 We only consider improvements in reliability via congestion pricing. The gains from eliminating travel time
unreliability (instead of only reducing it with congestion pricing) are potentially large, but we lack empirical
evidence on the effectiveness of policies targeted at reducing unreliability, such as better handling of traffic
incidents.

35

6. Correlation of mobility with city characteristics and urban development
We now explain mobility using city characteristics. We first consider basic characteristics like
population and area. We then consider indicators of urban economic development, such as
income levels, car ownership rates, and urban population growth. In addition, we consider
road network measures that reflect urban development, such as the availability of primary
roads and conformity to a regular grid pattern.
We report results for our benchmark mobility index in table 10. Table 11 panels a and b report the same specifications predicting the benchmark uncongested mobility and congestion
indices, respectively. Because the mobility index is equal to the uncongested mobility index
minus the congestion factor and we estimate the same specifications for all three dependent
variables in each column, a given coefficient in table 10 is equal to the analogous coefficient
in table 11 panel a minus the analogous coefficient in table 11 panel b.
In column 1 of table 10, we consider a simple specification with only log city population
and log city area as explanatory variables. Because our dependent variable is a measure of
log speed, we can interpret the coefficients as elasticities. For city population, we estimate
an elasticity of -0.18. For city area, the elasticity is of opposite sign and equal to 0.15.
These two variables explain more than half of the variation in mobility across Indian cities.
Further controls added in subsequent columns change these results little. The robustness of
these results is further confirmed in appendix tables D.2 and D.3 where we use alternative
measures of mobility as dependent variables.
These results suggest a large “gross density” effect since an increase in population keeping
land area constant is an increase in population density. An elasticity of the cost of travel
with respect to population density of 0.16 to 0.18, as implied by the results of table 10, is
comparable to the analogous elasticity of housing price at the center of French cities of 0.21
estimated by Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2019). To the extent that we can compare
India with France, these results are suggestive that much of the urban costs measured by
Combes et al. (2019) reflect worse mobility in denser cities.
At the same time, the mostly offsetting nature of the coefficients on population and urban
land area in table 10 suggest that “net scale” effects are small, once we allow for land area
to adjust to a larger population. Consistent with this, we estimate an elasticity of about -0.05
when regressing our preferred mobility index on log city population alone. Small net scale
effects are comparable to analogous density elasticities for measures of urban productivity

36

such as wages (Combes and Gobillon, 2015).
In panels a and b of table 11, we estimate the same specifications as in table 10 using
our preferred index of uncongested mobility and congestion factor as dependent variables.
Consistent with our earlier decompositions of overall variance, we find that most of the effect
of city population and city area on mobility works through uncongested mobility. For the
congestion factor, we find an elasticity of city population of 0.02 in column 1. This coefficient
remains between 0.02 and 0.03 in subsequent specifications. For the effect of city area on
the congestion factor, we estimate small and insignificant elasticities in most specifications.
Putting these results together, it appears that gross density mostly affects uncongested mobility, while the negative net scale effects are mostly about congestion.
Column 2 of tables 10 and 11 adds the log of primary roads length. Here and in subsequent
specifications, we estimate a small but robust elasticity of mobility with respect to primary
road kilometers of about 0.01. Other roadway measures are not robustly associated with
mobility.29 Interestingly, we find that the effect of primary roads on mobility mostly occurs
through uncongested mobility while the effect of primary roads on the congestion factor is a
precisely estimated zero. We think these findings reflect two facts. First, primary roads are
intrinsically faster than secondary or tertiary roads. Second, the absence of an effect on the
congestion factor is consistent with the fundamental law of ‘primary roads’ congestion: more
primary roads attract new traffic and eventually leave congestion unchanged (Duranton and
Turner, 2011).
Column 3 of table 10 further includes log city income and its square.30 We find evidence of
a hill shape where mobility first increases with income and then declines. The turning point
corresponds to a city slightly below the top quartile of income. This finding is consistent
with our rankings of the fastest and slowest cities in tables 5 and 6. Many of the fastest are
middle-income cities, while the slowest are either among the poorest or richest cities in the
country. When we examine the separate effects of income on uncongested mobility and the
congestion factor in table 11 we find that the overall shape of the income-mobility relationship
reflects two opposing forces. Uncongested mobility improves with income, perhaps because
29 Surprisingly,

more motorways—high capacity dual carriage roads equivalent to freeways in the United
States—are not robustly associated with improvement in mobility. We note that many Indian cities do not have
any motorways in our sample.
30 Our income measure is log daily earnings for men. Since it is measured at the district level, it is subject to
substantial measurement error. We exclude women due to lower labor force participation.

37

Table 10: Correlates of city mobility indices, benchmark mobility index

log population
log area
log roads
log income
log2 income

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.18a

-0.18a

-0.17a

-0.17a

-0.17a

-0.17a

-0.17a

(0.016) (0.015) (0.016)
0.15a 0.14a
0.13a
(0.016) (0.017) (0.017)
0.013a 0.012a
(0.0043) (0.0043)
0.22b
(0.10)
-0.064b
(0.031)

Network / shape

(0.017)
0.12a
(0.018)
0.013a
(0.0040)
0.23b
(0.10)
-0.066b
(0.031)
0.26a
(0.096)

Pop. growth 90-10
share w. car
share w. motorcycle
Observations
R-squared

153
0.54

153
0.56

153
0.57

153
0.59

(8)

-0.16a
(0.016) (0.018) (0.016) (0.017)
0.12a
0.12a
0.12a
0.11a
(0.017) (0.019) (0.017) (0.019)
0.011b 0.014a 0.013a 0.014a
(0.0044) (0.0045) (0.0042) (0.0042)
0.20c
0.23b
0.22b
(0.11) (0.11) (0.10)
-0.055c -0.064c -0.065b
(0.033) (0.034) (0.032)
0.11b 0.055c
(0.049) (0.029)
0.052c
(0.030)
0.21
(0.14)
0.11b
(0.054)
153
142
153
152
0.58
0.60
0.58
0.59

Notes: OLS regressions with a constant in all columns. The dependent variable is the city fixed effect
estimated in the specification reported in column 5 of table 4. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
a, b, c: significant at 1%, 5%, 10%. Log population is constructed from town populations from the
2011 census. Log roads is log kilometers of primary roads within the city-light. Income is measured
with male earnings from the 2011 census. The network / shape variable used in column 4 measures
the share of edges in the road network that conform to the grid’s main orientation, i.e., whose
compass bearing are within 2 degrees of the modulo 90 modal bearing in the network. The network /
shape variable in column 5 is a Gini index for the distribution of edge compass bearings in the road
network. It also measures how grid-like the city is. The network / shape variable used in column 6
uses Harari’s (2016) measure of the average distance between the centroid of the city and all the
points that define its periphery. It measures the compactness of the city. The measure of population
growth between 1990 and 2010 was constructed UN data. The share of households with access to a
car or to a motorcycle is from the 2011 census.

of better roads. The congestion factor also increases with income, consistent with our findings
on car ownership, which also rises with income. This second force appears to kick in at higher
levels of income as evidenced by the fact that it is captured by the squared log income term
in the regression. This is also consistent with our earlier findings that congestion is important
in only a small number of cities.
In columns 4 and 5 of table 10, we consider two different measures of how well the road
38

Table 11: Correlates of city mobility indices, uncongested mobility and congestion factor
(1)

(2)

Panel A: Uncongested mobility
log population
-0.16a -0.15a
(0.017) (0.016)
log area
0.17a
0.15a
(0.017) (0.017)
log roads
0.013a
(0.0050)
log income
log2 income

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.15a
(0.015)
0.13a
(0.018)
0.013a
(0.0049)
0.15c
(0.084)
-0.026
(0.026)

-0.14a
(0.016)
0.13a
(0.018)
0.014a
(0.0045)
0.15c
(0.083)
-0.029
(0.025)
0.21c
(0.11)

-0.14a
(0.015)
0.13a
(0.017)
0.012b
(0.0050)
0.13
(0.089)
-0.022
(0.027)
0.047
(0.063)

-0.15a
(0.017)
0.14a
(0.019)
0.015a
(0.0053)
0.14
(0.093)
-0.023
(0.028)
0.020
(0.032)

-0.14a
(0.014)
0.13a
(0.017)
0.015a
(0.0044)
0.14
(0.086)
-0.029
(0.026)

-0.13a
(0.017)
0.11a
(0.020)
0.017a
(0.0045)

Network / shape

0.11a
(0.030)

Pop. growth 90-10
share w. car
share w. motorcycle
R-squared

0.43

Panel B: Congestion factor
log population
0.024b
(0.0096)
log area
0.018b
(0.0086)
log roads

0.45

0.48

0.50

0.49

0.50

0.53

0.024b
(0.0096)
0.017c
(0.0095)
0.00068
(0.0028)

0.026a
(0.0095)
0.0071
(0.010)
0.00094
(0.0029)
-0.079
(0.060)
0.037b
(0.019)

0.025a
(0.0097)
0.0084
(0.011)
0.00068
(0.0029)
-0.080
(0.060)
0.038b
(0.019)
-0.046
(0.045)

0.024b
(0.0099)
0.0096
(0.011)
0.0017
(0.0029)
-0.064
(0.061)
0.032c
(0.019)
-0.061c
(0.035)

0.023b
(0.010)
0.011
(0.011)
0.00081
(0.0031)
-0.091
(0.065)
0.041b
(0.020)
-0.035b
(0.016)

0.029a
(0.0095)
0.0044
(0.010)
0.0017
(0.0027)
-0.081
(0.057)
0.036b
(0.018)

log income
log2 income
Network / shape

0.030a
(0.0098)
0.0068
(0.011)
0.0028
(0.0028)

0.054a
(0.018)

Pop. growth 90-10
share w. car
share w. motorcycle
R-squared
Observations

0.55a
(0.14)
0.016
(0.051)
0.53

0.54
153

0.54
153

0.60
153

0.60
153

0.61
153

0.61
142

0.63
153

0.34a
(0.091)
-0.096b
(0.042)
0.63
152

Notes: OLS regressions with a constant in all columns. The dependent variable is the city fixed effect
estimated for uncongested mobility in panel A, and the congestion factor in panel B. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. a, b, c: significant at 1%, 5%, 10%. See the footnote of table 10 for further details
about the explanatory variables.

39

network of a city conforms to a regular grid.31 Both measures suggest a positive association
between a more grid-like pattern and better mobility in cities. The magnitude of the coefficients reported in the table for these measures is hard to interpret directly. A normalization
indicates that a standard deviation in our grid variable is associated with 0.16 (in column 4)
or 0.11 (in column 5) standard deviation in log mobility. This finding provides preliminary
evidence in support of calls for more regular grid patterns for the roadway of emerging cities
(Angel, 2008, Fuller and Romer, 2014).
We also experimented with the measures of urban form constructed by Harari (2016) and
found a robust association between mobility and her measure of urban sprawl. The results
are reported in column 6. That more sprawl is positively correlated with mobility is consistent
with earlier results by Glaeser and Kahn (2004) for the us.
In column 7 of tables 10 and 11, we introduce a measure of past population growth.
Cities that experienced faster population growth between 1990 and 2010 enjoy both faster
uncongested mobility and more congestion. Overall the positive effect happening through
uncongested mobility appears to dominate. While we leave a deeper investigation of these
results for future research, we emphasize that they are inconsistent with typical claims that
rapid urban population growth in developing countries is necessarily associated with worse
mobility. Congestion may worsen with population growth but this negative effect is more
than offset by faster roads.
Finally, in column 8 we no longer consider income but instead introduce two measures
for the share of population with access to a car or equivalent, and (separately) a motorcycle.
The insignificant positive coefficient for cars in explaining mobility in table 10 results from
two offsetting effects where more cars are strongly and positively associated with both uncongested mobility and congestion in table 11. Motorcycles are associated with faster travel
via less congestion, consistent with them taking up less room than cars, but inconsistent with
them being a response to congestion. Again, causal identification is beyond our scope here
but we would like to highlight that standard indicators of urban economic development such
as higher incomes, faster population growth, and more cars are generally associated with
better mobility outcomes despite higher congestion.
31 The

first measure captures the share of edges in the network that conform to the grid’s main orientation
i.e., whose compass bearing are within 2 degrees of the modulo 90 modal bearing in the network. The second
measure is a Gini index for the distribution of edge compass bearings. Appendix A provides details. We also
experimented with measures of the density of intersections and the length and circuitry of road segments but
failed to uncover any robust association with our measures of mobility.

40

Although our findings above are generally stable across a wide variety of specifications,
they may be subject to bias due to omitted city-level variables. In results reported in Appendix E, we control for city fixed effects, using within-city variation in population, area, and
roads, at the level of concentric rings (0 to 2 kilometers from the center, 2 to 5, 5 to 10, 10 to 15,
and 15 and beyond) to gain further insights about variation in mobility. Within cities, rings
with more population and less urban area are slower, just as in the across-city results above.

7. Transit and walking
While roughly half the households in the average city in our data have access to a private
vehicle – sometimes a car but more often a motorcycle – we recognize that city dwellers in
India also often walk and use transit. To investigate these two alternative modes of travel,
we also collected travel time data for walking and transit for all our trip instances.
For walking trips, speeds typically do not vary much across our trips and remain constant
within trip. Mean walking speed is 4.8 kilometers/hour with a standard deviation of 0.1
kilometers/hour. We first estimate a city effect for walking trips in the same spirit as our
baseline mobility index above. The standard deviation for the city effects is unsurprisingly
tiny at 0.006. When we try to explain city effects for walking trip using the same approach as
in table 10, the only robust correlate of our walking mobility index is a measure of average
slope in the city. As Google Maps’ algorithm reflects, steeper slopes slow down walking.
As described in Appendix A, we also collected transit data. These data have two important
limitations. Google Maps only appears to return transit information for formal transit, and it
bases its information on official timetables. This ignores informal transit and delays or missed
services in formal transit. With these caveats in mind, we first note that only about 20% of
our trip instances have a transit alternative that we define as ‘viable’: it requires less than an
hour wait, and is strictly faster than walking. Despite this selection, viable transit trips take
on average 2.3 times as long as trips with private vehicles. In regressions not reported here,
we additionally find that, unsurprisingly, the transit time penalty is higher for shorter trips,
trips further from the center, and nighttime trips.
Next, for 141 cities we can estimate an index analogous to our baseline mobility index for
transit. Unlike with walking, there is a lot of cross-city variation for transit. The standard
deviation for our transit mobility index is about twice that of our baseline mobility index for

41

private vehicles. This variation does not seem to be due to sampling problems as these indices
are precisely estimated and alternative transit mobility indices are all highly correlated.
The correlation between our mobility index for transit and our baseline mobility index
(for private vehicles) is extremely low at 0.02. This correlation even becomes negative when
we focus on the largest cities. However, when we re-estimate our mobility index for private
vehicles on a sample limited to trip instances for which a viable transit alternative is possible,
this correlation increases from 0.02 to 0.17. This difference suggests a fair amount of selection
regarding which trip instances have a viable transit alternative known to Google. To confirm
the low correlation between transit and vehicle travel times we regress log transit travel time
on log private vehicle travel time and log walking time. In this regression, the coefficient
on log vehicle travel time is only 0.19 while the coefficient on log walking time, which is
essentially a measure of trip length, is 0.52.
Finally, we also replicated the regressions of table 10 for our transit mobility index. We did
not find any robust correlates of transit mobility at the city level. Given the sizable variation
across cities in transit mobility, this may seem surprising. Nonetheless, this result is consistent
with the weak correlation between (private vehicle) mobility and transit mobility. Although
we must remain cautious given the caveats that apply to our transit data, taken together
these results suggest to us to that transit mobility depends much more on the coverage and
frequency of transit than on driving speeds. This conclusion for the cross-section of cities is
consistent with figure A.4 in Appendix A, which shows that transit mobility is highest at the
slowest hours for vehicular mobility.

8. Conclusions and policy implications
We propose a novel approach to measuring vehicular mobility within cities, and decomposing it into uncongested mobility and a congestion factor. We apply it using novel large
scale data on counterfactual trips in 154 Indian cities collected from Google Maps. After
showing that various sampling and estimation strategies yield similar estimates of mobility,
we document a number of important facts about mobility in Indian cities. Among the most
important, we first highlight large mobility differences across cities. Second, slow mobility
is primarily due to cities being slow all the time rather than congested at peak hours. We
do nonetheless find an important role for congestion in the largest cities, especially close to
their centers. Third, several city attributes are consistently correlated with mobility and its

42

components. We find that population and land area are key correlates of city mobility. Higher
population density is strongly associated with slower uncongested mobility as well as more
congestion. We also find that both recent population growth and a measure of cars per capita
are positively associated with uncongested mobility but also with congestion. More primary
roads and a more regular grid-pattern are associated with moderately faster mobility. Higher
income cities have higher uncongested mobility, but also higher congestion, leading to a
hill-shaped relationship between income and overall mobility. Overall, these indicators of
urban economic development are associated with better mobility despite worse congestion,
contrary to a conventional wisdom that urban growth and development condemns developing cities to complete gridlock. While in principle, variation in uncongested mobility could
be due to many city attributes beyond those we consider here in our regressions, such as
the state of the vehicle stock or driving culture, we interpret it as being primarily due to the
quality of the road network. Most old cars can be driven 45 kilometers per hour (the 99th
percentile of our trip speed distribution), and Google Maps’ algorithm is likely to pick out a
high percentile of the block speed distribution it observes in order to distinguish motorized
from non-motorized vehicles.
We hope that this first set of cross-city evidence on urban mobility and congestion in a
developing country can help guide policy and future research. We now review three of our
findings that have research and policy implications. First, we document that congestion in
India is not a nationwide problem, but rather is highly concentrated near the center of the
largest Indian cities. Given their importance to the Indian economy, these areas with the
highest levels of congestion, such as the center of Bangalore, should be the focus of policy
effort to alleviate congestion, and of future research to identify the most effective policies.
Second, we compared travel patterns in India with those from more developed cities, and
we uncovered important differences. The fastest Indian cities are slower than the slowest
American cities, and in general Indian cities do not experience the familiar twin peak congestion patterns due to morning and evening commutes. There is a muted morning peak,
and instead a slow buildup of congestion that often persists until late into the evening.
Light rainfall appears to speed up traffic slightly. These unique patterns are consistent with
Indian roads being multi-purpose public goods serving a wide variety of uses other than
motorized transport that slow down travel. If this conjecture is correct, then further research
on technologies and policies for separating roadway uses appears especially promising, with
appropriate consideration for the costs of restricting non-vehicle uses. More generally, our
43

findings of unique Indian travel patterns imply that country-specific policies are necessary,
and that using our data sources and methodology to study other countries individually may
uncover distinctive patterns.
Third, our most surprising and perhaps controversial finding is that in most Indian cities
travel is slow at all times, not just peak times. Related to this, a simple welfare analysis
suggests sizable potential gains from improving uncongested speed in urban India, and
comparatively small gains from eliminating the deadweight loss from congestion. As a result,
standard policy recommendations like congestion pricing, hov lanes, or other types of travel
restrictions may do little to improve mobility. Recent empirical work on congestion in two
developing cities by Akbar and Duranton (2018) and Kreindler (2018) reinforce this message,
as they also conclude that the deadweight loss from congestion is small. We would therefore
like to encourage researchers to also study policies and investments that generate faster
uncongested speed. Our paper provides a first set of results suggesting a modest positive
role for the design of a regular network grid and the presence of more primary roads, but
much work remains to be done in terms of identifying cost-effective ways to build faster
urban networks. On an optimistic note, we find that better uncongested mobility generally
correlates with the process of economic development.
We believe a lot more can be learned from the data we use here. In an extension of this paper (Akbar, Couture, Duranton, and Storeygard, 2018), we provide complementary measures
of urban accessibility in Indian cities, decompose accessibility into proximity to destinations
and mobility, and provide an analysis of the urban correlates of accessibility and proximity.
This sort of data can thus be used to learn about the fundamentals of urban travel beyond
mobility and congestion. It can also potentially play an important role in our understanding
of patterns of land use and property prices in cities in relation to transportation. Relative
to more traditional travel surveys, the information used here is less complete but can be
gathered at a small fraction of the cost, hundreds of dollars instead of tens of millions for a
full travel survey. The type of data we used here is also much more versatile and can thus
be targeted at narrower issues or areas without fear of losing statistical power. It can also
be collected at much higher frequency than the typical 5 to 8 year gap between consecutive
traditional travel surveys, and allows for the evaluation of policy changes in the short-run
(Kreindler, 2016, Hanna et al., 2017). We believe future studies of this type will shed useful
light on many aspects of transportation policy in cities. Many other possible applications
are possible. They include, for instance, the monitoring of city recovery after major natural
44

disasters.
We also hope that more data underlying the production of real-time travel information
will be made available for research. The data that we use allow us to learn about mobility,
and the price (time cost) of travel for all possible trips at all times. The analogous quantities
(i.e., number of travelers) are potentially knowable from the same underlying data. With both
prices and quantities, the detailed study of congestion, both on particular road segments and
in larger areas, will be possible. Repeated observations of the same travelers would also
enable a much better analysis of individual travel behavior. For instance, Kreindler (2018)
uses a panel of trip-level data for 2,000 commuters from a smartphone app to learn about
individual response to peak travel congestion, and to measure the welfare impact of various
pricing policies to alleviate congestion in Bangalore. With appropriate regard for privacy,
the availability of larger trip-level samples across cities would allow for a comprehensive
analysis of the welfare consequences of better urban mobility and accessibility.

45

References
Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., Stephen J. Redding, Daniel M. Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. 2015. The
economics of density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall. Econometrica 83(6):2127–2189.
Akbar, Prottoy A., Victor Couture, Gilles Duranton, and Adam Storeygard. 2018. Accessibility in urban India. Work in progress, University of Pennsylvania.
Akbar, Prottoy A. and Gilles Duranton. 2018. Measuring congestion in a highly congested
city: Bogotá. Processed, University of Pennsylvania.
Alonso, William. 1964. Location and Land Use; Toward a General Theory of Land Rent. Cambridge,
ma: Harvard University Press.
Anderson, Simon P., André de Palma, and Jacques-Francois Thisse. 1992. Discrete Choice
Theory of Product Differentiation. Cambridge, ma: mit Press.
Angel, Shlomo. 2008. An arterial grid of dirt roads. Cities 25(3):146–162.
Annez, Patricia Clarke, Alain Bertaud, Marie-Agnes Bertaud, Bijal Bhatt, Chirayu Bhatt,
Bimal Patel, and Vidyadhar Phata. 2016. Ahmedabad. More but different government for
“slum free” and livable cities. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6267.
Atkin, David, Benjamin Faber, and Marco Gonzalez-Navarro. 2018. Retail globalization and
household welfare: Evidence from Mexico. Journal of Political Economy 126(1):1–73.
Ben-Akiva, Moshe E. and Steven R. Lerman. 1985. Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and
Application to Travel Demand. Cambridge, ma: mit Press.
Boston Consulting Group. 2018. Unlocking Cities. The impact of ridesharing across India.
Report.
Brownstone, David and Kenneth A. Small. 2005. Valuing time and reliability: Assessing the
evidence from road pricing demonstrations. Transportation Research Part A 39(4):27–293.
Ch, Rafael, Diego Martin, and Juan F. Vargas. 2018. Measuring cities with night-time light
data. Processed, CAF - Development Bank of Latin America.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, and Laurent Gobillon. 2019. The costs of agglomeration: House and land prices in French cities. Review of Economic Studies forthcoming.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe and Laurent Gobillon. 2015. The empirics of agglomeration
economies. In Gilles Duranton, Vernon Henderson, and William Strange (eds.) Handbook of
Regional and Urban Economics, volume 5A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 247–348.
Couture, Victor, Gilles Duranton, and Matthew A. Turner. 2018. Speed. Review of Economics
and Statistics Forthcoming.
Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga. 2015. Urban land use. In Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson, and William C. Strange (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, volume 5A.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 467–560.
46

Duranton, Gilles and Matthew A. Turner. 2011. The fundamental law of road congestion:
Evidence from US cities. American Economic Review 101(6):2616–2652.
Fuller, Brandon and Paul Romer. 2014. Urbanization as opportunity. World Bank Policy
Research Paper 6874.
Geroliminis, Nikolas and Carlos F. Daganzo. 2008. Existence of urban-scale macroscopic
fundamental diagrams: Some experimental findings. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 42(9):759–770.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. Sprawl and urban growth. In Vernon
Henderson and Jacques-François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
volume 4. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2481–2527.
Hanna, Rema, Gabriel Kreindler, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2017. Citywide effects of
high-occupancy vehicle restrictions: Evidence from “three-in-one” in Jakarta. Science
357(6346):89–93.
Harari, Mariaflavia. 2016. Cities in bad shape: Urban geometry in India. Processed, Wharton
School of the University of Pennsylvania.
Kreindler, Gabriel. 2016. Driving Delhi? Behavioural responses to driving restrictions. Processed, MIT.
Kreindler, Gabriel. 2018. The welfare effect of road congestion pricing: Experimental evidence
and equilibrium implications. Processed, MIT.
Mangrum, Daniel and Alejandro Molnar. 2017. The marginal congestion of a taxi in New
York City. Processed, Vamderbilt University.
Mills, Edwin S. 1967. An aggregative model of resource allocation in a metropolitan area.
American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 57(2):197–210.
Muth, Richard F. 1969. Cities and Housing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sheu, Gloria. 2014. Price, quality, and variety: Measuring the gains from trade in differentiated products. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(4):66–89.
Small, Kenneth A. and Erik T. Verhoef. 2007. The Economics of Urban Transportation. New York
(ny): Routledge.
United Nations. 2015. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision. New York (ny).

47

Appendix A. Further data description
City sample and extent
United Nations (2015) reports the population and location of 166 cities in India that reached
a population of 300,000 by 2014. Following Harari (2016) and Ch et al. (2018), we define the
spatial extent of these cities as sets of contiguous 30 arc-second pixels with a lights-at-night
digital number (dn) of at least 35 whose boundaries reach within 3 kilometers of the un’s
reported latitude and longitude. The lights data are the stable lights product from the F-18
satellite. They are available at https://ngdc.noaa.gov/eog/dmsp/downloadV4composites.
html (last accessed 6 September 2018.) The un database initially reported an incorrect location
for one city (Bokaro Steel City); it has since been corrected. We resampled Bokaro Steel City
in December 2017 once we discovered this problem.
We drop two cities (Cherthala and Malappuram) that are not within 3 kilometers of a
dn>35 light, one (Santipur) that belongs to a lit area with exactly one dn>35 pixel, which
is an implausibly small extent, and five cities that are too far east to be in the land use
dataset described below (Agartala, Aizawl, Guwahati, Imphal, and Shillong). Four city-lights
contain two cities each: Raipur and Durg-Bhilainagar, Mumbai and Bhiwandi, Asansol and
Durgapur, and Bangalore and Hosur. We treat each of these four pairs as an individual city,
with the center of the larger member of each pair kept as the center of the combined city. Our
primary sample thus includes 154 cities.
We further restrict city boundaries for the purpose of defining trip origins and destinations
by excluding water bodies and non-urban land using 40-meter resolution land cover classifications from the Global Human Settlement Layer (ghsl) of the European Commission’s Joint
Research Centre (jrc). Cells identified as at least partially built up or roads within a city light
are retained. Panel a of figure A.1 shows the lit and built-up portions on a median-sized city,
Jamnagar in Gujarat, which we use for illustrative purpose throughout this appendix.
Trip sample
This section describes how we determine the within-city trips to query on Google Maps. We
define a trip as a pair of points (origin and destination) within the same city as defined above.
A trip instance is a trip taken at a specific time on a specific day. A location/point refers to
a pair of longitude-latitude coordinates identifying the centroid of a roughly 40-meter ghsl
pixel. We require that trip location pairs are at least one kilometer apart in haversine length,
for three reasons. First, the rounding of travel times and lengths introduce potentially nonclassical measurement error in our computations of travel speed. Second, Google does not

48

Figure A.1: Illustrations for the city of Jamnagar
Geometric (abs) trips
Land Code Classification
Jamnagar

Jamnagar

12
13
14
15
16
17

2
5

Panel a: Built-up
categories
Geometric
(smooth) within
trips lit area
(higher numbers reflect
greater built-up intensity)
Jamnagar

2
4
6
8

Panel b: Radial
trips
of absolute
Geometric
(circum)
trips lengths
2 km, 5 km, 10 km, and
15 km from the center
Jamnagar

Clockwise
Counter−Clockwise

Panelc: Radial
tripstrips
over uniformly
Gravity
picked distance
Jamnagarpercentiles

Panel d: Circumferential trips around the center
school trips
Jamnagar

0
2
4
6
8
10
12

Panel e: Gravity trips

49

Panel f: Trips to school

Figure A.1 (continued): Illustrations for the city of Jamnagar
shopping_mall trips
hospital trips
Jamnagar

Jamnagar

Panel g: Trips to shopping malls

Panel h: Trips to hospitals

always return a driving time under traffic conditions for very short trips. Even when it does,
the travel times can sometimes be very inconsistent or require taking unnecessary detours.
Third, walking is an easy alternative to driving for short trips, and sources of error such as
the unobserved time cost of finding parking, etc. will be a more significant component of the
trip.
p
Our target sample for city c is 15 Popc trips, where Popc is the projected 2015 population
of city c from United Nations (2015), and 10 trip instances per trip, to ensure variation across
times of day. That is approximately 82,000 trip instances for the smallest of our cities, 116,000
instances for a median-sized city, and 760,000 instances for the largest city (Delhi).32
We define four types of trips: radial (2/9 of all trips), circumferential (1/9), gravity (1/3),
and amenity (1/3).
Radial trips
Radial trips are defined in a polar coordinate system with respect to a city center. They have
one end at a randomly located point within 1.5 kilometers of the city centroid as defined
by United Nations (2015). Distance from the centroid is drawn from a truncated normal
distribution with mean 0, standard deviation 0.75 kilometer and support [0,1.5] kilometers.
For convenience, we call this the destination, but in practice trips in both directions are
sampled. For each destination, the point of origin is determined using two methods with
equal probability:
32 By

comparison, in the 2008 us National Household Transportation Survey (nhts), the 187th, 100th, 50th,
10th and 1st most sampled us metro areas have about 200, 800, 2,200, 12,000, and 29,000 trips, respectively.

50

1. Absolute distances of AbsDist ∈ {2,5,10,15} kilometers (equally weighted) are drawn.
For each of these four distances, we (uniform) randomly pick a point of origin within
the lit-up area of the city that is between ( AbsDist − 0.2) kilometers and ( AbsDist + 0.2)
kilometers from the given destination. See panel b of figure A.1 for illustration with the
city of Jamnagar. Darker shades of red distinguish longer trips.
2. Distance percentiles relative to the largest possible distance for any trip from a lit-up area
of the city to that destination are drawn from a uniform distribution from the 1st to
99th percentile (excluding distances less than 1 kilometer). See panel c of figure A.1 for
illustration with the city of Jamnagar.
If a city has no valid trips for a given absolute distance +/-0.2 kilometer, the trips assigned
to that distance are reallocated to the distance percentiles sample.33 Similarly, if there are not
enough unique 40 m pixel centroids AbsDist +/-0.2 kilometer from the center destination
to fill a given absolute distance’s quota, the remainder of the quota is filled with randomly
drawn distance percentiles instead.
Circumferential trips
Like radial trips, circumferential trips are also defined in a polar coordinate system with
respect to a city center. Circumferential trips originate at a random origin at least 2 kilometers
away from the city centroid. The analogous destination is at the same distance (+/-0.2 kilometer) from the centroid, 30 (+/-3) degrees clockwise or counter-clockwise from the origin.
For three small cities, the city centroid according to United Nations (2015) is far from the
geographic center of the city-light, so it was not possible to fill the circumferential trip quota.
See panel c of figure A.1 for illustration with the city of Jamnagar.
Gravity trips
Gravity trips are designed to match the length profile of trips sampled in the us nhts and the
Bogotá Travel Survey. We identified each location-pair using the following algorithm:
1. Consider a uniformly randomly picked initial point (GravityPoint) and a length
(GravityLength kilometers) drawn from a truncated Pareto distribution with shape
parameter 1 and with support between 1 kilometer and 250 kilometers (corresponding
to a mean of roughly 5.52 kilometers).34
33 Only 43 cities have a maximum distance to centroid of 15 kilometers or more. 78, or roughly half, of the
cities have a maximum distance of 10 kilometers or more. 132 cities have a maximum distance of 5 kilometers
or more, and all cities have a maximum distance greater than 2 kilometers (with the smallest maximum distance
being 2.8 kilometers).
34 This mean of 5.52 kilometers is slightly smaller than the mean of 6.51 kilometers for Bogotá from Akbar and
Duranton (2018).

51

2. Choose a point randomly from among all points at a straight-line length between
( GravityLength − 0.2) kilometers and ( GravityLength + 0.2) kilometer from the point
GravityPoint. If there are no such points, start over from (1) with a new pair of
(GravityPoint,GravityLength).
See panel e of figure A.1 for illustration with the city of Jamnagar. Darker shades of red
distinguish longer trips.
Amenity trips
Amenity trips join a random origin with an instance of one of 17 amenities (e.g. shopping
malls, schools, train stations) as recorded in Google Places. The particular instance we
used is based on a combination of proximity and “prominence” assigned by Google. The
weighting across these amenity types is based on a mapping of amenities to trip purposes
for the 100 largest msa in the us from the 2008 us National Household Transportation Survey
(nhts) (Couture et al., 2018). nhts has nine categories of trip purpose (trip share in parentheses): Work (23.6%), Work-related business (3.3%), Shopping (21.8%), School & Religious
practice (4.6%), Medical/dental (2.2%), Vacation & visiting friends/relatives (6.0%), Other
social/recreational (13.8%), Other family/personal business (24.3%), and Other (0.5%).
The Google Places api classifies points of interest using one or more of roughly 100
Google-defined place "types". We match each nhts trip purpose to the most relevant Google
Places types, using city hall for Work, under the assumption that employment is relatively
concentrated near the city center. Since we cannot identify types associated with Other
family/personal business, we reallocated its 24.3% share among the rest of the categories
except Work using the following formula. If place type v gets TripTypeSharev % of the trips
24.3(23.6− TripTypeShare )
otherwise, then they get an additional ∑ (23.6−TripTypeShare v) . Less popular place types get a
w
w
larger share of Other family/personal business as we do not want too few absolute trips in
any category. The final allocation is shown below. The first number in each category is its
initial allocation, and the second is its share of Other family/personal business.
• Work: city hall (23.6%+0%)
• Work-related business: gas station (3.3%+1.5%)
• Shopping: shopping mall (7.3%+1.2%), convenience store (7.3%+1.2%), grocery/ supermarket (7.2%+1.2%)
• Social/recreational:
(2.4%+1.5%)

movie theater (5.7%+1.3%),

park (5.7%+1.3%),

• School & religious practice: school (2.3%+1.6%), place of worship (2.3%+1.6%)
• Medical/dental: hospital (1.1%+1.7%), doctor (1.1%+1.7%)

52

stadium

• Vacation & visits:
(2.0%+1.6%)

train station (3.0%+1.5%), airport (1.0%+1.7%), bus station

• Other: police (0.25%+1.75%), post office (0.25%+1.75%)
We set a different maximum radius of the search around any initial point based on the
place type:
• 50 kilometers radius: city hall, airport, stadium
• 20 kilometers radius: train station, bus station, hospital, doctor
• 10 kilometers radius: movie theater, school, police
• 5 kilometers radius: shopping mall, convenience store, grocery/supermarket, park,
place of worship, gas station, post office
A query request to Google Places api specifies a search location and a ‘type’. For each
query, we randomly draw (without replacement) a new location within our city’s lit-up
boundary. We call a query to the api successful if it returns at least one place. For a given
city, if a query by ‘type’ is unsuccessful more often than not after at least 50 unsuccessful
queries, we switch to querying by ‘keyword’, which is more likely to return results but also
more likely to include badly matched returns, e.g. return coordinates for some segment of a
road named "Airport Road" instead of coordinates for the airport. If queries by keyword also
continue to be unsuccessful more often than not, after 50 unsuccessful queries we reallocate
the remaining share of the location pairs evenly among the rest of the place types under the
same trip purpose category. For example, suppose we require 100 location pairs for ’convenience stores’ and the first 50 queries by type return zero results. So we switch to querying
by keyword. Suppose, the 80th query by keyword is the 50th unsuccessful one. Then we stop
there, get 30 location pairs from the successful queries for ‘convenience stores’ and reallocate
the remaining 70 required location pairs to ‘shopping mall’ and ‘grocery/supermarket’ (35
each). If all place types in the same trip purpose category yield zero place returns more
often than not and we have yet to fulfil our quota of location pairs in the category, then we
re-distribute the count of unqueried location pairs evenly across all the rest of the place types.
From each successful query, we collect only the first twenty places returned by Google
in order of "prominence", as determined "by a place’s ranking in Google’s index, global
popularity, and other factors". For each place, Google’s Places api returns us: geographical
coordinates, "name", "vicinity" (this might be either an address or nearby landmarks), and
the "types" it is classified under. We only keep places that are at least one kilometer in
straight-line distance from the random initial point. Then we use the "name", "vicinity" and
"types" of the place to score the relevance/quality of each place return. We drops places
below a minimum threshold (i.e. more likely to be a bad match), and use the highest scoring
place, breaking ties first with length differentials over one kilometer (i..e keeping the closest),
53

and then by "prominence" (i.e., the order in which they are reported by Google). This ensures
that small differences in length are ignored in favor of Google’s recommendation.
Since not all successful queries return good quality places, we make 50% more queries than
needed. When choosing the final set of trips to query for traffic, we prioritise trips to places
that scored highly on relevance. If we need to break ties here, we pick randomly. Panels
f, g, and h of figure A.1 illustrate for the city of Jamnagar our selection of trips to schools,
shopping malls, and hospitals, respectively.
Querying trips on Google Maps
Our target sample was 2,373,764 trips across all cities and strategies, corresponding to
1,186,882 locations pairs. Because of some overlaps between trips and because Google Maps
did not return any route for few hundred trips, we ended up with 2,333,762 queried trips, or
98.3% of our target. Across cities, the mean is 98.7% with a coefficient of variation of 1.34%.
We simulated 22,766,881 trip instances across 40 days between September and November
of 2016. This corresponds to 92.5% of our target on average in Indian cities with a coefficient
of variation of 4.06%. The median (as well as the mean) trip was queried 10 times (with
a standard deviation of 1.9) and 99% of the trips were queried at least 8 times. Missing trip
instances are due mostly to empty returns from Google Maps or minor technical glitches such
as early computer disconnections, formatting problems in the returns, etc.
We wanted the distribution of trip departure/query times to roughly resemble the distribution of departure times on a typical weekday.35 However, we also wanted enough
trip queries from each time period of the day for the fixed effects to be credible, so we
oversampled the early morning. At any hour of the day, we had the following number of
machines querying trips on Google: 12 a.m. - 4 a.m.: 15, 4 a.m. - 5 a.m.: 20, 5 a.m. - 6 a.m.:
35, 6 a.m. - 8 a.m.: 40, 8 a.m. - 12 p.m.: 35, 12 p.m. - 1 p.m.: 40, 1 p.m. - 5 p.m.: 35, 5 p.m. 7 p.m.: 40, 7 p.m. - 9 p.m.: 30, 9 p.m. - 10 p.m.: 25, 10 p.m. - 12 a.m.: 20. All the machines
had identical processing power, so the number of machines also reflects the distribution of
our trip queries across hours of the day. Panel a of figure A.2 shows the realized distribution
of query times across hours of the day.
We wanted to have an even spread of days and times across cities and trip types/strategies.
So the order in which the trips were queried was randomized to alternate between strategies
and cities (based on the size of the city, e.g. city A - with twice as many trips as city B - is
queried twice between every city B query). Once we have run through the ordered list of
trips, we start over at the beginning of the list. Panel b of figure A.2 shows the stable realized
proportion of trip types across hours of the day.
35 We

rely on a household transportation survey from Bogota, Colombia as a reference for this.

54

Figure A.2: Queries by time of the day

20

Number of trips (in thousands)
Share of trip queries
0.4

15

0.3

0.2

10
0.1

5

Hour of day

Radial

Circumferential

Gravity

Amenity

Hour of day

0
0

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Panel a: Number of trip instances
across times of the day

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

Panel b: Proportion of types
by time of day

As the ordering of trips stays the same, one may worry that if the time it takes to cycle
through the list is roughly a multiple of 24 hours, there will be too little variation in time of
day across instances of the same trip. So we split the day into four 6-hour time slots (12 a.m.
- 6 a.m., 6 a.m. - 12 p.m., 12 p.m. - 6 p.m., 6 p.m. - 12 a.m) and forced randomization within
each of them by maintaining a separate trip query list for each slot. That means, at the end
of each 6 hour slot we bookmarked our location on the query list and came back to it in 18
hours. This makes sure that no trip is randomly over- or under-queried at any given 6-hour
slot of day. We managed to make sure that 95% of the trips were queried at all four 6-hour
time slots, and every trip was queried at, at least, three of the four slots.
We sampled weekends at 50% of our weekday rate, using the same method. While we
might prefer to oversample “Other family/personal business” trips on weekends, as discussed above we cannot narrow down the set of destinations for this category.
Travel lengths and speeds
The median Google-reported travel length across all our trips is 5 kilometers (with a standard
deviation of 10.5 kilometers). However, there are noticeable differences across our four trip
selection strategies. Figure A.3 shows the distribution of travel lengths for the portfolio of
trips under each strategy. Amenity trips are relatively shorter in length, with a median of
4.2 kilometers. This is understandable as our algorithm weakly prefers closer destinations
for any given amenity. Radial trips are the longest, with a median of 6.6 kilometers. This
is probably because we force a large share of the trips to be of fixed haversine lengths of 5 ,
10 and 15 kilometers, which translate to even larger actual travel lengths.36 Recall that the
36 In

fact, the ratio of total travel length to total haversine length is 1.53.

55

Figure A.3: Travel length and speed
Share of trip queries

0.02

Speed (km/h)
24

23

0.015
Radial
0.01

22

Circumferential
21

Gravity
0.005

Radial
Circumferential

Amenity

20

Gravity

Trip distance (km)
19
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Hour of day

Amenity

0
40

Panel a: Distribution of travel lengths
by trip class

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Panel b: Travel speeds across time
of day by trip class

gravity trips are designed to mirror the distribution of travel lengths that have been observed
in other cities.
Panel b of figure A.3 shows how travel speeds through the day vary across our trip selection strategies. As we would expect, speeds are highest in the early hours of the morning and
late at night and lowest during the day, in particular around the 6 - 7 p.m. evening rush hour.
Some of the differences in speeds across strategies may be explained by the differences in trip
lengths, as longer trips also tend to be faster. But, clearly there is more to it: circumferential
trips experience the lowest speeds, and speeds for the radial and circumferential trips seem
relatively more sensitive to daytime increases in traffic.
Walking and transit trips
We do not expect walking times for a given trip to vary by either the day or the hour of day.
However, walking speeds do vary based on slope and the density of the network of streets
and pedestrian paths. So, unlike for driving times, we query each location pair only once, in
one direction, for walking times.
Google does not generally track transit in real time, but instead relies on public transportation schedules made available by transit authorities and open General Transit Feed
Specification data. Thus, for any given trip, we do not expect any meaningful variation across
weekdays in our travel times by transit. Scheduled transit frequency does however vary by
time of day. We thus re-queried each weekday trip instance in our driving data as a transit
trip, at its original time of day, but on 10 January 2018. This was a Wednesday that did not
coincide with any public holidays in India to our knowledge.
56

Table A.1: Ranking of cities by transit network coverage
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

City

State

Chennai
Tamil Nadu
Bangalore
Karnataka
Pune
Maharashtra
Mysore
Karnataka
Mumbai
Maharashtra
Ahmedabad
Gujarat
Chandigarh Chandigarh
Rajkot
Gujarat
Kolkata
West Bengal
Jaipur
Rajasthan

Coverage
0.74
0.73
0.73
0.69
0.67
0.65
0.63
0.62
0.61
0.61

Notes: Coverage refers to the share of trip instances with viable transit routes returned by Google
Maps.

There are several important caveats to these data. First, 22% of queries, including all
queries in 14 cities, returned no routes. Second, we do not expect the schedules to include
informal transit providers, which own the large majority of India’s bus fleet.37 Third, some
returned routes are implausible. Specifically, we exclude routes that (1) require walking
all the way, (2) require waiting over an hour to start the trip, or (3) are slower than their
walking counterpart, which happens when Google uses inter-city rail, presumably because it
is the only nearby transit alternative, to create highly convoluted itineraries. Following these
exclusions, only 20% of our driving trip instances offer viable transit alternatives, and they
are highly concentrated in the largest cities. In 133 of our 154 cities, less than 8% of trips
are viable by transit. We cannot distinguish whether the absence of a viable transit route is
due to limitations in the city’s transit network or limitations in Google Maps’ coverage of the
transit network. With that in mind, we report the 10 cities with the largest share of our trip
instances covered by Google Maps in Table A.1. Figure A.4 shows, for each hour of the day,
the number of transit query in Panel a, and the average speed by trip class in Panel b.
Road network data
Our measures of road network characteristics come from OpenStreetMap (osm), a collaborative worldwide mapping project. We downloaded osm data within the light-based boundary
of each city through Geofabrik in September 2016 (http://download.geofabrik.de/asia/
india.html, last accessed, 6 September 2018). We then used osmnx, a python package created
37 See

https://data.gov.in/catalog/number-buses-owned-public-and-private-sectors-india, last accessed, 6 September 2018. Note also that Google Maps only officially lists transit authorities spanning 12
Indian cities, corresponding to 10 of our cities, and four multi-region services that share their transit schedules (http://maps.google.com/landing/transit/cities/, last accessed 6 September 2018), but queries in an
additional 130 cities returned transit components.

57

Figure A.4: Transit data
20

Number of trips (in thousands)

Speed (km/h)

14

13

15

12
10

11
5

0

10
Hour of day
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Panel a: Distribution of query times
across times of the day

0

1

2

3

Radial

Circumferential

Gravity

Amenity

4

5

6

7

8

Hour of day

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Panel b: Travel speeds across time
of day by trip class

by Geoff Boeing, to process the OpenStreetMap network as a directed graph of edges and
nodes.
Road length
Each edge in the osm network receives a tag which characterizes its road type. We measure
total road length in kilometers for three types of roads:
1. Motorways: The highest capacity roads in a country, equivalent to freeways in the
United States. Motorways generally consist of restricted access dual carriage ways with
2 or more lanes in each direction plus emergency hard shoulder.38
2. Primary Roads: The next most important road in a country’s transportation system,
after motorways and trunks. Generally not dual carriage ways.
3. Total Road Length: aggregation of all road types driveable by motor vehicles and public
for everyone to use.39
We note that certain cities have incomplete street networks on osm. Using satellite data,
we visually identified a set of cities for which the road network appear incomplete (Jhansi,
on the left-hand panel of Figure A.5, is one such cities.) The results are robust to limiting the
sample to the subset of cities for which we have a more complete road network.
38 We

also include the less frequent osm type "trunks" in the motorways category. Trunk are the next most
important types of roads after motorway, and often but not always consist of dual carriage ways.
39 In the osm network, both carriage ways of a motorway count as separate edges (in each direction). We
experimented with counting dual carriage ways only once when measuring length, and also with measuring
lane-kilometers, instead of just edge kilometers. These adjustments generate measures of length by road type
that are very highly correlated with that without adjustments that we show in the paper.

58

Characterizing the road network
osmnx calculates the compass bearing ("bearing" for short) from each directed edge’s origin
node to its destination node. The bearing captures the orientation of the edge with respect to
true north. We use the distribution of edge bearings in a city to characterize how ‘grid-like’ its
road network is. We measure how grid-like a network is in two separate ways: ‘orientation’
which captures the share of edges conforming to the network’s main grid orientation, and
‘Gini’ which captures the dispersion in the distribution of edge bearings. We now describe
both measures of how grid-like a road network is in more detail.
Orientation. A grid is a series of roads intersecting at perpendicular angles. If a city were a
perfect grid network, then all bearings for would be either perpendicular or parallel to each
other. The orientation grid metric measures the proportion of edges in a city’s road network
that conform to the dominant grid orientation in that they are perpendicular or parallel to the
modal edge bearing.
Let g index each edge in the road network of city c, and let xcg be the edge bearing rounded
to the nearest degree, and xcmodal be the modal edge bearing modulo 90 of city c. For example,
if a city’s grid were oriented N-E-S-W, then xcmodal would equal 0. Let δgc,xcmodal ,ν be an indicator
for whether edge g in city c conforms to grid orientation xcmodal within a bandwidth error of
ν:



1 if ( x g − x0ct ) mod 90 <= ν


(a1)
δic,xcmodal ,ν = 1 if ( x g − x0ct ) mod 90 >= (90 − ν)



0 else.
We then compute our grid-like measure as:
Orientationc =

∑ g∈ Ic δgc,xcmodal ,ν
Qc

,

(a2)

where Ic is the set of all edges in city c, and Qc is the number of edges in Ic .
In the paper, we report results using a narrow error bandwidth of ν = 2◦ . We experimented
with a wider bandwidth of 5◦ . We also experimented with allowing for more than one dominant grid orientation, because for instance larger cities can have smaller sub-grids whose
orientation differs from that of the main grid.40 These variations produce highly correlated
rankings of cities, and we therefore prefer the simplest version above. Visual inspection
suggests that our methodology performs well at ranking road networks by how grid-like
40 We also experimented with weighting edges by length, but such measures appear to overestimate how
grid-like small cities with few very long roads are.

59

Figure A.5: Most and least grid-like city road network using orientation grid metric

Panel a: Chandigarh - Grid Score = 0.54

Panel b: Jhansi - Grid Score = 0.08

they are. Figure A.5 shows the most and least grid-like cities according to the orientation
metric, side-by-side.41
Gini. We modify the definition of the Gini index for income inequality to measure the
normalized dispersion of edge bearings. For each city c, we define 360 different possible
bearings, indexed by k, and ranked by their frequency such that k = 1 is the least frequent
bearing and k = 360 is the most frequent bearing. In a perfectly gridded city, the four
most frequent bearings, spaced 90 degrees apart, would account for 100% of edge bearings.
Therefore, we can interpret high values of the following Gini index as corresponding to cities
with a more grid-like network:
Ginic =

k
Qc × 360 − 2 ∑360
k=1 ∑l =1 θcl
,
Qc × 360

(a3)

where θcl is the number of edges in city c with bearing l. The Gini and orientation metric
have a correlation of 0.53.
The assumption of 360 possible distinct bearings is arbitrary, and we also computed Gini
indices after rounding up each bearing to the nearest even degree (i.e., by assuming 180
possible bearings.) We also experimented with defining modulo 90 bearings (instead of
modulo 360 as above).42 These variations produce Gini indices that are highly correlated
with the index defined above that we use in the paper.
41 It

is also possible to compute measures of how grid-like the road network is separately for different types
of road defined above, instead of only for the total road network. However, visual inspection suggests that
these measures do not perform well at capturing overall how grid-like cities are, and for instance motorways
are often curved and outside of the main grid.
42 For some smaller cities with sparser road networks, the number of distinct edge bearings is less than 360.
In these cases, we adjust the calculation to consider only the total set of bearings present in that city, which may
be less than 360.

60

Weather data
Hourly and daily historical weather data (rain, thunderstorm, temperature, humidity, and
wind speed) are from the Weather Underground website. (https://www.wunderground.com/
history, last accessed, 6 September 2018).) Weather Underground (wu) links each city to a
station nearby (if there is one) and reads the weather reported by the station at the time it was
reported.
We recovered weather data for 112 cities during the trips collection period. The median
city-day has 8 weather readings, with a range from 1 to 144. On an average day, 25 of the
cities report weather at least once every hour and 13 of them (mostly cities with international
airports) report every half hour or more. The number of readings per day for a given city
varies little across days.
The remaining 42 cities are missing data for one or more of the following three reasons
First, wu does not recognize the city name (4 cities). Second, wu recognizes the city name,
but has no data on it (i.e., not linked to any weather stations – 31 cities). Third, wu re-directs
to a different city name, either because: (a) wu recognizes our entry as an alternative name
to the returned city, or (b) wu treats the city as a suburb or extension of a larger city nearby
(20 cities). In this case, we accepted the returned city as a proxy as long as it was within
50 kilometers of the queried city (8 of 20 cities). Over the two months when we collected
weather data, it rained 4.5% of the time and there were thunderstorms 2% of the time.
Comparison with Uber Movement data
We use data from Uber Movement (https://movement.uber.com) based on actual trips taken
by Uber riders for four Indian cities, Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad, and Bangalore. Uber
provides data by multi-hour period by day, or alternatively, by individual hour by calendar
quarter. Given the importance of within-day variation in mobility, we use the latter for the
last quarter of 2016 when we collected our main data. Uber Movement divides each city
into small zones and provides a travel time between zone pairs for each hour of the day. For
example, in Bangalore, there are 198 zones, averaging less than 4 square kilometers, and Uber
Movement reports travel times for 87.2% of all 198 × 197 × 24 = 936,342 zone pair-hours.43
If these were average speeds of actual trips between these zone pairs, we could compare
them directly to our gm trips. However, they differ from real trips in a critical way. Uber
Movement computes zone-pair travel times using all trips that pass through a pair of zones.
Because these zones are fairly small, we expect a typical Uber trip to generate information for
many pairs. For example, a real trip that passes through ten zones will provide travel time
43 We exclude the travel time information that Uber Movement reports for each ward to itself, which is
provided only for the last hour of the day.

61

information for 10×(10-1)/2 = 45 different pairs. We call these pairs trip segments. These
segments will contain a different distribution of zones than the actual trip. For example,
the beginning and end zones represent 20% of the zones in an actual ten-zone trip. But in
the 45 trip segments, they represent only 9%. This is a problem because we expect that the
beginning and end of a trip are on average slower than their middle, for the same reason that
long trips are faster than short trips – drivers must use slow local roads at the beginning and
end of many trips.
A second complication of comparing our Google Maps data with the Uber Movement data
is that there is no way of knowing the actual road distance traveled between two zones in an
Uber Movement trip segment. Therefore, we measure the haversine distance between the
centroids of the zones of the endpoints of either each trip instance (Google Maps) or each trip
segment (Uber Movement) and compute the corresponding effective speed.
To make the samples comparable, we restrict attention to Google Maps trip instances
matched to a corresponding Uber Movement observation by zone of origin, zone of departure, and hour of departure. Uber Movement’s effective definition of each city is generally
smaller than ours. In Bangalore, 81.3% of our 495,708 Google Maps trip instances have both
their origin and their destination in a zone reported by Uber Movement. Uber Movement
provides matching travel times data (origin, destination, and hour) for 92.1% of these, or
371,215. Conversely, only 13.1% of zone-pair-hours reported by Uber Movement have a
corresponding Google Maps trip in our Bangalore sample.44
Consistent with our conjecture above, the effective travel speeds computed from Uber
Movement travel times are much faster than the corresponding speeds computed from counterfactual trip instances obtained from Google Maps. We plot these speeds for all hours of the
day in figure A.6. For instance, at 6 a.m., we observe an average effective speed of nearly 25
kilometers per hour for Uber Movement instead of about 16 kilometers per hour for Google
Maps. Note that we pool data for all four cities together but the patterns are the same for each
city taken individually. Note also that we do not condition out trip characteristics as we do in
the rest of the paper because some characteristics like trip type are missing from the Uber data
while others like trip length cannot be directly compared across both groups. Note finally
that for Uber Movement trip segments in figure A.6, we only use trip segments for which
the matching Google Map trip instance has a road length of less than 15 kilometers. This is
because we compare these Uber Movement trip segments to Google Maps trip instances with
a length of less than 15 kilometers.45
44 Using

instead all Uber Movement observations only makes minor differences. On the other hand, Google
Maps trip instances within the Uber-defined city limits is further from the center on average.
45 We nonetheless keep in mind that these length ranges are not immediately comparable since trip segments
of a given length can be part of much longer trip instances.

62

Figure A.6: Comparing Uber Movement with different parts of Google Maps trips

Effective Speed (km/hr)
25

20

15
GM (all trips)

10

GM first km (all trips)
GM middle part (trips of length 5-10 km)
GM middle part (trips of length 10-15 km)

5

Uber (trip segements of length less than 15 km)

Hour of day

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Pooled data for four cities (Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad, and Bangalore). Series computed as described in the
text.

Since Uber Movement oversamples the fast middle parts of trips as noted above, it is more
appropriate to compare speeds computed from Uber Movement data with speeds computed
for the middle part of Google Maps trips instead of the entire trips. To compute speed for
the middle part of trips, we proceed as follows. Using our supplementary data collection
from August 2018, Google Maps provides length and duration data for each step of a trip
instance (that is, each portion of a trip between changes of direction) in meters and seconds.
Unfortunately, step travel speed is not updated in real-time. It appears to reflect an average
travel speed for that step.
We thus create step-specific speeds as follows. Let Siτ be the (real-time) speed of whole
trip instance i at time of day τ in 5-minute increments, and Zi nτ be the (average) speed of
segment n that is part of trip i at time of day τ, where n could be the first kilometer, or the
middle (defined as all but the first and last 2 kilometers). We calculate estimates of Si nτ for
all Google Maps trip instances i with an Uber Movement counterpart as Si nτ = Siτ × ZZi nτ ,
iτ

where ZZi nτ is the speed of segment n relative to the speed of the whole trip. We then average
iτ
this quantity across all trips in each hour τ̄ of the day to get Snτ̄ for two segments n: the
first kilometer and middle, in turn separating out the middle for trips of 5–10 kilometers and
10–15 kilometers.
The resulting speed profiles by time of the day are plotted in figure A.6. While the first

63

kilometer of trips is sizeably slower than their average speed, the middle part of trips is
much faster, especially for longer trips that are more likely to use faster roads.46 During most
of the day, we find that the speeds we infer from Uber Movement travel times are close to the
speeds we estimate for the middle part of 10–15 kilometer trip instances and slightly above
the speeds of the middle part of 5–10 kilometer trips.
The pattern of remaining deviations between the Uber Movement and Google Maps data
are potentially interesting. The largest deviation is in the uncongested early morning, where
Uber movement trips are faster than our Google trips. Recall that speeds for the middle parts
of trips are estimated under the assumption that congestion delays affect all parts of trips
equally (since step durations reported by Google Maps are invariant during the day). If,
consistent with the results of Akbar and Duranton (2018), the middle part of trips on major
roads is subject to worse congestion delays than the beginning and end parts on local roads,
our calculation of the speed for the middle part of trips should be an underestimate at the
least congested hours of the day and an overestimate at the most congested hours of the day.
This appears true in at least a relative sense in figure A.6.
Public holidays
In total, 11 public holidays took place during our data collection period in 2016:
1. 15-16 September: Onam in Kerala.
2. 23 September: Haryana’s Heroes’ Martyrdom Day in Haryana.
3. 28 September: Birthday of Bhagat Singh Ji in Punjab.
4. 30 September: Mahalaya in Karnakata, Orissa, and West Bengal.
5. 10 October: Ayudha Puja in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, Durga Puja in West Bengal,
and Mahanavami in Bihar, Kerala, and Orissa.
6. 12 October: Durga Puja in Orissa.
7. 17 October: Parkash Gurpurab of Sri Guru Ram Das Ji in Punjab.
8. 31 October: Vikram Samvat New Year in Gujarat, Deepavali in Karnataka and Maharastra, and Vishvakarma Day in Punjab.
9. 1 November: Bhai Bij in Gujarat and Haryana Day in Haryana.
10. 7 November: Chhath Puja in Bihar.
11. 14 November: Rassa Purmina in Orissa.
46 Although

we do not plot them here, we find that the last kilometer of trips is about as slow as the first.
The second and second to last kilometers are also slower than the trip average but faster than the first and last
kilometers.

64

On three of these days (31 October, 1 November, and 14 November), we did not happen to
be sampling cities in the affected states. For each of the other public holidays, we estimate a
variant of our preferred specification (column 5 of table 4) adding an indicator for the holiday,
limiting our sample to the cities of the state(s) where the holiday occurs. Given our concern
that data quality may be lower in small cities, we alternatively limit samples to cities of less
than 0.5 million residents; in some cases this means a single city.
Excluding the exceptions discussed below, mobility on public holidays was significantly
faster, even in the small-city samples, consistent with less traffic. Improvements were generally moderate, but occasionally sizable. For instance, we estimate 5 to 6% faster mobility in
Bangalore and Kolkata, two highly congested cities, during Mahalaya. For small cities, these
improvements in mobility are small, between 0.5 and 2% or less, which is reasonable since
congestion delays are limited to start with.
The main exceptions to these patterns are the following. We estimate insignificant coefficients for Ayudha Puja (10 October) in the three small cities of Tamil Nadu and for
Mahanavami (also 10 October) in the small cities of Kerala and Orissa.
We also estimate negative and significant coefficients for Durga Puja (10 October) in the
small cities of West Bengal, for Parkash Gurpurab of Sri Guru Ram Das Ji (17 October) in
Amritsar, and Chhath Puja (7 November) in the small cities of Bihar. In all three cases, these
are particularly important festivities that draw lots of visitors and involve outdoor celebrations. Negative effects on mobility should be expected. For instance, Parkash Gurpurab of
Sri Guru Ram Das Ji is a celebration of the founder of Amritsar, the holiest city of Sikhism.
We find worse mobility in Amritsar that day while mobility is better in other cities of Punjab,
which also celebrate the public holiday but do not draw large crowds.
Other web sources
300 million smartphones in India for the fourth quarter of 2016:
https:
//www.counterpointresearch.com/india-smartphone-user-base-tops-300-million-as
-smartphone-market-grew-18-yoy-in-2016/ (accessed 7 September 2018).
97% share of Android smartphones among all smartphones: http://indianexpress.com/
article/technology/googles-android-captured-97-indian-smartphone-market-share
-in-q2-2016-report-2957566/ (accessed 6 September 2018).
71%
share
of
urban
mobile
internet
users
in
2015:
http://
indianexpress.com/article/technology/tech-news-technology/mobile-internet
-users-in-india-to-reach-371-mn-by-june-2016/ (accessed 6 September 2018).
Source for public holidays in India: https://www.officeholidays.com/countries/
india/2016.php

65

Appendix B. Derivation and computation of the logit/CES mobility index.
We define the utility from visiting the destination of trip i in city c as:
uci = log(bci ) + (1 − σ) log(tci ) + eci ,

(b1)

where tci = γTci is the time cost of a trip to destination i in city c that takes Tci units of time
at value of time γ per unit, and eci , the random component of utility, has a Type I extreme
value distribution.47 The parameter σ > 1 is an elasticity of substitution across destinations,
and bci is a trip-specific quality parameter capturing all factors other than time costs making
some destinations more desirable than others.48
As shown by Anderson et al. (1992, pp. 60–61), the expected utility of a traveler in city c
is equal to the expected value of uci ’s maximum across the Nc travel destinations available in
city c:
!
!


Nc

E max{uci }
i ∈ Nc

= log

∑ exp [log(bci ) + (1 − σ) log(tci )]

Nc

= log

i =1

∑ bci t1ci−σ

.

(b2)

i =1

Now consider two cities, c and c0 . Define a relative price index Gc,c0 as the factor by which
travel costs in city c would have to change in order to equalize expected utility in the two
cities:
!
!
Nc

log

∑ bci (Gc,c0 tci )1−σ

Nc

∑ bc0 i t1c0−i σ

= log

i =1

.

(b3)

i =1

It is easy to show that
Nc0

Gc,c0 =

∑i

bc0 i t1c0−i σ

!1/(1−σ)

Nc0

=

N
∑i c bci t1ci−σ

∑i

σ
bc0 i Tc10−
i

N
∑i c bci Tci1−σ

!1/(1−σ)
,

(b4)

where the second equality uses tci = γTci . The relative price index Gc,c0 is best characterized
as a relative travel accessibility index. It is low when comparing cities that have many
destinations to those with few (gains from variety), and when comparing cities where travel
to those destinations is short-distance and fast to those where it is long-distance and slow.
We now develop a simple non-parametric procedure to isolate a pure mobility index
determined only by speed differences across cities. To do this, we replace the denominator
of Gc,c0 with a ‘national index’ that has exactly the same distribution of trip length as in city
47 Ben-Akiva

and Lerman (1985) are the first to show how to derive a travel accessibility index from a logit
model of travel demand. Anderson, de Palma, and Thisse (1992) are the first to show the correspondence
between the logit and ces models.
48 In Table 8, we present an index computed at σ = 0. Technically, values of σ < 1 are inconsistent with utility
maximization. In practice, the index at σ = 0 simply weights all trips equally and intuitively corresponds to a
perfect complement case.

66

c, and the same number of trips. This leads to equation (6) in the main text. Note that we
inverted the index to ensure that Gc increases with faster speed (the index derived above is a
price index increasing with time costs.) We compute T ci as the average travel time of all trips
in the national sample with length within 1% of that of trip i in city c. We drop any trip with
fewer than 10 corresponding trips within 1% of its length in the national sample (less than
0.01% of trips).
We investigate robustness to the parametrization of the quality parameters bci . For this
investigation, we restrict the sample to amenity trips. We do not observe the quality of
destinations, but we sampled amenity trips to match the trip shares in the us nhts, so
assuming that bci = 1 for all amenity trips is a reasonable starting point to compute Gc . We
then compute variations of this index using random draws of bci ∈ U [1,100], thus randomly
allowing certain destinations to be more desirable and to carry a higher weight in the index.
Indices obtained from these draws are highly correlated with one another and with our
benchmark index. This exercise corroborates other findings from Table 8, showing that slow
cities are slow for all types of trips, and that weighting certain trips more than others has little
impact on our mobility indices.
Finally, we divide trips into M groups and compute the following nested ces/logit mobility index (Sheu, 2014):

 1
1− µ 1− µ
M
G
∑m
=1 mc
(b5)
Gcnest = 
 1 ,
1− µ 1− µ
M
∑m=1 G mc
and
Nmc

Gmc =

∑ bci Tci1−σ

!

1
1− σ

Nmc

,

i =1

G mc =

∑

1− σ
bci T i

!

1
1− σ

,

(b6)

i =1

where µ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across groups, σ > µ is the elasticity of substitution within groups, and Nmc is the number of trips in group m in city c. As an example,
we can define eight groups, one for each amenity type recorded in Appendix A. In this case,
the nested index Gcnest puts less weight on destination types that are relatively slower in city
c; travelers substitute away from them because they are costlier. We compute these indices
using exactly the same methodology as before. Setting µ = 1.5 and σ = 2.5, we experiment
with various nesting structures defined by time (e.g., off peak, low peak, high peak), area
(e.g., rings), and type of destination (e.g., amenity types), and find a high correlation with
our benchmark index in all cases.

67

Appendix C. A simple model of supply and demand for travel in a city
In this section, we derive the key parameters to estimate the value of increasing uncongested
speed versus reducing congestion. Consider the setup in Figure C.1, panel b. Demand is
given by P = a − bQ. Average costs are AC = c + f Q, where we observe c, the intercept,
directly as the uncongested inverse speed. The equilibrium inverse speed is:
Peq = a − b

a−c
f
b
=a
+c
.
b+ f
b+ f
b+ f

(c1)

The part of an increase in uncongested speed that is not crowded out by congestion (the
shaded rectangle in Figure C.1, panel b) is given by:


a − cH
a − cL
b
eq
eq
PH − PL = a − b
− a−b
(c H − c L )
(c2)
=
b+ f
b+ f
b+ f
The share of the uncongested mobility improvement (c H − c L ) that persists in equilibrium is
b
b+ f . This share is small if the average cost curve is steep (congestible network) and if demand
is flat (drivers are price-sensitive).
To estimate the structural equation (c1), we run the regression:
p = α + βc + e

(c3)
f

β will be an unbiased estimate of b+b f unless c is correlated with a b+ f . The key concern here
is correlated supply and demand shocks. For example, higher incomes could decrease c and
increase a. This would however create a downward bias in β. We thus view our estimate as
conservative. In our data, uncongested mobility (c) is correlated with congestion (which rises
with a) at only 0.2, suggesting that this is not a severe bias.
The area of the deadweight loss triangle in Figure C.1, panel c is (height*base)/2:
1
DW L = ( Qeq − Qopt ) ∗ ( MC ( Qeq ) − Peq ) =
2



a−c
b+ f

2

f2
2( b + 2 f )

(c4)

We define ∆ as the share of travel cost that is a deadweight loss:
∆=

DW L
f2
Qeq
=
.
Qeq Peq
2(b + 2 f ) Peq

(c5)

Our regression estimate b+b f = 0.85 implies that f = 0.176b, suggesting that either supply is
is very flat or demand is very steep. From above, both of these imply that the DWL is small.
eq
Plugging f = 0.176b into equation (c5), we get ∆ = 0.01b Q
Peq . With linear demand, the price
P
1P
elasticity of demand is just − dQ
dP Q = − σ = b Q , so ∆ = 0.01/σ. If we are willing to assume
unit elasticity locally at equilibrium, then ∆ = 0.01: the DWL is one percent of travel costs.
68

Unreliability
As noted in the main text, we make two assumptions about unreliability: that it increases
proportionally with the quantity of travel, and that it is valued as much as travel delay.
Incorporating unreliability (u), the average cost curve thus becomes ACu = c + ( f + u) Q.
Our estimates above assume u = 0, so we must first determine the relationship between f
and u. The per km cost of an uncongested trip is c. The cost of an equilibrium peak trip
including only travel delay is 1.2c (based on 20% average travel delay), so in equilibrium
AC = c + f Q = 1.2c. Accounting for unreliability as well, the equilibrium cost of a trip
becomes (1 + 0.2 + 0.08)c = 1.28c (based on 8% average unreliability). Putting this together,
the average cost at equilibrium including unreliability is AC = c + ( f + u) Q = 1.28c, so that
u = 0.4 f .
Next we estimate the downward bias, due to ignoring unreliability, in our regression
estimate of how much of uncongested speed differences are crowded by additional traffic.
eq
eq
Denote by Pu the equilibrium price inclusive of the cost of unreliability, and by Pobs the
price that we observe and use in our regression (our peak mobility index), which excludes
unreliability. Their difference is just the difference between the two analogous average cost
curves at the same equilibrium:
eq

eq

Pu − Po b s = uQeq
This means that the regression that we would like to run is:
eq

Pu = a − b

f +u
b
a−c
=a
+c
,
b+ f +u
b+ f +u
b+ f +u

(c6)

but the regression that we actually run is:
eq

eq

Pobs = Pu − uQeq = a

b+u
f
+c
.
b+ f +u
b+ f +u

In other words, by ignoring unreliablity we obtained a biased estimate
tural parameter

b
b+ f +u .

Our estimate of

b+u
b+ f +u

(c7)
b+u
b+ f +u

of the struc-

= 0.85, combined with u = 0.4 f , implies

that b+ bf +u = 0.79. Similarly, we can obtain ∆ (again assuming unit demand elasticity) by
replacing f with f + u in (c5):
DW L
( f + u )2
Qeq
∆ = eq eq =
= 2.3%.
Q P
2(b + 2( f + u)) Peq

Appendix D. Additional tables
The four panels of table D.1 duplicate the results of table 4 for each type of trip separately.
Table D.2 duplicates table 10 but uses as dependent variable a fixed effect from a trip regression where trips are weighted by how slow they are relative to their speed in absence of traffic
69

Figure C.1: Theoretical framework for valuing faster uncongested mobility

ΔConsumer Surplus from
Faster Uncongested
Mobility

Average Cost (high)
Average Cost (low)

Demand

= Total Travel Distance

Panel a: ∆ Consumer surplus with perfectly elastic supply

Average Cost (high)
ΔConsumer Surplus from
Faster Uncongested
Mobility Crowded out by
Congestion

Average Cost (low)

Demand (Peak)

= Total Travel Distance

Panel b: ∆ Consumer surplus with less elastic supply

Marginal Cost

Dead Weight Loss
From Congestion

Average Cost

Demand

= Total Travel Distance

Panel c: Deadweight loss

70

(λ = 0.2). Table D.3 duplicates the specification of column 6 in table 10 but uses as dependent
variables further alternative mobility indices.

Appendix E. A ring analysis of mobility in Indian cities
Although our main findings of city-level correlations in Section 6 are generally stable across a
wide variety of specifications, they may be subject to bias due to omitted city-level variables.
We now use within-city variation in population, area, and roads to avoid this problem and
gain further insights about variation in mobility.
Specifically, we divide each city in our sample into concentric rings. Among other advantages, nearly all radial trips will pass through the same rings, regardless of route. We apply
the following transformation of equation (2) which uses the location of trips within cities to
estimate a mobility index for each ring within each city:
log Si = αXi0 + ∑ Rrc(i) sharerc(i) (i ) + ei ,

(e1)

r

where sharerc(i) (i ) is the share of trip i which takes places within ring r of city c and Rrc is a
mobility index for ring r of city c. We consider (up to) 5 rings around each city center: 0 to 2
kilometers, 2 to 5, 5 to 10, 10 to 15, and 15 and beyond. We compute each trip’s share in each
ring using information about the origin and destination. For instance, a radial trip that starts
9 kilometers from the center and finishes one kilometer from the center on the same side will
receive a share of 12.5% (=1/8) for the first ring of 0 to 2 kilometers, 37.5% for the second ring,
50% for the third ring and 0% for the fourth and fifth ring. We estimate equation (e1) using as
controls log trip length, time of day and day of week indicators in manner that is consistent
with our baseline index.
In a second step, we can estimate the following regression
0
R̂rc = κr + β c + αXrc
+ ei ,

(e2)

where κr is a ring fixed effect, β c is a city fixed effect, and Xrc is a vector of explanatory
variables at the level of the city-ring. In our dataset, only land area, population, and roads are
available separately by city-ring. Two caveats must be kept in mind. First, we winsorize the
top and bottom 5% of city-ring effects before estimating equation (e2). This is because some
cities barely enter an outer ring and therefore these city-rings have a tiny number of trips.
Second, we also expect some equilibrium effects across rings as, for instance, population in

71

Table D.1: Correlates of log trip speed for specific trip classes
(1)
Panel A. Radial trips
log trip length
log trip length2

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.28a 0.073b 0.074b 0.28a 0.069b 0.069b 0.049

(0.0063) (0.033) (0.033) (0.0063) (0.033)

log distance to center2

(0.059)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.018)

0.16a

0.16a

0.057a 0.057a 0.063a

0.15a

(0.011) (0.011)

log distance to center

(0.033)

0.055a 0.055a
0.15a

(0.049)

-0.11b -0.11b

-0.11b -0.11b -0.13b

(0.042) (0.042)

(0.042)

(0.049)

0.15b

(0.048) (0.048)

(0.042)

(0.076)
(0.061)

Observations
5,102,925
- 4,347,207
2,313,862
R-squared
0.53
0.54 0.54
0.53
0.54
0.54
0.57
Panel B. Circumferential trips
log trip length
0.26a 0.056c 0.056c 0.26a 0.053c 0.053c 0.037
log trip length2

(0.0083) (0.030) (0.030) (0.0082) (0.030)

log distance to center2

(0.010)

(0.018)

0.15b

0.15b

(0.062)

-0.13b -0.13b

-0.13b -0.13b -0.14c
(0.052)

- 1,934,692
0.47
0.45
0.46
0.13a

0.21a

0.13a

0.016a 0.016a

0.13a

(0.012)

0.14a

(0.014)

(0.051) (0.051)

(0.050)

Observations
7,672,821
R-squared
0.38
0.45
Panel D. Amenity trips
log trip length
0.25a 0.17a

0.18a

0.18a

0.036

(0.025)

- 6,539,528
0.45
0.37
0.45
0.17a

0.25a

0.17a

(0.0045) (0.011) (0.011) (0.0045) (0.010)

0.0064c 0.0064c
(0.0034) (0.0034)

0.21a

0.21a

0.18a

(0.050)

0.036

(0.025)

0.13c

(0.077)

0.047

(0.038)

3,495,291
0.45
0.46
0.17a

(0.010)

0.16a

(0.014)

0.0059c 0.0059c 0.0081c
(0.0033) (0.0033) (0.0044)

0.21a

0.21a

(0.036)

0.0052 0.0052

0.0097 0.0097 0.019

0.60
Y
Y
Y
N

(0.019)

(0.036)

0.17a

(0.037) (0.037)
(0.019) (0.019)

0.55
Y
Y
Y
N

1,018,394
0.47
0.51

0.015a 0.015a 0.013a

0.031 0.031

7,706,854

(0.082)

(0.0032) (0.0032) (0.0035)

(0.026) (0.026)

log distance to center2

(0.052)

(0.11)

(0.0031) (0.0031)

0.18a

log distance to center

(0.062)

0.14

(0.060) (0.060)

(0.0032) (0.012) (0.012) (0.0032) (0.012)

log distance to center2

Observations
R-squared
City effect
Day effect
Time effect
Weather

0.15b

(0.051) (0.051)

log distance to center

log trip length2

(0.010)

0.15b

Observations
2,261,556
R-squared
0.45
0.46
Panel C. Gravity trips
log trip length
0.21a 0.13a
log trip length2

(0.058)

0.060a 0.060a 0.066a

(0.010) (0.010)

log distance to center

(0.030)

0.060a 0.059a

(0.018)

(0.052)
(0.027)

- 6,564,229
3,492,392
0.60
0.55
0.60
0.60
0.54
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y weekd. weekd.weekd. Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
only

Notes: OLS regressions with city, day, and time of day (for each 30-minute period) indicators. Log
speed is the dependent variable in all columns. Robust standard errors in parentheses. a, b, c:
significant at 1%, 5%, 10%. 154 cities in columns 1-7 and 107 in column 8. All trip instances in
columns 1-3. Only weekday trip instances in columns 4-6. Only weekday trip instances for which we
have weather information in column 7. Weather in column 3 and 6 consists of indicators for rain (yes,
no, missing), thunderstorms (yes, no, missing), wind speed (13 indicator variables), humidity (12
indicator variables), and temperature (8 indicator variables). These variables are introduced as
continuous indicator variables in column 7. Sample sizes for columns 1 and 4 apply to columns 1–3
and 4–6, respectively.

72

Table D.2: Correlates of city mobility indices, mobility index for which trips are weighted by powered
congestion factor

(1)
log population
log area
log roads

(2)

-0.19a -0.19a
(0.021) (0.021)
0.13a 0.11a
(0.020) (0.022)
0.015a
(0.0057)

log income
log2 income

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.18a
(0.021)
0.11a
(0.022)
0.013b
(0.0060)
0.46a
(0.17)
-0.15a
(0.055)

-0.18a
(0.021)
0.10a
(0.022)
0.016a
(0.0052)
0.48a
(0.18)
-0.15a
(0.055)
0.36a
(0.11)

-0.18a
(0.020)
0.11a
(0.021)
0.011c
(0.0058)
0.42b
(0.18)
-0.14b
(0.055)
0.18a
(0.062)

-0.17a
(0.023)
0.10a
(0.025)
0.014b
(0.0060)
0.50b
(0.21)
-0.16b
(0.062)
0.097b
(0.037)

-0.18a
(0.021)
0.11a
(0.022)
0.014b
(0.0060)
0.46a
(0.18)
-0.15a
(0.055)

-0.17a
(0.021)
0.085a
(0.024)
0.014b
(0.0056)

Network / shape
Pop. growth 90-10

0.020
(0.037)

share w. car

-0.18
(0.19)
0.31a
(0.081)

share w. motorcycle

Observations
R-squared

153
0.51

153
0.52

153
0.56

153
0.58

153
0.58

142
0.59

153
0.56

152
0.58

Notes: OLS regressions with a constant in all columns. The dependent variable is the city fixed effect
estimated in the specification reported in column 5 of table 4 where trips are weighted by how slow
they are relative to their speed in absence of traffic (λ = 0.2). Robust standard errors in parentheses.
a, b, c: significant at 1%, 5%, 10%. See the footnote of table 10 for further details about the explanatory
variables.

nearby rings may affect mobility locally. Given the limited precision of our population data,
detecting such effects may be out of reach here.
We report results in table E.1. The coefficient on population is -0.084 in our baseline
specification, and similar in the rest of the table.49 We note that the population coefficients
estimated in table E.1 are only about half those estimated in table 10. This may be because
our measures of ring population are less precise. We also expect mobility within ring to be
determined by population in neighboring rings.50 Consistent with table 10, table E.1 also
49 It

is only when we do not control for trip characteristics in the first step in column 2, that we estimate a
slightly larger coefficient in absolute value. This is likely because longer trips are faster and predominantly take
place in outer rings where population is less dense.
50 We experimented with specifications that also included population in neighboring rings. Estimated coefficients are generally small and insignificant.

73

Table D.3: Correlates of city mobility indices with alternative mobility indices

Dep. var.
log population
log area
log roads
log income
log2 income

Observations
R-squared

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Effect. sp.Peak hrs. Mean Simp. FEAmenitycent.<5 kmLaspeyresPaasche
-0.15a
-0.18a -0.17a
(0.019) (0.017) (0.029)
0.072a
0.12a
0.21a
(0.020) (0.018) (0.032)
0.014a
0.011b -0.0066
(0.0048) (0.0044) (0.0097)
0.25b
0.27b -0.032
(0.10)
(0.11) (0.23)
-0.073b -0.084b 0.0083
(0.032) (0.034) (0.064)
153
0.56

153
0.60

153
0.28

-0.17a
(0.015)
0.15a
(0.016)
0.012a
(0.0044)
0.20b
(0.094)
-0.054c
(0.029)

-0.17a
(0.017)
0.12a
(0.019)
0.013a
(0.0047)
0.17
(0.12)
-0.049
(0.036)

-0.17a
(0.016)
0.13a
(0.017)
0.013a
(0.0043)
0.19c
(0.10)
-0.048
(0.032)

-0.17a
(0.021)
0.12a
(0.024)
0.027a
(0.0062)
0.25
(0.18)
-0.088c
(0.052)

-0.17a
(0.018)
0.15a
(0.021)
0.011b
(0.0051)
0.15
(0.12)
-0.046
(0.037)

153
0.55

153
0.56

153
0.54

153
0.42

153
0.47

Notes: OLS regressions with a constant in all columns. The dependent variable is the city fixed effect
estimated using effective speed in column 1, only peak hour observations in column 2, a simpler
speed regression in column 4, only amenity trips in column 5, only trips taking place within 5
kilometers from the center in column 6, our benchmark Laspeyres index in column 7, and a
benchmark Paasche index in column 8. The dependent variable in column 3 is the log of a simple
mean speed (length-weighted). Robust standard errors in parentheses. a, b, c: significant at 1%, 5%,
10%. Log population is constructed from the town population from the 2011 census. Log roads is log
kilometers of primary roads within the city-light.

reports small positive coefficients for area. On the other hand, the coefficient on roads is
generally negative, though it is only significantly different from zero when we focus on the
city centers. Although we do not report the details here, this negative coefficient is driven
mainly by the central ring when roads effects are allowed to vary by ring in columns 5 and 6.
Finally, table E.1 also reports that mobility is generally faster in outer rings, which confirms
earlier results from section 4.

74

Table E.1: Correlates of city mobility indices, rings analysis

(1)
Base
log ring population -0.084a
(0.013)
log ring area
0.038b
(0.018)
log roads
-0.010
(0.0095)
ring 2
0.14a
(0.019)
ring 3
0.20a
(0.025)
ring 4
0.19a
(0.031)
ring 5
0.20a
(0.042)
roads per ring
N
Observations
R-squared

467
0.56

(2)
(3)
(4)
No Step 1 < 5 km < 3 km
Control

(5)
Base

(6)
<5m

(7)
Peak

(8)
Peak
<5 km
-0.086a
(0.010)
0.059a
(0.014)
-0.018b
(0.0076)
0.073a
(0.015)
0.079a
(0.020)
0.025
(0.025)
0.018
(0.034)
N
466
0.44

-0.13a
(0.018)
0.039
(0.024)
-0.0017
(0.013)
0.30a
(0.026)
0.44a
(0.033)
0.46a
(0.042)
0.53a
(0.057)
N

-0.086a
(0.010)
0.054a
(0.014)
-0.017b
(0.0076)
0.082a
(0.015)
0.092a
(0.020)
0.038
(0.024)
0.036
(0.034)
N

-0.089a
(0.010)
0.058a
(0.014)
-0.018b
(0.0076)
0.062a
(0.015)
0.058a
(0.020)
0.00043
(0.025)
-0.0067
(0.034)
N

-0.085a
(0.013)
0.028
(0.019)

-0.088a
(0.011)
0.050a
(0.015)

0.10b
(0.043)
0.19a
(0.036)
0.15a
(0.045)
0.15a
(0.055)
Y

0.048
(0.035)
0.078a
(0.029)
-0.014
(0.036)
0.048
(0.044)
Y

-0.090a
(0.013)
0.048a
(0.018)
-0.011
(0.0097)
0.13a
(0.019)
0.20a
(0.025)
0.19a
(0.031)
0.20a
(0.043)
N

467
0.72

466
0.47

465
0.42

467
0.57

466
0.48

467
0.57

Notes: OLS regressions with a city fixed effect and a ring fixed effect in all columns (145 cities in all
regressions). The dependent variable is the city-ring fixed effect estimated as per equation (E2).
Robust standard errors in parentheses. a, b, c: significant at 1%, 5%, 10%. Column 1 is our baseline
estimation for which city-ring effects are estimated as described in the text. Column 2 considers city
ring effects estimated with out trip controls in the first step. Columns 3 and 4 only consider trips with
a length of less than 5 and 3 kilometers respectively. Columns 5 and 6 estimate separate roads effects
for each ring. Columns 7 and 8 duplicate columns 1 and 3 but only consider peak-hour trips.

75

