                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         IDENTIFYING PRICE INFORMATIVENESS

                                         Eduardo Dávila
                                         Cecilia Parlatore

                                       Working Paper 25210
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25210


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




We would like to thank Ricardo Caballero, Jennifer Carpenter, John Campbell, Ian Dew-Becker,
Darrell Duffie, Emmanuel Farhi, Itay Goldstein, Joel Hasbrouck, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ben
Lester, Stephen Morris, Stefan Nagel, Guillermo Ordoñez, Michael Sockin, David Thesmar, Aleh
Tsyvinski, Kathy Yuan, Wei Xiong, and Toni Whited, as well as seminar participants at SITE,
Michigan Ross, and BYU for helpful comments and discussions. We are especially thankful to
Alexi Savov for extended conversations on the topic of this paper, as well as for sharing code and
data. Luke Min provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Identifying Price Informativeness
Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore
NBER Working Paper No. 25210
November 2018
JEL No. D82,D83,G14

                                          ABSTRACT

We show that outcomes (parameter estimates and R-squareds) of regressions of prices on
fundamentals allow us to recover exact measures of the ability of asset prices to aggregate
dispersed information. Formally, we show how to recover absolute and relative price
informativeness in dynamic environments with rich heterogeneity across investors (regarding
signals, private trading needs, or preferences), minimal distributional assumptions, multiple risky
assets, and allowing for stationary and non-stationary asset payoffs. We implement our
methodology empirically, finding stock-specific measures of price informativeness for U.S.
stocks. We find a right-skewed distribution of price informativeness, measured in the form of the
Kalman gain used by an external observer that conditions its posterior belief on the asset price.
The recovered mean and median are 0.05 and 0.02 respectively. We find that price
informativeness is higher for stocks with higher market capitalization and higher trading volume.


Eduardo Dávila
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
edavila@stern.nyu.edu

Cecilia Parlatore
NYU Stern
Department of Finance
44 W 4th street suite 9-87
New York, NY, 10012
cparlato@stern.nyu.edu
1     Introduction

Financial markets play an important role by aggregating dispersed information about the
fundamentals of the economy. By pooling different sources of information, asset prices act as a public
signal to any external observer, potentially influencing individual decisions. This view, uncontested
within economics and traced back to Hayek (1945), has faced significant challenges when translating its
theoretical findings to more applied settings because measuring the informational content of prices is
not an easy task.1 In particular, one may be interested in understanding whether different markets
aggregate dispersed information to different degrees.                       However, without direct measures of the
informational content of prices (price informativeness), how can one know which markets are better at
aggregating information?
     In this paper, we develop a methodology that allows us to recover exact stock-specific measures
of price informativeness. Formally, we show that the outcomes (parameters and R-squareds) of
linear regressions of prices on fundamentals are sufficient to identify absolute and relative price
informativeness within a large class of linear asset demand models that feature rich heterogeneity
across investors (regarding signals, private trading needs, or preferences) and minimal distributional
assumptions.2
     Throughout the paper, we formally define and study two measures of the informational content
of prices: absolute and relative price informativeness. Absolute price informativeness measures the
amount of information contained in the price for an investor who only learns about an asset’s payoff
from the price. We formally define absolute price informativeness as the precision of the unbiased
signal about the innovation to the fundamental revealed by asset prices. Relative price informativeness
measures the informational content of prices relative to the total amount of uncertainty about the
asset’s payoff. Formally, relative price informativeness corresponds to the ratio between absolute
price informativeness and the precision of the innovation to the fundamental, which measures the
underlying source of uncertainty. This measure captures how much can be learned from the price
relative to the total amount that can be learned.
     The main contribution of this paper is methodological. For illustration, let us describe how
price informativeness can be recovered. In a stationary environment, consider running the following
regression relating the ex-dividend price at which an asset is traded in period t, pt , to the asset payoff
to be realized at the end of period t, θt+1 , and its contemporary payoff, θt ,

                                              p t = β 0 + β 1 θ t + β 2 θ t +1 + ε t .                                 (R0)
    1 Hayek   (1945) highlights the relevance of price informativeness as follows: “The economic problem of society is (...)
rather a problem of how to secure the best use of resources known to any of the members of society, for ends whose relative
importance only these individuals know. Or, to put it briefly, it is a problem of the utilization of knowledge which is not
given to anyone in its totality.”
   2 Given that linear asset demands can be interpreted as an approximation to more general models, one should expect our

results to be valid more broadly in an approximate sense.


                                                                 2
   The equilibrium relation that supports Regression R0 provides the foundation for our procedure
                                                            β22
to identify price informativeness.      We show that       Var[ε t ]
                                                                       exactly corresponds to absolute price
informativeness, that is, to the precision of the unbiased signal about the innovation to the fundamental
contained in asset prices. We structurally map the error term ε t to the noise component of asset prices,
and we show how it can arise from different primitive assumptions (e.g. random heterogeneous priors,
multiple risky assets, unlearnable component of the fundamental, etc.).
   We also show that the difference between the R-squared of Regression R0 and the R-squared
of an identical regression that does not include θt+1 can be directly mapped to relative price
informativeness. Formally, we show that a corrected incremental R-squared between both regressions
exactly determines relative price informativeness. Under Gaussian primitives, we also show that
the same difference directly determines the Kalman gain that an external observer attributes to
the innovation to the fundamental when forming a posterior about the future payoff of the asset.
Importantly, our results are not only qualitative, but they provide exact measures of informativeness.
For instance, finding a Kalman gain of K = 0.2 implies that an external observer weighs the information
contained in the price by 20% relative to his prior.
   It is worth highlighting that our identification procedure does not make parametric assumptions
regarding the underlying source of noise and does not require that investors form beliefs using
Bayesian updating. We also discuss in detail how our results relate to alternative measures that relate
to price informativeness, like the posterior variance of the fundamental or forecasting price efficiency
measures.
   Although we derive our identification results without the need to fully specify the model
primitives, we explicitly develop a fully microfounded dynamic model of trading in Section 4 of
the paper. In the context of this model, we provide a new identification result that allows us to
recover, using aggregate information, the precision of investors’ private signals and the volatility of
the aggregate component of investors trading needs (noise). To our knowledge, this result provides
the first methodology that transparently recovers the precision of investors’ signals precision in REE
models. It also provides a direct methodology to capture the amount of noise trading in REE models.
   We systematically extend our methodology to more general environments. In particular, we show
how to adapt our methodology to allow for unit-roots in the process followed by the fundamental.
When allowing for non-stationary payoffs, we show how to implement our results in difference form.
We also extend our results to include multiple risky assets, and payoffs with learnable and unlearnable
components. In all scenarios, our methodology remains valid to answer the question of how much an
external observer can learn from the price. These extensions highlight that the exact interpretation of
the noise term depends on the exact assumptions of the model. Throughout the paper, we discuss at
length the rationale behind our measures of informativeness, and how the exercise of identifying price
informativeness is distinct from exploring predictability relations.
   After describing the methodology, we proceed to implement our results empirically, recovering


                                                       3
actual measures of price informativeness. Exploiting our theoretical framework, we run regressions
of prices on fundamentals at the stock level to recover exact measures of absolute and relative price
informativeness. Crucially, by exploiting time series variation for a given stock, we are able to recover
exact measures of price informativeness that are asset-specific. Our theoretical results allow us to
provide an exact structural interpretation of our estimates and their magnitudes.
   To implement our identification results empirically, we use stock market values and quarterly
earnings as a measure of fundamentals. Using data from 1963 to 2017, compute exact measures of
price informativeness for each individual stock in our sample using our identification results. Our
empirical implementation generates distributions of absolute price informativeness, relative price
informativeness, and Kalman gains across stocks. We find a right skewed distribution of Kalman gains,
with a mean and median Kalman gain of 0.05 and 0.02. These numbers imply that, for half of the stocks
in the sample, the information contained in the price would weight less than 2% in the posterior of a
Bayesian investor. The magnitudes of these estimates suggest that prices contain substantially more
noise than information.
   The distribution of stock-specific estimates exhibits substantial cross-sectional dispersion. This
heterogeneity in price informativeness at the stock level is ubiquitous across stock characteristics such
as the exchange in which they are traded, their market capitalization, the volume traded and their
corresponding industry. We find that price informativeness is higher for stocks traded in the NYSE,
with higher market capitalization, and traded more frequently.

Related Literature Our theoretical framework builds on the literature that studies the role played
by financial markets in aggregating dispersed information, following Grossman and Stiglitz (1980),
Hellwig (1980), and Diamond and Verrecchia (1981), De Long et al. (1990), among others. Vives (2008)
and Veldkamp (2009) provide thorough reviews of this well-developed and growing body of work.
   While the role of financial markets aggregating information has been the subject of a substantial
theoretical literature, the development of empirical measures of price informativeness is more recent.
The work of Bai, Philippon and Savov (2015) is perhaps the closest. Leaving aside that we consider
a substantially richer framework than theirs, there are three significant differences between their
approach and ours. First, we focus on the ability of financial markets to aggregate information
while their focus is on the allocation of capital. As we show in the paper, the measure they use
to make inferences about price informativeness (forecasting price efficiency, VFPE ) does not allow to
separately identify the role of financial markets aggregating dispersed information from the volatility
of the fundamental. While their measure VFPE is relevant to infer whether the allocation of capital
in financial markets has improved or worsened, our results show that it is not the right measure to
understand whether financial markets have become better at aggregating information. Forecasting
price efficiency, VFPE , can be high due to a low volatility of the fundamental or due to a high level
of price informativeness. Second, since their focus is on the forecasting power of prices (about future
fundamentals), they focus on a regressions of fundamentals on asset prices. Instead, we focus on


                                                   4
the relation between an endogenous variable (price) and exogenous variables (fundamentals), which
avoids potential biases in the estimation. Finally, they estimate VFPE by running cross-sectional
regressions, which implicitly assumes that the fundamental and noise are distributed identically across
all of the stocks in their sample. Instead, we exploit time series variation to recover asset specific
measures of informativeness.
    Following the approach in Bai, Philippon and Savov (2015), Farboodi, Matray and Veldkamp (2017)
also use forecasting price efficiency to infer changes in price informativeness. They find that while
average price informativeness increased in the S&P500, it decreased for the whole sample. They argue
that this can be due to a composition effect in the S&P500 as price informativeness increased for large
firms and decreased for small ones. Using this same framework, Kacperczyk, Sundaresan and Wang
(2018) find that forecasting price efficiency increases with ownership by foreign investors.
    There exists earlier work that proposes ad-hoc variables to study the informational content of
prices. Influenced by the predictions of the CAPM/APT frameworks and following Roll (1988), Morck,
Yeung and Yu (2000) study regressions of returns on a single or multiple factors and informally argue
that the R2 of such regressions can be used to capture whether asset prices are informative/predictive
about firm-specific fundamentals. This measure, sometimes referred to as price nonsynchronicity, has
been used in several empirical studies that link price informativeness to capital allocation. Wurgler
(2000) finds that countries with higher price nonsynchronicity display a better allocation of capital.
Durnev, Morck and Yeung (2004) document a positive correlation between price nonsynchronicity
and corporate investment. Chen, Goldstein and Jiang (2006) show a positive relation between the
sensitivity of corporate investment to price and two measures of the information contained in prices,
price nonsynchronicity and the probability of informed trading (PIN), and conclude that managers
learn from the price when making corporate investment decisions.3
    More recently, Weller (2018) uses a price jump ratio to measure how much information enters prices
relatively to how much is potentially acquirable at the stock level. Using this measure, he finds that
algorithmic trading decreases the amount of information that is incorporated in prices.
    While these results uncover interesting empirical relations, the measures used by this body of work
do not have a structural interpretation. Hou, Peng and Xiong (2013) forcefully highlight the importance
of this structural link in the context of the return R2 . They question the link between return R2 and
price informativeness theoretically, in rational and behavioral settings, and empirically. Moreover,
even if the existing measures may correlate with price informativeness, it is impossible to translate
the magnitude of the changes in these variables into changes in the informational content of prices
without a structural interpretation. By showing how to recover exact measures of stock specific price
informativeness, we can reach quantitative conclusions about price informativeness.
    As in any structural model, the measure of informativeness that we recover is linked to our
  3 The   PIN, developed in Easley, O’Hara and Paperman (1998), seeks to measures the probability of an informed trade in a
model with noise and informed traders.



                                                             5
assumptions on the behavior of investors and the market structure.                                  While our framework is
general along several dimensions, there is scope to think about how to identify price informativeness
in alternative models of trading that depart from our linearity assumption.                                   In particular, our
analysis purposefully abstracts from feedback between prices and fundamentals, summarized in Bond,
Edmans and Goldstein (2012), and tested in and Chen, Goldstein and Jiang (2006), which introduces
fundamental non-linearities that can only be considered using full-information methods.

Outline Section 2 describes the assumptions of our baseline model, formally introduces the
definitions of absolute and relative price informativeness, and presents our main results regarding how
to recover price informativeness from linear regressions. Section 3 introduces a fully microfounded
model that maps to the assumptions on endogenous objects made in Section 2 and that allows us to
fully recover model primitives. Section 4 extends our methodology to more general environments,
including non-stationary payoffs, multiple risky assets, and payoffs with learnable and unlearnable
components. Section 5 empirically implements the methodology introduced in the paper, while Section
6 concludes. All proofs and derivations are in the Appendix.


2      Identifying Price Informativeness

In this section, we introduce the main identification results in the context of a dynamic model with
a single risky asset whose payoff process is stationary.                        We extend the results to more general
environments in Section 4.


2.1     Model

Time is discrete, with periods denoted by t = 0, 1, 2, . . . , ∞. There is a continuum of investors, indexed
by i ∈ I, who trade a risky asset in fixed supply each period at a price pt . The payoff of the risky asset
in period t + 1, θt+1 , is given by the following stationary AR(1) process

                                                      θt+1 = µθ + ρθt + ηt ,

where µθ is a scalar, |ρ| < 1, and where the innovations to the payoff, ηt , have mean zero, finite
variance, and are independently distributed. Investors trade in period t with imperfect information
about the innovation to the payoff, ηt , which is realized at the end of the period. When trading in
period t, the contemporaneous payoff θt has already been realized and is common knowledge to all
investors. We often refer to the asset payoff θt+1 as the fundamental.
      Each period t, an investor i observes a private signal sit of the innovation to the payoff ηt .4 Investors
have an additional motive for trading the risky asset that is orthogonal to the asset payoff. We denote
    4 Assuming   that investors observe private signals about the payoff, θt+1 , or its innovation, ηt , is formally equivalent, since
θt is known to investors when trading in period t.



                                                                  6
by nit investor i’s additional trading motive in period t. These additional trading motives are private
information of each investor and are potentially random in the aggregate.
    We derive the main results of the paper under two assumptions. The first assumption imposes an
additive informational structure and guarantees the existence of second moments, while the second
assumption imposes a linear structure for investors’ equilibrium asset demands. In general, linear
demands can be interpreted as a first-order approximation to other forms of asset demands, so one
may expect our results to approximately hold in a larger class of models. Both assumptions facilitate
the aggregation of individual demands in order to yield a linear equilibrium pricing function.

Assumption 1. (Additive noise) Each period t, every investor i receives an unbiased private signal sit about
the innovation to the payoff, ηt , of the form
                                                       sit = ηt + εist ,                                     (1)

where εist , ∀i ∈ I, ∀t , are random variables with mean zero and finite variances, whose realizations are
independent across investors and over time. Each period t, every investor i has a private trading need nit , of
the form
                                                      nit = nt + εint ,                                      (2)

where nt is a random variable with finite mean, denoted by µn , and finite variance, and where εint , ∀i ∈ I, ∀t
, are random variables with mean zero and finite variances, whose realizations are independent across investors
and over time.

    Assumption 1 imposes restrictions on the noise structure in the signals about the innovation to the
fundamental ηt and on all other sources of investors’ private trading needs by making them additive
and independent across investors. This assumption does not restrict the distribution of any random
variable beyond the existence of finite first and second moments. Our second assumption describes
the structure of the investors’ net demands for the risky asset ∆qit .

Assumption 2. (Linear asset demands) Investors’ net asset demands satisfy

                                       ∆qit = αis sit + αiθ θt + αin nit − αip pt + ψi ,

where αis , αiθ , αin , αip , and ψi are individual demand coefficients, determined in equilibrium.

    Assumption 2 imposes a linear structure on the individual investors’ net asset demand for the
risky asset. More specifically, that an individual investor’s net demand is linear in his signal about the
fundamental and his private trading needs, as well as in the asset price pt and the current realization
of the fundamental θt . It also allows for an individual specific invariant component ψi . In Section 3, we
provide a fully specified model that is consistent with Assumptions 1 and 2 and briefly describe other
models that are consistent with both assumptions.




                                                              7
                                                                                                         ´
    Given our assumptions, market clearing for the risky asset implies that                                  ∆qit di = 0, ∀t. Market
clearing, exploiting a Law of Large Numbers, yields an equilibrium pricing equation of the form

                                                      αs     αθ    αn    ψ
                                              pt =       ηt + θ t + n t + ,                                                      (3)
                                                      αp     αp    αp    αp
                                                                                                 ´
where we denote the cross sectional averages of individual demand coefficients by αs = I αis di,
     ´              ´              ´                 ´
α p = I αip di, αθ = I αiθ di, αn = I αin di, and ψ = I ψi di. The linearity of net demands implies that
the equilibrium asset price is also linear in the future realization of the fundamental θt+1 , the current
fundamental θt , and the common component of investors’ private trading needs nt . An interpretation
of Equation (3) as a linear regression provides the foundation for our procedure to identify price
informativeness.
    Although the equilibrium price pt is the main endogenous observable variable generated by the
model, the relevant variable from the perspective of information aggregation is p̂t , defined by

                                                      αp     αθ   αn   ψ
                                              p̂t ≡      pt − θt − µn − ,                                                        (4)
                                                      αs     αs   αs   αs
which corresponds to the unbiased signal of the innovation ηt contained in the price pt . Note that p̂t
corresponds to p̂t = ηt +         αn
                                  αs   (nt − µn ) , implying that E [ p̂t |θt+1 , θt ] = ηt . Because the contemporary
realization of the fundamental θt is observed at date t, information about the innovation ηt translates
one-for-one to information about the asset payoff. Using the definition of p̂t , we can formally define
the two measures of price informativeness that we show how to recover in this paper as follows.5

Definition 1. (Absolute price informativeness) We define absolute price informativeness as the precision
of the unbiased signal about the innovation to the fundamental payoff θt+1 contained in the asset price pt . We
denote absolute price informativeness by τp̂ , which formally corresponds to
                                                                                            2
                                                                           −1           αs
                                          τp̂ ≡ (Var [ p̂t |θt+1 , θt ])        =                 τn ,                           (5)
                                                                                        αn

where τn ≡ Var [nt ]−1 .

    Absolute price informativeness increases when investors trade more aggressively on their private
signals (high αs ), when they trade less aggressively on their private trading motives (low αn ), and
when the aggregate component of trading motives is less volatile (has a high precision τn ). Absolute
price informativeness reveals, for given realizations of the future and current fundamentals θt+1 and
θt , the possible dispersion of observed equilibrium prices. In a statistical sense, it indicates whether the
signal contained in the price is close to the fundamental. Consequently, absolute price informativeness
   5 The   measures of price informativeness that we study in this paper are the relevant measures for an external observer
who learns about the fundamental from the price. See Davila and Parlatore (2018) for a discussion on how to link external
price informativeness to internal price informativeness, which may be the relevant object of interest for investors within the
model in some environments. That paper systematically studies the subtle relation between the volatility of the equilibrium
price pt and the precision of the unbiased signal about the fundamental innovation p̂t .


                                                                  8
captures how much information about the fundamental can be gained by an uninformed external
observer by exclusively observing the price. When absolute price informativeness is high, an external
observer receives a very precise signal about the fundamental by observing the asset price pt . On the
contrary, when price informativeness is low, an external observer learns little about the fundamental
by observing the asset price pt .

Definition 2. (Relative price informativeness) We define relative price informativeness as the ratio between
absolute price informativeness and the precision of the innovation to the fundamental. We denote relative price
informativeness by τp̂R , which formally corresponds to
                                                              τp̂
                                                    τp̂R ≡        ,                                         (6)
                                                              τη

where τη ≡ Var [ηt ]−1 .
   Relative price informativeness simply corrects absolute price informativeness for the precision of
the innovation to the fundamental. This measure expresses how much can be learned by observing the
price relative to the volatility of the fundamental. As we will show below, there is a tight connection
between relative price informativeness and the Kalman gain of an external observer in Gaussian
models with Bayesian updating.
   We would like to conclude the description of the model environment with the following remarks.

Remark 1. Precision of price as signal of fundamentals versus posterior variance. The variance of the signal
about the innovation to the fundamental has the advantage that it can be derived without the need to
make assumptions about how an external observer updates its information about the fundamental. In
our setup, it is possible to calculate Var [ p̂t |θt+1 , θt ] without making distributional assumptions beyond
the existence of second moments. However, to calculate the posterior variance Var [θt+1 | p̂t , θt ], it is
necessary to make assumptions regarding the distribution of priors and signals. For this reason, τp̂ as
defined in Eq. (5) is a more appealing measure of informativeness, since it can be derived (and, as we
show in this paper, recovered from observables) without specifying the nature of updating/filtering
used by investors. We further discuss the adequacy of the measures just defined and other measures
of informativeness after introducing our main results in Section 3.

Remark 2. Cross-sectional Heterogeneity. Our framework allows for a rich cross-sectional heterogeneity
among investors. In particular, it accommodates heterogeneity in investors’ risk aversion, in the
precision of their information, and in the distribution of their idiosyncratic trading motives. For
instance, our assumptions can accommodate models with informed and uninformed traders, which
can be mapped to environments in which one set of agents does not observe any private signal, and
those with classic noise traders, which can be mapped to environments in which one set of agents
trades fixed amounts regardless of the price or other features of the environment.

Remark 3. Distributional Assumptions. It’s worth highlighting that Assumption 1 does not require
normality of signals or fundamentals, so our main results in Propositions 1 and 2 do not rely

                                                          9
on distributional assumptions beyond the existence of well-defined first and second moments.
However, at times, we discuss how our results can be more easily interpreted if we assume that
signals and fundamentals have a Gaussian structure – we explicitly state in the text for which
results/interpretations normality is needed.
Remark 4. Multiple Assets/General Shock Structure. For clarity, we introduce our results in the context
of a single asset model. We show in Section 4.2 how to reinterpret our results when investors can
trade many risky assets with payoff processes that are potentially correlated across assets and with the
aggregate trading needs. The more general framework studied in Section 4.2 shows how to reinterpret
our results when there are multiple risky assets. In Section 4.1, we extend the methodology to non-
stationary processes. We also show in Sections 4.3 how to interpret our results when the payoff features
a learnable and an unlearnable component.


2.2     Identification Results

Exploiting Assumptions 1 and 2, as well as market clearing, we now proceed to derive Propositions 1
and 2, which provide the main identification results of the paper. We can rewrite the equilibrium price
introduced in Equation (3) in terms of the future and contemporary asset payoffs as follows:
                                             
                                    αθ     αs        αs      αn      ψ
                             pt =       − ρ θ t + θ t +1 + n t + .                                                 (7)
                                    αp     αp        αp      αp      αp
      This reformulation of the equilibrium pricing equation allows us to identify price informativeness
from measures of prices and fundamentals.                      We sequentially show how to use the outcomes
(coefficients and R-squareds) of a regression of prices on fundamentals to exactly recover measures
of absolute and relative price informativeness.

Proposition 1. (Identifying absolute price informativeness) Assume that the additive noise assumption
and the linear asset demands assumption are satisfied. Let β 0 , β 1 , and β 2 denote the coefficients of the following
regression of prices on fundamentals,

                                             p t = β 0 + β 1 θ t + β 2 θ t +1 + ε t ,                             (R1)

where pt denotes the ex-dividend price at the beginning of period t, θt+1 denotes the measure of fundamentals
realized over period t, and where we denote the variance of the error by σε2 = Var [ε t ] . Then, absolute price
informativeness, τp̂ , can be recovered by
                                                         β22
                                                          τp̂ =
                                                             .                                        (8)
                                                         σε2
      The proof of Proposition 1 relies on finding the right combination of parameters in our econometric
specification defined in Regression R1, that maps into the definition of absolute price informativeness,
τp̂ . By comparing Equation (7) with Regression R1, it is easy to verify that
                                           2
                                            αs         2
                                  β22       αp           αs
                                    2
                                      =  2        =          τn = τp̂ ,
                                  σε     αn      −1      αn
                                         αp    τn


                                                               10
which proves our statement.                             Intuitively, a strong co-movement between the price pt and the
fundamental θt+1 (high β 2 ) and a high explanatory power of the regression (low σε2 ) indicates that
prices are more informative. Since the error in Regression R1 is orthogonal to the regressors, OLS
provides consistent estimates of β 2 and σε2 , and consequently of τp̂ .6
        It may seem that Proposition 1 allows us to recover relative price informativeness by computing
and dividing by the precision of the innovation to the fundamental τη . However, this procedure would
require to directly estimate the process for θt+1 , which would require parametric assumptions on the
process. Instead, in Proposition 2, we show how to directly recover relative price informativeness,
exclusively as a function R-squareds of regressions of prices on fundamentals.

Proposition 2. (Identifying relative price informativeness) Assume that the additive noise and the linear
                                                                                            Var[ε t ]
asset demands assumptions are satisfied. Let R2|θ                                    ≡ 1−   Var[ pt ]
                                                                                                        be the R-squared of Regression R1. Let R2|θt ,
                                                                           t+1 ,θt

ζ 0 , and ζ 1 respectively denote the R-squared and the coefficients of the following regression of prices on lagged
fundamentals
                                                                                                 ζ
                                                                     pt = ζ 0 + ζ 1 θt + ε t .                                                   (R2)

Then, relative price informativeness τp̂R can be recovered by

                                                                      τp̂   R2|θ ,θt − R2|θt
                                                             τp̂R   =     =     t +1
                                                                                             .
                                                                      τη     1 − R2|θ ,θt
                                                                                               t +1


        Note that the recovered value of relative price informativeness τp̂R has to be non-negative, since
R2|θ
       t+1 ,θt
                   ≥ R2|θt and R2|θt+1 ,θt ∈ [0, 1]. Intuitively, τp̂R is increasing on R2|θt+1 ,θt for two reasons: a higher
R2|θ    reflects a lower residual uncertainty after observing the price and accounting for the lagged
       t+1 ,θt             
fundamental ( 1 − R2|θ ,θt is lower) and a larger reduction in uncertainty after observing the price
                       t +1
                                                                        
relative to only accounting for the lagged fundamental ( R2|θ ,θt − R2|θt is higher). By directly relying
                                                                                                      t +1

on Proposition 2 there is no need to directly estimate τη or the AR coefficient ρ.
        It may be helpful to relate relative price informativeness to the Kalman gain used by an outside
observer. In particular, if we further assume that all primitive random variables are Gaussian, a non-
linear transformation of relative price informativeness maps to the Kalman gain of an external Bayesian
observer, as expressed in the following corollary to Proposition 2.7
   6 Formally,             when β̃ 2 and σ̃ε2 denote consistent estimates of β 2 and σε2 in Regression R1, τp̂ can be consistently estimated as
          β̃22
τ̃p̂ =    σ̃ε2
               ,   since
                                                                                       2
                                                                           !             αs        2
                                                                   β̃22        β22      αp        αs
                                           plim τ̃p̂ = plim                    = 2 =  2       =      τn = τp̂ .
                                                                    σ̃ε2        σε    αn     −1    αn
                                                                                      αp    τn
  Throughout the paper we distinguish between economic identification, understood as the ability to recover model
parameters or other endogenous objects of interest from observable variables, and consistent estimation. The focus of
this paper is on identification, although at times with discuss the consistency properties of standard estimators when
implementing the results of our model.
  7 The Kalman gain corresponds to the relative weight given to the price as a signal about the fundamental. Formally, the




                                                                                     11
                                                             2            2
                                                            R|θt ,θt−1
                                                                       − R|θ t−1




                                               0          2
                                                         R|θ                  2
                                                                             R|θ                 1
                                                             t−1                 t ,θt−1

                                                                               2
                                                                          1 − R|θt−1



                                              Figure 1: Kalman gain interpretation


Corollary. (Kalman gain) Under a Gaussian information structure, the Kalman gain for an external Bayesian
observer, denoted by K, can be recovered as follows

                                                        τp̂      τp̂R     R2|θ ,θt − R2|θt
                                                                              t +1
                                            K≡               =          =                  .
                                                    τp̂ + τη   1 + τp̂R       1 − R2|θt

    Note that Kalman gains must take values between 0 and 1. This feature makes them appealing from
the perspective of interpreting the results. When R2|θ                              → 1, the posterior of an external observer fully
                                                                          t+1 ,θt

disregards the prior information, putting all the weight on the price as a signal of the innovation. On
the contrary, when R2|θ                → R2|θt , an external observer does not update his prior at all after observing
                             t+1 ,θt

the price. In the special case in which the payoff process is i.i.d., so the lagged fundamental is irrelevant
to predict future fundamentals, R2|θt → 0, and the R-squared of a regression of prices on fundamentals
exactly maps to the Kalman gain of an external observer.
    Figure 1 illustrates how to graphically interpret the recovered Kalman gain.                                    Intuitively, the
denominator 1 −      R2|θt   can be interpreted as the share of uncertainty to be learned after accounting for
the contemporary fundamental. The numerator can be interpreted as the share of information learned
by conditioning on the price relative to the contemporary fundamental. The Kalman gain corresponds
to the fraction of an external observer’s precision about the fundamental that is conveyed by observing
the price. For instance, a Kalman gain of 0.4 implies that 40% of investors’ ex-post precision about the
innovation to the fundamental comes from conditioning on the price.
    Together, Propositions 1 and 2 show that the outcomes of regressions of prices on fundamentals
are sufficient to directly recover exact measure of absolute and relative price informativeness in
environments with rich heterogeneity across investors (regarding signals, private trading needs, or
preferences) and minimal distributional assumptions.
    In the remainder of this section, we would like to make two remarks concerning our main results.

Remark 5. (Alternative measures of informativeness) Although we have advocated for the precision of
the unbiased signal about the fundamental as an appropriate measure to assess the role of prices
aggregating information, one can consider other measures. Two alternative measures are i) the posterior
posterior distribution of an external observer who makes use of the price as a signal about the innovation to the fundamental
is given by
                                                                       −1                         τp̂
                                        ηt | pt ∼ N K · p̂t , τp̂ + τη        ,     where   K=            ,
                                                                                                 τp̂ + τη
and p̂t corresponds to Equation (4).


                                                                        12
variance of the fundamental given the price, that is, VP ≡ Var [θt+1 |θt , pt ], and ii) forecasting price
efficiency (FPE), which is given by VFPE ≡ Var [E [θt+1 |θt , pt ]].8 Under Gaussian uncertainty and
Bayesian updating, both measures can be expressed as

                                             −1          1    1                                        τp̂R     1
                          VP = τη + τp̂            =        R
                                                                           and         VFPE =                       .                                   (9)
                                                       1 + τp̂ τη                                     1 + τp̂R   τη

    From Equation (9), it is evident that both measures face the same challenge: They confound the
effect of uncertainty about the fundamental with price informativeness. For instance, VFPE , which is
the measure of informativeness used by Bai, Philippon and Savov (2015) and subsequent work, can be
be high because the fundamental is easy to predict (high τη ) or because the price is a very precise signal
of the fundamental (high τp̂R ). The same ambiguous inference applies to VP , suggesting that neither of
these measures is adequate to recover price informativeness.

Remark 6. (Predictability versus informativeness/Reverse regression) It’s worth highlighting that our goal
is not to predict future fundamentals from current prices. Instead, our goal is to understand how
good are financial markets at aggregating information. For this reason, it is natural to consider
regressions of prices (endogenous variable) on future fundamentals (exogenous), even though this
entails considering the regression of a variable observable in period t on a explanatory variable realized
in the future. Even if one is not interested in predictability, one may wonder why not run regressions
of fundamentals on prices, since this type of regression can be use for predictive purposes. This would
imply reinterpreting Regression R1 as follows

                                                θt+1 = γ0 + γ1 θt + γ2 pt + νt ,                                                                      (R3)

                      ψ                                αp
where γ0 = − αs , γ1 =            αθ
                                  αs   − ρ, γ2 =       αs ,   and νt = − ααns nt . The main pitfall of this regression is
that OLS estimates of the coefficients and the residual variance will be biased, since Cov ( pt , νt ) =

αs α p Var ( nt )   6= 0.9 For this reason, given the question addressed in this paper and the exclusion
αn αn

restrictions imposed by our model, it is more natural to consider regressions similar to R1.

Remark 7. (Irrelevance of Bayesian updating) Finally, it’s worth noting that the measures of absolute and
relative price informativeness do not require that investors update their beliefs by Bayesian updating.
   8 Note that the posterior variance of the fundamental and forecasting price efficiency are two sides of the same coin.                            While
the former measures the residual uncertainty about the fundamental after observing the price, the latter measures how much
uncertainty about the fundamental is dissipated by observing the realization of the price. Both measures are linked through
the Law of Total Variance, as follows
                                                                                                       

                                  Var [θt+1 |θt ] = Var [E [θt+1 |θt , pt ]] +E Var [θt+1 |θt , pt ] .
                                                                                                    
                                                    |        {z           }       |     {z         }
                                                               VFPE                       VP

  In Bai, Philippon and Savov (2015) ρ = 0 and, hence, forecasting price efficiency is defined as VFPE ≡ Var [E [θt+1 | pt ]].
                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                              α
                                                                                                                                       αs
                                                                                                                                          Var(θt )
   9 When   ρ = 0, the bias of the OLS estimate of γ1 can be easily calculated: γ̃1 =       κ αps ,   where κ =             2
                                                                                                                                       αp
                                                                                                                                            2           .
                                                                                                                        αs
                                                                                                                        αp        Var(θt )+ ααnp Var(nt )




                                                                      13
This is an important consideration, since it allows for rich patterns of belief formation. See Barberis
(2018) and Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018) for recent accounts of the importance of non-fully rational
expectation formation. That said, any results presented in the form of Kalman gains rely on the
assumption that the external observer faces Gaussian uncertainty and uses Bayesian updating.


3     Fully Specified Environment

In our analysis so far, we have remained agnostic about the source of the noise that is impounded in
the price and the way in which investors learn from the price. In this section, we study a particular
dynamic learning model with overlapping generations that endogenously satisfies Assumptions 1 and
2. Our goal in describing this particular model is two-fold. First, it provides a tractable framework that
maps to the main assumptions on equilibrium objects made in Section 2. Second, it allows us to provide
a new identification result. Given the new set of assumptions, we are able to exactly recover, using
aggregate information, the precision of investors’ private signals and the volatility of the aggregate
component of investors trading needs (noise).


3.1    Environment

Time is discrete, with periods denoted by t = 0, 1, 2, . . . , ∞. Each period t, there is a continuum of
investors, indexed by i ∈ I. Each generation lives two periods and has exponential utility over their
last period wealth. An investor born at time t has preferences given by

                                          U (wt+1 ) = −e−γwt+1 ,

where γ is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion and wt+1 is the investor’s wealth in his final period.
There are two long-term assets in the economy: A risk-free asset in perfectly elastic supply, with return
R > 1, and a risky asset in fixed supply Q. The payoff of the risky asset each period t is given by

                                          θt+1 = µθ + ρθt + ηt ,

where µθ is a scalar, |ρ| < 1, and θ0 = 0. The dividend θt is realized and becomes common knowledge
at the end of period t − 1. The innovation in the dividend, ηt , and, hence, θt+1 are realized and observed
at the end on period t. The innovations in the dividend are independently distributed over time.
      We assume that investors’ private trading needs arise from random heterogeneous priors. This
is a particularly tractable formulation that sidesteps many of the issues associated with classic noise
trading and that prevents full revelation of information – see Davila and Parlatore (2017) for a thorough
analysis of this formulation. Formally, each investor i in generation t has a prior over the innovation at
time t given by
                                                             
                                           ηt ∼i N η it , τη−1 ,



                                                    14
where
                                                                                   
                                                                        iid
                                      η it = nt + εiηt    with     εiηt ∼ N 0, τη−1

and nt ∼ N µn , τn−1 can be interpreted as the aggregate sentiment in the economy, where nt ⊥ εiηt for
                    

all t and all i. The aggregate sentiment nt is not observed and acts as a source of aggregate noise in the
economy, preventing the price from being fully revealing.
      Each investor i in generation t receives a signal about the innovation in the asset payoff ηt given by
                                                                        
                                   sit = ηt + εist with εist ∼ N 0, τs−1

and ε it ⊥ ε jt for all i ⊥ j, and ηt ⊥ ε it for all t and all i.
      We focus on stationary equilibria in which demand functions are linear in the price and information
set of the investors.

Definition. (Equilibrium) A stationary rational expectations equilibrium in linear strategies is a set
of linear demand functions qit for each investor i in generation t and a price function pt such that: a)
qit maximizes investor i’s expected utility given his information set for every possible price and b) the
                                                                                            ´
price function pt is such that the market for the risky asset clears each period t, that is, qit di = 0.
      There always exists a unique stationary rational expectations equilibrium in linear strategies. In the
Appendix, we characterize the equilibrium demand coefficients which are the basis to our procedure
to identify the parameters of the model.


3.2     Equilibrium Characterization and Identification Result

As we show in the Appendix, the asset demand submitted by investor i born in period t is given by
the solution to the following problem
                         h                      i            γ     h                i  2
                max E θt+1 + R−1 pt+1 |Iti − pt qit − Var θt+1 + R−1 pt+1 |Itt qit ,
                 qit                                           2
            n                   o
where Iti = θt , sit , η it , pt is the information set of an investor i in period t.
      The optimality condition for an investor i in period t satisfies

                                          E θt+1 + R−1 pt+1 |Iti − pt
                                                                 
                                      i
                                     qt =                              .
                                           γVar θt+1 + R−1 pt+1 |Iti
                                                  

In a stationary equilibrium in linear strategies, the equilibrium demand of investor i can be expressed
as
                                       ∆qit = αiθ θt + αis sit + αiη η it − αip pt + ψi ,               (10)

where αiθ , αin , αip , and ψi are individual equilibrium demand coefficients, whose expressions are derived
in the Appendix. Market clearing and the Strong Law of Large Numbers allows us to express the
equilibrium price in period t as
                                                  αθ      αs   αη    ψ
                                           pt =      θ t + ηt + n t + ,
                                                  αp      αp   αp    αp

                                                              15
and the unbiased signal of the innovation to the fundamental contained in the price can be defined as
                                    
      α        α                  ψ
p̂t = αps pt − αηp µn − ααθp θt − α p , so

                                                         αη
                                                p̂t = ηt +   (nt − µn ) ,
                                                          αs
                                                       
as in Section 2. Note that p̂t |θt+1 , θt ∼ N ηt , τp̂−1 , with absolute price informativeness given by

                                                                                     2
                                                                    −1           αs
                                     τp̂ = (Var [ p̂|θt+1 , θt ])        =                 τn .
                                                                                 αη

Lemma 1. (Assumptions 1 and 2 satisfied) The set of assumptions considered in Section 2 are such that
Assumptions 1 and 2 are endogenously satisfied. Therefore, the model described in this section is a special case of
the more general framework studied in Section 2.

    We are ready to introduce the new identification result that allows to recover several primitives of
the model in this environment in the following Proposition.

Proposition 3. (Identifying signal precision and trading needs precision) Consider the environment described
in Section 3 and assume that τsi = τs and τni = τn , ∀i. Let β 0 , β 1 , and β 2 denote the coefficients of Regression
R1, and let ζ 0 and ζ 1 denote the coefficients of Regression R2. The precision of investors’ private signals τs , and
the precision of the aggregate component of investors trading needs (noise), τn , can be recovered as follows:
                                                              !
                                          β2          1
                        τs = τp̂                          −1           (Signal Precision)
                                   1 + R−1 ζ 1 − β 2 τp̂R
                                                            −2
                                          β2              R
                        τn = τp̂                      − τp̂      ,     (Noise)
                                   1 + R −1 ζ 1 − β 2

where τp̂ and τp̂R are respectively recovered as in Propositions 1 and 2 and R corresponds to the risk-free rate.

    Intuitively, in this model, β 2 =      αs
                                           αp    can be interpreted as the share of total ex-post information
(measured in precisions) that is acquired by an investor either privately by observing a private signal,
or publicly, by conditioning on the price. When β 2 is high, it means that investors priors are relatively
unimportant, and that investors mostly trade on private information or acquired public information,
which suggests that τs is likely to be high and that τn is likely to be low. When τp̂ and τp̂R are high too,
this implies that it is likely that investors learn more from the price in relative terms, which suggest
that τs is likely to be low and that τn is likely to be high. A high ζ 1 is associated with finding a low τs
and a high τn , given the other estimates, since it increases the amount of common public information.
    To our knowledge, we provide the first approach that enables to directly recover measures of noise
trading in Rational Expectations models. However, it’s worth highlighting that the identification result
in Proposition 3 holds for a much more restrictive set of assumptions than the results in Propositions 1
and 2. In this section, we are taking a particular stance regarding the form of noise trading and we are
restricting the information structure to be homogeneous across investors.

                                                             16
4       Extensions

For expositional purposes, we have developed our approach in the context of the single asset model
with a stationary payoff process. However, it’s worth understanding how to extend our methodology
to more general environments. In this section, we extend our results to the case with non-stationary
payoffs, multiple risky assets, and payoffs with learnable and unlearnable components.


4.1         Non-stationary Payoff

It is well known, see e.g., Campbell (2017) for a recent discussion of the literature, that assuming that
measures of asset payoffs (dividends, earnings, etc) are non-stationary is often perceived as a better
assumption. We show how to adapt our results to an environment in which the asset payoff follows a
non-stationary process. Formally, we assume that the asset payoff follows a random walk with drift

                                                         ∆θt+1 = µθ + ηt ,

which corresponds to our baseline specification setting ρ = 1.10 In this case, Equation (3) remains valid,
but the fact that the asset payoff and prices are non-stationary complicates the estimation.11 However,
taking first differences of the equilibrium pricing equation, we get to the following expression in
differences                                                   
                                                     αθ   αs               αs        αn
                                        ∆pt =           −          ∆θt +      ∆θt+1 + ∆nt ,                                (11)
                                                     αp   αp               αp        αp
in which all variables are stationary. In this case, we can recover absolute price informativeness as
follows.

Proposition 4. (Identifying absolute price informativeness, non-stationary payoff) Assume that the
additive noise and the linear asset demands assumptions are satisfied. Let β 0 , β 1 , and β 2 denote the coefficients
of the following regression of prices on fundamentals,

                                              ∆pt = β 0 + β 1 ∆θt + β 2 ∆θt+1 + ε t ,                                      (R4)

where pt denotes the ex-dividend price at the beginning of period t, θt+1 denotes the measure of fundamentals
realized over period t, and where we denote the variance of the error by σε2 = Var [ε t ] . Then, absolute price
informativeness, τp̂ , can be recovered as follows

                                                                      β22
                                                         τp̂ = 2               .                                           (12)
                                                                    Var [ε t ]
       Intuitively, since we can express Var [ε t ] in the following way,
                                             2                   2
                                             αn                     αn
                               Var [ε t ] =          Var [∆nt ] =        2Var [nt ] ,
                                             αp                     αp
    10 Our    methodology can be extended to allow for more general unit root processes.
    11 If   the process for the payoff is non-stationary, estimating Regression R1 using OLS is a spurious regression, using the
terminology of Granger and Newbold (1974).


                                                                    17
we can combine Var [ε t ] and β 2 to recover τp̂ . As in the case in which payoffs are stationary, we can also
recover relative price informativeness without estimating the process for the fundamental by running
our regressions in differences, as follows.

Proposition 5. (Identifying relative price informativeness, non-stationary payoff) Let R2|∆θ                            ≡
                                                                                                             t+1 ,∆θt
      Var[ε t ]
1−    Var[∆pt ]
                  be the R-squared of Regression R4. Let R2|∆θt , ζ 0 and ζ 1 respectively denote the R-squared and the
coefficients of the following regression R5 of prices on lagged fundamentals

                                                 ∆pt = ζ 0 + ζ 1 ∆θt + ε t .
                                                                                   ζ
                                                                                                                   (R5)

Then, relative price informativeness, τp̂R , can be recovered as follows

                                                     τp̂    R2|∆θ ,∆θt − R2|∆θt
                                            τp̂R =       =2      t +1
                                                                                .                                  (13)
                                                     τη       1 − R2|∆θ ,∆θ
                                                                            t +1       t


      Remarkably, the formulas that recover absolute and relative price informativeness when the payoff
process corresponds to a random walk are identical to those in the stationary model with two
modifications. First, the relevant underlying regressions ought to be run in differences, not in levels
to obtain unbiased estimates of the coefficients. Second, the formulas for absolute and relative price
informativeness are multiplied by a factor for two. This factor accounts for the fact that the error term
in the representation in differences is twice as noisy as the one in the equation in levels, since it is given
by the difference of the realizations of nt and nt−1 , which are independent and identically distributed.


4.2     Multiple Risky Assets

We now consider a multi-asset extension to our baseline model and show that an appropriate
reinterpretation of aggregate noise allows us to use the single market framework for measurement
purposes. The goal of studying this more general framework is two-fold. First, it allows us to
reinterpret the results of the single-asset model when many assets are available. Second, it suggests
how to use our approach more generally to answer different questions about price informativeness.
      We assume that there are N risky assets indexed by j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }, with payoffs distributed
according to
                                                  θt+1 = µθ + Cθt + ηt ,                                           (14)

where µθ , θt and ηt are N × 1 vectors and C is an N × N matrix such that the process θt+1 is stationary.
      The counterparts of assumptions 1 and 2 for the baseline environment are as follows.

Assumption 3. (Additive noise) Each period t, every investor i receives a vector of unbiased private signals
sit about the vector of innovations to the payoffs, ηt , of the form

                                                        sit = ηt + εist ,                                          (15)



                                                              18
where εist , ∀i ∈ I, ∀t , are vectors of random variables with mean zero and finite second moments, whose
realizations are independent across investors and over time. Each period t, every investor i has a vector of private
trading needs nit , of the form
                                                            nit = nt + εint ,                                                            (16)

where nt is a vector of random variables with mean µn and finite second moments, and where εint , ∀i ∈ I, ∀t ,
are vectors of random variables with mean zero and finite second moments, whose realizations are independent
across investors and over time.

Assumption 4. (Linear asset demands) Investors’ net asset demands satisfy

                                         ∆qit = Aiθ θt + Ais sit + Ain nit − Aip pt + A0i ,                                              (17)

where Ais , Ain , Aip , and A0i are N × N matrices of individual demand coefficients, determined in equilibrium.
                                                                                                             ´
    Given both Assumptions, market clearing for the risky asset implies that                                     ∆qit di = 0, ∀t, which,
exploiting a Law of Large Numbers, yields a pricing equation of the form
                                        −1                  −1                  −1                  −1
                            pt = A p          As ηt + A p          Aθ θt + A p          An nt + A p          A0 ,                        (18)
                                                                                                                                ´
where we denote the cross sectional averages of individual demand coefficients by As =                                              I   Ais di,
     ´              ´              ´                  ´
A p = I Aip di, Aθ = I Aiθ di, An = I Ain di, and A0 = A0i di.
    In a multi-asset environment, there are several notions of price informativeness. The vector of
prices p̂t contains information about the vector of fundamentals θt+1 . At the same time, each price p j
contains information about the vector of fundamentals. Since we are interested in the precision of the
price p j,t as a signal of the fundamental θ j,t+1 , our notion of absolute price informativeness along asset
dimension j is given by
                                                    j                              −1
                                                  τp̂ = Var p̂ j |θ j,t+1 , θ j,t
                                                           
                                                                                       ,
                                                                                             j
where p̂ j is the unbiased signal about θ j,t+1 contained in the price. τp̂ is the precision of the unbiased
signal contained about the fundamental of asset j from the perspective of an external observer who
sees the previous realization of the fundamental of asset j only. The price of asset j is given by
                                                                                          
         h     −1 i              h     −1 i                      h    −1             i
  p j,t = A p     A0 + ∑ π jh A p          As    θ j,t+1 + ∑ π jh A p        Aθ − As C         θ j,t + Γ j u j,t
                            j                               jh                                                         jh
                                h                                            h

where u j,t is the vector of all the trading motives of investors that are orthogonal to the fundamentals
of asset j and Γ j is a function of aggregate equilibrium demand sensitivities. More specifically
                                                   h               i0
                                                     j0   j0
                                            u j,t = ωt , ωt−1 , n0t ,
          h                i
       j    j            j                                j
where ωt = ω1t , ...., ω Nt is orthogonal to θ j,t+1 and ωh,t is defined as the residual of a regression of
θh,t+1 on θ j,t+1 , i.e.,
                                                           Cov θh,t+1 , θ j,t+1
                                                                               
                                          j
                                         ωh,t   = θh,t+1 −                        θ j,t+1 .
                                                             Var [θh,t+1 ]

                                                                    19
             j
Hence, ω j,t = 0. Moreover,
                                           h                                                        
                                                          −1     i h     −1          i h     −1 i
                                    Γj =            Ap          As , A p      Aθ − As C ,   Ap     An    .
                                                                      j                                                 j                         j

                                                                                                                                                                  j
If the realizations of θh,t+1 and θ j,t+1 are uncorrelated, then the price will put weight 0 on ωh,t .
    From the perspective of an external observer who only observes the current fundamental of asset j,
the unbiased signal about the future fundamental of asset j contained in the price is

                                                        i  −1
                                                          !                                                                                                                          !
                                h         −1                                       h             −1        i                        h         −1               i
  p̂ j,t =   ∑           π jh       Ap             As
                                                        jh
                                                                          p j,t −        Ap             A0
                                                                                                                 j
                                                                                                                     − ∑ π jh             Ap          Aθ − As C
                                                                                                                                                                       jh
                                                                                                                                                                                θ j,t
                 h                                                                                                          h
                                                                     i  −1
                                                                       !
                                               h         −1
       = θ j,t+1 +              ∑       π jh       Ap           As
                                                                     jh
                                                                                    Γ j u j,t .
                                h

The precision of this signal is our measure of price informativeness and it is given by

                                                                                                                                 i  2
                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                      −1                               h         −1                                    −1
                                                                                    ∑
                           j
                               = Var p̂ j,t |θ j,t+1 , θ j,t                                                                              Var Γ j u j,t
                                                                                                                                            
                         τp̂                                                =                    π jh       Ap              As                               .
                                                                                                                                 jh
                                                                                     h

Proposition 6. (Identifying relative price informativeness through univariate regression) Assume
that the additive noise and the linear asset demands assumptions are satisfied. Let β 0 , β 1 , and β 2 denote the
coefficients of the following regression of prices on fundamentals. This measure of price informativeness can be
recovered from the asset specific regression

                                                                p j,t = β 0 + β 1 θ j,t + β 2 θ j,t+1 + ε j,t

where pt denotes the ex-dividend price at the beginning of period t, θ j,t+1 denotes the measure of fundamentals for
asset j realized over period t, and where we denote the variance of the error by σεj2 = Var ε j,t . Then, absolute
                                                                                               

price informativeness, τp̂ , can be recovered as follows

                                                                                         j         β22
                                                                                     τ̂p̂ =             .
                                                                                                   σεj2

    The main difference between the single asset and the multi-asset version of our model is the
interpretation of the noise that prevents the price from being fully revealing. In the single asset case,
the noise is given purely by the aggregate trading motives, which is orthogonal to the innovation to
the fundamental. In the multi-asset case, the noise is a combination of the aggregate trading motives
for all assets in the economy and the components in the realizations of the fundamentals of other
assets that are orthogonal to the fundamental of the asset in which one is interested. These additional
sources of noise enter the pricing equation when the fundamentals are correlated across assets. In
this case, a signal about the innovation to the fundamental of one asset can also be used to learn
about the innovation to the fundamental of another asset. In our general approach in Section 2 we
are not restricting the source of the noise. Hence, the analysis in the previous sections accommodates
correlated asset payoffs in multi-asset environments.

                                                                                             20
4.3     Learnable and Unlearnable Payoff

Our results so far imply that if investors could fully aggregate their dispersed information, they would
be able to fully learn the asset payoff. In this subsection, we consider the possibility that part of the
asset payoff is simply unlearnable for investors at the trading stage. Formally, we assume that the
innovation to the asset payoff has learnable and unlearnable components, so the asset payoff can be
written as
                                  θt+1 = ρθt + ηt      where         ηt = ηtL + ηtU ,

where the unlearnable component ηtU is random, has mean zero and finite variance, and its realization
are independently distributed from other random variables. Investors exclusively receive signals about
the learnable component of the asset payoff, so formally

                                                  sit = ηtL + εist .

Investors’ signals can be reformulated as follows

                                         sit = ηt − ηtU + εist = ηt + εist0 ,

where εist0 = −ηtU + εist , which allows to derive the following expression for the equilibrium price

                                         ψ   α      αs   αn     αs
                                  pt =      + θ θt + ηt + nt − ηtU ,
                                         αp  αp     αp   αp     αp
                                                         |   {z    }
                                                                                    εt

                                                                                                  αp
where the unbiased signal about the innovation to the fundamental corresponds to p̂t =            αs   pt −   αθ
                                                                                                              αs θ t   −
ψ
αs   = ηt +   αn
              αs n t   − ηtU .

Proposition 7. (Identifying Price Informativeness with Learnable and Unlearnable Payoffs) Assume
that the additive noise and the linear asset demands assumptions are satisfied. Then, absolute and relative price
informativeness can be recovered from Regressions R1 and R2 as follows

                                         β2                        R2|θ             − R2|θt
                                                                          t+1 ,θt
                                    τp̂ = 22     and    τp̂R   =                              .
                                         σε                         1 − R2|θ
                                                                                    t+1 ,θt


      It should be evident that the identification results from Propositions 1 and 2 apply to this case,
provided that we reinterpret the noise component by including the uncertainty about the unlearnable
component of the asset payoff. Conceptually, the fact that the information received by investors as a
whole is not enough to recover the asset payoff means that prices have to be less informative.


5     Empirical Implementation

In this section, we empirically implement our identification strategy and recover stock-specific
measures of price informativeness. In the text, we provide a brief description of the data and the

                                                         21
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics (All Observations)



Statistic              N          Mean          St. Dev.            Min          Pctl(25)      Median         Pctl(75)           Max

Market Cap.         88,356      3,336.34       17,681.97            0.72           81.45        352.77       1,532.62          682,084.00
Earnings            88,356        93.14          595.14        −15,181.20          0.71           7.78         39.43           33,304.45

Note: Table 1 presents summary statistics for the full sample of 88, 256 stock-year observations. It provides information on
the sample mean, median, and standard deviation, as well as the minimum, the maximum and the 25th and 75th percentiles
of the distribution of market capitalization and total earnings. All variables are expressed in millions of dollars in 2008.


sample selection procedure, leaving a more detailed description to the companion R notebooks.
Our theoretical results show that running cross-sectional regressions to recover measures of price
informativeness imposes strong assumptions about primitives across stocks. In particular, it imposes
that the fundamental has the same volatility for all stocks in the sample at any point in time.
Consistent with the identification results presented in our theoretical analysis, we instead run time-
series regressions at the stock level to recover estimates of absolute price informativeness, relative
price informativeness, and Kalman gains.


5.1    Data Description

We now describe the data sources and variables used to implement the methodology we develop in
the previous sections to obtain measures of price informativeness. We conduct our analysis using data
from 1963 to 2017. We obtain stock price data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) to
calculate stocks market values, data on reported earnings, to use as a measure of fundamentals, from
CRSP/Compustat Merged (CCM), and a personal consumption deflator index from FRED.
      In this section, we use a sample with all CRSP common stocks at a quarterly frequency. In the
Appendix, we report the results of our analysis at an annual frequency. Without loss of generality, to
avoid dealing with float issues, we use market value, which we denote by M, as the relevant measure
for the value/price of a firm. We use firms’ total earnings, as measured by EBIT, which we denote by
E, as the relevant measure of firms’ payoffs.12 To match the timing of our model and ensure that the
realized earnings are observed at the time at which the price is determined, we match the date t EBIT,
Et , with the price one quarter forward.13 For example, EBIT on March 1986 corresponds to θt in our
model and the stock price on June 1986 corresponds to pt . Similarly, the realization of the fundamental
at the end of period t is given by the reported EBIT a quarter later. The realized payoff on March 1986
  12 The choice of payoff measures may be objectionable.   Dividend measures at the stock level are noisy. As it is customary in
the literature that studies individual stocks, e.g. Vuolteenaho (2002), we map payoffs in the model to measures of earnings.
  13 For our analysis at a quarterly frequency, we use the price one month forward. Using contemporary variables yields

similar results, which are available in the R code provided online.



                                                               22
                   Table 2: Summary Statistics (Mean and Standard Deviation of Earnings)



Statistic                  N       Mean       St. Dev.         Min         Pctl(25)        Median   Pctl(75)    Max

Mean Earnings             839      77.04       344.25        −104.39          1.21          11.76    43.69     5,731.18
St. Dev. Earnings         839      81.06       371.29          0.18           3.41          12.23    39.49     5,693.84

Note: Table 2 presents summary statistics for the full sample of 839 stocks. It provides information on the sample mean,
median, and standard deviation, as well as the minimum, the maximum and the 25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution
of the variance of earnings. All variables are expressed in millions of dollars in 2008.


is given by EBIT on June 1986, which corresponds to θt+1 in our model. Finally, we run our regressions
at the stock level and include only firms for which we have at least 80 observations available.
      Table 1 shows summary statistics for our full sample of 88, 356 stock-quarter observations. Our
sample exhibits considerable variation in terms of market capitalization and total earnings. The
distribution of market capitalization across firms and periods has a mean of $3, 336 million, a median
of $352 million and a standard deviation of $17, 681 million. The minimum market capitalization in a
given quarter is $0.72 million and the maximum is $682, 962 million. The distribution of total earnings
across firms and periods has a mean of $93 million, a median of $7.8 million, and a standard deviation
of $595 million.
      Table 2 shows summary statistics at the stock level for the 839 stocks with more than 80
observations. In particular, this table summarizes the differences in the distribution of earnings across
stocks. The mean earnings across stocks have a mean of $77 million, a median of $11.8 million and a
standard deviation of $344 million. The median standard deviation in earnings is $81 million and it
exhibits a standard deviation of $371 million. These summary statistics show that there is significant
heterogeneity in the earnings process in the cross-section of firms as the mean and, more importantly,
the volatility of the fundamental vary considerable across stocks. This finding questions the validity of
using cross-sectional regressions. Figure 2 shows the distribution of standard deviations for earnings
across stocks.


5.2    Empirical Specification

We implement Proposition 1 by running time-series regression for each individual stock. On the right-
                                                                j
hand side, we have measures of market value, Mt . On the left-hand side, we use current earnings,
Ej,t and earnings one period ahead, Ej,t+1 . Formally, for each stock, which we index by j, we run a




                                                               23
                                       0.5




                                       0.4




           Density (# of securities)
                                       0.3




                                       0.2




                                       0.1




                                       0.0

                                                                                        10                                                                     1000
                                                                                                  St. Dev. Earnings




                                                  Figure 2: Distribution of standard deviation of total earnings
Note: Figure 2 depicts the distribution of the standard distribution of earnings across the 839 stocks in our sample.


time-series regression of the form

                                                                   j            j   j                 j                      j                  2j
                                                                Mt = β 0 + β 1 Ej,t + β 2 Ej,t+1 + ε t ⇒ R|θ                                                          (19)
                                                                                                                                                 t+1 ,θt
                                                                   j        j       j                                       j                   2j
                                                                Mt = ζ 0 + ζ 1 Ej,t                                   + ε̂ t ⇒ R|θt ,                                 (20)

                                                                                                           j      j                        j
where t corresponds to the time index. Variables β 0 , β 1 , and β 2 are the coefficients for each of the
regressions, whereas ε j,t are the error terms. We respectively denote the R-squareds of the regressions
                                             2j                        2j
(19) and (20) by R|θ                                    and the R|θt . Hence, Regression R1 in the paper maps to Equation (19), while
                                              t+1 ,θt

Regression R2 maps to Equation (20). Using the results in Propositions (1) and (2) we recover absolute
and relative price informativeness as follows

                                                                          j 2
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                                                                            2j                       2j
                                                                  j
                                                                        β 2                                Rj
                                                                                                                       R|θ
                                                                                                                                 t+1 ,θt
                                                                                                                                               − R |θt
                                                                τp̂ =      h i
                                                                              j
                                                                                             and          τp̂   =                      2j
                                                                                                                                                           .          (21)
                                                                      Var ε t                                               1 − R|θ
                                                                                                                                               t+1 ,θt

    One of the main assumptions behind the validity of our methodology running our linear
regressions in levels, is the stationarity of the process for earnings. To evaluate the plausibility of
this assumption in our data, we run Dickey-Fuller (DF) tests for each stock. For 309 out of 839
stocks in our sample, there is not enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis that a unit root is
present in the autoregressive process for earnings.14 For these stocks, we estimate our measures of
price informativeness using the results derived in Section 4.1. We run the following specification in
differences

                                                            j      j            j             j                         j                                2j
                                                        ∆Mt = β 0 + β 1 ∆Ej,t + β 2 ∆Ej,t+1 + ε ∆t                                             ⇒ R|∆θt+1 ,∆θt         (22)
                                                            j      j        j                                           j                                2j
                                                        ∆Mt = ζ 0 + ζ 1 ∆Ej,t                                   + ε̂ ∆t                        ⇒ R |θt ,              (23)
  14 The          839 stocks in our sample are the remaining stocks after removing the stocks with unit roots in the process for ∆Et .


                                                                                                     24
where, analogous to Equation (19) and (20), t and j correspond to the time and stock index,
respectively. Equations (22) and (23) respectively map to the regressions in Equations (R4) and (R5),
        2j                    2j
and R|∆θ                and R|∆θt are their corresponding R-squareds. Hence, using the results in Equations (12)
             t+1 ,∆θt

and (13) we recover absolute and relative price informativeness for each stock j as follows

                                                j 2
                                                 
                                                                         2j                     2j
                                      j
                                              β 2             Rj
                                                                        R|∆θ
                                                                               t+1 ,∆θt
                                                                                          − R|∆θt
                                    τp̂ = 2    h i
                                                   j
                                                       and   τp̂   =2               2j
                                                                                                     .      (24)
                                            Var ε ∆t                     1 − R|∆θ
                                                                                          t+1 ,∆θt


      Finally, we exclude outliers from our sample. We remove all stocks for which the maximum
leverage score of any observation is above 0.4 when estimating either Equation (19) or Equation (20),
or for their counterparts in differences for those stocks that fail our stationarity tests.


5.3     Empirical Findings

After removing outliers, we have 666 individual stocks with more than 80 quarterly observations. For
all stocks that pass our stationarity tests, we recover stock specific measures of absolute and relative
price informativeness from Equation (21). For those stocks that fail our stationarity tests, we estimate
our measures of price informativeness from Equation (24), after running the difference specifications in
Equations (22) and (23). Table 3 shows summary statistics for the distribution of our estimates of stock-
specific measures of price informativeness. In the Appendix, we report estimates of our measures of
price informativeness assuming the earnings process is non-stationary for all stocks.
      We find that, in our sample, the mean absolute price informativeness is 0.04 and the median is 0.001.
More importantly, there is significant variation in our estimates of absolute price informativeness in the
data. The standard deviation of absolute price informativeness is 0.11, which reinforces our prior about
the importance of providing stock-specific measures of informativeness. However, looking at absolute
price informativeness may not be the most adequate measure to understand the informational content
of prices in the cross section since there are differences in the uncertainty about the fundamental across
stocks.
      Relative price informativeness normalizes the precision of the signal contained in the price by the
volatility of the fundamental for each stock. This normalization makes the comparison across stocks
meaningful and more natural to interpret. In our sample, the mean relative price informativeness is
around 0.07 which implies that, on average, the precision of the price as a signal of the fundamental
is 7% of the precision of the prior. In terms of variances, this translates to the signal contained in
the price being 14 times more uncertain than the fundamental. As one would expect, there is a
significant variation in relative price informativeness across stocks. The distribution of relative price
informativeness is right skewed, with 75% of stocks featuring relative prices informativeness to be less
than 8% of the precision of the innovation to earnings.
      Though relative price informativeness provides a better context than absolute price informativeness
to interpret the magnitudes of the informational content of prices, it is still somewhat difficult to

                                                             25
give these numbers an economic interpretation. The best measure of price informativeness to do so
is the Kalman gain.15 There is a one-to-one mapping between the Kalman gain and relative price
informativeness given by
                                                                  Rj
                                                               τp̂
                                                      Kj =             Rj
                                                                            .                                          (25)
                                                             1 + τp̂
This expression is bounded between 0 and 1, and it measures the weight that a Bayesian investor puts
on the new information revealed by the price when updating his beliefs about the fundamental. For
example, a Kalman gain of 0.4 implies that a Bayesian investor will put 40% weight on the information
contained in the price and 60% on his prior in forming his beliefs. In the limit, when prices are fully
revealing, the Kalman gain is equal to 1, and it is 0 when prices contain no information. We focus the
rest of our analysis using the Kalman gain as a measure of informativeness.

                       Table 3: Summary Statistics (Recovered Informativeness Measures)



Statistic                                   N      Mean       St. Dev.          Min    Pctl(25)       Median   Pctl(75)       Max

Absolute Price Informativeness             666      0.04          0.19          0.00   0.0001          0.001    0.01          2.26
Relative Price Informativeness             666      0.07          0.11          0.00    0.01           0.02     0.08          1.00
Kalman Gain                                666      0.05          0.08          0.00    0.01           0.02     0.08          0.50

Note: Table 3 presents summary statistics on the informative measures recovered. It provides information on the sample
mean, median, and standard deviation, as well as the 25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution.


    The mean Kalman gain in our sample is 0.05 and the median is 0.08. As with our measures of
absolute and relative price informativeness, Table 3 shows there is a substantial dispersion in the
distribution of Kalman gains across stocks. Prices contain little to no information for 75% of our stocks,
which is reflected by a Kalman gain of less than 0.08. Figure 3 shows the distribution of Kalman gains
for all stocks in our sample.
    Our approach does not allow us to identify the source of noise impounded in the price. However,
our estimates shed light on the amount of noise in financial markets. Given the small magnitude of
our estimates of price informativeness, our empirical results suggest that although prices contain some
information about the fundamental, they also reflect a considerable amount of noise.
    To better understand of the distribution of Kalman gains across stocks, we look at different
stock characteristics and their correlation with relative price informativeness. We compare price
informativeness in different exchanges, across market capitalization, across the level of volume traded.
    An important takeaway from our empirical analysis is the ubiquitous heterogeneity in price
informativeness across stocks.             This heterogeneity in our estimates across stock characteristics
  15 The   economic interpretation of the expression of the Kalman gain in Equation assumes Bayesian updating and Gaussian
uncertainty.


                                                             26
                       200




                       150
Number of securities




                       100




                       50




                         0

                                0.0             0.1                 0.2                      0.3     0.4               0.5
                                                                               Kalman gain




                                                      Figure 3: Distribution of Kalman gains
Note: Figure 3 shows the histogram of Kalman gains for the final sample of 666 stocks. The estimates are computed using
quarterly data.


challenges the interpretation of results from cross-sectional regressions as measures of price
informativeness, even when controlling for firm-specific characteristics.
                        Note that our empirical approach uses time series regressions to identify asset-specific measures
of price informativeness. This approach contrasts with some of the recent literature that seeks to
measure price informativeness from the cross-section of securities, which implicitly imposes that all
primitives are constant across asset classes. An advantage of running time-series regressions is that
they sidestep potential composition issues, although they introduce potential concerns regarding time
variation in the model parameters, for instance, associated with time-varying risk premia or time-
varying characteristics.


5.3.1                        Informativeness across exchanges

Prices aggregate the information dispersed in the market. The quality of this aggregation depends
on how much information is held by investors and on how much noise is present in individual
demands. Markets in which investors have very precise private information about the fundamental
and trade mostly on this information will have prices with high price informativeness. Markets in
which investors trade primarily on trading motives that are orthogonal to the fundamental will have
low price informativeness. Therefore, an important determinant of how much information is contained
in asset prices is the set of market participants.
                        In our sample, stocks are traded in three different exchanges: NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Figure
4 shows the distribution of Kalman gains for stocks traded in each of these exchanges. We find that, on
average, stocks traded in the NYSE have the highest price informativeness, followed by those traded

                                                                          27
               0.5




                                                                              15
               0.4
 Kalman Gain




               0.3
                                                                                                                         Exchange




                                                                    density
                                                                              10
                                                                                                                           NYSE
                                                                                                                           AMEX
                                                                                                                           NASDAQ
               0.2


                                                                              5

               0.1




               0.0                                                            0

                          NYSE          AMEX          NASDAQ                       0.0   0.1       0.2       0.3   0.4
                                       Exchange                                                Kalman Gain




                      Figure 4: Distribution of Kalman gains across exchanges in which the asset is traded
Note: Figure 4 shows the histogram of Kalman gains for the final sample of 666 stocks sorted by the exchange in which they
trade. The estimates are computed using quarterly data.


in the NASDAQ. Stocks traded in the AMEX have the lowest level of price informativeness and the
lowest dispersion of Kalman gains across the three exchanges.


5.3.2                Informativeness and market capitalization

We look at the relation between price informativeness and market capitalization. A priori, it is not
clear what the sign of this correlation should be. For example, on the one hand, one could argue that
investors acquire more information about stocks with higher market capitalization because it increases
the scale of the trades through which the investor can benefit from his private information. This would
imply a positive correlation between price informativeness and market capitalization. On the other
hand, bigger firms can also attract more speculative trades and, hence, its stocks can trade at prices
that incorporate a lot of noise and have little informational content. Not surprisingly, whether price
informativeness is positively or negatively correlated with market capitalization depends on how the
ratio of information to noise impounded in the price varies with this variable. In our sample, we
find that the relative price informativeness increases with market capitalization. Figure 5 shows the
distribution of Kalman gains across stocks with different average market capitalization. This figure
presents a positive relation between our estimated Kalman gains and the average market capitalization
of a stock. At the same time, this figure exhibits considerable variation in Kalman gains for a given level
of market capitalization.


5.3.3                Informativeness and traded volume

Next, we explore how price informativeness correlates with a stock’s traded volume. As in the
case of market capitalization, it is not clear what the correlation between traded volume and price

                                                               28
                                        0.5




                                        0.4




                          Kalman Gain
                                        0.3




                                        0.2




                                        0.1




                                        0.0

                                                  54.59815          1096.63316             22026.46579
                                                             Market Capitalization (log)



                    Figure 5: Distribution of Kalman gains across market capitalization
Note: Figure 5 shows the histogram of Kalman gains for the final sample of 666 stocks sorted by their average market
capitalization in our sample. The estimates are computed using quarterly data. The blue solid line represents the linear
regression line.


informativeness should be.                    One could argue that high traded volume reflects a large amount
of speculative trades and, hence, expect price informativeness and the Kalman gain to be low.
Alternatively, high traded volume can reflect large trades by investors with precise information, which
would lead to high price informativeness and a high Kalman gain.
    Figure 6 shows our estimates of Kalman gains as a function of the stock’s average traded volume
computed in US dollars. The figure shows a positive correlation between price informativeness and
average traded volume. This figure also shows that there is substantial dispersion in Kalman gains
after conditioning for the average traded volume.


5.3.4   Informativeness across industries

Figure 7 shows the distribution of Kalman gains in different industries. Our results show heterogeneity
in price informativeness across industries and within industry.                                    We find that on average, price
informativeness is highest in the manufacturing and agriculture, mining and construction sectors, and
lowest in the finance and insurance and services sectors. As Figure 7 illustrates, there is considerable
dispersion in price informativeness within each sector. Without a specific conjecture of why one sector
would have higher informativeness than other, the main conclusion of this analysis is that there is not
a strong relation between industry and price informativeness.




                                                                    29
                                                     0.5




                                                     0.4




                                                     0.3

                                       Kalman Gain

                                                     0.2




                                                     0.1




                                                     0.0

                                                                                   20.08554                      1096.63316                    59874.14172
                                                                                                    Dollar Volume (log)



             Figure 6: Distribution of Kalman gains across average traded volume in dollars
Note: Figure 6 shows the histogram of Kalman gains for the final sample of 666 stocks sorted by their average traded volume
in dollars. The estimates are computed using quarterly data. The blue solid line represents the linear regression line.




                                       0.5




                                       0.4
                         Kalman Gain




                                       0.3




                                       0.2




                                       0.1




                                       0.0

                                                     Agric./Mining/Construction Manufacturing   Transportation   Wholesale/Retail trade Finance/Insurance    Services
                                                                                                   Industry (One−digit SIC)




                                                        Figure 7: Distribution of Kalman gains by industry
Note: Figure 7 shows the distributions of Kalman gains for the final sample of 666 stocks sorted by industry using one-digit
standard industry codes. The estimates are computed using quarterly data.




                                                                                                          30
6   Conclusion

We have shown that the outcomes of linear regressions of prices on fundamentals are sufficient to
recover exact measures of the ability of asset prices to aggregate dispersed information under minimal
assumptions about the environment and exclusively using aggregate market information. In our
empirical exercise, we find that the amount of information that can be found by an external observer
by conditioning on the price is on average small, although there is a substantial cross sectional
dispersion. We find that price informativeness is higher for stocks traded in the NYSE, with higher
market capitalization, and traded more frequently. Given that our empirical implementation delivers
stock-specific measures of informativeness, there is scope to further explore the relation between
informativeness and other outcomes in the cross-section of stocks.
    Looking forward, identifying model primitives when there is feedback between financial markets
and investment is a challenging but fascinating area for future research, since the nature of production
introduces unavoidable non-linearities when there is two-way feedback between financial and real
markets.




                                                  31
References

Bai, Jennie, Thomas Philippon, and Alexi Savov. 2015. “Have financial markets become more
  informative?” Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Barberis, Nicholas C. 2018. “Psychology-based Models of Asset Prices and Trading Volume.”
Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein. 2012. “The Real Effects of Financial Markets.” Annual
  Review of Financial Economics, 4(1): 339–360.
Campbell, John Y. 2017. Financial decisions and markets: a course in asset pricing. Princeton University
  Press.
Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang. 2006. “Price informativeness and investment sensitivity to
  stock price.” The Review of Financial Studies, 20(3): 619–650.
Davila, Eduardo, and Cecilia Parlatore. 2017. “Trading Costs and Informational Efficiency.” Working
  Paper.
Davila, Eduardo, and Cecilia Parlatore. 2018. “Volatility and Informativeness.” Working Paper.
De Long, J Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H Summers, and Robert J Waldmann. 1990. “Noise
  Trader Risk in Financial Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 98(4): 703–738.
Diamond, Douglas W, and Robert E Verrecchia. 1981. “Information aggregation in a noisy rational
  expectations economy.” Journal of Financial Economics, 9(3): 221–235.
Durnev, Art, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung. 2004. “Value-enhancing capital budgeting and firm-
  specific stock return variation.” The Journal of Finance, 59(1): 65–105.
Easley, D., M. O’Hara, and J. Paperman. 1998. “Financial analysts and information-based trade.”
  Journal of Financial Markets, 1: 175–201.
Farboodi, Maryam, Adrien Matray, and Laura Veldkamp. 2017. “Where Has All the Big Data Gone?”
  Working Paper.
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer. 2018. A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and Financial
  Fragility. Princeton University Press.
Granger, Clive WJ, and Paul Newbold. 1974. “Spurious regressions in econometrics.” Journal of
  Econometrics, 2(2): 111–120.
Grossman, S.J., and J.E. Stiglitz. 1980. “On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets.” The
  American Economic Review, 393–408.
Hayek, FA. 1945. “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” The American Economic Review, 35(4): 519–530.
Hellwig, M.F. 1980. “On the aggregation of information in competitive markets.” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 22(3): 477–498.
Hou, Kewei, Lin Peng, and Wei Xiong. 2013. “Is R2 a Measure of Market Inefficiency?” working paper.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Savitar Sundaresan, and Tianyu Wang. 2018. “Do Foreign Investors Improve
  Market Efficiency?” working paper.




                                                    32
Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu. 2000. “Tehe information content of stock markets:
  Why do emerging markets have synchronous stock price movements?” Journal of Financial Economics,
  58: 215–260.
Roll, Richard. 1988. “R2.” The Journal of Finance, 43(3): 541–566.
Veldkamp, Laura. 2009. “Information Choice in Macroeconomics and Finance.” Manuscript, New York
  University.
Vives, Xavier. 2008. Information and Learning in Markets: the Impact of Market Microstructure. Princeton
  University Press.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo. 2002. “What Drives Firm-Level Stock Returns?” The Journal of Finance, 57(1): 233–
  264.
Weller, Brian M. 2018. “Does Algorithmic Trading Reduce Information Acquisition?” The Review of
  Financial Studies, 31(6): 2184–2226.
Wurgler, Jeffrey. 2000. “Financial markets and the allocation of capital.” Journal of Financial Economics,
  58: 187–214.




                                                    33
                                                 A PPENDIX

A      Proofs: Section 2

Assumptions 2 (linear demands) and market clearing imply that
               ˆ             ˆ       ˆ          ˆ             ˆ        ˆ
                  ∆qt di = θt αθ di + αs st di + αn nt di − pt α p di + ψi di = 0,
                     i         i       i i         i i          i



so the equilibrium price must satisfy
                                          ´              ´ i i
                                       αis sit di    αθ   αn nt di   ψ
                                pt =              + θt +           + ,
                                        αp           αp    αp       αp
                                                   ´        ´              ´
where we define cross sectional averages αθ = αiθ di, α p = αip di, and ψ = ψi di. Under Assumption
1, which implies the additive structure of signals in Equations. (1) and (2), we can further write
                                                      ´ i i         ´ i i
                             αs      αθ       αn       αs ε st di    αn ε nt di  ψ
                       pt =     ηt + θ t + n t +                  +             + ,
                             αp      αp       αp        αp             αp        αp
                                                 ´                   ´
where we define cross sectional averages αs = αis di and αn = αin di. Under a Strong Law of Large
                                                    ´                       ´
                                                        αis εist di             αin εint di
Numbers, see, e.g. Vives (2008), the terms               αp           and         αp          vanish when there is a continuum of
investors, which allows us to derive Equation (3) in the text.

Proof of Proposition 1. (Identifying absolute price informativeness)

Comparing Equations (7) and (R1) allows us to structurally interpret the coefficients β 0 and β 2 and the
                                                                                         2
residual term as β 0 = α p , β 2 = ααps , and ε t = ααnp nt . Consequently, Var [ε t ] = ααnp τn−1 . It then follows
                       ψ

that                                              2
                                                    αs        2
                                           β22      αp        αs
                                      τp̂ = 2 =  2       =      τn .
                                           σε    αn     −1    α n
                                                 αp    τn

Proof of Proposition 2. (Identifying relative price informativeness)

We reproduce here Regressions R1 and R2:

                                          p t = β 0 + β 1 θ t + β 2 θ t +1 + ε t                                             (R1)
                                                                        ζ
                                          pt = ζ 0 + ζ 1 θt + ε t .                                                          (R2)

Note that Regression R1 can also be written as

                                      pt = β 0 + ( β 1 + ρβ 2 ) θt + β 2 ηt + ε t ,

which allows us to interpret the coefficient ζ 1 in Regression R2 as follows

                                                   ζ 1 = β 1 + ρβ 2 ,

                                                                 34
                              ζ
since θt is orthogonal to ε t = β 2 ηt + ε t .
    Consequently, we can find the following variance decomposition

                           Var ( pt ) = ( β 1 + ρβ 2 )2 Var (θt ) + β22 Var (ηt ) + Var (ε t ) ,
                                        |      {z     }
                                                 ζ 12

which implies that
                                                                                                                                          

       ζ 12 Var (θt ) β22 Var (ηt )   Var (ε t )        ζ 12 Var (θt )   Var (ε t )     β21 Var (ηt ) 
                                                                                                       
    1=               +              +            ⇐⇒ 1 =                +             1+                .
        Var ( pt )     Var ( pt )     Var ( pt )         Var ( pt )      Var ( pt )       Var ( ε t )  
                                                        | {z } | {z }                   |    {z       }
                                                                                            R2|θ            1− R2|θ                 τp̂R
                                                                                                   t                  t+1 ,θt


Therefore,
                                                                                          1 − R2|θt
                         1−   R2|θt   = 1−   R2|θt+1 ,θt         1 + τp̂R             ⇒                          = 1 + τp̂R ,
                                                                                            1 − R2|θ
                                                                                                       t+1 ,θt

which implies that
                                                                 R2|θ             − R2|θt
                                                                        t+1 ,θt
                                                        τp̂R =                               .
                                                                  1 − R2|θ
                                                                                  t+1 ,θt

Moreover, the Kalman gain can be recovered by

                                               τp̂      τp̂R     R2|θ ,θt − R2|θt
                                                                     t +1
                                      K≡            =          =                  .
                                           τp̂ + τη   1 + τp̂R       1 − R2|θt


B    Proofs: Section 3
Equilibrium Characterization

An investor i born in period t chooses a quantity of the risky asset to solve
                       h                  i         γ   h                    i  2
                 max E θt+1 + R−1 pt+1 |Iti − pt qit − Var θt+1 + R−1 pt+1 |Itt qit ,
                  qit                                 2
           n                    o
where Iti = θt , sit , η it , pt is the information set of investor i at time t.
    The first order condition for an investor at time t is
                                          E θt+1 + R−1 pt+1 |Iti − pt
                                                               
                                      i
                                    qt =                            .
                                          γVar θt+1 + R−1 pt+1 |Iti
                                                 

In an equilibrium in linear strategies, we conjecture and verify that the demand of an investor i can be
written as
                                       ∆qit = αiθ θt + αis sit + αiη η it − αip pt + ψi .

Market clearing and the Strong Law of Large Numbers imply

                                                        αθ      αs   αη    ψ
                                           pt =            θ t + ηt + n t + .
                                                        αp      αp   αp    αp

                                                                        35
The unbiased signal of the innovation in the dividend contained in the price is
                                                       
                             αp       αη      αθ     ψ           αη
                       p̂t =      pt − µn − θt −          = ηt +     (nt − µn ) ,
                             αs       αs      αp     αp          αs
where
                                                                                                                 
                                                                     p̂t |θt+1 , θt ∼ N              ηt , τp̂−1       ,

with price informativeness given by
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                  αs
                                                          τp̂ = (Var [ p̂t |θt+1 , θt ])−1 =                                   τη .
                                                                                                                  αη
Given our guesses for the demand functions and the linear structure of prices we have
                                                                             αθ              αs            αη            ψ
                    θ t +1 + R −1 p t +1 = θ t +1 + R −1                        θ t +1 + R −1 η t +1 + R −1 n t +1 + R −1 ,
                                                                             αp              αp            αp            αp
                                                                            
                h
                               −1
                                                  i
                                                                    −1 α θ
                                                                       h       i        αs            αη              ψ
            E θ t +1 + R            pt+1 |Iti         =       1+R   E θt+1 |Iti + R−1 E [ηt+1 ] + R−1 E [nt+1 ] + R−1
                                                                αp                      αp            αp              αp
                                                                  
                                                                α            h       i    αs              αη          ψ
                                                      = 1 + R −1 θ    ρθt + E ηt |Iti + R−1 E [ηt+1 ] + R−1 nt + R−1 ,
                                                                αp                         αp              αp         αp
and
                                                                        2
                                                                                       αs 2
                                                                                                               2
                                                               −1 α θ                                       −1 α η
            h                                 i                                  h               i
                             −1                                                                             −1
        Var θt+1 + R              pt+1 |Iti       = 1+R           Var          + R   θt+1 |Iti
                                                                                            Var [ηt+1 ] + R           Var [nt+1 ]
                                                            αp                        αp                       αp
                                                               2
                                                                                    αs 2                    α η 2 −1
                                                                                                           
                                                            α         h      i
                                                  = 1 + R −1 θ    Var ηt |Iti + R−1       Var [ηt+1 ] + R−1         τnt+1 .
                                                            αp                      αp                      αp
Moreover, given the Gaussian structure of the signals in the information set, Bayesian updating implies
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                         α        α
                                                                                 τs sit + τη η it + +τp̂ αps pt − αηs µn −            αθ           ψ
                         h                    i     τs sit + τη η it + τp̂ p̂t                                                        α p θt   −   αp
                      E ηt |sti , η it , pt       =                            =                                                                            ,
                                                         τs + τη + τp̂                                 τs + τη + τp̂
and                                         h       i     h                   i                 −1
                                         Var ηt |Iti = Var ηt |sit , η it , pt = τs + τη + τp̂      .
    Then, the first order condition is the given by is
                                   h       i                                                     
             −1 α θ                                                   α        α
                             ρθt + Var ηt |Iti τs sit + τη η it + τp̂ αps pt − αηs µn − ααθp θt − α p
                                                                                                  ψ
                                                                                                          + R−1 ααps E [ηt+1 ] + R−1 αηp µn + R−1 α p − pt
                                                                                                                                     α            ψ
      1 1 + R αp
qit =                                                  2                           2                          2                                      .
      γ
                                            1 + R−1 ααθp Var [ηt |Iit ] + R−1 ααps Var [ηt+1 ] + R−1 αηp τn−1
                                                                                                              α


Matching coefficients we have
                               
                   1 + R−1 ααθp         h    i
           αis =                  Var ηt |Iti τs                                                                                                                (26)
                      κ        
                   1 + R−1 ααθp         h    i
           αiη =                  Var ηt |Iti τη
                      κ        
                   1 + R−1 ααθp             h       i α 
             i
                                    ρ − Var ηt |It τp̂
                                                   i         θ
           αθ =
                       κ                                    αs
                                                        i α 
                 1                 −1 α θ
                                                h
                                                                p
            i
           αp =      1− 1+R                 Var ηt |It τp̂
                                                         i
                 κ                     αp                      αs
                                                                                        
                   1             −1 α θ
                                              h        i       αη      ψ       −1 α η      ψ
              i
           ψ =−          1+R              Var ηt |It τp̂
                                                     i
                                                                  µn +      −R        µn +       ,
                   κ                αp                         αs      αs          αp      αp


                                                                                        36
where                                     2                                          2                                          2          !
                                  −1 α θ                                      −1 α s                                        −1 α η
                                                      h             i
             κ≡γ          1+R                   Var       ηt |Iti       + R                  Var [ηt+1 ] + R                              τn−1       ,
                                      αp                                           αp                                          αp
                                   −1
since Var ηt |Iti = τs + τη + τp̂
                
                                       for all i.
    Then, an equilibrium in linear strategies always exists if the system above has a solution. Note that
the demand sensitivities are the same for all i. Then, there exists a unique solution to the system in
Equations (26), that is given by
                                1      1             τs                1       1        τη
                          αis =           − 1
                                                            , αiη =              − 1
                                κ 1 − R ρ τη + τs + τp̂                κ 1 − R ρ τη + τs + τp̂
                                1      ρ          τs              1 τs
                          αiθ =           − 1
                                                        , αip =              , and
                                κ 1 − R ρ τs + τp̂                κ τs + τp̂
                                                 1 − R−1 τp̂ − R−1 τs τη +τηs +τp̂ µn
                                  1     1
                                                                            τ
                                  κ 1 − R −1 ρ
                            i
                          ψ =−                                                        ,
                                               1 + (1 − R−1 ) τp̂ − R−1 τs
                                                                            

where                                                                            2
                                                                             τs
                                                               τp̂ =                   τη
                                                                             τη
and
                                                                                           !2                                                    !2         
                          2
                                                                      τs + τp̂                                  R −1    τs + τp̂ τη
               
                 1                  1                 −1       1
      κ = γ                                 +    R                                              τη−1   +                                                τη−1  .
             1 − R −1 ρ        τη + τs + τp̂                     − 1
                                                           1 − R ρ τη + τs + τp̂                                   − 1
                                                                                                             1 − R ρ τη + τs + τp̂ τs


Proof of Proposition 3. (Identifying signal and trading needs precisions)

We reproduce here Regressions R1 and R2:

                                                  p t = β 0 + β 1 θ t + β 2 θ t +1 + ε t                                                                            (R1)
                                                                             ζ
                                                  pt =       ζ 0 + ζ 1 θt + ε t .                                                                                   (R2)

Note that Regression R1 can be written as

                                            pt = β 0 + ( β 1 + ρβ 2 ) θt + β 2 ηt + ε t ,

and that the following equilibrium equation is valid in this model

                                                           αθ      αs   αη    ψ
                                                 pt =         θ t + ηt + n t + .
                                                           αp      αp   αp    αp
                                                                                                                              αs           αs
From the characterization of the equilibrium described above, we can express                                                  αp   and     αη    as follows:

                      αs
                                                     
                                                              τs + τp̂
                                                                                                                τs
                                                                                                                       + τp̂R
                                            −1 α θ                                                −1 α θ          τη
                         =            1+R                                =              1+R                                                                         (27)
                      αp                         αp        τη + τs + τp̂                                αp       1+    τs
                                                                                                                       τη   + τp̂R
                      αs  τs
                         = .
                      αη  τη
Under the stated assumptions, we can therefore interpret the coefficients β 1 and ζ 1 as follows
                                                                αs                           αθ
                                                      β2 =               and       ζ1 =         .                                                                   (28)
                                                                αp                           αp

                                                                         37
Therefore, Equations (27) and Equation (28) imply that                           τs
                                                                                 τη   + τp̂R can be recovered as follows

                                                      τs
                                                             + τp̂R                 τs               β2
                                        −1              τη
                        β2 = 1 + R            ζ1                                ⇒      + τp̂R =              ,
                                                       1+    τs
                                                             τη   + τp̂R            τη          1 + ζ 1 − β2

which allows to express τs :
                                                                                                             !
                                  β2                                                      β2           1
                       τs =      −
                                             τη − τp̂ = τp̂                                                −1 ,
                            1 + R 1 ζ 1 − β2                                        1 + R−1 ζ 1 − β 2 τp̂R
                                                                                                                          2
                                                                       τp̂
using the fact that τη can be recovered from τη =                      τp̂R
                                                                            .   Finally, exploiting the relation τp̂ =     τs
                                                                                                                           τη   τn , τn
can be recovered as follows
                2                                  2                                      −2
                τs                  β2              R                       β2              R
         τp̂ =        τn =                      − τp̂    τn ⇒ τn =                      − τp̂      τp̂ ,
                τη           1 + R −1 ζ 1 − β 2                      1 + R −1 ζ 1 − β 2

where R can be mapped to the risk-free rate.


C    Proofs: Section 4
Proof of Proposition 4. (Identifying absolute price informativeness: random walk)

We reproduce here Regression R4 and the equilibrium condition in Equation (11):

                                   ∆pt = β 1 ∆θt + β 2 ∆θt+1 + ε t ,                                                             (R4)
                                                    
                                            αθ    αs          αs      αn
                                   ∆pt =       −        ∆θt + ∆θ t+1 + ∆nt .                                                      (11)
                                            αp    αp          αp      αp

Consequently, we can express Var [ε t ] as follows
                                                           2                                  2
                                                       αn                                   αn
                                Var [ε t ] =                      Var [∆nt ] =                        2τn−1 ,
                                                       αp                                   αp
where the last equality follows from the i.i.d. assumption of nt shocks. We can therefore find τp̂ as
                                                                         2
                                                                    αs
                                               β2             2     αp
                                                                                        
                                                                                            αs
                                                                                                 2
                                      τp̂ =   2 22     =          2               =                 τn .
                                               σε                                           αn
                                                              αn
                                                              αp        2τn−1

Proof of Proposition 5. (Identifying relative price informativeness: random walk)

In this model, the equilibrium pricing equation can be written as

                                     αθ            αs        αn      ψ
                               pt =     θt +          ηt + n t +
                                     αp            αp        αp     αp
                                                     
                                       αθ          αs          αs      αn     ψ
                                   =       −             θ t + θ t +1 + n t +    + µθ .
                                       αp          αp          αp      αp     αp




                                                                       38
Taking first differences, this Equation yields Equation (11) in the text, which yields consistent estimates
when estimated by OLS, since ∆θt = ηt−1 and ∆θt+1 = ηt are orthogonal to the error term. We exploit
Regressions R4 and R5, reproduced here.
                                                                                             ∆pt = β 1 ∆θt + β 2 ∆θt+1 + ε t ,                                                                                                                                (R4)
                                                                                             ∆pt = ζ 0 + ζ 1 ∆θt + ε t .
                                                                                                                                                            ζ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (R5)
                                                                                                                                          ζ
Note that ζ 1 = β 1 , given that ηt−1 is orthogonal to ε t .
   Exploiting Regression R4, we can write the following variance decomposition
                                                            Var [∆pt ] = β21 Var [∆θt ] + β22 Var [∆θt+1 ] + Var [ε t ] ,
which when divided by Var [∆pt ] yields
                                                                                                                                                                                                           

                                                              β21 Var [∆θt ]   Var [ε t ]      Var   ∆θ
                                                                                           2                      
                                                                                            β 2     [    t + 1 ]   
                                                           1=                +                                  +1
                                                                                                                   .
                                                                Var [∆pt ]     Var [∆pt ]  Var [ε t ]
                                                                                          
                                                                                                                   
                                                              |    {z      } | {z } |             {z           }
                                                                                   R2|∆θ                           1− R2|∆θ                                              1 R
                                                                                                                                                                         2 τp̂
                                                                                            t                                     t+1 ,∆θt

This expression can be rearranged to solve for τp̂R as follows:
                                                                1 − R2|∆θt                                1 R            R2|∆θ ,∆θt − R2|∆θt
                                                                                                                  R           t +1
                                                                                                     = 1 + τp̂ ⇒ τp̂ = 2                     ,
                                                           1 − R2|∆θ                                      2                1 − R2|∆θ ,∆θ
                                                                                  t+1 ,∆θt                                                                                                  t +1            t

which corresponds to Equation (13) in the text. The Kalman Gain for an external observer can be
                                         τp̂R
calculated as K =                     1+τp̂R
                                                      .


Multiple Risky Assets
The price of asset j is given by
          h          −1                          i                h              −1           i                     h           −1              i                h            −1           i
p j,t =        Ap            Aθ − As C                     θt +          Ap                As            θt+1 +             Ap                An            nt +          Ap               A0
                                                       j                                             j                                                  j                                           j
           N     h
                              −1                              i                      h              −1          i                           h             −1           i                           h         −1        i
    =     ∑             Ap          Aθ − As C
                                                                    jh
                                                                         θh,t +             Ap                As
                                                                                                                       jh
                                                                                                                            θh,t+1 +                Ap               An
                                                                                                                                                                               jh
                                                                                                                                                                                    nh,t       +            Ap          A0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 j
          h =1
                        h                                                                                                                                     h                                                                                                                
                                   −1                              i                      h              −1          i                                                         −1                            i                          h         −1        i
    = ∑ π jh                                                                                                                                                ∑
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             j
                             Ap              Aθ − As C                        θ j,t +                Ap            As            θ j,t+1           +                      Ap                Aθ − As C                      ωh,t−1 +              Ap          As            ωh,t
                                                                         jh                                                 jh                                                                                        jh                                              jh
          h                                                                                                                                             h6= j
                    h         −1        i                      h             −1            i
          +∑            Ap          An            nh,t +                Ap              A0           ,
                                             jh                                                  j
               h
                                                                    j                                                             j
where θh,t+1 = π jh θ j,t+1 + ωh,t with π jj = 1 and ω j,t = 0. Hence, the estimates in the regression
                                                                                           p j,t = β 0 + β 1 θ j,t + β 2 θ j,t+1 + ε j,t
imply
                                                  h
                                                                 −1                                     i                           h             −1          i                            N        h         −1        i
                                         ∑                                                                                                                                                  ∑
                                                                                                                  j
                             ε jt =                        Ap                 Aθ − As C                         ω                +            Ap            As            ωh,t          +                   Ap          An            nh,t
                                                                                                              jh h,t−1                                               jh                                                          jh
                                      h6= j                                                                                                                                                 h =1
                                         N        h             −1           i
                             β2 =        ∑                Ap             As
                                                                                  jh
                                                                                       π jh .
                                      h =1

Therefore, price informativeness can be recovered as
                                                                                                                   j               β22
                                                                                                                τ̂p̂ =               .
                                                                                                                                 Var ε j,t


                                                                                                                                   39
D     Additional Results
In this Section, we report additional results mentioned in the text. Table A1 reports the distribution
of our estimates for absolute price informativeness, relative price informativeness and Kalman gains
assuming all stocks have non-stationary earning processes using quarterly data. Table A2 provides
summary statistics of our data at an annual frequency. Finally, Table and the corresponding estimates
of our measures of price informativeness.

                               Table A1: Results assuming non-stationary earnings


Statistic                                  N       Mean       St. Dev.       Min      Pctl(25)     Median        Pctl(75)       Max

Absolute Price Informativeness            666       0.04          0.25       0.00     0.0001        0.001          0.01         4.51
Relative Price Informativeness            666       0.08          0.12       0.00      0.01          0.03          0.10         1.00
Kalman Gain                               666       0.06          0.08       0.00      0.01          0.03          0.09         0.50
Note: Table A1 presents summary statistics on the informative measures recovered assuming the earnings process for all
stocks is non stationary using quarterly data. It provides information on the sample mean, median, and standard deviation,
as well as the 25th and 75th percentiles of the A3 for the sample without outliers.




                                  Table A2: Summary statistics for annual data


Statistic                 N       Mean         St. Dev.      Min         Pctl(25)     Median       Pctl(75)        Max

Mean Earnings            466     778.08      2,038.33       −7.04         41.41       170.12       567.11       21,649.80
St. Dev. Earnings        466     662.11      1,771.28       1.73          32.05       136.22       531.08       15,434.57
Table A2 presents summary statistics for the full sample of 466 stocks at an annual frequency. It provides information on the
sample mean, median, and standard deviation, as well as the minimum, the maximum and the 25th and 75th percentiles of
the distribution of the variance of earnings. All variables are expressed in millions of dollars in 2008.




                    Table A3: Estimates of Price Informativeness at an Annual Frequency


Statistic                                  N       Mean       St. Dev.        Min       Pctl(25)     Median        Pctl(75)      Max

Absolute Price Informativeness            272      0.004          0.02        0.00       0.0000       0.0001         0.001        0.29
Relative Price Informativeness            272       0.44          0.49       0.0000       0.10         0.28           0.62        3.07
Kalman Gain                               272       0.25          0.19       0.0000       0.09         0.22           0.38        0.75
Note: Table A3 presents summary statistics on the informative measures recovered assuming the earnings process for all
stocks is non stationary using annual data. It provides information on the sample mean, median, and standard deviation, as
well as the 25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution for the sample without outliers.




                                                             40
                                      O NLINE A PPENDIX

A    Relation to Bai, Philippon, Savov (2015)
In this section, we explicitly re-derive the model in Bai, Philippon and Savov (2015) (BPS) as a special
case of our general framework. Consistent with our approach, we abstract from investment decisions,
and exclusively focus on the role of financial markets aggregating information. Identical remarks apply
to the subsequent literature that builds on BPS.16
    There are two major differences between our approach and the one developed in BPS. The first and
most important difference concerns how price informativeness is measured. The second difference lies
in the assumptions behind the empirical implementation.
    As we describe in the text, BPS use forecasting price efficiency (FPE), i.e., the unconditional variance
of the expected value of the fundamental conditional on the price, as a proxy for price informativeness.
While higher price informativeness will lead to higher FPE, higher FPE may not reflect an increase in
price informativeness. More specifically, we show that FPE confounds changes in the volatility of
the fundamental with changes in the ability of markets to aggregate dispersed information. Hence,
FPE can increase because price informativeness increases or because the fundamental becomes more
volatile and harder to predict. Alternatively, absolute price informativeness is the precision of the
unbiased signal about the fundamental contained in the price. This precision is a direct measure of the
ability of financial markets to aggregate dispersed information and it is independent of the volatility
of the fundamental.
    Regarding the empirical implementation, the regressions run in BPS and the regressions that we
run in this paper to recover price informativeness are different. BPS run cross-sectional regressions of
fundamentals on prices and report the time-series evolution of their cross-sectional estimates of FPE.
BPS provide estimates of FPE at the market level (or for a subset of the market) over time. In contrast,
we use time series regressions to provide firm-specific measures of price informativeness. Moreover,
we run regressions of prices on fundamentals, which we show to be more adequate to obtain consistent
estimates of price informativeness. The main difference between these two approaches concerns the
underlying assumptions regarding the nature of firm-specific primitives and investors’ characteristics
(e.g., volatility of the fundamental, precision of private signals, or volatility of private trading needs)
across time and firms. By running cross-sectional regressions, BPS assume that all firms’ fundamentals
(among others, the volatility of the fundamental and noise, as well as the precision of investors’ private
signals) are identical in a given period. This assumption is unlikely to hold in practice and clearly
rejected by the data (see Table 2). Our approach assumes instead that firm-specific parameters are
time-invariant, but allows for firm specific parameters to vary freely in the cross-section of firms.

Measures of price informativeness
In the remained of this section, our approach to the approach in BPS in more detail. To compare
FPE to absolute and relative price informativeness we first describe the environment in BPS using our
notation to show how it is nested in our general specification. Then, we show that while FPE is relevant
 16 Thesame conceptual framework is used in Farboodi, Matray and Veldkamp (2017) and Kacperczyk, Sundaresan and
Wang (2018).



                                                      41
for welfare, it does not disentangle the ability of markets to aggregate information from how easy it is
to forecast the fundamental.
                                                                                             
Environment There are two periods, t = 0, 1. There is one asset with a payoff θ ∼ N θ, τθ−1 . There
are i = 1, ..., I informed traders who choose their demand q1i to maximize mean variance preferences
with imperfect information about θ. The asset payoff θ is not observable. However, investors observe
a private signal
                                                 s = θ + εs
and a public signal
                                                            π = θ + επ,
                  −1                      −1
                                            
where ε s ∼ N 0, τs , ε π ∼ N 0, τπ , and ε s ⊥ ε π . Note that all informed investors observe the same
set of signals. There are N noise traders whose total demand is random and given by n ∼ N 0, τn−1 .
                                                                                                     

    The informed traders’ problem is
                                                                     γ
                               max (E [θ |s, π ] − p) q1i −            Var [θ |s, π ] q21i + pq0i
                                q1i                                  2
which leads to the following demand curve
                                                             E [θ |s, π ] − p
                                                   q1i =                      ,
                                                             γVar [θ |s, π ]
where
                                τθ θ + τs s + τπ π                           1
                      E [θ |s, η ] =               and Var [θ |s, η ] =              .
                                  τθ + τs + τπ                          τθ + τs + τπ
Since all informed investors share the same information set, there is no learning from the price.
   In an equilibrium in linear strategies net demands for informed traders are given by

                                        ∆q1i
                                          I
                                             = αsI s + απI π + αnI n − α Ip p + ψ I ,

and for uninformed traders

                                       ∆qU     U      U      U      U       U
                                         1i = αs s + απ π + αn n − α p p + ψ .

Matching coefficients we have that
                                                 τs         τπ
                                           αsI =    , απI =    , αnI = 0,
                                                 γ          γ
                                                 1
                                           α Ip = (τθ + τs + τπ )
                                                 γ
                                                 τ
                                           ψ I = θ − q0i ,
                                                  θ
                                                 γ
                                                   1
and αU    U     U     U         U
     s = απ = α p = ψ = 0, and αn =                N.
   Market clearing implies
                                                        I
                                                    ∑ ∆qsiI + n = 0,
                                                    i =1
which is the same as
                                                   αs    απ    ψ   αn
                                            p=        s+    π+    + n,
                                                   αp    αp    αp  αp

where αs = IαsI + NαsN . απ = IαπI + NαπN , α p = Iα Ip + Nα N          I     N             I    N
                                                             p , αn = Iαn + Nαn , and ψ = Iψ + Nψ .


                                                                42
Price informativeness and forecasting price efficiency Observing the price is equivalent to
observing                            
                         αp        ψ           αs           απ           αn
                 p̂ =           p−      =θ+         εs +         επ +         n,
                      αs + απ      αp       αs + απ      αs + απ      αs + απ
where                                                                   
                                                       p̂|θ ∼ N θ, τp̂−1

with
                                          2                           2                           2
                                    αs                            απ                            αn
                     τp̂ =                      τs−1   +                      τπ−1   +                      τn−1 .   (29)
                                 αs + απ                       αs + απ                       αs + απ

τp̂ in Equation (29) corresponds to our measure of absolute price informativeness when there is a finite
number of investors. There are two differences with respect to the baseline model presented in the
main text. First, there are multiple sources of aggregate noise: the error of the private signal, ε s ; the
error of he public signal, ε π ; and the demand of noise traders, n. Second, price informativeness is
modulated by αs + απ instead of by αs because there are two sources of external information about the
fundamental θ.
     A Bayesian external observer who only observes the price, learns from the price in the following
way
                                                        τθ θ + τp̂ p̂
                                           E [θ | p̂] =               .
                                                         τθ + τp̂
Forecasting price efficiency (FPE) is then given by
                                                                                2 
                                                                         τp̂                            
                             VFPE = Var (E [θ | p̂]) =                                   τθ−1 + τp̂−1
                                                                      τθ + τp̂
                                                                            2 
                                                                                 τθ + τp̂
                                                                                         
                                                                      τp̂
                                                               =
                                                                   τθ + τp̂       τθ τp̂
                                                                    τp̂
                                                               =          τ −1 .                                     (30)
                                                                 τθ + τp̂ θ

The expression for FPE in Equation (30) is the predicted variance of cash flows θ from prices. From
this equation, it is easy to see that FPE confounds two effects. FPE can increase due to changes in
the ability of prices to aggregate information,τp̂ , or due to changes in the ease of forecastability of
the fundamental, τθ . Hence, conditional on the variance of the fundamental remaining constant, FPE
and price informativeness will co-move. However, without controlling for changes in fundamental
volatility, one cannot make any inferences about price informativeness by looking at FPE.




                                                                 43
