                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DO HOUSEHOLD FINANCES CONSTRAIN UNCONVENTIONAL FISCAL POLICY?

                                         Scott R. Baker
                                         Lorenz Kueng
                                       Leslie McGranahan
                                        Brian T. Melzer

                                      Working Paper 25212
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25212


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




We would like to thank Robert Moffitt for comments on earlier drafts and participants at the
Workshop on New Consumption Data in Copenhagen and the NBER Tax Policy and the
Economy Conference for valuable feedback. Jacqueline Craig provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the
Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Scott R. Baker, Lorenz Kueng, Leslie McGranahan, and Brian T. Melzer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Household Finances Constrain Unconventional Fiscal Policy?
Scott R. Baker, Lorenz Kueng, Leslie McGranahan, and Brian T. Melzer
NBER Working Paper No. 25212
November 2018
JEL No. D12,E21,G01,G11,H2,H31

                                         ABSTRACT

When the zero lower bound on nominal interest rate binds, monetary policy makers may lack
traditional tools to stimulate aggregate demand. We investigate whether "unconventional" fiscal
policy, in the form of pre-announced consumption tax changes, has the potential to meaningfully
shift durables purchases intertemporally and how it is affected by consumer credit. In particular,
we test whether car sales react in anticipation of future sales tax changes, leveraging 57 pre-
announced changes in state sales tax rates from 1999-2017. We find evidence for substantial tax
elasticities, with car sales rising by over 8% in the month before a 1% increase in the sales tax
rate. Responses are heterogeneous across households and sensitive to supply of credit. Consumers
with high credit risk scores are most able to pull purchases forward. At the same time, other
effects such as customer composition and attention lead to an even larger tax elasticity during
recessions, despite these credit frictions. We discuss policy implications and the likely
magnitudes of tax changes necessary for any substantive long-term responses.

Scott R. Baker                                  Leslie McGranahan
Northwestern University                         Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Kellogg School of Management                    leslie.mcgranahan@chi.frb.org
Suite 4394
2211 Campus Drive                               Brian T. Melzer
Evanston, IL 60208                              Tuck School of Business
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu                Dartmouth College
                                                100 Tuck Hall
Lorenz Kueng                                    Hanover, NH 03755
Northwestern University                         Brian.T.Melzer@tuck.dartmouth.edu
Kellogg School of Management
Suite 4394
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1 Introduction
      The prolonged period of low demand and low interest rates during the Great Recession
prompted economists to consider new policies to stabilize the business cycle. The constraint
of the zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates, in particular, prevented the use of
short-term interest rate reductions to stimulate consumption and investment. To overcome this
problem, macroeconomic theorists (Feldstein 2002, Hall 2011, Correia et al. 2013) proposed an
“unconventional” fiscal policy: a commitment to raise consumption taxes in the future. The an-
ticipation of higher consumption taxes can promote intertemporal substitution just as traditional
monetary policy does, by raising the price of future consumption relative to current consumption.
A credible commitment to raise sales taxes may therefore be used to stimulate consumer spending
during a recession, particularly when paired with coincident lump sum transfers or income tax
reductions to offset any sales tax-related decline in real income.1
      Unconventional fiscal policy holds promise in theory but may not be effective in practice. In-
tertemporal substitution may be muted because consumers are inattentive and unaware of future
tax changes. Recent literature in public economics argues that sales taxes are not fully salient
(e.g., Chetty et al. 2009). Intertemporal substitution may also be muted by financial frictions.
In order to shift expenditures forward in time, households need wealth or credit access, both
of which typically decline during recessions. Financial frictions may therefore impede spending
even among consumers who are attentive to future sales tax increases. Lastly, there is a ques-
tion of whether demand elasticity changes over the business cycle, leading to either stronger or
weaker responses during recessions. There is some evidence that (compensated) product demand
is more price sensitive during recessions, particularly for luxury goods (Gordon et al. 2013). On
the other hand, Berger and Vavra (2015) show that durable purchases adjust less frequently dur-
ing recessions, as households prefer to reduce their consumption of durables and do so through
depreciation and reduced purchases because of adjustment costs.
      We evaluate these issues by studying the response of vehicle purchases to state sales tax
changes in the United States between 1999 and 2017. We measure the number of financed
vehicle purchases, at monthly frequency in each zip code, using the FRBNY Consumer Credit
Panel/Equifax Data. During the sample period we observe 57 changes in sales taxes at the state
  1
    Announcing temporary investment tax credits would have similar effects on business investments (House and
Shapiro 2006).

                                                     1
level. The majority of these changes—more than 70%—are sales tax increases and the mean size
of the change is 0.5 percentage points. We supplement this analysis with additional data on car
registrations by zip code from Experion’s AutoCount database.
    We focus on vehicle purchases for two reasons. First, large durable purchases such as cars
are particularly relevant for countercyclical policies. They are the type of long-lasting good for
which expenditures can be shifted in time without outsized variation in consumption and the
category of consumption that varies most through the business cycle. For example, during the
Great Recession, the decline in durable goods was about triple that in nondurables. Second,
vehicle sales taxes depend on the location of the vehicle registration rather than the location of
the purchase. This feature proves crucial for predicting the effect of a national sales tax increase
on expenditures. For other goods and services that are taxed based on the location of purchase,
consumers can avoid state taxes by shopping across state borders (Baker et al. 2018). The local
spending response in these categories therefore incorporates adjustments to shopping patterns
in addition to intertemporal substitution due to taxes. By contrast, vehicle spending responses
isolate the intertemporal substitution that is relevant to evaluating a binding national sales tax.
    We estimate the elasticity of vehicle purchases to sales taxes by regressing the (log) change
in the number of purchases on the change in (log one plus) the sales tax rate. We address the
concern that sales taxes are endogenous to economic conditions in two ways. We use the staggered
nature of sales tax changes to absorb common national variation in purchases, including business
cycle fluctuations, with year-by-month fixed effects. We also examine high-frequency (monthly)
changes in purchases precisely around the date of the sales tax changes so as to avoid bias from
lower-frequency co-movement in tax rates and economic conditions. We present four key findings.
    First, consumers respond strongly to anticipated changes in future sales tax rates. We esti-
mate a tax elasticity of 8—that is, vehicle purchases increase by 8% in the current month for
each 1 percentage point increase in the subsequent month’s tax rate. The anticipatory response is
concentrated in the month prior to the tax increase, consistent with a model in which consumers
are attentive to future tax changes and accelerate their purchases by just enough to avoid paying
higher sales tax. The tax elasticity of vehicle purchases is about 6 times larger than that of
other retail spending in Baker et al. (2018), as one would expect based on the high durability of
vehicles and the inability to avoid tax increases through cross-border or online shopping.2
   2
     Using data from retail merchandisers, Baker et al. (2018) show that the tax elasticity of spending is highest
for storable or durable consumer retail goods that households can stock prior to a tax increase.

                                                        2
       Second, more creditworthy consumers respond more strongly to future sales tax changes. Con-
sumers in the highest quintile of credit or risk scores (either Equifax Risk Score or VantageScore
provided by Experian) are twice as responsive as those in the lowest quintile. This heterogeneity
in tax elasticity is consistent with a model in which consumers rely on credit to accelerate their
vehicle purchases and that credit frictions dampen the intertemporal substitution required for
unconventional fiscal policy.3
       Third, the tax elasticity of vehicle spending varies through the business cycle and, surprisingly,
is largest during recessions. In particular, we find that car purchases are twice as responsive
during recessions as during non-recessions. This finding holds independent of whether we define
recessions nationally or in a state specific manner. The relevance of credit frictions in the cross-
section of consumers predicts the opposite effect, namely that the average tax elasticity might be
particularly low in recessions, when loan delinquency rates rise (see Figure 1) and lenders reduce
credit supply (Benmelech et al. 2017), particularly for less creditworthy consumers (Agarwal
et al. 2018). What might the countervailing force be? Some of this increased responsiveness may
be driven by increased attention paid to price changes or sale opportunities in a recession. We
find that consumers search more intensively on Google for information about sales tax changes
during recessions relative to expansions. This increase in search attention comes despite the
fact that news coverage of tax changes remains unchanged during recessions. We also find that
the composition of buyers changes in recessions. That is, the month before a sales tax increase
during a recession sees more of an increase in age, credit score, and credit quality than before a
tax increase during non-recessions.

                                           [Figure 1 about here]

       Fourth, the sales tax changes that we observe induce substitution over a very short horizon.
In our sample, the incremental purchases in advance of tax increases fully reverse in the month
of the tax changes, implying substitution over a one-to-two month horizon. Though such rapid
reversal would present a problem for unconventional fiscal policy, we are hesitant to conclude
that the effects of unconventional fiscal stimulus would reverse so quickly. The reason we remain
circumspect is that the sales tax changes in our sample are small, leading to small savings from
accelerating purchases, whereas the proposed consumption tax increase in the calibrated New
   3
    Two-thirds of car purchases in the U.S. are financed with credit (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System 2016)

                                                      3
Keynesian model of Correia et al. (2013) is 10 percentage points. Accelerating the purchase
of a $25,000 new vehicle would save $2,500 under the proposed scenario but only $125 for the
average tax increase of 0.50 percentage points in our sample. With modest savings at stake, it
makes sense that consumers accelerate their purchases by only a few months. A simple back-
of-the-envelope calculation illustrates this point. The consumer should compare the sales tax
savings to the expense of scrapping an old car earlier than planned. This expense is roughly the
monthly depreciation rate of the old car times the number of months by which the purchase and
trade-in is accelerated. If we assume straight-line depreciation and a vehicle life of 11 years, we
find that consumers should accelerate purchases by one month if the sales tax rate changes by at
least 0.6 percentage points, consistent with our findings. Extrapolating to a 10 percentage point
increase in taxes, we estimate that consumers should pull future car purchases forward by 16.5
months. Hence, such a policy could shift consumer spending substantially, though we are unable
to evaluate such large changes directly in our sample.
   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3
describes our data. Section 4 provides institutional details about sales taxes. Section 5 describes
our methodology to study the effect of sales tax rate changes on car purchases. Section 6 discusses
the results of our analysis. Section 7 concludes.


2 Related Literature
   Our paper relates to the literatures on the dynamic effect of consumption tax changes, on
financial constraints faced by households, and on the purchase of durable goods during recessions.
   There is a growing empirical literature that studies the effect of consumption taxes on con-
sumer spending. Most evidence is based on event studies of one-time changes in value added
taxes (VAT) in different countries (e.g., Crossley et al. 2014, Cashin 2014, Cashin and Unayama
2016, Büttner and Madzharova 2017, D’Acunto et al. 2018). However, only few papers study
sales tax changes in the U.S. One important difference between VATs and sales taxes in the U.S.
is that sales taxes are not included in posted prices and hence could be much less salient to
consumers than changes in price-inclusive VATs.
   Agarwal et al. (2017) show that a substantial fraction of consumers responds to temporary
state sales tax holidays and Baker et al. (2018) show similar results to sales tax rate changes.
Most of the response is in the form of stockpiling of consumer goods, with larger responses for

                                                4
more storable and durable goods. However, these studies are limited in scope by either the
policy’s coverage of a small set of products (e.g., in the case of sales tax holidays in Agarwal
et al. 2017) or limitations of the spending data used to study broader sales tax changes (e.g.,
retail spending covered by AC Nielsen scanner data in Baker et al. 2018).
   A related literature in empirical industrial organization shows that it is important to account
for anticipated price changes and consumer inventory behavior when estimating dynamic demand
elasticities (e.g., Hendel and Nevo 2006, Coglianese et al. 2017).
   We contribute to this literature by exploring the role of credit frictions in the transmission
of policy changes to aggregate demand. Credit frictions have received increased attention by
researchers in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis (e.g., Gross and Souleles 2002, Mian
and Sufi 2009, 2011, Mian et al. 2013, Mondragon 2014, Agarwal et al. 2018).
   Related to our analysis of the stimulative effect of tax policy on car sales, Mian and Sufi (2012)
evaluate the effect of the Car Allowance Rebate System program of 2009 (CARS or “Cash-for-
Clunkers”), finding a relatively large demand effect that is reversed within a few months after
the end of the program (i.e., evidence of intertemporal substitution).
   Green et al. (2018) extend this analysis by studying the role of credit frictions in this context.
The large demand response is puzzling considering both credit constraints and transaction fixed
costs, which should lower the response. However, the study shows that the large program take-up
was mainly driven by the fact that the subsidy provided liquidity at the time of purchase (which is
different from other similar programs such as the First Time Homebuyer Credit, where the subsidy
is delayed through a tax credit in the following year; e.g., Berger et al. 2014). Hence, financial
frictions played a much smaller role for the “Cash-for-Clunkers” program because consumers
were able to use the rebates for down payments on new car loans.
   Finally, our paper is also relates to research studying whether the effect of a policy depends
on the state of the economy (e.g., Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012, Ramey and Zubairy 2018,
Eichenbaum et al. 2018). As mentioned above, and related to our focus on the demand for
durables, Berger and Vavra (2015) argue that more households would like to downsize durables
during recessions independent of credit frictions, but adjustment costs prevents them from ac-
tively adjusting their stock of durables. Instead, these households let the stock of durables further
depreciate, leading to fewer transactions during recessions and cash transfers having a smaller
effect on durable purchases than during normal times.

                                                 5
   This result is noteworthy since previous work surveyed in Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010, 2017)
has shown that the marginal propensity to consume nondurables out of income (MPC) is larger
among credit-constrained consumers. Hence, the average MPC of nondurables increases in re-
cessions as more households are credit constrained (e.g., Gross et al. 2016). The buffer stock
model—the canonical model of intertemporal consumption behavior—also predicts that the MPC
is larger for credit-constrained consumers with low levels of liquid assets and low debt capacity
(e.g., Carroll et al. 2017). Our findings suggest that while the sensitivity of durable purchases to
cash flows might be lower during recessions, the price sensitivity is higher. Hence, policies that
affect relative prices might be particularly effective during recessions.


3 Data
   The main data on motor vehicle sales comes from the FRBNY/Equifax Consumer Credit
Panel and is supplemented with the Experian AutoCount database.


3.1 Sales Tax Data
   The main analysis uses hand-collected state sales tax rate changes for 1999-2017. In previous
research (Baker et al. 2018), we also used zip code level sales tax rate changes. These come from
CCH Wolters Kluwer and cover the period 2003-2015. For each zip code-month observation, we
have information on all levels of sales taxes imposed in the zip code. These sales taxes stem
from four levels of tax jurisdiction: state, county, city, and special tax districts (often comprised
of jurisdictions relating to water districts, school districts, water districts, etc.). In addition, we
know the combined rate, which may differ somewhat from the sum of the component rates due
to local sales tax offsets or statutory maximum tax rates in a jurisdiction.
   The local sales tax data cover 41,250 ZIP codes across all 50 states as well as Washington DC.
Sales taxes vary significantly across both states and over time, ranging between 0% and 12%.
A number of states have no sales tax (Delaware, Montana, New Hampshire, and Oregon), while
others are generally high (such as Washington, Louisiana, Tennessee, and California having rates
consistently above 8%). A majority of a given zip code’s total sales tax rate is driven by the
state sales tax. State sales taxes average approximately 5.5%, while local sales taxes total about
1.3%. Distributional data regarding the sales tax changes in our sample — for both state and
overall sales tax changes— are detailed in Table 1.

                                                  6
                                      [Table 1 about here]

   However, as discussed below, there appears to be significant reporting issues with the car
sales data at this granular level, which is the reason we use state-level tax changes in our main
analysis.

                                      [Figure 2 about here]

   Figure 2 demonstrates some of the considerable variation in state tax rates, both in the cross-
sectional and over time. The top panel shows the highest sales tax rate ever applicable to a state
during our sample period. The bottom panel maps out the number of sales tax changes during
the same period.
   Because of persistent differences in car sales and leasing behavior across geographic areas, we
focus our analysis primarily on changes in car purchases in the months surrounding changes in
sales taxes. During our sample period, there were 57 state-level sales tax changes (and more than
2,000 distinct local-level tax changes). The size of a given state sales tax change (in absolute
value) varies widely: from less than a tenth of a percentage point to over one percentage point.
During our sample period, sales taxes have been rising, on average. Of the 57 state sales tax rate
changes that we observe, 42 are positive, with average sales tax rate increase of about 0.61% and
the average decrease about 0.46%.
   While these sales tax changes are not uniformly distributed across months in a year, they do
exhibit a significant amount of variation in timing. For instance, while tax changes in January
and July (the beginning of most state Fiscal Years) are the most common months, neither month
makes up more than 20% of total sales tax changes. In addition, the first month of each quarter
(January, April, July, and October) sees slightly more sales tax changes than the following
months.


3.2 FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax
   We obtained panel data on the number and dollar amount of newly initiated vehicle loans
from the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax (CCP) tradeline database.
   The CCP is populated with a 5% random sample of individuals who have an Equifax credit
report and whose credit report includes their social security number. The panel we use covers
the years 1999 to 2017 and contains both unsecured and secured loans/lines of credit for a given
                                                7
borrower. This consists of car loans, but also the multitude of other borrowing such as mortgages
and HELOCs. In addition, we observe the borrower’s Equifax credit risk score.
      For each auto loan taken out by sample members, the CCP tracks the loan amount, origination
date, and prepayment or maturity date. We use this auto “tradeline” information to measure
the number of newly initiated auto loans in each month, by zip code and credit score grouping.
The CCP does not identify financed purchases per se, but we believe the initiation of a loan is
a close proxy for a financed purchase since automobile loan refinancing is quite rare. The CCP
therefore allows us to analyze financed purchases, but not outright purchases and leases.


3.3 Experian AutoCount
      To analyze such outright purchases and leases, we turn to Experian AutoCount data. This
panel data reports the number of new and used vehicle purchases by zip code, month and financing
status, covering years 2005-2015.
      Experian constructs the AutoCount database from two sources: vehicle registration records
at state Departments of Motor Vehicles (DMV) and buyer credit reports at Experian’s credit
bureau. The data are a census of vehicle transactions in the 46 states (and Washington DC) in
which the DMV makes registration records available.4 On a monthly basis, Experian collects the
following vehicle transaction information from each state DMV: the locations of the buyer and
seller (to the zip code level), vehicle manufacturer, model and model year, vehicle status (new
or used), financing status (outright purchase, debt-financed purchase or lease), and month of
purchase. For financed purchases (but not outright purchases and leases), Experian then merges
in the buyer’s credit record at the individual level.
      The final database provides aggregate measures of the number of transactions by zip code,
month, vehicle status and financing status. We further stratify financed purchases by the buyer’s
credit score to test whether sales tax elasticities vary by buyer creditworthiness. Details of these
variables are noted in Table 1. Car sales in a zip code-month range from 0 up to over 1,000 sales,
with the average zip code seeing about 80 total car sales in a month. Leases are significantly
more skewed and are highly concentrated in just the top 5% of zip codes.
      For our monthly analysis of sales tax changes, it is important to note that the AutoCount
data include measurement error in the timing of purchase. Experian does not observe the precise
  4
      Delaware, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, and Wyoming do not provide information to Experian AutoCount.


                                                     8
transaction date, but instead identifies the month of purchase as the month in which the trans-
action first appears in its database. Since the database is updated at a monthly frequency (at
least), there can be a one-month lag in the timing of purchase. In particular, when the purchase
either occurs or is reported to the DMV subsequent to Experian’s monthly update, it will be
dated one month after the actual purchase. We discuss this issue in more detail below when
interpreting the short-run dynamics around sales tax changes.


4 Sales Taxes, Auto Sales, and Leases
      For the purposes of the taxability of automobile sales and leases, the applicable tax jurisdiction
is the location in which the vehicle is registered (e.g., if a car is purchased in Gary, Indiana
but registered in Chicago, Illinois, the combined state and local sales tax rate in Chicago is the
applicable rate). In accordance with this fact, we organize our auto sales and lease data according
to where the vehicles were registered. Customers who trade in a vehicle as part of their purchase
or lease of a new vehicle will almost always be responsible for sales taxes as applied to the net
purchase price, receiving a sales tax credit for their traded-in vehicle.5
      For a given tax jurisdiction, automobile sales and leases are generally subject to simply the
prevailing state and local sales taxes. However, there are a number of deviations from this general
trend. Some states, such as Iowa and New Mexico, have a motor vehicle excise tax (e.g., 3%)
that is not linked to the state-wide sales tax. We exclude such states from our primary analysis.
      The treatment of sales taxes on auto leases varies significantly across states. Arkansas, Mary-
land, Illinois, Oklahoma, Texas, and Virginia were states that charged sale taxes on the full cost
of the vehicle rather than just on down-payments and monthly lease payments. This could be the
difference between paying 8% on the car’s $40,000 price rather than on a $2,000 down-payment
and 24 monthly payments of $300 each.
      Other states, such as New Jersey, New York, Minnesota, and Georgia, while only charging
sales taxes on down-payments and lease payments, require that all of the future sales taxes be
paid up front (e.g., the sales tax applicable to the down payment and sum of all future monthly
payments).
      One other persistent difference across states is that, for some states, sales taxes may be applied
  5
   Exceptions to receiving the tax credit for trade-ins are California, Hawaii, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan,
Montana, and Virginia.


                                                     9
to the full vehicle price rather than the actual price paid by the customer. That is, the sales
taxes due may not take into account any dealership or manufacturer rebates or incentives that
are applied to the sales price. Thus, a location with a 5% sales tax may see a customer paying
an effective tax of 6% or more on their final vehicle purchase price.
       While there is variation in both the tax treatment of leases and discounts across states,
there is little variation of these policies within states over time and what variation we do see is
uncorrelated with changes in sales tax rates.6


5 Method
       We measure the response of vehicle transactions to sales taxes by regressing monthly changes
in vehicle purchases or leases on (leads and lags of) monthly changes in sales taxes. We estimate
the regression model:

                                            X
                          ∆ ln(carsjt ) =         βi ∆ ln(1 + τs,t+i ) + γt + zst + εjt ,                       (1)
                                              i


where carsjt is the number of vehicle purchases or leases in zip code j in state s and month t, τ
is the sales tax rate, γt are time fixed effects, and zst are additional time-varying covariates. We
cluster standard errors by state.
       The coefficients βi measure the elasticity of the number or value of vehicle purchases to
changes in the sales tax rate. In further specifications, we also conduct sub-sample analysis to
test for heterogeneity in the tax elasticity of spending. We focus in particular on the role of
credit supply in moderating or amplifying spending responses, splitting by credit risk scores and
other measure of creditworthiness.
       The economic interpretation of our empirical results depends crucially on whether the tax
changes were anticipated. If tax changes are anticipated, then the spending changes around the
tax changes reflect substitution effects, while income and wealth effects take place at the time
households learn about an upcoming tax change. As mentioned above, such income and wealth
effects could be neutralized either over the business cycle or by offsetting changes to labor income
or capital taxation as in Correia et al. (2013).
   6
     For instance, on January 1, 2015, Illinois shifted its sales tax regime for car leases. Previously, individuals
leasing a car would pay sales taxes on the entire capitalized cost of the vehicle. After the change, sales taxes are
only due on the down payment and monthly lease payments.


                                                         10
   Using newspaper articles, Baker et al. (2018) show that the typical sales tax rate change has
a “fiscal inside lag” of 6 to 9 months, i.e., the difference between when the policy is announced
or voted on and when it is implemented. Sales tax changes passed by ballot propositions tended
to have lower lags in implementation, but still generally give at least 2-3 months of potential
anticipation before a change takes effect. The study also documents the fact that searches on
Google containing the term “sales tax” tended to spike before the new tax rate is implemented,
suggesting that households were aware of upcoming changes and were seeking information about
them.


6 Results

6.1 Retiming of Car Purchases Around Sales Tax Changes
   Table 2 shows our main results estimating equation 1 using the Equifax data. We find that
consumers pull car purchases forward by one month in anticipation of a state sales tax increase.
Even though sales taxes are not included in posted prices and are therefore potentially less
salient than price-inclusive consumption taxes such as excise taxes or VATs, consumers seem to
pay attention to the tax changes. Table 8 discussed in Section 6.3 below supports this finding
by showing that Google searches increase substantially in the months before tax rates change.

                                       [Table 2 about here]

   In column 1, we report a large tax elasticity, over eight, in anticipation of the tax change.
This sizable increase in purchases is then offset by a large decline in the month when the increase
is implemented. In the month following the initial month of tax increase, purchases increase from
the low level of the month of implementation to approximately the level that existed prior to
tax increase. This dynamic suggests that some purchases from the period of the tax change are
moved forward by approximately one month and then the trend in auto sales largely reverts.


6.1.1   Tax Increases, Decreases, and Size of Tax Change

Columns 2 to 4 show similar results restricting the sample of tax changes to either large changes
(at least 0.5 percentage points in absolute value) or if we separate the changes into increases in
tax rates and decreases. The results for increases are modestly larger suggesting that households

                                                11
might be more likely to pull purchases forward in response to future tax increases than delay
them in response to an anticipated decline. However, as shown in Table 1, the great majority of
tax changes in our sample are increases implying that the increase results rely on a broader set
of observations.


6.1.2   Longer-Term Spending Dynamics

Column 5 adds local-level sales tax changes to the analysis. For this column, the change in tax
is the change in total sales taxes at the zip code level, as compared to the state only changes
in columns 1 to 4. The overall pattern of a pre-implementation increase followed by an im-
plementation month decline persists. However, all results are muted. There are two potential
explanations for this attenuation. First, local sales tax changes may be less salient than state
sales taxes because consumers are less aware of these changes and hence less responsive to them.
This may be partially due to the fact that local changes tend to be more modest. The challenge
with this explanation is that in previous research with retailer-specific and household-specific
data, no difference in responsiveness between local- and state-level changes was seen (see Baker
et al. 2018).
   An alternative explanation is that local-level taxes are not correctly applied or accounted
for during car sales. This could introduce substantial measurement error. Another potential
manifestation of this is that many households are not aware that these taxes are applied based
on the owner’s place of residence and as a result believe that non state-wide sales tax increases
can be avoided. In support of this conjecture we note that the AutoCount data confirm that the
majority of car sales occur in a zip code different from the one where the owner resides, while
nearly all occur in the state of residence. In addition, cars are among the only items where sales
tax is applied based on place of residence rather than based on the point of sale.
   Finally, column 6 shows longer term dynamics, adding more leads and lags, and estimating
in log-levels. This column displays a similar pattern, but also shows that there is a negative pre-
trend. Hence the short-run response we see in the surrounding months are on top of a negative
trend, which might be the reason for the sales tax increase.

                                       [Table 3 about here]

   In Table 3, we show a similar results as in column 1 of Table 2, but now using AutoCount data.
The AutoCount data are generated via a different process and, as a result, cover a somewhat
                                                12
different set of transactions. In particular, the AutoCount data cover car purchases independent
of whether they were financed, but lack data on financed and non-financed transactions that
were not purchased from dealers (in most states). We also know whether a car was new or used
when purchased, which is important since we would expect new car sales to have a much larger
impact on aggregate demand than used car transactions.
   As noted earlier, the AutoCount data also have modest, but potentially important, mis-
measurement in the timing of transactions for two reasons. First, a car enters the data set at the
time of registration rather than at the time of purchase. There is generally a small delay between
purchase and registration. This delay is likely to be more severe for used cars not purchased from
dealers, which are not included in the data set. Second, the month of the data set is the month
when the data were updated, rather than the actual date of the registration.
   While the data are pulled late in the month, some registrations may not have entered the
database by the time the data are pulled and may end up being measured in a subsequent month’s
transactions. As a result, some sales that are attributed to month t in the AutoCount data may
have actually occurred in month t − 1. This is particularly problematic if the dynamics around
sales tax changes are very short run and there is a substantial increase in purchasing in the last
couple days before the increase as these are the transactions that are most likely to be attributed
to the subsequent month.
   Column 1 shows the results for total sales. We see a substantial increase in purchasing in the
month prior to an increase, an insignificant increase in the month of the tax hike and a decline
in the month following the increase.


6.1.3   New vs. Used Car Sales and Financing Status

Columns 2 to 4 show a similar pattern based on a breakdown by financing status - the pattern
in total sales is quite similar to the patterns in financed and non-financed sales as well as leases.
Columns 5 to 8 trace the responses separately for used and new car purchases. New car pur-
chases seem to respond particularly strongly to sales tax changes, as purchases rise both prior
and contemporaneous with the tax change, and the cumulative increase—the sum of these two
coefficients—exceeds that of used purchases by 50%.
   There are three takeaways from this table. First, the timing issue appears to be large and
meaningful when comparing these results to those in Table 1 with more precise measurement of

                                                 13
transaction month. The continued (though sometimes insignificant) growth in purchasing during
the month of the tax increase likely reflects the combination of growth in the last few days before
implementation and decline following implementation. The month after implementation then
represents the first month of data when all transactions are subject to the new tax rate. Second,
the response of purchases to the tax change is very similar across the eight columns in the table.
Importantly for our analysis, the results for financed sales are very similar to the results for total
sales. This suggests that the patterns for the financed sales in the Equifax data are representative
of overall sales. Third, new vehicle purchases respond, if anything, more strongly to sales tax
changes than do used purchases. Sales tax policy therefore matters for the level and timing of
vehicle production rather than just the timing of trades within the existing vehicle stock.


6.2 Consumer Credit and the Responsiveness of Car Sales
   In Table 4, we divide individuals into quintiles of the Equifax Risk Score distribution to
investigate whether tax changes affect these different groups in substantially different ways.
Note that the 1st quintile denotes the largest credit risks and the 5th quintile denotes the lowest
risk group. We find that the general pattern of the response is comparable across the different
Equifax Risk Score groups, with sales increasing in advance of a tax decrease and decreasing
after the tax is increased.

                                        [Table 4 about here]

   However, individuals in the highest two quintiles are nearly twice as responsive as individuals
in the bottom quintile in both the month of and the month prior to a tax change. This is consis-
tent with credit constraints playing a factor in aggregate responsiveness of car sales to foreseen
price/tax changes. Households with higher credit risk scores are more able to obtain financing
to purchase a car earlier than they would have in the absence of a tax change. Households with
the lowest credit risk scores may be unable to obtain financing or be unable to save up the nec-
essary down-payment for a car purchase with one or two fewer months to save. Overall, these
results suggest substantial distributional effects across households, with higher credit risk score
households making up a greater proportion of car sales in the month prior to a tax increase. We
test this prediction directly in Table 7.

                                        [Table 5 about here]
                                                 14
   Table 5 performs a similar analysis using the AutoCount data and dividing households into
quintiles of the VantageScore distribution to measure credit availability. We also divide the
analysis into total, new and used sales. We find that the response of new vehicle purchases to
sales taxes seems particularly sensitive to credit availability. In particular, we observe the lowest
levels of responsiveness for new purchases among those at the bottom of the credit risk score
distribution. By contrast, there is no meaningful gap in the responses of households at the top
and bottom of the VantageScore distribution for used car purchases. Part of the reason for this
disparity may be that financing is more important for the purchase of new, higher-priced cars.


6.3 Car Sales Responsiveness During Recessions
   One interpretation of the results in Tables 4 and 5 is that sales tax changes might be an
ineffective policy tool during recessions or financial crises when credit is tight. Credit access might
serve to dampen the response to unconventional fiscal policy at the time when it is most needed.
In Table 6 we investigate this conjecture directly, showing that responses during recessions are
not depressed because there are other effects that go in opposite direction. These effects tend to
dominate the dampening caused by growing credit frictions.

                                        [Table 6 about here]

   In columns 1 and 2 we show breakdowns in the responsiveness to tax changes based on
whether the economy is in recession. We find that the elasticity is more than twice as large
during recessionary periods as in normal times. Here, we define recessions at a national level
(using the timing from the NBER dating committee), because we might expect aggregate shocks
to the credit environment to be most important during national recessions. Columns 3 and 4
show that we continue to find much larger effects during recessions if we define a recession using
state specific economic measures. In particular, we define a state as being in recession if the
value of the State Coincident Index developed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia is
below its reading from three months prior.
   This larger response during recessions suggests that other factors that work in opposite di-
rection during recessions more than offset the dampening effect of credit frictions. We explore
two such potential mechanisms, differences in the composition of consumers and differences in
attention to taxes.

                                                  15
6.3.1      Differences in Buyer Composition During Recessions

In columns 5 to 9 we investigate whether there are different reactions to recessions within each
Equifax Risk Score quintile by adding recession interactions to our Equifax Risk Score based
regressions in Table 4. These columns demonstrate that while all consumers are more responsive
in recessions, households with high Equifax Risk Scores are much more responsive. This pattern
is suggestive of composition effects driving part of the larger response in recessions. In particular,
the sales tax rate changes during recessions might draw in more buyers with higher credit risk
scores. This could occur if Equifax Risk Score borrowers are a larger fraction of the pool during
recessions or if they become more responsive due to the condition of the economy.

                                            [Table 7 about here]

       Table 7 approaches this question in a different way. Here, we test whether the average
characteristics of car buyers is more sensitive to sales tax changes during recessions than in
normal times. We find substantial evidence that this is the case.
       Most importantly, columns 1 and 2 show that credit risk scores are higher in the month before
the tax change, suggesting that high credit risk score buyers do take advantage of purchasing
before a sales tax increase more so than lower credit risk scores. This effect is much stronger
during recessions than during non-recessionary periods. Similarly, we find equivalent patterns in
columns 3 to 8.7
       The likelihood of a car buyer also having a mortgage (proxy for being wealthier and more
credit-worthy) is much higher in the month preceding a sales tax increase. Car buyers tend to
buy more expensive cars, reflected in the increase in loan amounts, in the month before a sales
tax increase. And car buyers are disproportionately young in the month following a sales tax
increase. All of these indicators suggest that richer, more credit-worthy, and more sophisticated
car buyers are the ones who respond most strongly. Moreover, these households seem to be
particularly sensitive during recessions.
       In addition, these short-term swings are large relative to the differences in average car pur-
chaser composition during recessions and non-recessions. For instance, during recessions, a 1%
   7
    The sample sizes in this table are smaller than in the other tables. In the other tables we are able to impute
missing values with a 0 if there was no purchase in a given zip code-month. In Table 7 however, we need at least
one purchase in each zip code-month in order to have an existing value for the dependent variable (Equifax Risk
Score, mortgage, etc.).

                                                       16
sales tax increase is associated with an approximate 8 point swing in purchaser credit risk score
from the month prior to the increase to the month of the increase. In normal times, this swing
is only 3 points.
       We should note that all our estimates that find larger responsiveness during recessions are
based on growth rates. It may be true that these larger elasticities during recessions represent
similar level changes in car sales if there is a sufficiently smaller base during recessionary periods.
In Table 6 we find that the responsiveness in recessions is more than double the response during
non-recessions. For the level changes to be similar, we would need the base level of car sales
during non-recessions to be about double the level in recessions. While car sales are substantially
lower during recessionary periods, they are only about 30% lower in our data so a lower base is
insufficient to reverse the higher responsiveness during recessions.

                                            [Table 8 about here]


6.3.2      More Attention to Taxes in Recessions

Columns 5-9 of Table 6 show that the differential response in recessions and normal times to a
pre-announced sales tax change remains even conditional on the Equifax Risk Score (i.e., within
quintiles of the score). This suggests that while composition effects can explain some of the
difference in tax elasticities in recessions and normal times, there are other factors that lead
these elasticities to differ.
       Table 8 presents evidence of one such other factor explaining why households may be more
sensitive to upcoming price changes during recessions than during normal times. In this table,
we look at how sales tax changes affect two indicators of news and attention. Google Trends
provides one way of measuring what households are searching for online over time. We can track
this at a city- or state-level with a monthly frequency. In columns 1 and 2, we build on prior
work by Baker et al. (2018) and show that Google searches that contain the term “sales tax”
increase substantially in the month before and month of a tax change. In column 3, we see that
this spike is especially large during recessions, suggesting that households may be more sensitive
to a potential price change that they may be able to take advantage of.8
       In columns 4 to 6, the same exercise is repeated but for the fraction of news articles that
   8
   Results are equivalent if we utilize the Google search term “tax” rather than “sales tax”. See, for instance,
Baker and Fradkin (2017) for a more thorough discussion of the data.

                                                      17
mention the term “sales tax”, as measured at a state-month level. We wish to test whether the
increase in Google searches during recessions is just a function of a greater degree of news coverage
of the tax changes themselves. Here, we document a similar increase in news coverage leading up
to the tax change, but no differential increase in coverage during recessions. If anything, there
seems to be an insignificant relative decrease in coverage of sales tax changes during recessions.
   Consistent with the findings of Gordon et al. (2013), these results suggest that households may
be more sensitive to price changes during recessions and that households may expend somewhat
more effort to take advantage of lower prices where they can. Such an effect would ameliorate
the increase in financing and liquidity frictions that are likely to be present during recessions and
make it more likely that unconventional fiscal policy could still achieve significant results.


6.4 Duration of the Stimulus
   Our findings indicate that household bring spending forward to the months before sales tax
rates increase and that this intertemporal substitution is off-set within one or two months. Hence,
one might be worried that the effect of such unconventional fiscal policy is too short-lived to be
relevant in practice. We now use a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation to show that this is
not necessarily the case. The reason is that the observed tax rate changes are small relative to
the size of the sales tax rate change that would have been called for during the Great Recession.
   Let T denote the economic life of a car (in months) and g the monthly growth rate of the
value (or price) of a new car. Hence, for a consumer who replaces his old car, the value of the
new car, Vnew , and the value of the previous car when purchased new T months ago, Vold , is
Vnew = (1 + g)T × Vold .
   Pulling forward the car purchase by one month is worth it if the amount of tax saving exceeds
the amount of value lost by scrapping the car one month earlier than planned, i.e., if

                                                       Vold
                                        ∆τ × Vnew ≥         ,                                    (2)
                                                        T

assuming straight-line depreciation.
   The average new car during our sample period had an economic life of about years (T = 132).
If the value of new cars grows at the annual rate of inflation of about 2% (g = 0.17%), the break-
even tax rate change that leaves the consumer indifferent between purchasing the car in the


                                                 18
month of the tax increase versus one month before is 0.61%, which is close to the average state
sales tax change (in absolute value) of 0.55% observed over our sample period.
   Calibrating a New Keynesian macroeconomic model to the U.S. economy in a recession at
the ZLB, Correia et al. (2013) find that consumption taxes would need to increase by about 10
percentage points (from 5% to 15%) and potentially by even more if one takes into account the
relatively small tax base of sale taxes in the U.S. Hence, the policy intervention would need to
be about 18 times larger than the typical tax change observed in the data. Extrapolating our
findings to such a large tax change suggests that the effect might last for about 16.5 months after
the tax increase. For comparison, the Great Recession lasted 18 months according to the NBER
recession dating committee.


7 Conclusion
   In the face of the zero lower bound, monetary policy authorities may be unable to utilize
their typical countercyclical policy tools. As one policy alternative, a number of researchers
have proposed “unconventional” fiscal policies. These would take the form of stimulus payments
financed by pre-announced changes in consumption taxes.
   This paper evaluates one measure of the impact of this unconventional fiscal policy on the
magnitude of intertemporal substitution component of aggregate demand stimulus, namely car
purchases. We address four main questions regarding the effectiveness of such a policy:

  1. Are sales tax changes salient enough for consumers to respond significantly?

  2. Do credit frictions dampen the response of large durable purchases?

  3. Is the response especially low during recessions, precisely when we need it the most?

  4. Will the effect of the stimulus last long enough to be policy relevant in practice?

   Utilizing high-frequency data surrounding 57 changes in state sales tax rates, we provide an-
swers to these questions. In prior research (Baker et al. 2018) we show that households actively
search for information about upcoming sales tax changes using Google search data, suggesting
that sales tax changes are sufficiently salient in practice. In this paper we show that this fiscal
foresight also translates into significant effects on durable purchases (in addition to the effects
on retail spending documented in Baker et al. 2018). Consumers exhibit significant levels of
intertemporal substitution in car purchases, financing, and leasing. Car sales rise (fall) dramati-

                                                19
cally in the months just prior to a sales tax increase (decrease) and return to trend in the months
after the tax change takes effect.
   As many consumer durables are purchased with consumer credit, we seek to better understand
the importance of credit constraints when households face incentives to pull forward purchases.
We demonstrate that credit constraints are indeed an important driver of both the heterogeneous
effects across households and the overall size of the intertemporal substitution we observe, with
more constrained households exhibiting significantly lower car purchase elasticities. Given the
typical decline in credit supply during recessions, it is likely that any unconventional fiscal policy
will have a more muted impact than in periods with abundant credit.
   These results reinforce the importance of the direct stimulus or liquidity provision component
of “unconventional” fiscal policy. Such direct payments to households prior to the onset of any
consumption tax increase would alleviate some of the credit and liquidity constraints that likely
prevented many households from purchasing a car to take full advantage of the lower sales taxes
in the present, as shown by by Green et al. (2018) for the “Cash for Clunkers” program.
   Despite these credit constraints having a dampening effect on the stimulus, we find that the
average response to a sales tax rate change is actually larger during recessions. We show that
this can largely be explained by composition effects and by increased price sensitivity during
recessions. Specifically, we find that while most consumers are more price sensitive during reces-
sions, this is especially true for consumers with higher creditworthiness. We show that there is
a systematic shift during recession toward consumers with higher credit risk scores, which leads
to a substantial increase in the average response.
   Going beyond this composition effect, we show that one mechanism which leads to higher
price sensitivity during recession may be increased attention. We find that Google searches for
the term “sales tax” increase much more during recessions than during expansions, even though
news coverage of tax changes is not higher in recessions.
   Finally, we show that while the small historical sales tax rate changes we observe in the
data lead to relatively short-lived responses, we can reasonably expect the much larger sales tax
changes that would be called for during a deep recession to have a much longer-lived effect on
demand.
   There are several caveats for using our estimates to obtain a complete picture of the effec-
tiveness of unconventional fiscal policy. First, we only study one market. While car purchases

                                                 20
are an important component of consumer durables, further research is needed to extrapolate our
results to other important markets subject to credit constraints, most importantly residential
investment in housing and non-residential fixed investment.9
      Second, the sales tax rate changes we study are small such that the observed effect on durable
expenditures dies out quickly. Studying the large tax changes needed in plausibly calibrated
macroeconomic models to respond to a shock that can explain the Great Recession as in Correia
et al. (2013) therefore involves a substantial amount of extrapolation. It is possible that there are
important non-linearities that our analysis is unable to identify that would affect such a dramatic
change in tax rates. Moreover, one might expect substantial supply-side effects and pre-tax price
responses to such an unusual policy.
      There are also important practical issues that need to be resolved. First and foremost, the
U.S. currently does not have a federal consumption tax. Second, there are important questions
about time-inconsistency of such policies, which are discussed in Auerbach and Obstfeld (2004,
2005) and Correia et al. (2013). These committment issues are potentially more serious for the
federal government than for states, which have balanced-budget requirements that make such
budget-neutral tax policies more credible.
      Finally, an important open question for future research is how to schedule the temporary tax
increase in practice. Policymakers face a subtle trade-off. On the one hand, they would ideally
like to start increasing sales taxes as soon as possible to ensure that the increase in demand occurs
at the trough of the business cycle. On the other hand, consumers also need enough foresight to
pull purchases forward before tax changes increase. Moreover, it is important that households
and firms understand that this policy is budget-neutral. An unexpected and uncompensated
increase in sales taxes would decrease aggregate demand and potentially worsen the recession.



References
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel.
  2018. “Do Banks Pass Through Credit Expansions to Consumers Who Want to Borrow?”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 129–190.

Agarwal, Sumit, Nathan Marwell, and Leslie McGranahan. 2017. “Consumption Re-
  9
      Here, the unconventional fiscal policy would be a pre-announced property tax increase.


                                                        21
  sponses to Temporary Tax Incentives: Evidence from State Sales Tax Holidays.” American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and
  Expansion.” In Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis.: University of Chicago press, 63–98.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Maurice Obstfeld. 2004. “Monetary and Fiscal Remedies for De-
  flation.” American Economic Review, 94(2): 71–75.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Maurice Obstfeld. 2005. “The Case for Open-Market Purchases in
  a Liquidity Trap.” American Economic Review, 95(1): 110–137.

Baker, Scott R., and Andrey Fradkin. 2017. “The Impact of Unemployment Insurance
  on Job Search: Evidence from Google Search Data.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 99
  756–768.

Baker, Scott R., Stephanie Johnson, and Lorenz Kueng. 2018. “Shopping for Lower Sales
  Tax Rates.” NBER Working Paper No. 23665.

Benmelech, Efraim, Ralf R. Meisenzahl, and Rodney Ramcharan. 2017. “The Real
  Effects of Liquidity During the Financial Crisis: Evidence from Automobiles.” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 132(1): 317–365.

Berger, David, Nicholas Turner, and Eric Zwick. 2014. “Household Credit and Employ-
  ment in the Great Recession.” NBER Working Paper No. 22903.

Berger, David, and Joseph Vavra. 2015. “Consumption Dynamics during Recessions.”
  Econometrica, 83(1): 101–154.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016. “Report on the Economic
  Well-Being of US Households in 2015.”

Büttner, Thiess, and Boryana Madzharova. 2017. “Sales and Price Effects of Pre-
  announced Consumption Tax Reforms: Micro-level Evidence from European VAT.” University
  of Erlangen-Nuremberg Working Paper.

Carroll, Christopher, Jiri Slacalek, Kiichi Tokuoka, and Matthew N. White. 2017.
  “The Distribution of Wealth and the Marginal Propensity to Consume.” Quantitative Eco-
  nomics, 8(3): 977–1020.

Cashin, David. 2014. “The Intertemporal Substitution and Income Effects of a Consumption
  Tax Rate Increase: Evidence from New Zealand.” University of Michigan Working Paper.


                                              22
Cashin, David, and Takashi Unayama. 2016. “Measuring Intertemporal Substitution in
  Consumption: Evidence from a VAT Increase in Japan.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  98(2): 285–297.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
  Evidence.” American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145–1177.

Coglianese, John, Lucas W. Davis, Lutz Kilian, and James H. Stock. 2017. “Antic-
  ipation, Tax Avoidance, and the Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand.” Journal of Applied
  Econometrics, 32(1): 1–15.

Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2013. “Uncon-
  ventional Fiscal Policy at the Zero Bound.” American Economic Review, 103(4): 1172–1211.

Crossley, Thomas F., Hamish W. Low, and Cath Sleeman. 2014. “Using a Temporary
  Indirect Tax Cut as a Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the UK.” Working Paper.

D’Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber. 2018. “Unconventional Fiscal
  Policy.” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108 519–23.

Eichenbaum, Martin, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong. 2018. “State Dependency and
  the Efficacy of Monetary Policy: The Refinancing Channel.” Northwestern University Working
  Paper.

Feldstein, Martin. 2002. “The Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy in a Low Interest Rate
  Environment.” NBER Working Paper No. 9203.

Gordon, Brett R., Avi Goldfarb, and Yang Li. 2013. “Does Price Elasticity Vary with
  Economic Growth? A Cross-Category Analysis.” Journal of Marketing Research, 50(1): 4–23.

Green, Daniel, Brian Melzer, Johnathan A. Parker, and Arcenis Rojas. 2018. “Acceler-
  ator or Brake? Microeconomic Estimates of the ‘Cash for Clunkers’ and Aggregate Demand.”
  NBER Working Paper No. 22878.

Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest
  Rates Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 117(1): 149–185.

Gross, Tal, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang. 2016. “The Marginal Propensity
  to Consume over the Business Cycle.” NBER Working Paper No. 22518.

Hall, Robert E. 2011. “The Long Slump.” American Economic Review, 101(2): 431–69.


                                            23
Hendel, Igal, and Aviv Nevo. 2006. “Measuring the Implications of Sales and Consumer
  Inventory Behavior.” Econometrica, 74(6): 1637–1673.

House, Christopher L., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2006. “Phased-In Tax Cuts and Eco-
  nomic Activity.” American Economic Review, 96(5): 1835–1849.

Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2010. “The Consumption Response to Income
  Changes.” Annual Review of Economics, 2 479–506.

Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2017. The Economics of Consumption: Theory and
  Evidence.: Oxford University Press.

Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
  and the Economic Slump.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4): 1687–1726.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
  from the US Mortgage Default Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1449–1496.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US
  Household Leverage Crisis.” American Economic Review, 101(5): 2132–56.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2012. “The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009
  Cash for Clunkers Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1107–1142.

Mondragon, John. 2014. “Household Credit and Employment in the Great Recession.” North-
  western University Working Paper.

Ramey, Valerie A, and Sarah Zubairy. 2018. “Government Spending Multipliers in Good
  Times and in Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data.” Journal of Political Economy, 126(2):
  850–901.




                                            24
                          Figure 1: Delinquencies Over the Business Cycle




Notes: Graphs display the delinquency rate on all covered consumer loans at commercial banks and the quarterly
U3 unemployment rate in the United States. Both series cover 1985-2018.
                                  Figure 2: Sales Tax Rate Variation

                                (a) Maximum state sales tax rates, 1999-2017




                             (b) Number of tax rate changes by state, 1999-2017




Notes: Maps plot the maximum level of state sales tax rates for years 1999-2017 (a) and number tax changes for
each state in this period (b). Sales tax rates are expressed in percentages.
                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                           Percentiles
                                        Mean      Min       5th     25th      50th       75th   95th     Max

Panel A: CCH Sales Tax Data
 State Sales Tax                        5.6%         0    4.0%     4.75%      6.0%    6.25%     7.25%   8.25%
 Total Sales Tax                        6.8%        0     5.0%      6.0%      7.0%     8.0%      9.2%   12.0%
 ∆State Sales Tax                      0.55%*     -1.0%   -1.0%    0.25%     0.25%    1.0%      1.0%    1.25%

Panel B: FRBNY Equifax Consumer Credit Panel
 Total Purchases (Unconditional)   3   0    0                         0         1          4     14      193
 Total Purchases (Conditional >0)  5   1    1                        1          3          7     17      193
 Equifax Risk Score               680  0  555                       638       685        729    789      840
 Average Loan Size (in $1,000)    13.9 0   4.7                      9.5       12.9       16.7   25.8     100
 Credit Card Utilization          0.46 0  0.02                      0.23      0.41       0.61   0.98     1.00

Panel C: Experian AutoCount Data
 Total Car Sales              82.8                  0        2       10        33        114     317     1,903
 New Car Sales                23.1                  0        1       2          8        30       95     1,137
 Used Car Sales               59.7                  0        2       7         24        78      230     1,517
 Non-Financed Sales           34.5                  0        1        4        13         41     134     1,478
 Financed Sales               48.3                  0        1       5         17        65      194     1,248
 Leases                        5.9                  0        0       0          0         2       27     5,935
 Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax data from 1999-2017 and
 Experian AutoCount data from 2005-2015. For purposes of summary statistics, an observation is a zip code-
 month. For changes in sales taxes, months with no change are omitted in this table. Statistics are weighted by
 Census 2000 population.
 * The average state change is the average absolute value change.




                                                   27
                    Table 2: Response of Car Purchases to State Sales Tax Changes, Equifax CCP Data

                         All Tax Changes Large Changes      Increases      Decreases    Total Sales Tax       Levels
                                (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)

∆log(1+τ), leads 2-4                                                                                           -2.287
                                                                                                              (1.422)
∆log(1+τ), lead 1             8.247***        8.832***       8.120***       8.620***        5.493**           4.954**
                               (2.782)         (2.625)        (2.832)        (2.998)        (2.203)           (2.318)
∆log(1+τ)                    -9.645***       -10.73***      -11.18***      -5.499***       -6.763***        -4.713***
                               (1.949)         (2.001)        (2.718)        (1.739)        (2.443)           (1.105)
∆log(1+τ), lag 1              3.068***        3.142***       1.851***       6.271***         2.010*            -1.630
                               (0.805)         (0.713)        (0.668)        (1.401)        (1.142)           (1.095)
∆log(1+τ), lags 2-4                                                                                         -3.400***
                                                                                                              (1.120)
∆log(1+τ), lags 5-8                                                                                          -3.842**
                                                                                                              (1.537)

Year-by-month FE                Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
Observations                 5,996,086       5,933,599      5,962,468      5,926,423       4,397,986        5,996,086
R-squared                      0.024           0.025          0.024          0.024           0.023            0.790
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax data. The dependent variable is log
monthly car purchases financed with credit. Specifications are listed in the heading of each column. Changes in columns
(1) to (5) and levels in column (6). Regressions are weighted by average annual zip code population from the U.S.
Census Bureau. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1.
               Table 3: Response of Car Purchases to State Sales Tax Changes, Experian AutoCount Data

                                                                                                 New
                                                Non-
                    Total Sales   Financed    financed     Leases       Used       All New     Financed      Non-fin.
                        (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)

∆log(1+τ), lead 1    9.053***      8.862***    7.221***     7.858**   9.391***     7.003***      6.656**     6.111***
                      (2.039)       (2.959)     (1.764)     (3.225)    (2.123)      (2.476)      (2.806)      (1.835)
∆log(1+τ)               3.695        2.836        4.067      4.931       1.032      8.493**       8.172*     9.838***
                      (3.784)       (3.934)     (3.667)     (4.808)    (3.261)      (4.155)      (4.358)      (3.225)
∆log(1+τ), lag 1    -8.986***     -8.668***   -9.924***   -10.538*** -6.039***    -13.867***   -12.327***   -17.605***
                      (2.391)       (2.251)     (2.664)     (2.503)    (2.130)      (3.000)      (2.963)      (2.734)
∆log(1+τ), lag 2       -4.759       -7.952*      -3.192    7.425***     -4.769       -6.952     -8.800**       -5.066
                      (5.045)       (4.011)     (5.410)     (2.542)    (5.111)      (4.190)      (4.019)      (5.172)

Year-by-month FE     Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations     2,356,223        2,356,223   2,356,223   2,356,223   2,356,223   2,356,223    2,356,223    2,356,223
R-squared           0.206            0.166       0.115       0.037       0.187       0.134        0.124        0.041
Source: Authors’ calculations based on Experian AutoCount data. Regressions are weighted by average annual zip code
population from the U.S. Census Bureau. Dependent variables are listed in the heading of each column. Robust standard
errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1.
     Table 4: Differential Response Across Credit Scores, Equifax CCP Data

                       Equifax Risk Score Quintiles (from highest to lowest risk)
                         1st         2nd          3rd         4th          5th
                         (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)

∆log(1+τ), lead 1      3.966***    3.399**      4.963**      7.537***     6.460**
                        (0.920)    (1.559)      (1.996)       (2.003)     (2.602)
∆log(1+τ)             -4.140***   -5.030***    -5.544***    -8.179***   -7.301***
                        (1.458)    (0.977)      (0.708)       (1.591)     (2.000)
∆log(1+τ), lag 1         1.170      1.454        0.963       3.330***    3.209***
                        (0.891)    (1.052)      (0.760)       (0.815)     (0.980)

Year-by-month FE         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Observations          5,989,936   5,989,936    5,989,936    5,989,936   5,989,936
R-squared               0.007       0.008        0.009        0.010       0.010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax
data. The dependent variable is the change in log monthly car purchases financed
with credit. Regressions are weighted by average annual zip code population from
the U.S. Census Bureau. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the
state level. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1.
         Table 5: Differential Responses Across Credit Scores, Experian AutoCount Data

                               Experian VantageScore Quintiles (from highest to lowest risk)
                               (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)
Panel A: Total Sales           1st           2nd            3rd            4th            5th

∆log(1+τ), lead 1           8.611***       7.497**        7.686***       7.988***      9.251***
                             (2.955)       (2.976)         (2.369)        (2.416)       (3.217)
∆log(1+τ)                      2.177        1.252           1.926          3.422         4.672
                             (4.579)       (3.509)         (4.010)        (4.207)       (4.211)
∆log(1+τ), lag 1            -6.505**      -6.315***      -7.748***      -10.071***    -11.122***
                             (2.414)       (2.342)         (2.566)        (2.484)       (2.393)
∆log(1+τ), lag 2              -4.691       -7.835*         -7.654*       -8.539**      -7.639**
                             (4.390)       (4.114)         (3.917)        (4.172)       (3.562)

R-squared                     0.084         0.085          0.071          0.064          0.057

Panel B: New Sales             1st           2nd            3rd            4th            5th

∆log(1+τ), lead 1            -2.359*        4.688**        4.639*         6.041**      8.045***
                             (1.228)        (2.281)        (2.591)        (2.540)       (2.976)
∆log(1+τ)                      2.251         4.537         8.613*         9.220**      10.281**
                             (2.248)        (3.675)        (4.484)        (4.449)       (4.509)
∆log(1+τ), lag 1            -3.544**        -5.967*      -10.357***     -13.136***    -14.890***
                             (1.584)        (2.967)        (3.385)        (3.005)       (3.102)
∆log(1+τ), lag 2              -3.035       -8.300**       -7.786**       -9.344**       -6.245*
                             (2.456)        (3.949)        (3.337)        (3.785)       (3.139)

R-squared                     0.012         0.044          0.055          0.058          0.056

Panel C: Used Sales            1st           2nd            3rd            4th            5th

∆log(1+τ), lead 1           9.549***        8.530**       8.943***       8.025***      8.562***
                             (3.086)        (3.278)        (1.996)        (2.088)       (2.768)
∆log(1+τ)                      1.690         0.339          -1.704         -2.176        -1.890
                             (4.536)        (3.346)        (3.478)        (3.390)       (3.373)
∆log(1+τ), lag 1            -5.912**       -5.993**       -5.178**      -5.799***      -4.384**
                             (2.261)        (2.253)        (2.273)        (2.065)       (2.141)
∆log(1+τ), lag 2              -4.143        -7.175*        -7.106*         -5.928       -8.057*
                             (4.297)        (4.187)        (4.085)        (4.063)       (4.133)

R-squared                     0.083          0.068         0.039          0.025          0.019
Year-by-month FE               Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                1,460,260      1,460,260     1,460,260      1,460,260      1,460,260
Source: Authors’ calculations based on Experian AutoCount data. Regressions are weighted by
average annual zip code population from the U.S. Census Bureau. Dependent variables for all
columns is the change in log car sales for households within a given credit score quintile,
aggregated to the zip-month level. Panel A displays results for changes in total car sales, Panel B
does the same for only new car sales, and Panel C does the same for only used car sales. Robust
standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1.
                                                   Table 6: Response in Recessions vs. Normal Times

                                by NBER Recession Dates        by State Coincident Index                    by Equifax Risk Score Quintile
                                Recession   Non-Recession       Recession   Non-Recession         1st        2nd         3rd         4th         5th
                                   (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)

∆log(1+τ), lead 1                15.08***      6.328***          13.51***       5.923**        3.913***       1.662     4.175**     6.436***     4.142*
                                  (2.286)       (2.217)           (2.558)       (2.635)         (1.006)     (1.675)     (1.749)      (1.539)    (2.269)
∆log(1+τ)                       -17.48***     -7.098***         -16.82***     -6.631***         -2.664*    -4.027***   -4.475***   -5.780***   -3.847***
                                  (2.623)       (1.301)           (2.039)       (1.354)         (1.347)     (0.980)     (0.905)      (1.126)    (1.334)
∆log(1+τ), lag 1                 3.708***      2.867***          3.917***      2.746***          0.477       2.384*      1.095      3.751***     2.244*
                                  (1.175)       (0.923)           (0.863)       (1.009)         (1.294)     (1.205)     (0.878)      (1.252)    (1.114)

Recession x ∆log(1+τ), lead 1                                                                     0.164    5.333***       2.419       3.386     7.116***
                                                                                                 (1.122)    (1.607)     (1.889)     (2.197)      (1.618)
Recession x ∆log(1+τ)                                                                           -4.527**     -3.075    -3.281**    -7.356***   -10.60***
                                                                                                 (1.890)    (1.958)     (1.351)     (2.244)      (1.681)
Recession x ∆log(1+τ), lag 1                                                                      2.132      -2.864      -0.409      -1.296      2.963**
                                                                                                 (1.712)    (1.917)     (1.109)     (1.656)      (1.185)

Year-by-month FE                   Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations                     524,157      5,471,929         1,129,625      4,866,461       5,989,936   5,989,936   5,989,936   5,989,936   5,989,936
R-squared                         0.017         0.025             0.036          0.022           0.007       0.008       0.009       0.010       0.010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax and Haver Analytics/Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia data. The
dependent variable is the change in log monthly car purchases financed with credit. Regressions are weighted by average annual zip code population from
the U.S. Census Bureau. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1.
                                         Table 7: Composition Effects in Recessions vs. Normal Times

                           Equifax Risk Score                   Mortgage                  ln(Loan Value)                    Age
                        Recession   Non-Recession     Recession Non-Recession        Recession Non-Recession    Recession Non-Recession
                           (1)           (2)              (3)              (4)          (5)            (6)         (7)              (8)

∆log(1+τ), lead 1         238.2**       120.4           1.514*         0.297         3.481***       0.0222        5.697            -7.903
                          (99.50)      (78.87)          (0.891)       (0.465)         (0.493)      (0.806)       (12.50)          (12.16)
∆log(1+τ)               -595.1***     -196.0**        -3.062***        0.111         -1.966**        0.330      -88.86***          -17.09
                          (70.11)      (81.13)          (0.599)       (0.257)         (0.802)      (0.756)       (23.63)          (12.88)
∆log(1+τ), lag 1         281.5***      172.5**         1.835***       0.00962        1.357***      1.319**        46.02             16.30
                          (82.16)      (75.84)          (0.487)       (0.350)         (0.438)      (0.570)       (34.15)          (10.13)

Year-by-month FE          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Observations            257,048       2,875,428        256,942       2,840,889        257,048      2,875,428     256,938      2,838,616
R-squared                0.003          0.004           0.002          0.002           0.002         0.002        0.001         0.002

Mean of dep. variable    678.66        675.59            0.47          0.42             9.46           9.54       44.32           44.36
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax data. Dependent variables are listed in the heading of each
column. Regressions are weighted by average annual zip code population from the U.S. Census Bureau. Robust standard errors in parentheses
are clustered at the state level. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1.
                     Table 8: Google Searches and Newspaper Articles during Recessions

                                             Google Searches                          Newspaper Articles
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)

∆log(1+τ), lead 4                   -2.368                                    16.06*
                                   (4.774)                                    (8.006)
∆log(1+τ), lead 3                   -4.599                                   35.18***
                                   (5.926)                                    (12.31)
∆log(1+τ), lead 2                    8.103                                   36.59***
                                   (4.902)                                    (6.628)
∆log(1+τ), lead 1                 44.48***      50.37***       38.76***      44.45***     42.34***     45.92***
                                   (7.178)       (9.819)        (5.943)       (10.20)      (6.146)      (6.870)
∆log(1+τ)                         15.03***                                     9.749
                                   (5.355)                                    (5.904)
Recession x ∆log(1+τ), lead 1                                  57.66***                                  -16.68
                                                                (13.36)                                 (15.02)

Year-by-month FE                    Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
State FE                            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Observations                       3,886          4,814         4,814         6,171         7,293          7,293
R-squared                          0.727          0.745         0.729         0.636         0.608          0.599
Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1.
