                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             CONSUMER MISINFORMATION AND THE BRAND PREMIUM:
                    A PRIVATE LABEL BLIND TASTE TEST

                                       Bart Bronnenberg
                                      Jean-Pierre H. Dubé
                                       Robert E. Sanders

                                      Working Paper 25214
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25214


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




We are grateful to Bob Mariano and Roundy’s Supermarkets for providing the data for this
project. We benefitted from the comments and suggestions of Bryan Bollinger, Guido Imbens and
Moshen Bayati, along with seminar participants at McGill University, the 2016 Data Science
Academy at AC Nielsen, the 2016 Kilts Center Marketing Insights Conference and the 2016
Marketing Science Conference in Shanghai. Bronnenberg acknowledges research support from
Stanford University as the 2017-2018 GSB Trust Faculty Fellow; Dubé acknowledges research
support from the Kilts Center for Marketing and the Charles E. Merrill faculty research fund; and
Sanders acknowledges the Marketing Science Institute for research support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Bart Bronnenberg, Jean-Pierre H. Dubé, and Robert E. Sanders. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumer Misinformation and the Brand Premium: A Private Label Blind Taste Test
Bart Bronnenberg, Jean-Pierre H. Dubé, and Robert E. Sanders
NBER Working Paper No. 25214
November 2018
JEL No. L11,L15,M31,M37

                                          ABSTRACT

We run in-store blind taste tests with a retailer’s private label food brands and the leading
national brand counterparts in three large CPG categories. In a survey administered during the
taste test, subjects self-report very high expectations about the quality of the private labels
relative to national brands. However, they predict a relatively low probability of choosing them in
a blind taste test. Surprisingly however, an overwhelming majority systematically chooses the
private label in the blinded test. During the week after the intervention, the tested private label
product market shares increase by 15 share points, on top of a base share of 8 share points.
However, the effect diminishes to 8 share points during the second to fourth week after the test
and to 2 share points during the second to fifth month after the test. Using a structural model of
demand, we show these effects survive controls for point-of-purchase prices, purchase incidence,
and the feedback effects of brand loyalty. We also find that the intervention increases the
preference for the private label brands, and that it decreases the preference for the national
brands, relative to the outside good. The findings are consistent with a treatment effect of
information on demand where the memory for this information decays slowly over time.
Alternative explanations to the information treatment are ruled out.

Bart Bronnenberg                                 Robert E. Sanders
Tilburg University and CentER                    University of California San Diego
Warandelaan 2, Koopmans K-1003                   9500 Gilman Drive #0553
5037 AB Tilburg                                  Wells Fargo Hall, 3W106
The Netherlands                                  San Diego, CA 92093
bart.bronnenberg@uvt.nl                          rsanders@rady.ucsd.edu

Jean-Pierre H. Dubé
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jdube@chicagobooth.edu
1      INTRODUCTION
Private label brands in the consumer packaged goods (CPG) industry are still relatively under-
developed in the United States (US) relative to other western economies. According to a 2014
global Nielsen survey, private labels accounted for only 18% of US CPG sales, which is compa-
rable to the weighted global average of 16.5% but much smaller than shares exceeding 40% in
European countries like the United Kingdom, Switzerland and Spain.1 In Europe, private labels
represent $1 of every $3 spent on CPG. In spite of the spending gap between the US and Europe,
survey evidence suggests that there is no gap in private label quality perceptions: 75% of US re-
spondents agreed with the statement “Private Labels are a good alternative to name brands.” In
Europe, the rate is comparable at 69%. In spite of perceptions, US consumers routinely pay a
large price premium for national brands. Recent research finds that US consumers could save $44
billion annually by switching to a comparable store brand when available (Bronnenberg, Dubé,
Gentzkow, and Shapiro, 2015).
    We investigate the extent to which US consumers’ willingness-to-pay a CPG brand price pre-
mium relative to private label alternatives is driven by an information barrier. In cooperation with
Mariano’s, a large, mid-western supermarket chain, we conduct a series of in-store blind taste tests
that match the chain’s private label products against the leading national brand competitors in sev-
eral CPG categories. Mariano’s carries a high-quality line of private label products using the pri-
vate label, “Roundy’s,” along with a premium line of private label products under the private label
“Roundy’s Select.” Prior to sampling the products, subjects are asked several questions regarding
their private label beliefs. After the blind taste test, when the identities of the sampled products are
revealed, subjects self-report their future purchase intentions for the private label. Each participant
sampled products from only one category: Cookies (Roundy’s O’s versus Oreos), Greek Yogurt
(Roundy’s Greek versus Chobani) or Ice Cream (Roundy’s Select versus Breyers). These product
categories exhibit a substantial national brand price premium (36.6% in Cookies, 19.7% in Greek
Yogurt and 24.8% in Ice Cream). To measure a treatment effect of the blind taste test, the survey
responses are matched to each subject’s loyalty card account so that national brand and private
label purchases can be tracked within-consumer before and after the in-store intervention.
    1 “TheState of Private Label Around the World: where it’s growing, where it’s not, and what the future holds,”
Nielsen, November 2014.


                                                        2
   It is not possible to design an in-store sampling promotion that randomly assigns subjects to
information treatment conditions. Hence, participation in the blind taste test could be self-selected
on unobserved aspects of consumer preferences for private labels. We propose a difference-in-
differences (DID) approach to obtain a consistent estimate of the causal effect of the blind taste test
on the treated consumers. We use time stamps on consumers’ transactions to construct a “control
group” of consumers who shopped in the store-day of the blind taste tests. We then compare
within-household changes in private label purchasing behavior on trips 150 days before and 157
days after the date of the blind taste test for our test and control consumers.
   Our key identifying assumption consists of the usual parallel trends condition. We validate our
test and control design using the pre-test purchase panel data, finding little systematic differences in
preferences for test and control consumers and no evidence of non-parallel trends. We also show
that the estimated treatment effect of the blind taste test is robust to an alternative fixed-effects
specification that allows us to relax the parallel trends condition and allow for richer patterns both
across time and across consumers.
   We begin with an analysis of the survey data. Across the three categories, 81% of participants
agreed that overall, Mariano’s “Roundy’s” private label is as good as the national brands. Surpris-
ingly, only 44% of participants predicted they would pick the private label over the national brand
in the blind taste test. However, 73% of participants preferred the Roundy’s private label immedi-
ately after the blind taste test (but before revealing the identities of brands), which is much higher
than pure chance and, and more in line with the initial self-reported quality beliefs. Finally, after
the identity of the chosen product was revealed, 83% of participants predicted that they would buy
the Roundy’s private label next time they shopped in the category they sampled.
   Our DID estimates indicate a large initial impact of the blind taste test on purchases. During
the week after the blind taste test, the pooled private label share for test consumers increased
by 15 percentage points on a base of 8 percentage points. This effect is much larger than the
usual advertising effects from traditional media like television. The effect size varies considerably
across the three categories: 48 share points in Cookies, 22 share points in Ice Cream and 10 share
points in Greek Yogurt. After the first week, the treatment effect declines. During the period
spanning 1 to 4 weeks after the test, the pooled treatment effect across categories falls to 8 share
points. During the period spanning 1 to 5 months after the test, the pooled treatment effect across


                                                   3
categories falls to 2 share points. The latter still represents a quarter of the initial private label
share. These findings are qualitatively unchanged when we re-run our analysis at the weekly level
using a matrix completion estimator (Athey, Bayati, Doudchenko, and Imbens, 2017) that relaxes
the parallel trends assumption.
   An analysis of the valence effects suggest that the information conveyed by the blind taste test
is not merely generating a salience effect, in contrast with traditional promotional tools like in-
aisle displays. In particular, the treatment effect is much larger for subjects that derived a positive
signal from the taste test, suggesting an informative role of the blind taste test. The persistence in
the effect of the intervention indicates that the blind taste test is generating more than an instan-
taneous promotional effect. Finally, even if we exclude the day of the intervention, we still find a
large treatment effect during the first week suggesting a carry-over effect of the intervention into
subsequent trips.
   A limitation of the DID estimates is that they do not allow for heterogeneity in the treatment
effect and they do not control for prices, purchase incidence, the presence of other substitute brands
in the category that were not sampled in the blind taste test, and the potentially confounding role
of purchase reinforcement through brand loyalty (e.g., Givon and Horsky, 1990). We estimate a
random coefficients choice model to control for these various factors in the Greek Yogurt category,
which we selected due to its relatively high purchase incidence. Our random coefficients analysis
focuses on the largest brands in the category.
   We find that, once we control for heterogeneity, we reject a model with brand loyalty (i.e.,
inertia) in favor of one without. We therefore conclude that any persistence in the effect of the
blind taste test is not merely picking up the indirect feedback effect of brand loyalty. Our main
finding regarding the short, medium and long-run treatment effects of the blind taste test are robust
to the various controls. We also find that the blind taste test increases the consumer preference for
the private label and decreases the utility for the tested national brand.
   To assess the role of our informational intervention, we use the structural estimates to simu-
late the counterfactual scenario in which all consumers visiting the store participate in the blind
taste test. We predict such a policy would generate a large initial outward shift in private label de-
mand, ceteribus paribus. But, over time (1 to 5 months post test), the demand shift would weaken,
converging back towards the initial pre-treatment levels. These findings suggest that the one-time


                                                   4
information treatment may not be sufficient to overwhelm the persistent effects of brand capital,
as documented in Bronnenberg, Dhar, and Dubé (2009) and Bronnenberg, Dubé, and Gentzkow
(2012).
   Our findings add to the extant literature on the role of consumer information. Earlier work has
found that product knowledge and domain expertise are associated with private label purchases.
Pharmacists are considerably more likely to buy private label headache medicines, and chefs are
considerably more likely to buy private label pantry staples (Bronnenberg, Dubé, Gentzkow, and
Shapiro, 2015). However, it is unclear whether policies that directly communicate objective prod-
uct information to consumers have a material impact on their brand choices. Bollinger, Leslie, and
Sorensen (2011) find that calorie posting nudges consumers towards healthier product choices and
Jin and Leslie (2003) find that restaurant hygiene report cards lead more demand for clean restau-
rants and a larger supply of high-hygiene restaurants. In contrast, in the CPG industry, consumers
still tend to pick a higher-priced national CPG brand even when they are told that the private label is
objectively comparable in quality (Cox, Coney, and Ruppe, 1983; Carrera and Villas-Boas, 2015).
Similarly, in the automobile industry, Allcott and Knittel (2017) find that providing consumers
with fuel economy information does not affect consumer car purchases. We find that providing
consumers with their own, subjective CPG food information has a long lasting, yet largely tran-
sient, effect on their private label purchases.
   Our findings also add to the broader literature on branding as a barrier to entry in consumer
goods markets (Bain, 1956; Schmalensee, 1982; Bronnenberg, Dubé, and Gentzkow, 2012). The
survey results indicate that consumers underestimate their likelihood of choosing the private label
in a blind taste test, in spite of their stated belief that the private label brands are as good as
the national brands. In contrast with most of the structural learning literature (e.g., Erdem and
Keane, 1996; Ackerberg, 2003), we find that the information effect erodes over time and purchase
behavior reverts back towards the pre-test purchase rates, possibly due to forgetting (e.g., Mehta,
Rajiv, and Srinivasan, 2004). These findings are consistent with a small theoretical literature on
free sampling that also allows for forgetting (e.g., Heiman, McWilliams, Shen, and Zilberman,
2001). The decline is also consistent with the empirical advertising literature in which advertising
is found to have a persistent effect on demand that decays slowly over time (e.g., Clarke, 1976;
Assmus, Farley, and Lehmann, 1984; Dubé, Hitsch, and Manchanda, 2005; Sahni, 2012); although


                                                  5
our blind taste test generates a much larger effect on demand than impressions from traditional
advertising media.
    Our findings also contribute to the managerial literature on free samples and non-price promo-
tions. Price promotions, like coupons, are typically only found to have short-term direct effects
on consumer purchases (e.g., Klein, 1981; Irons, Little, and Klein, 1983), with any longer-term
effects typically arising through purchase feedback (e.g., Gedenk and Neslin, 1999). The find-
ings on non-price promotions are more mixed. Gedenk and Neslin (1999) find either no effect or
purely a purchase feedback effect from non-price promotions like feature ads and sampling. We
explicitly test for and reject purchase feedback, finding a direct long-term effect from the blind
taste tests, similar to the long-term effects in Bawa and Shoemaker (2004)’s study of free sampling
campaigns. Unlike past studies of free samples, we explicitly treat our consumer subjects with
information about their subjective taste for branded versus private label goods. The information
treatment changed the beliefs of many consumers regarding the perceived quality gap between
national brand and private labels.
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the blind taste test and the data used in
this study. Section 3 reports on survey findings. Next, section 4 discusses the results of our DID
analysis, and section 5 explains the structural model and analysis. Finally, section 6 concludes.



2     Data
The data originate from a partnership with Roundy’s, the parent company of several midwestern
supermarket chains. We use data from the “Mariano’s” chain, located in Cook County, Illinois. The
database comprises three sources: (1) transaction-level data collected through shoppers’ loyalty
cards, (2) SKU-level data tracking daily price and product availability data by store, and (3) the
in-store beliefs and preference survey conducted during our blind taste test. We now describe each
data set in detail.


2.1    Loyalty Card Data

First, we collected transaction-level data through Mariano’s loyalty card database. The data span
the 57-month period from July, 2010 (the opening of the first Mariano’s store in Arlington Heights,

                                                 6
IL) to March, 2015. They include 70,635,896 transactions time-stamped by day, hour, and minute,
and comprise 1,329,900 unique customers and over 29 unique Mariano’s stores. We retain the
UPC-level purchase information for our 3 categories of interest: ice cream, yogurt and shelf-
stable packaged cookies. The purchase data include the panelist’s unique loyalty card number, the
quantity of each UPC purchased, the price paid net of discounts, the trip date and the unique store
number.


2.2      Store-Level Data

We also obtained a store-level database tracking the weekly shelf prices and product availability of
each of the UPCs in our 3 categories of interest: (shelf-stable) cookies, ice cream, and yogurt. The
data span 29 stores, 3,301 UPCs and the time period between July 2010 through and April 2015.


2.3      Blind Taste Test Survey Data

The blind taste tests were conducted at the end of October, 2014. For each of the three categories,
between 10 and 16 separate blind taste test sessions were conducted. In a given store-day, there
was never more than one tested category. In total, the blind taste tests spanned 5 stores across
8 days. Table 1 summarizes the date and location of each of the 36 sessions. A given session
typically lasted 6 hours and resulted in 3 to 82 respondents.2 During a session, a “free samples”
table was manned by a trained sales associate near the main entrance of the store. The associate
used a pre-programmed tablet device to administer the survey and to record responses. Mariano’s
management trained each sales associate regarding how to use the tablet device and how to admin-
ister the survey. Each participant was first asked to swipe her loyalty card. The participant was
then asked to answer yes/no to the question: “Do you think Roundy’s branded food products are at
least as good as their national brand counter-parts?” After answering, the sales associate explained
which two products the participant would sample. Before sampling, the participant was asked to
answer a second yes/no question: “Do you think you will prefer [own brand being tested] or [na-
tional brand being tested]?” Depending on the session, the participant compared either Roundy’s
O’s and Oreos (Cookies), Roundy’s Greek and Chobani (Greek Yogurt), or Roundy’s Select and
  2 In   the store with only 3 trials, the sampling booth only ran for 20 minutes and was shut down early.



                                                            7
Breyers (Ice Cream). At this point, the Mariano’s employee offered the participant samples of the
private label and branded good with the product identities masked. The participant was then asked
to answer a third question: “Which product did you prefer?” Finally, the participant was asked
a fourth yes/no question: “Next time you shop for (product category being tested), will you buy
(own brand being tested)?”

                                         – insert Table 1 here –

    In total, we collected 1,228 responses from 1,119 unique card holders who participated in one
of the 36 blind taste test sessions listed in Table 1. For each unique card holder, we retained the
first response (in case of multiple household member participating in the same in-store test) of the
first test (in case of exposure to multiple in-store tests) for our analysis. Our final treatment sample
therefore contains 1,119 responses and unique card holders.


2.4    Estimation Sample

For our analysis, we focus on the population of shoppers who shopped in one of our 5 test stores on
a date during which we ran one of the blind taste test sessions listed in Table 1. We then define our
sample period as the 150 days prior to the blind taste test and the 157 days following the blind taste
test. We observe panelist shopping data as early as 2010, when the first Mariano’s stores opened
in Chicago. However, we only use the 150 days prior to the taste test to mitigate the potentially
confounding effects of changing tastes over time. The decision to use 157 days post treatment
is due to the fact that our transaction data end at that time. In total, we retain 16,680 unique
customers who make 211,790 unique transactions within the three categories studied across all 29
stores during the time period of interest. We match households’ blind-taste test responses with
pre- and post-intervention purchase data using their unique loyalty card number. Among the 1,119
consumers who participated in a blind taste test, 440 (39%) can be matched to purchase data of the
varieties they tasted (e.g., Greek yogurt). Of these 440 participants, 99 sampled private-label and
branded Oreo style Cookies, 156 sampled branded and unbranded Greek Yogurt and 185 sampled
Ice Cream. These panelists represent the test sample for our analysis.
    For our control sample, we use all panelists who (a) shopped on the same day and location as
the 36 blind taste test sessions, (b) did not participate in the test itself, and (c) purchase in the tested

                                                     8
categories. In total, we have 16,240 unique control panelists.
   Table 2 provides descriptive statistics of our final estimation sample. For each of the control
and test groups, we report the unique number of panelists, the total number of transactions and
the average number of transactions per panelist. We also report the average private label share,
computed as the average share of purchases by volume in the time period.

                                      – insert Table 2 here –


2.5   Estimation Sample for Structural Analysis

For the structural analysis, we assemble a choice panel from the Greek Yogurt category that allows
us to control for prices, product availability and other point-of-purchase factors. We focus on the
Greek Yogurt category because of the relatively high purchase rate.
   We define the Greek Yogurt market as the top-selling stock-keeping-units (SKUs) of Greek-
labeled yogurt sold at Mariano’s stores during our sample period. We construct these SKUs using
the store level data described above. A SKU consists of the combination of UPCs with the same
brand and pack size and with coordinated pricing.
   We then retain the 6 top-selling SKUs, all of which are single-serving sized and which represent
60.3% of the total volume of Greek yogurt sold during our sample period: Chobani, Dannon, Fage,
Roundy’s, Noosa and Yoplait. A SKU’s price in a given store-day consists of the average price
across the UPCs available for that SKU on the same store-day. Table 3 lists each of our SKUs used
for the structural analysis. For each SKU, we list the brand name and each of the underlying UPCs
included. We also report the average shelf price and the average share of Greek yogurt volume
sold across all stores and days during the entire estimation sample period.
   We merge the SKU data with our transaction data by store and date. We only retain those
panelists that shopped in one of our test stores on a day during which one of the Greek yogurt
blind taste tests was fielded, and those weeks corresponding to our estimation sample period (365
days prior to the test and 149 after the test). A retained panelist must purchase Greek yogurt at
least once during the sample period. In total, we observe 259 test panelists that make 21,869 trips
across the 29 stores during the sample period. We also observe 10,837 control panelists that make
827,995 trips across the 29 stores during the sample period. For each observed trip, we track the


                                                 9
chosen item (if one of our Greek Yogurt SKUs was purchased) along with the entire choice set
including available SKUs on that trip and their respective prices. If none of the 6 SKUs is chosen,
we classify the trip as a “no purchase” occasion. Effectively, we have defined an “outside good.”
This outside good is chosen on 93.7% of the trips during the entire sample period.
    Greek Yogurt purchases appear to satisfy the “discrete choice” assumption since 91.3% of the
purchase trips result in the purchase of a single SKU. We dropped the remaining trips that involved
purchasing multiple brands.

                                            – insert Table 3 here –

    Table 4 summarizes the unconditional and conditional (on purchase) shares for the test and
control groups. Chobani is the top-selling product in the category, with 36% of sales. Roundy’s
private label Greek yogurt is the lowest-share brand with only 5.6% of the market share. We
observe some self-selection into the test sample. Our test panelists are more likely to buy Roundy’s
(6.7% versus 5.5% in control) and Noosa (24.0% versus 13.1% in control), but they are less likely
to buy Chobani (26.7% versus 36.2% in control).

                                            – insert Table 4 here –



3     Survey Findings
We now summarize the main descriptive results of the blind taste test survey. The survey consisted
of four questions regarding panelists’ beliefs about the private label brand in the three categories
tested (Oreo-style Cookies, Greek Yogurt, Ice Cream), with two questions asked before and two
after the blind taste test. Table 5 provides summary statistics for the responses from those subjects
that make at least one purchase from the tested categories during the sample period.
    A total of 81% of our sample responded affirmatively to question one regarding private label
quality in general (Q1): “Do you think Roundy’s branded food products are as good as their
national brand counterpart?” However, only 44% of our sample responded affirmatively to question
two (Q2): “Do you think you will prefer Roundy’s [product] or [competitor brand product]?”3 The
    3 We used Roundy’s O’s, Roundy’s Select and Roundy’s for the cookies, ice cream and Greek yogurt categories
respectively. We also used the national brands Nabisco Oreo, Chobani and Breyers for the cookies, Greek yogurt and
ice cream categories respectively.

                                                       10
large difference in responses between Q1 and Q2 is surprising since it seems to suggest subjects
do not trust their own beliefs about private label quality in general.4 It is even more striking that
72% of the sample responded affirmatively to question three (Q3): “Did you prefer Roundy’s
O’s Cookie or Nabisco Oreo Cookie?” The actual choice rate in Q3 was 27 percentage points
higher than the predicted choice rate in Q2. After the identity of the chosen brand was revealed to
subjects, 84% of the sample responded affirmatively to question four (Q4): “Next time you shop
for Cookies, will you buy Roundy’s private label O’s Cookie?” The predicted purchase intention
is 12 percentage points higher than the choice rate in Q3, and 40 percentage points higher than the
predicted choice rate in Q2.

                                               – insert Table 5 here –

    The results are robust to a more micro analysis of the three individual categories. Although
not reported in further detail, the category-specific survey responses mimic the findings in Table
5 qualitatively. The findings are also robust to conditioning the sample on those subjects that
purchased private label in the chain prior to the intervention.
    The sharp increase in stated future private label purchase intention relative to predicted pur-
chase is consistent with an information effect, but could also reflect a salience effect from the
in-store taste test. As preliminary evidence of an information effect, we now study the impact of
the valence of the information conveyed by the blind taste test. The response to Q2 reveals aspects
of a subject’s prior belief about her relative preference for Roundy’s versus the corresponding
national brand. The comparison of a subject’s response to Q2 and Q3 indicates the sign of the
information signal provided to the subject from the blind taste test. For instance, a subject who
predicted choosing the national brand on Q2 and who chose the private label on Q3 received a
positive signal about the private label brand. We now analyze whether the impact of the blind taste
test on choice is moderated by the sign of the information signal. A limitation of this exercise is
that we cannot randomly assign subjects to information treatments. Therefore the sign of the in-
formation signal is self-selected on a panelist’s tastes and our findings should be interpreted purely
as correlational.
   4 Itis possible that a large group of participants is indifferent between private labels and national brands but choose
the national brand as a tie-breaker.




                                                           11
   Table 6 gives the results. From the table, we observe that among all shoppers who thought that
they would not prefer the private label brand before the taste test (N = 371), 63% chose the private
label in the blind taste test and, accordingly, received a positive signal about the private label. In
contrast, among those who did think that they would prefer the private label brand (N = 293),
only 18% chose the national brand in the blind taste test and, accordingly, received a negative
signal about the private label. Taken at face value, our results are suggestive that the probability of
deriving a positive signal conditional on having a negative prior is much higher than the probability
of deriving a negative signal conditional on having a positive prior.

                                        – insert Table 6 here –

   Table 7 shows the association between the signal derived from the taste test and the stated in-
tention to purchase private label on the next purchase occasion. The table is structured to facilitate
contrasts between households who hold the same pre-test beliefs but who differ in their post-test
beliefs. In particular, looking at the first two rows, holding constant the pre-test stated preference
for the private label brand at Q2 = 1, 68% (N = 53) of consumers who updated negatively (Q3 = 0)
indicated the intention to buy the private label next time. However, among those who remained
positive (Q3 = 1; N = 240), a strongly contrasting 95% indicated they would buy the private label
next time. Holding constant, in rows 3 and 4, the pre-test stated preference for the private label
brand at Q2 = 0, among all who thought initially they would not prefer the private label brand and
continued to do so (Q3 = 0; N = 136), 51% claim to buy the private label brand on a next occasion,
whereas, among those who updated positively (Q3 = 1; N = 235), 97% indicated the intention to
buy the private label next time, almost doubling the intent to buy the private label. In sum, holding
constant initial beliefs, the taste test resulted in updated beliefs that are strongly correlated to the
intent to buy private label in the future.

                                        – insert Table 7 here –

   In the next section, we use subjects’ actual purchase behavior after the date of the blind taste
test to analyze whether the blind taste test had a persistent effect on their beliefs and shopping
behavior.




                                                  12
4     Difference-in-Differences (DID) Analysis

4.1    Method

We use the shopping panel data described in section 2.4 to estimate the causal effect of the blind
taste test on panelists’ private label choices. Our approach consists of using a two-way fixed effects
model to compare the differences in shopping behavior, before versus after the test dates, between
our participants in the taste tests and all other shoppers in the test store on the same date. In a
subsequent section, we verify the robustness of our difference-in-differences (DID) estimator to
some of its key underlying identifying assumption.
    Let h = 1, ..., H denote panelists, each with a unique individual loyalty card, and let c = 1, ...,C
denote the product categories. We index the panelist’s trip dates by t = −Thb , ..., 0, ..., The where
t = 0 indicates the date of the blind taste test, Thb is the total number of days between the first
observed trip for h and the date of the test, and The is the total number of days elapsed between
the date of the test and the last observed trip. Let τhct ∈ {0, 1} indicate whether panelist h was
“treated” in category c prior to or on date t, meaning that she participated in the blind taste test,
i.e., τhct ≡ I{treatment group,t≥0} . Let Yhct ∈ {0, 1} indicate whether panelist h buys the private label
in category c, conditional on making a category purchase on date t. Using the familiar potential
outcomes framework, for each individual h and time period t, we are interested in the potential
outcomes Yhct (τhct ).
    Our empirical goal consists of obtaining an estimate of the average treatment effect of the blind
taste test for a given category c on the treated units and time periods:


                         AT Tc = E (Yhct (1) −Yhct (0)|τhct = 1)
                                                                                                       (1)
                                = E (Yhct (1) |τhct = 1) −E (Yhct (0)|τhct = 1) .

As with most settings, the challenge is that we do not observe (Yhct (0) |τhct = 1).
    To resolve this problem, our key identifying assumption is that treated and untreated households
follow parallel trends. More formally, we assume (e.g., Abadie, 2005):


          E (Yhct (0) −Yhct 0 (0) |τhct = 1) = E (Yhct (0) −Yhct 0 (0) |τhct = 0) , where t 6= t 0 .   (2)



                                                     13
This assumption imposes that any changes in Yhct over time are independent of whether or not a
household participated in the blind taste test.
    We use the parallel trends assumption to form a standard two-way fixed-effects estimator of
AT Tc based on the difference-in-differences between treated and untreated households. In partic-
ular, we use a linear probability model to predict a panelist’s choice between the private label and
the tested national brand in a category c on trip date t, conditional on purchase:


                                  Yhct = αhc + γct + βSR · τhct · I{t∈(0,6)}

                                                     + βMR · τhct · I{t∈(7,27)}                                     (3)

                                                     + βLR · τhct · I{t>27} + εhct.


The parameter αhc is a panelist-category fixed effect, γct is a category-week fixed effect,5 and the
indicator variables I{t∈T } denote whether trip date t falls in the time interval T , measured in days.
The parameters {βSR , βMR , βLR } capture the average treatment effect of the blind taste test on the
propensity to buy a private label versus a national brand, conditional on purchase. We allow the
treatment effect to vary with the duration of time elapsed since the date of the in-store taste test:
a short run effect of the taste test during the first 7 days after the test (βSR ), a medium run effect
of the taste test during the time interval between 7 days and 27 days after the test (βMR ), and a
long run effect of the taste test during the time interval between 28 days and 157 days after the test
(βLR ). We also report a version of Equation (3) that splits the long run effect, βLR , into separate
4-week treatment effects, (β4-8 weeks , β9-12 weeks , β13-16 weeks , β>16 weeks ).


4.2       DID and Identification

The heart of our identification strategy relies on the panel structure of our transaction data. To ad-
dress the potential bias associated with self-selection into the blind taste, we include panelist×category-
specific fixed effects in equation (3) to control for the persistent differences between panelists by
category. In addition, we use the parallel trends assumption. While we cannot directly test this
assumption, we can follow Angrist and Krueger (1999, p. 1299) to exploit the long time series
   5 To define category-week fixed effects, we use the 7-day periods relative to the date that the blind taste test took
place in a store.


                                                          14
in our panel data and test for parallel trends during the pre-treatment period. First, we conduct a
direct pre-treatment test for parallel trends by estimating


                             Yhct = αhc + δct + ωctI{treatment group} + εhct , t < 0                                (4)


using all panelists during the pre-treatment period. The parameter δc is the common trend and ωc
is a deviation from the common trend for the treatment group. Results are displayed in Table 8 for
a pre-treatment window of 150 days, i.e., Thb ≤ 150. The common trend is small, relative to the
7.9% baseline private label share, and statistically insignificant. Of interest is the null hypothesis of
parallel trends: H0 : ωc = 0. We fail to reject the null of parallel trends, with an economically small
predicted mean difference of only 0.045 percentage points. However, the results are imprecise and
we cannot rule out that the treatment group trend is as much as 0.21 percentage points lower. This
finding is robust to the use of alternative pre-treatment window lengths as long as one year. With
a one-year window length, we do reject the null of equal trends at the 5% significance level; but
the difference in the weekly trend size remains small at 0.091%.6 In section 4.4, we will check
the robustness of our AT T estimates to an estimator that uses a weaker assumption than parallel
trends.7

                                               –insert Table 8 here–

    Our tests appear to support the assumption of parallel trends. This evidence in conjunction
with the panelist-specific fixed effects should ensure the consistency of our DID estimates of the
treatment effect from the blind taste tests. Nevertheless, below in section 4.4, we explore the
robustness of our results to an estimator that relaxes the parallel trends assumption.


4.3     Treatment Effects

We now focus on the DID estimates using the linear probabilities model in equation (3). Table 9
presents the estimates for the DID regressions. We observe that the base share of the private label
   6 The significance of the difference reflects the large sample size of N = 206, 532 panelist-trips for the 365-day
pre-window.
   7 Although not reported herein, we also experimented with placebo tests that assigned a treatment date arbitrarily

during the pre-treatment period. In this specification, we also fail reject the assumption of parallel trends. Still, we
cannot reject moderate-sized differences between treatment and control consumers once we account for the statistical
uncertainty.

                                                          15
across the three categories ranges from 4.0 (Greek Yogurt) to 19.1 percent (Ice Cream). Pooled
across categories, panelists, and purchase occasions, the baseline probability of buying the private
label brand is 7.9 percent.

                                       –insert Table 9 here–

   In the first column of Table 9, we pool the three categories and allow for a common treatment
effect. We find that during the week after the blind taste test, the short run purchase probability
of the private label brand increases by 15.1 percentage points to 23.0 percent; although we cannot
rule out an increase as small as 11.3 percentage points at the 5% significance level. The blind
taste test thus tripled the market share of the private label in the short run. We also find a large
and significant short-run effect of the category-specific treatment effects reported in columns two,
three and four.
   Pooling across categories, we find that between 7 and 27 days after the blind taste test, the
medium run purchase probability is still 7.8 percentage points larger than before the test, doubling
the baseline purchase probability of 7.9 percent; although we cannot rule out an increase as small as
4.4 percentage points at the 5% significance level. Therefore, the pooled treatment effect declines
relative to the short-run effect. Pooling across categories, the difference between the short run
and medium run effects is large enough that we can reject the null hypothesis that they are the
same. The numerical difference between the short run and medium run effect is large for each
individual category. However, the difference is not always significant due to the limited sample
sizes in specific categories.
   During the four-month period starting 28 days after the test, the pooled (across categories) pri-
vate label share is still 2.3 percentage points higher than during the pre-treatment period, although
we cannot rule out that it is as small as 0.8 percentage points at the 5% significance level. Hence,
the treatment effect of the in-store blind taste test declines further over time, albeit more slowly
over a 5-month period. Still, compared to the baseline purchase probability of 7.9%, the taste test
increases the relative share of the private label by 29% in the long run. In the pooled analysis, we
reject the null hypothesis of no difference between the medium run and long run effects. These
differences are also significant in the category level analysis for Greek Yogurt.
   Table 10 decomposes the long-term treatment effect by allowing for separate consecutive 4


                                                 16
week effects. Column one indicates that the pooled treatment effect across categories decays from
over time. The effect becomes statistically insignificant after 8 weeks. Even though after 16 weeks
the treatment effect is insignificant in all three categories, we cannot rule out effects as large as
several percentage points at the 5% significance level.

                                       –insert Table 10 here–

   As a robustness check, Appendix A reports the treatment effects using only the difference
(before versus after treatment) within the treatment group. A time trend, identified off the pre-
treatment data, controls for a constant trend in the pre- and post periods. The results in Tables
15 and 16 confirm the estimates of the DID analysis above. The larger effect sizes, especially for
the long run, highlight the importance of the two-way fixed effect specification used above. The
DID approach uses the untreated group to identify post-treatment time effects that might otherwise
generate spurious treatment effects.
   We conduct three robustness checks. For brevity these are reported for the pooled data only,
corresponding to the first column of table 10. First, we check the sensitivity of our results to
the definition of the short-run time interval. A concern is that, in addition to communicating
product information, the in-store free samples booth may simply create a salience effect, similar
to standard in-store promotions like in-aisle or end-of-aisle displays. We re-estimate the DID
regression dropping treated panelists who bought from the test-category on the same day as the
taste test. Figure 1 compares the predicted private label share level when households who buy
from the category of interest at the test day are retained (as before) versus excluded. The figure
shows that once we drop households who buy on the test day, our point estimate for the short-
run effect falls by several percentage points and we fail to reject the hypothesis that short-run and
medium-run effects are the same (the lower sample size from sub-setting the data also generates
a noisier estimate of the short-run effect). Still, Figure 1 suggests a “day of the test” effect which
might be capturing the salience effect of the sampling booth on choice. Importantly, however, we
continue to find a persistent treatment effect after the date of the test even among those who do not
buy on the test day.

                                       –insert Figure 1 here–



                                                 17
   As a second robustness check, we check the sensitivity of our results to the definition of the
private label versus national brand and present the results from using the purchases in the categories
(Cookies, Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt, and Yogurt) versus only the subcategories (Oreo-style
Cookies, Ice Cream, and Greek Yogurt) used in the blind taste test. Figure 2 compares the results
for each of the two choice set definitions. The short-run effect appears to be robust across the two
definitions. However, our point estimate for the medium run effect is several percentage points
smaller when we use the entire category (this difference is statistically significant). This finding
is not surprising since the broader category definition includes product varieties that were not
explicitly tested even though they use the same brand names as those in the test. Most important,
we continue to find a statistically significant effect in the medium run and long run under both
definitions.

                                       –insert Figure 2 here–

   As a final robustness check, we check the sensitivity of our results to the length of the pre-
treatment window. As shown in Figure 3, we find that the magnitude and significance of our
estimated treatment effects appear to be robust to the different window lengths.

                                       –insert Figure 3 here–

   We conclude that the effects of the blind taste test between the tested private label food products
and their corresponding leading national-brand competitors are both large and persistent over a
period of several months, although the effects decline over time.


4.4    Relaxing the Parallel Trends Assumption

In this section, we briefly explore the robustness of our treatment effects estimates by specifying
a more general interactive fixed-effects model (e.g., Bai, 2009) and using the matrix completion
estimator proposed by Athey, Bayati, Doudchenko, and Imbens (2017). As explained earlier, the
key identification assumption underlying our DID estimates in section 4.3 is that treatment and
control consumers’ purchases follow parallel trends. Suppose, for instance, that some of the un-
treated consumers would never consider purchasing the private label. In that case, we would not
observe any trend in their propensity to purchase private label and the mean trend in the control

                                                 18
group would not likely be the same as that in the treated group. The interactive fixed-effects model
no longer requires the same stable time paths in outcomes for treated and untreated households.
   As before, we face the problem that we do not observe (Yhct (0)|τhct = 1). To impute these miss-
ing values, Athey, Bayati, Doudchenko, and Imbens (2017) model the outcomes in the following
matrix form:
                                                  YH×T = LH×T + εH×T                                               (5)

where L is an H ×T matrix to be estimated, and εht is measurement error with E (ε|L) = 0. Standard
factor models assume that L has a lower-rank approximation (of rank R) that can be expressed as the
product of common time-factors, VT ×R , and heterogeneous cross-sectional factor loadings, UH×R .
                                                            0
That is, L can be decomposed as L = UH×RVT ×R and a missing outcome can be approximated using
Lht ≈ ∑Rr=1 UhrVtr . The factor
                             model,
                                    therefore, nests the DID approach as a special case when R =
         h     i              1
2, Uh = γh 1 and Vt =  . Larger-rank R allows for richer heterogeneity beyond unit fixed
                              δt
effects and common time-shocks. Unlike a standard factor model, Athey, Bayati, Doudchenko,
and Imbens (2017) allow R to grow with H and T , allowing for richer patterns of unobserved
heterogeneity.
   For estimation, we use the following regularized regression proposed by Athey, Bayati, Doud-
chenko, and Imbens (2017):
                                                        "                                          #
                                                               (Yht − Lht − γh − δt )2
                        L̂, Θ̂ =      arg min             ∑                             + λ kLk1                   (6)
                                   {Lht },{γh },{δt }   (h,t)∈O
                                                                         |O|


where Θ = (γ1 , ..., γN , δ1 , ..., δT ) are parameters to be estimated and the notation O denotes the
set of observations, indexed by (h,t), for which the outcome is observed. Regularization depends
                                                                           min(H,T )                         min(H,T )
on the penalty term, λ ,8 and the Nuclear norm, kLk1 = ∑i=1                            σi (L), where {σi (L)}i=1
are the singular values of L. Accordingly, this problem is termed matrix completion with nuclear
norm minimization (MC-NNM) because the objective consists of estimating the components of the
matrices U and V above. We refer the interested reader to Athey, Bayati, Doudchenko, and Imbens
(2017) for technical details and note that, like them, we do not regularize the fixed effects to ensure
we control for time-invariant heterogeneity and common time-shocks. The additional factors Lht
   8 The   parameter λ is selected using 5-fold cross-validation and out-of-sample RMSE.


                                                                19
allow for time-varying unobservable heterogeneity.
    Our estimate of the ATT is then:
                                                                                      
                                  MC−NNM             ∑(h,t) τht Yht − L̂ht − γ̂h − δ̂h
                            ATˆ T        =                                                 .                        (7)
                                                                  ∑(h,t) τht

    For comparison purposes, we also use the following reformulation of our DID estimator to be
comparable to the MC-NNM estimator above. Again, if we let R = 2 and γh2 = 1 and δt1 = 1 (i.e.
L = 0), our data-generating process simplifies to the two-way fixed-effects model again:


                                                Yht = γh + δt + εht .


We can obtain OLS estimates γ̂h and δ̂t with the special-case of λ = 0. Accordingly, a DID analog
of the ATT can be obtained as follows:
                                                                              
                                           DID
                                                           τ   Y
                                                     ∑(h,t) ht ht − γ̂ h − δ̂t
                                     ATˆ T     =                                   .                                (8)
                                                               ∑(h,t) τht

    To manage dimensionality, we collapse the estimation sample to a weekly frequency for each
household, instead of daily. In addition, we need to drop those households for which we do
not observed any pre-treatment-period observations.               9   We define our dependent variable, Yht ,as
the share of purchases that are private label and use this share as our dependent variable: Yht =
 # PL purchases by h in week t 10
total # purchases by h in week t .
    Table 11 reports the point estimates and bootstrapped (at the household-level) 95% confidence
intervals for AT T MC−NNM and AT T DID . As before, we allow the treatment effect to differ over the
short run of one week after the intervention (SR), the medium run from the end of the first week to
end of four weeks after the intervention (MR), and the long run from the end of the fourth week to
the end of our sample (LR).
    The differences between the point estimates of AT T MC−NNM and AT T DID in Table 11 are
   9 Although   not reported herein, the AT T DID estimates are quite similar to those based on equation (3), reported
above in section 4.3, suggesting that the deletion of households does not alter our key findings. Results are available
from the authors upon request.
   10 Again, although not reported herein, AT T DID computed with the daily versus weekly outcomes are almost iden-

tical, suggesting that the time-aggregation also does not alter our key findings. Results are available from the authors
upon request.


                                                          20
negligible and alleviate concerns that our main results are driven by a violation of the parallel
trends assumption. Indeed, the same general findings emerge as those in our primary specification
in Section 4. We find a significant and large effect of the blind taste test on private label purchase
likelihood which then decays over time to a smaller, but economically meaningful, long run point
estimate. The robustness of these findings to the methods in this section suggest our initial results
were not merely spurious, as would have been the case had they been identified off un-modeled
deviations in the time trends between the control and treatment group.


4.5    Valence of Information

We now explore the potential information content of the treatment effect. A novel aspect of our
data is that we surveyed panel members about their preference for the private label relative to
the national brand before and after the blind taste test. Within panelist, this format allows us to
measure the moderating effect of the valence of the subjective information from the blind taste test
on the treatment effect. Panelist fixed effects allow us to control for the potential self-selection into
a positive versus negative initial state.
   We use the stated preference, elicited immediately before and after the blind taste test to mea-
sure the sign of the information signal conveyed by the free samples. If a panelist predicted she
would prefer the national brand and then stated she preferred the private label after the taste test, we
classify the information as a positive update. If the panelist predicted she would prefer the private
label and still does so after the test, we classify the information as positive confirmation. Similarly,
we define a negative update as a predicted preference for the private label and a preference for the
national brand after the taste test. Finally, if the panelist predicted she would prefer the national
brand and still does so after the taste test, we classify this information as negative confirmation.
   We re-run the DID regressions in (3) with a single average (over time) treatment effect and an
interaction between the treatment effect and the valence of the information:

                           Yhct = αhc + γct + β neg→pos · τhc · I{t≥0}
                                            + β pos→neg · τhc · I{t≥0}
                                            + β pos→pos · τhc · I{t≥0}
                                            + β neg→neg · τhc · I{t≥0} + εhct .


                                                   21
    Table 12 presents the results against the baseline of the average treatment effect over the entire
post-test time window. In the column labeled “Baseline” we confirm that the blind taste test has a
large positive impact on the probability to purchase a private label over a branded product in the
three categories tested. The propensity to buy private label increases from from 7.6% to 12.0%, a
larger than 50% increase.

                                       –insert Table 12 here–

    Moving to the column labeled “Valence”, we find that the positive treatment effect is concen-
trated among those who have positive evaluations of the private label after the taste test: those
panelists that update their preference for the private label positively and those that confirm their
positive prior disposition. For those who update negatively on the private label, the point estimate
for the effect of the blind taste test is negative yet insignificant. We cannot rule out a negative
treatment effect on the private label choice propensity as large as -10.3 percentage points or a pos-
itive effect as large as 0.9 percentage points at the 5% significance level. Finally, for those who
remain negative about the private label brand we fail to reject a null effect, although we cannot
rule out an effect as small as -1.5 percentage points or as large as 4.1 percentage points at the 5%
level. These findings suggest that the blind taste test impacts mostly those participants who derive
a positive signal from the experience although we cannot rule out a negative treatment effect for
those participants who derived a negative signal.



5    Structural Analysis
Continuing our analysis, we now estimate a structural model to test for a number of potentially
confounding factors that could not easily be addressed by the DID analysis. The DID approach
in section 4 focused on the binary outcome of private label choice conditional on purchase. It
did not consider the specific brand choice alternatives or the no-purchase option. In addition, the
DID estimator did not control for several potential confounding factors including variation across
trips in the set of available brands in the category and/or the products’ prices. Moreover, while the
DID approach is robust to heterogeneity, it does not provide a characterization of the heterogeneity
in the treatment effect. Since we expect consumers to have different degrees of experience and


                                                 22
information with the various brands and the private label, we anticipate heterogeneity in the amount
of information conveyed by the taste test and therefore in its effect size. To account for the role of
causal factors like the choice set, prices and the role of consumer heterogeneity, we fit a random
coefficients logit demand system to the transaction panel data.
    An additional concern is that any persistence in the treatment effect of the blind taste test could
be identified spuriously from omitted state dependence in demand, or “purchase feedback” effects.
We also estimate a version of the model that allows for structural state dependence in choices to
control for such feedback effects, allowing for a more robust test of the causal effect of the blind
taste test.
    Finally, we use our demand estimates to simulate a counterfactual wherein all consumers are
part of the blind taste test. Extrapolating from the average treatment effect on the treated consumers
to the full population of consumers visiting the store requires additional structure and assumptions,
which we discuss below.
    In contrast with the DID results, we use a longer pre-treatment window of one year (365 days),
to improve the precision of our estimates of heterogeneity. In Appendix B, we report estimates for
a 150-day pre-treatment window that conforms with the DID analysis.


5.1    Model and Econometric Specification

We denote consumer loyalty card panelists by h = 1, ..., H. On a trip during date t, a panelist
chooses amongst the j = 1, ..., J products in a category or chooses j = 0, an outside option (i.e.
“no purchase”). As before, we assume t = −Thb , ..., 0, ..., The where the blind taste test occurs at
date t = 0. We assume the timing of trips is exogenous to demand in the given category. A self-
selected subset of the panelists, T, participates in a blind taste test on date t = 0. We use j = PL
and j = NB to denote the private label and national brand alternatives that were sampled during
the blind taste test.
    On trip date t, panelist h derives the following conditional indirect utility from choosing alter-
native j: uhjt = v j p jt , sth ; Θh + ε hjt , where v j p jt , sth ; Θh represents the panelist’s deterministic
                                                                       

(conditional on the parameters Θh ) utility ε hjt is an i.i.d. Type I Extreme Value distributed random
utility term. The indirect utilities are as follows:



                                                      23
                          
                           α hj + η h p jt + γ h I{sth = j} + ε hjt ,
                                                                                        j∈/ {PL, NB}
                       
    u j p jt , sth ; Θh =   α hj + β jh I{h∈T,t≥τ} + η h p jt + γ h I{sth = j} + ε hjt , j ∈ {PL, NB}      (9)
                          
                          
                           εh ,
                          
                                                                                              j=0
                             jt


where p jt is the price of product j. The state variable sth ∈ {1, . . . , J} indicates the previous product
purchased by panelist h such that repeat-buying the same product generates a marginal utility of
γ h . The coefficients {βPL , βNB } allow for the possibility that a panelist’s brand preferences for the
private label or tested national brand change in response to the information from the blind taste
test. We let the treatment effects {βPL , βNB } vary over time as follows:
                                 
                                  β SR , t ∈ (0, 6)
                                  j
                                 
                                 
                            βj =   β jMR , t ∈ (7, 29)  , j ∈ {PL, NB} .
                                 
                                 
                                  β LR , t ∈ (30, 149)
                                 
                                      j


    The conditional probability that panelist h chooses alternative j on trip t is

                                                          exp v j p jt , sth ; Θh
                                                                                    
                           Pr{ j|pt , sth , Θh } =                                        .             (10)
                                                     1 + ∑Jk=1 exp vk pkt , sth ; Θh

    To allow for persistent heterogeneity in tastes, we assume panelist tastes, Θh = α1h , . . . , αJh , βPL
                                                                                                          h , β h , η h, γ h ,
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                               NB
                                                     
are drawn from a population distribution N Θ̄, Σ with mean Θ̄ and covariance matrix Σ. We es-
timate the model using MCMC with a chain consisting of 100,000 posterior draws, dropping the
first 10,000 draws as a burn-in period.11
    We now discuss the key assumptions for the identification of the blind taste test treatment
effects, {βPL , βNB }. First, we assume that all panelist preferences are drawn from the common
population distribution, F (Θ). The tastes for {α1 , ..., αJ , η, γ} are identified by pooling all the
panelists during the pre-test period, t < 0. The covariances between the stable taste parameters,
{α1 , ..., αJ , η, γ}, and the treatment effects, {βSR , βMR , βLR }, are identified off the test panelists’
choices after the blind taste test. We assume that these covariances are common across test and
  11 Weimplemented the MCMC algorithm using the Bayesm package in R, and refer the reader to Rossi, Allenby,
and McCulloch (2005) for a more thorough discussion of the approach.



                                                          24
control panelists and, hence, there is no self-selection on the ability to learn from the blind taste
test. This assumption is not critical for estimation. But, it is critical for our counterfactual that
requires us to make inferences about the treatment effect on untreated panelists.
    An additional concern is that persistence in the effect of the blind taste test could be identified
spuriously from omitted brand loyalty. Suppose the blind taste test only has an immediate direct
effect on demand, causing a consumer to switch to the private label at the time of the intervention.
The demand inertia associated with loyalty could create an indirect long-term effect of the blind
taste test through purchase reinforcement (e.g., Givon and Horsky, 1990). The inclusion of the
loyalty term, I{sth = j}, controls for such purchase reinforcement (e.g., Keane, 1997; Dubé, Hitsch,
and Rossi, 2010).


5.2     Structural Estimates

We fit the demand model to the transaction data from the Greek yogurt category. We first com-
pare the fit of four different specifications in total: (1) baseline demand (βPL = βNB = γ = 0), (2)
baseline demand with loyalty (βPL = βNB = 0), (3) demand with treatment effects (γ = 0), and (4)
demand with treatment effects and loyalty. For each specification, we compare results with versus
without unobserved heterogeneity. We assess posterior model fit using the Newton and Raftery
(1994) approximation of the posterior likelihood.
    Table 13 reports the posterior likelihood of each model. As expected, unobserved heterogeneity
improves model fit substantially. We also find that after controlling for heterogeneity, the inclusion
of loyalty worsens posterior fit.12 The inclusion of treatment effects improves fit, but the magnitude
of the improvement is small due to the fact that our test panelists represent only a small fraction of
the sample. The best-fitting specification excludes loyalty but includes the treatment effect of the
blind taste test. This finding also suggests that purchase reinforcement is not contributing to the
persistent effect of the blind taste test.

                                              –insert Table 13 here–

    For posterior inference, we retain every 5th draw from the chain, leaving us with 8,000 posterior
  12 Theposterior likelihood has a built-in control for over-fitting as can be seen by its asymptotic approximation, the
Schwarz criterion, which penalizes models with more parameters.


                                                          25
draws. We report the posterior mean and 95% posterior credibility intervals for each of the hyper-
parameters in Table 14. As expected, Chobani has, overall, the highest mean brand preference,
αChobani , and Roundy’s has the lowest overall brand preference, αRoundy0 s . Also as expected, the
posterior probability that the mean price effect is negative is 100%.

                                       –insert Table 14 here–

   Consistent with the DID analysis presented previously, the blind taste test has a causal effect
on utility. Interestingly, we find an effect on both the brand component of utility for Roundy’s and
Chobani. In the week after the test (Short Run), the expected brand taste for Roundy’s increases,
while the expected brand taste for Chobani decreases. The expected gap between the two brands
shrinks by over 80%. From 7 days to 30 days after the test (Medium Run), the expected brand util-
ity for Chobani decreases even more. Interestingly, we cannot rule out zero effect on the expected
Roundy’s utility. The reduction in the expected gap is now only 38%, relative to the no-treatment
case. Finally, between 30 and 150 days after the test (Long Run), we observe a small and negative
expected change in utility for both brands. We cannot rule out that the gap is now unchanged rel-
ative to the no-treatment case. At least in the short and medium runs, our findings of a treatment
effect of the blind taste test on preferences survives our controls for prices, brand choice and the
purchase incidence choice.


5.3    The Impact of Information on Demand

Of interest is whether treating the chain’s entire consumer population with the blind taste test treat-
ment would fundamentally alter the relative demand of the private label and national brand. We
use our demand estimates from the previous section to simulate the impact of this counter-factual
information treatment scenario on the entire consumer population. We compare the posterior mean
baseline demand with no information treatment to the short-run, medium-run and long-run demand
that would prevail if all consumers received the blind taste test treatment.
   In Figure 4, we plot the posterior expected demand for Roundy’s Greek yogurt holding its
competitors’ prices fixed at their mean levels during the sample period. The demand curve is
conditional on purchase so we can compare with our DID results. The plot compares the posterior
mean and 95% credibility interval for expected untreated demand (control) as well as the short

                                                  26
run, medium run and long run demands along a wide range of prices. As a reference, we indicate
expected demand at Roundy’s average in-sample posted price of $1.03. At each point along the
grid of prices, there is close to a 100% posterior probability that the short-run demand exceeds
the baseline demand. At each point, there is at least a 93% posterior probability that the medium
run demand exceeds baseline demand. Recall that our long-run estimate of the treatment effect on
Roundy’s was found to be small and imprecise. Any tested differences between baseline demand
and long-run demand are inconclusive. In sum, we can see that the blind taste test shifts out
expected demand for Roundy’s in the short run and medium run. Demand appears to shift back
close to baseline in the long run.

                                        –insert Figure 4 here–

   To quantify the economic magnitude of the demand effects, the three panels in Figure 5 plot
the distribution of the posterior expected shift in Roundy’s demand across a range of prices for
the SR, MR and LR respectively. Once again, we hold all the competitors’ prices fixed at their
average in-sample levels. At each price point, we report the expected magnitude of the shift in
the demand relative to the untreated (pre) level (in share points) as well as the the 95% credibility
interval, indicated by the whiskers. As a reference, we once more indicate the expected demand
shift at Roundy’s average in-sample posted price of $1.03. We can see that the outward shifts in
demand are significant, even in the long-run. Although not reported in the figure, the posterior
mean market share (conditional on purchase) for Roundy’s at the average posted price of $1.03
increases relative to the baseline by 13.5 percentage points in the short run, and 6.7 percentage
points in the medium run. These magnitudes are comparable to the treatment effects found with
our DID estimator in section 4.3, even though we now control for prices, brand choice and purchase
incidence. In contrast with our DID estimates, we now find a small long-term shift in demand and
fail to rule out that it could be zero under 95% posterior credibility.

                                        –insert Figure 5 here–

   We also plot the analogous conditional demands and distributions of demand shifts for Chobani
in Figures 6 and 7, respectively. We predict a large decline in share for Chobani in the short run
and, even more, in the long-run. At the average posted price of $1.23, the expected short-run
demand declines by 14 percentage points, and medium-run demand by 18 percentage points. The

                                                  27
expected long-run demand fall by 2.5 percentage points; but we fail to reject it is 0 under 95%
posterior credibility.

                                        –insert Figure 6 here–

                                        –insert Figure 7 here–

    Thus, we conclude that the direct and the competitive effects of informing consumers on brand
shares are statistically and substantively important. These findings survive our controls for prices,
brand choice and purchase incidence. Moreover, we find that the blind taste test not only influences
perceived utility from the private label, it has a negative influence on the perceived utility of the
tested national brand, Chobani. However, as in our DID regressions, the short run effects are much
larger than the long run effects.



6    Conclusions
Our findings add to the growing literature studying the implications of consumer misinformation.
For the categories studied, the private label alternative typically has a much lower market share
than the leading national brands. The majority of participants in our blind taste tests self-reported
a high perception of the quality of private labels, describing them as at least as good as the leading
national brand. However, a much smaller proportion of these same respondents predicted they
would pick the private label over the top national brand in a blind taste test.
    Using three blind taste tests, we find that the majority of test participants chose the private label
over the leading national brand. Using a difference-in-differences approach, we find that partici-
pation in the blind taste test has a persistent positive effect on demand for the private label, even
five months after the intervention. An exploratory analysis shows a strong association between the
valence of the information conveyed by the taste test (i.e. positive versus negative signal) and the
impact on future purchase behavior.
    In a structural exercise, we estimate a demand system that controls for the causal factors at the
point of purchase, such as prices and availability. We find that the blind taste test increases the
preferences for the store brand, but decreases the preferences for the competing national brand,
both relative to the outside good. Accordingly, the increase in demand for the private label stems

                                                   28
from both a direct and an indirect informational effect. We use our estimates to simulate the
total effect of assigning the entire day’s store population to the blind taste test. We again find
the large initial effect, followed by a gradual decay. Our findings are consistent with consumers
learning and then forgetting gradually about the quality information from the blind taste test. This
depreciation could reflect forgetting (e.g., Mehta, Rajiv, and Srinivasan, 2004) although we do
not rule out alternative potential explanations (e.g. on-going marketing by the national brands re-
establishes brand capital). Therefore, while our findings suggest we can change consumer demand
for private labels, a single usage experience may be insufficient to generate a lasting effect. The
information effects reported by us are qualitatively different from the usual in-store advertising
effects, like a display, in terms of their duration. Indeed, past research has not documented such
direct long-term effects from in-store advertising. The information effects are also much larger
than the typical estimates of traditional, e.g., television, advertising effects on demand (see, e.g.,
Sethuraman, Tellis, and Briesch, 2011).
   Our findings also contribute to the literature studying the barriers to entry created by established
brands. Even though the majority of our consumers pick the private label in the blind taste test, only
a minority predicted they would. This inconsistency illustrates the obstacles facing the launch and
growth of new brands, including private labels that may provide comparable value to consumers at
a lower price.
   Finally, our findings add to the established wisdom on free-sampling campaigns. The finding
of a long lasting effect suggests an investment benefit from our informative, non-price promotion,
in contrast with what has been detected in past work regarding price promotions. The depreciation
of the effect is also consistent with past theoretical work allowing for learning and forgetting from
sampling campaigns. Our results suggest that on-going repetitions of the information treatment
may be necessary to generate a more permanent benefit to private labels. In future work, it would
be interesting to explore whether such on-going non-price promotions would be cost effective
as a long-term strategy. More broadly, it would be interesting to investigate whether repeated
information treatments could be sufficient to overwhelm the barriers created by brand capital for
the leading national brands.




                                                 29
References
A BADIE , A. (2005): “Semiparametric difference-in-differences estimators,” Review of Economic
   Studies, 72(1), 1–19.
ACKERBERG , D. A. (2003): “Advertising, Learning, and Consumer Choice in Experience Good
   Markets: An Empirical Examination,” International Economic Review, 44(3), 1007–1040.
A LLCOTT, H., AND C. K NITTEL (2017): “Are Consumers Poorly-Informed about Fuel Economy?
   Evidence from Two Experiments,” NBER Working Paper No. 23076.
A NGRIST, J. D., AND A. B. K RUEGER (1999): “Chapter 23 - Empirical Strategies in Labor
   Economics,” vol. 3, Part A of Handbook of Labor Economics, pp. 1277 – 1366. Elsevier.
A SSMUS , G., J. U. FARLEY, AND D. R. L EHMANN (1984): “How Advertising Affects Sales:
   Meta-Analysis of Econometric Results,” Journal of Marketing Research, 21(1), 65–74.
ATHEY, S., M. BAYATI , N. D OUDCHENKO , AND G. I MBENS (2017): “Matrix Completion Meth-
   ods for Causal Panel Data Models,” Stanford GSB Working Paper.
BAI , J. (2009): “Panel data models with interactive fixed effects,” Econometrica, 77(4), 1229–
   1279.
BAIN , J. S. (1956): Barriers to New Competition. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
BAWA , K., AND R. S HOEMAKER (2004): “The Effects of Free Sample Promotions on Incremental
   Brand Sales,” Marketing Science, 23(3), 345–363.
B OLLINGER , B., P. L ESLIE , AND A. S ORENSEN (2011): “Calorie Posting in Chain Restaurants,”
   The American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1), 91–128.
B RONNENBERG , B. J., S. K. D HAR , AND J.-P. D UBÉ (2009): “Brand History, Geography, and
   the Persistence of Brand Shares,” Journal of Political Economy, 117, 87–115.
B RONNENBERG , B. J., J.-P. D UBÉ , AND M. G ENTZKOW (2012): “The Evolution of Brand
   Preferences: Evidence from Consumer Migration,” American Economic Review, 102(6), 2472–
   2508.
B RONNENBERG , B. J., J.-P. D UBÉ , M. G ENTZKOW, AND J. M. S HAPIRO (2015): “Do Phar-
   macists Buy Bayer? Sophisticated Shoppers and the Brand Premium,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 130.
C ARRERA , M., AND S. B. V ILLAS -B OAS (2015): “Generic aversion and observational learning
   in the over-the-counter drug market,” Working Paper.
C LARKE , D. G. (1976): “Econometric Measurement of the Duration of Advertising Effect on
   Sales,” Journal of Marketing Research, 13(4), 345–357.
C OX , S. R., K. A. C ONEY, AND P. F. RUPPE (1983): “The impact of comparative product ingre-
   dient information,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 2, 57–69.
D UBÉ , J.-P., G. J. H ITSCH , AND P. M ANCHANDA (2005): “An Empirical Model of Advertising
   Dynamics,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 3, 107–144.
D UBÉ , J.-P., G. J. H ITSCH , AND P. E. ROSSI (2010): “State dependence and alternative explana-
   tions for consumer inertia,” RAND Journal of Economics, 41(3), 417–445.
E RDEM , T., AND M. P. K EANE (1996): “Decision-Making Under Uncertainty: Capturing Dy-
   namic Brand Choice Processes in Turbulent Consumer Goods Markets,” Marketing Science,
   15(1), 1–20.


                                               30
G EDENK , K., AND S. A. N ESLIN (1999): “The Role of Retail Promotion in Determining Future
   Brand Loyalty: Its Effect on Purchase Event Feedback,” Journal of Retailing, 75(4), 433–459.
G IVON , M., AND D. H ORSKY (1990): “Untangling the Effects of Purchase Reinforcement and
   Advertising Carryover,” Marketing Science, 9(2), 171–187.
H EIMAN , A., B. M C W ILLIAMS , Z. S HEN , AND D. Z ILBERMAN (2001): “Learning and Forget-
   ting: Modeling Optimal Product Sampling Over Time,” Management Science, 47(4), 532–546.
I RONS , K. W., J. D. C. L ITTLE , AND R. L. K LEIN (1983): Proc. 1983 ORSA/TIMMS Marketing
   Sci. Conf chap. Determinants of coupon effectiveness, pp. 157–164.
J IN , G. Z., AND P. L ESLIE (2003): “The Effect of Information on Product Quality: Evidence from
   Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 409–451.
K EANE , M. P. (1997): “Modeling Heterogeneity and State Dependence in Consumer Choice Be-
   havior,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 15(3), 310–327.
K LEIN , R. L. (1981): Marketing: Measurement and Analysis. Proc. Third ORSA/TIMS Special
   Interest Conf. on Market Measurement and Analysischap. Using supermarket scanner panels to
   measure the effectiveness of coupon promotions, pp. 118–124. Institute of Management Sci-
   ences.
M EHTA , N., S. R AJIV, AND K. S RINIVASAN (2004): “Role of Forgetting in Memory-Based
   Choice Decisions: A Structural Model,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 2, 107–140.
N EWTON , M. A., AND A. E. R AFTERY (1994): “Approximate Bayesian Inference with the
   Weighted Likelihood Bootstrap,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 56(1), 3–
   48.
ROSSI , P., G. A LLENBY, AND R. M C C ULLOCH (2005): Bayesian Statistics and Marketing. John
   Wiley & Sons.
S AHNI , N. S. (2012): “Effect of Temporal Spacing between Advertising Exposures: Evidence
   from Online Field Experiments,” manuscript.
S CHMALENSEE , R. (1982): “Product Differentiation Advantages of Pioneering Brands,” The
   American Economic Review, 72, 349–365.
S ETHURAMAN , R., G. J. T ELLIS , AND R. A. B RIESCH (2011): “How Well Does Advertis-
   ing Work? Generalizations from Meta-Analysis of Brand Advertising Elasticities.,” Journal of
   Marketing Research., 48(3), 457–471.




                                               31
                Table 1: Number of participants in each blind taste test session
                                          Cookies                 Ice Cream      Greek Yogurt
  Store Number and Location 10/15 10/20 10/23 10/26 10/22 10/25 10/21 10/24
  8502 (Vernon Hills)                   22      37       20       46       76     47     29
  8509 (Frankfort)                      17      11       65       35       41     46     51
  8515 (Chicago)                        12      63       25       17       27     18     14
  8516 (Chicago)                         5       5       30       15       34      4      3
  8529 (Western Springs)      24        30      27       55       34       75     25     34




                   Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Estimation Sample
   sub-sample variable                      pooled Cookies Ice Cream          Greek Yogurt
              number of panelists            16240       4266        7529         6793
              number of transactions        208000      12420       49560        146000
   control    transactions per household 12.806          2.911      6.582        21.500
   panelists  (standard deviation)         (24.906) (3.693)        (9.506)      (33.290)
              private label share            0.081       0.057      0.184         0.048
              (standard deviation)          (0.199) (0.204)        (0.292)       (0.154)
              number of panelists              440         99         185          156
              number of transactions          3790        291        1052         2447
   test       transactions per household     8.614       2.939      5.686        15.686
   panelists  (standard deviation)         (17.107) (3.063)        (7.695)      (25.913)
              private label share            0.125       0.131      0.226         0.080
              (standard deviation)          (0.254) (0.286)        (0.312)       (0.205)




Table 3: SKUs, the underlying UPCs, the average shelf price, and the average share of Greek
Yogurt volume sold across all stores and days
                                                      Average volume share
               Brand              UPCS Average Price     of Greek Yogurt
               Chobani             39         1.21             0.21
               Dannon Oikos        38         1.19             0.08
               Fage                21         1.34             0.14
               Noosa               11         1.82             0.09
               Roundy’s            18         1.00             0.03
               Yoplait Greek       33         1.16             0.05



                                              32
                            Table 4: Choice shares for greek yogurt
                                         Unconditional Shares
          Chobani           Dannon Fage Roundy’s Noosa Yoplait                   No Purchase
Control    0.021             0.008 0.014       0.003      0.009 0.007               0.939
Test       0.011             0.005 0.005       0.003      0.012 0.004               0.960
All        0.021             0.008 0.014       0.003      0.009 0.007               0.939
                                          Conditional Shares
          Chobani           Dannon Fage Roundy’s Noosa Yoplait
Control    0.348             0.125 0.230       0.044      0.140 0.112
Test       0.285             0.118 0.129       0.078      0.288 0.101
All        0.347             0.125 0.228       0.045      0.142 0.112




             Table 5: Descriptive statistics of the survey questions
                                       before        after
                                    taste test taste test mean st. dev.                  N
   PL as good as national brand?            X               0.806    0.396             664
 Do you think you will prefer PL?           X               0.441    0.497             664
              Did you prefer PL?                        X 0.715      0.452             664
              Next time, buy PL?                        X 0.843      0.364             664
Note: The total number of respondents (N) is equal to the number of survey respondents
who have a purchase history in the category surveyed.




                                      Table 6: Updating of beliefs
                                             After taste test: Did prefer PL?
                 Before taste test:
                  Will prefer PL?




                                                    no         yes       total
                                        no         136         235        371
                                               36.66% 63.34% 100.00%
                                       yes         53         240        293
                                              18.09%      81.91%    100.00%
                                      total       189         475        664
                                              28.46%      71.54%    100.00%

               Note: The total number of respondents (N) is equal to
               the number of survey respondents who have a purchase
               history in the category surveyed.



                                                   33
                                      Table 7: Updating of beliefs
                                                                 After taste test:
                                                         Will buy PL next time?
                                                         no        yes        total
        Valence of updating
            during taste test
                                  negative update        17         36          53
                                (Q2 = 1, Q3 = 0) 32.08% 67.92% 100.00%
                                  positive neutral             12       228        240
                                (Q2 = 1, Q3 = 1)           5.00%    95.00%    100.00%
                                  negative neutral          67           69        136
                                (Q2 = 0, Q3 = 0)       49.26%       50.74%    100.00%
                                  positive update              8        227        235
                                (Q2 = 0, Q3 = 1)           3.40%    96.60%    100.00%
                                              total        104          560        664
                                                       15.66%       84.34%    100.00%

      Note: The total number of respondents (N) is equal to the number of
      survey respondents who have a purchase history in the category sur-
      veyed. Q2 − Do you think you will prefer the Private Label brand?
      (pre-test) Q3 − Did you prefer the Private Label brand?




                                         Table 8: Parallel trends
                                              Pooled Cookies Ice cream               Yogurt
                                  constant    0.0784      0.0644  0.1771             0.0439
                                            (0.0034) (0.0130) (0.0111)             (0.0030)
                                 trend (δ )     0.0000       -0.0002      0.0004     0.0000
                                              (0.0001)      (0.0004)    (0.0004)   (0.0001)
 trend × treatment (ωτh )                      -0.0004   0.0013          -0.0007 -0.0005
                                              (0.0008) (0.0028)         (0.0024) (0.0008)
                                hh effects            X             X          X         X
                                        N     107200           6063      25350      75760
                                        R2     0.6028        0.8477      0.6349     0.5884
Note: Regressions use a pre-treatment period of 150 days prior to a panelist’s store
visit on the day of a blind taste test. Standard errors in parentheses. All specifications
include panelist fixed effects. The trend variables are in weeks.




                                                      34
                   Table 9: Difference in difference regressions
                                     Pooled Cookies Ice cream                        Yogurt
                        constant     0.0788      0.0704      0.1913                  0.0397
                                   (0.0046) (0.0174) (0.0143)                      (0.0045)
                   0-6 days -βSR          0.1513        0.4785         0.2167        0.0988
                                        (0.0193)      (0.0546)       (0.0602)      (0.0187)
                  7-27 days-βMR           0.0775        0.1596         0.1248        0.0403
                                        (0.0170)      (0.0535)       (0.0417)      (0.0184)
               28-157 days-βLR            0.0232        0.0626         0.0270        0.0201
                                        (0.0079)      (0.0239)       (0.0237)      (0.0078)
  hh×cat fixed effects −αhc                     X             X               X             X
 week×cat fixed effects −γtc                    X             X               X             X
                H0 : β SR = β MR           reject         reject
                H0 : β MR = β LR           reject                                      reject
                                 N       211800         12710          50610         148500
                                 R2       0.5754        0.7726         0.5695         0.5186
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The regressions show the short, medium, and long
run treatment effects of the blind taste tests on the probability of choosing the private label.
The regressions account for fixed effects for each combination of panelist and category.
The pre taste-test window is 150 days.




                                              35
                  Table 10: Difference in difference regressions
                                     Pooled Cookies Ice cream                        Yogurt
                        constant     0.0789     0.0701      0.1912                   0.0396
                                   (0.0046) (0.0174) (0.0143)                      (0.0045)
                   0-6 days -βSR          0.1487        0.4738         0.2120        0.0963
                                        (0.0193)      (0.0548)       (0.0603)      (0.0187)
                  7-27 days-βMR           0.0765        0.1600         0.1188        0.0404
                                        (0.0170)      (0.0535)       (0.0416)      (0.0184)
          28-55 days-β4-8 weeks           0.0527        0.0119        -0.0012        0.0833
                                        (0.0131)      (0.0366)       (0.0372)      (0.0132)
         56-83 days-β9-12 weeks           0.0132        0.2901        -0.0188        0.0157
                                        (0.0136)      (0.0623)       (0.0386)      (0.0133)
      84-111 days-β12-16 weeks            0.0037        0.0671         0.0358       -0.0128
                                        (0.0115)      (0.0311)       (0.0346)      (0.0114)
      112-157 days-β>16 weeks             0.0162        0.0566         0.0336        0.0090
                                        (0.0121)      (0.0339)       (0.0361)      (0.0119)
  hh×cat fixed effects −αhc                     X             X               X             X
 week×cat fixed effects −γtc                    X             X               X             X
                                 N       211800         12710          50610         148500
                                 R2       0.5755        0.7731         0.5696         0.5188
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The regressions show the short, medium, and long
run treatment effects of the blind taste tests on the probability of choosing the private label.
The regression account for fixed effects for each combination of customer and category.
The pre taste-test window is 150 days.




                                              36
                                                   Table 11: Average Treatment Effect on the Treated over Time
                                   Cookies                                Ice Cream                               Yogurt                                Pooled
                       AT T MC−NNM          AT T DID             AT T MC−NNM      AT T DID             AT T MC−NNM       AT T DID            AT T MC−NNM       AT T DID
         short run         0.51               0.51                   0.28           0.31                   0.24           0.22                   0.29           0.30
        (0-6 days)    (1.1e-03 ,1.00 )   (-2e-04 ,0.99 )         (0.06 ,0.50 ) (0.10 ,0.52 )           (0.08 ,0.39 ) ([0.09 ,0.43 )          (0.18 ,0.41 ) (0.16 ,0.41 )

       medium run          0.17               0.17                   0.09             0.11                 0.06             0.05                  0.08            0.08




37
       (7-27 days)     (-0.02 ,0.66 )     (-0.02 ,0.54 )         (-0.02 ,0.24 )   (-0.01 ,0.25 )       (-0.02 ,0.15 )   (-0.03 ,0.14 )        (0.01 ,0.15 )   (0.02 ,0.16 )

         long run          0.08                0.07                  5e-04            0.01                 0.03             0.03                 0.02              0.02
         (28-157)      (-0.01 ,0.20 )    (-3.3e-03 ,0.18 )       (-0.07 ,0.08 )   (-0.07 ,0.10 )       (-0.02 ,0.09 )   (-0.03 ,0.08 )       (-0.02 ,0.07 )   (-0.01 ,0.07 )
     Note: Point estimates represent means of the estimators across the B = 200 bootstrap replications that draw individual customers with replacement. Confidence
     intervals in square brackets represent the 2.5th and 97.5th quantiles of the estimators across the B = 200 bootstrap replications. AT T OLS f ull refers to the estimator
     used on the sample that includes treated units for whom we do not observe a pre-treatment period.
                       Table 12: Valence of information

                                                             Baseline     Valence
                                                constant       -0.032       0.069
                                                              (0.050)     (0.034)
                                     average treatment           0.044
                                                               (0.008)
         treatment after positive update (β neg→pos )                        0.067
                                                                           (0.012)
         treatment after negative update (β pos→neg )                       -0.051
                                                                           (0.028)
  treatment after positive confirmation (β pos→pos )                         0.054
                                                                           (0.014)
  treatment after negative confirmation (β neg→neg )                         0.009
                                                                           (0.014)
                panelist×category fixed effects–αhc                  X           X
                  week×category fixed effects−γtc                    X           X
                                                       N      211800       211800
                                                       R2      0.573        0.575
 Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions account for fixed effects for each
 combination of panelist and category and are pooled across categories.




             Table 13: Posterior Likelihood (Greek Yogurt)
                                    posterior log likelihood
                     no loyalty      loyalty     treatment &              treatment
                                                  no loyalty              & loyalty
homogeneous          -284,738.0 -245,380.5 -284,709.8                    -245,369.4
random coefficients -176,640.8 -177,023.8 -176,530.8                     -176,826.1




                                         38
              Table 14: Hyper-parameter estimates (Greek Yogurt)
Coefficient                          Population mean       Population st. dev.
                                  50th 2.5th 97.5th 50th 2.5th 97.5th
Chobani (αChobani )               -2.18 -2.42 -1.93 4.92 4.74             5.11
Dannon Oikos (αDannon )           -3.93 -4.22 -3.66 5.73 5.54             5.93
Fage (αFage )                    -3.75   -4.03   -3.49   5.06   4.87     5.26
Roundy’s αRoundy0 s               -6.00 -6.29 -5.71 5.20 5.01             5.40
Noosa (αNoosa )                  -4.57 -4.97 -4.16 7.32 7.03             7.61
Yoplait Greek αYoplait            -4.74 -5.00 -4.48 5.17 4.98             5.36
price (η)                         -2.86 -3.06 -2.66 3.77 3.62             3.92
                       SR
                              
(SR treat)*Chobani   βChobani  -0.94 -1.73 -0.44 1.77 1.15              2.36
                      SR
(SR treat)*Roundy’s βRoundy    2.13 1.58          2.56    1.99   0.96   2.64
                            0s
                      MR
                            
(MR treat)*Chobani βChobani  -1.12 -1.67        -0.56   1.45   0.95   2.01
                       MR
(MR treat)*Roundy’s βRoundy    0.31 -0.11         0.73    1.49   1.17   1.78
                             0
                     LR
                           s
(LR treat)*Chobani 
                   βChobani  -0.38 -0.92         0.03    1.41   1.00   1.77
                     LR
(LR treat)*Roundy’s βRoundy       -0.78   -1.39   -0.17   1.76   1.20   2.36
                            0s




                                     39
                         Figure 1: Robustness – Panelists not Buying on the Treatment Day

                               Including Same Day                                              Excluding Same Day
                .3




                                                                              .3
                    .2




                                                                                  .2
          Market Share




                                                                        Market Share
          .1




                                                                        .1
                0




                                                                              0
                          ol   ee
                                 k   ks     ks     ks    ks   ks                          ol   ee
                                                                                                  k   ks     ks       ks    ks   ks
                      ntr          ee wee wee wee wee                                  ntr          ee wee wee wee wee
                    Co       1w 4w      8     2       6     6                     Co         1w 4w       8      2        6     6
                               2−   5 −      1      1     1                                      −     −      1        1     1
                                          9−    13
                                                  −     >                                      2     5     9−     13
                                                                                                                     −     >



 Note: The graph on the left reproduces the first column in table (10). The graph on the right represents the case
where the difference-in-differences regression is estimated on the sub-sample of treated panelists who do not buy
from the category on the treatment-day.




                                 Figure 2: Robustness – Different Scope of Category

                             Sub−Categories in Test                                                Entire Category
                .3




                                                                              .3
                    .2




                                                                                  .2
          Market Share




                                                                        Market Share
          .1




                                                                        .1
                0




                                                                              0




                          ol   ee
                                 k   ks     ks     ks    ks   ks                          ol   ee
                                                                                                  k   ks     ks       ks    ks   ks
                      ntr          ee wee wee wee wee                                  ntr          ee wee wee wee wee
                    Co       1w 4w      8     2       6     6                     Co         1w 4w       8      2        6     6
                               2−   5 −      1      1     1                                      −     −      1        1     1
                                          9−    13
                                                  −     >                                      2     5     9−     13
                                                                                                                     −     >



Note: The graph on the left reproduces the first column in table (10). The graph on the right represents the case
where the difference-in-differences regression is estimated using all items in the three categories.




                                                                   40
                                              Figure 3: Robustness –Different Pre-Treatment Windows
                               Pre−window 90 days                                                  Pre−window 150 days                                                 Pre−window 365 days
        .3




                                                                            .3




                                                                                                                                                .3
             .2




                                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                     .2
  Market Share




                                                                      Market Share




                                                                                                                                          Market Share
 .1




                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                         .1
        0




                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                0
                     ol     ee
                               k       ks    ks     ks    ks    ks                       ol     ee
                                                                                                   k       ks    ks     ks    ks    ks                       ol     ee
                                                                                                                                                                       k       ks    ks    ks    ks    ks
                  ntr               ee    ee     ee    ee    ee                       ntr               ee    ee     ee    ee    ee                       ntr               ee    ee     ee   ee    ee
            Co            1w     4 w −8 w 12 w 16 w 16 w                        Co            1w     4 w −8 w 12 w 16 w 16 w                        Co            1w     4 w −8 w 12 w 16 w 16 w
                             2 −     5                                                             −                                                                   −
                                          9−    13
                                                   −    >                                        2       5    9−    13
                                                                                                                       −    >                                        2       5    9−    13
                                                                                                                                                                                           −   >



 Note: The graph in the middle reproduces the first column in table (10). The graph on the left and right represent
the case where the difference-in-differences regression is estimated using shorter and longer pre-treatment windows,
respectively.



                                                  Figure 4: Posterior Expected Demand for Roundy’s

                                                                                        Roundy's Demand
                                        0.5




                                                                                                                                                 Control
                                                                                                                                                 SR
                                                                                                                                                 MR
                                                                                                                                                 LR
                                                                                                                                                 95% cred
                                        0.4




                                                                       avg Roundy's
                                                                        price=$1.03
                                        0.3
                                share

                                        0.2
                                        0.1
                                        0.0




                                               0.5                                    1.0                               1.5                                       2.0

                                                                                                     price ($)




                                                                                                     41
                                    Figure 5: Posterior Expected Demand Shifts for Roundy’s
                                                            Distribution of Roundy's Demand Shifts (SR)
                   0.3
share difference




                          ●     ●   ●   ●                   avg Roundy's price=$1.03
                                            ●   ●   ●   ●     ●   ●   ●     ●   ●   ●
                   0.1




                                                                                        ●    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●     ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                   −0.1




                          0.5                                         1.0                                        1.5                                       2.0

                                                                                        price ($)



                                                            Distribution of Roundy's Demand Shifts (MR)
                   0.3
share difference




                                                            avg Roundy's price=$1.03
                   0.1




                          ●     ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●     ●   ●   ●     ●   ●   ●   ●    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●     ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                   −0.1




                          0.5                                         1.0                                        1.5                                       2.0

                                                                                        price ($)



                                                            Distribution of Roundy's Demand Shifts (LR)
                   0.3
share difference




                                                            avg Roundy's price=$1.03
                   0.1




                                                                            ●   ●   ●   ●    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●     ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                              ●   ●   ●
                                                ●   ●   ●
                                    ●   ●   ●
                          ●     ●
                   −0.1




                          0.5                                         1.0                                        1.5                                       2.0

                                                                                        price ($)




                                                                                        42
                Figure 6: Posterior Expected Demand for Chobani

                                 Chobani Demand


                                                              Control
                                                              SR
                                                              MR
                                                              LR
                                                              95% cred
        0.6




                                     avg Chobani
                                      price=$1.23
        0.4
share

        0.2
        0.0




              0.5              1.0                  1.5            2.0

                                       price ($)




                                       43
                                     Figure 7: Posterior Expected Demand Shifts for Chobani
                                                             Distribution of Chobani Demand Shifts (SR)
                   0.05




                                                                                avg Chobani price=$1.23
share difference

                   −0.10




                                                                                                                                                ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                    ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                        ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                          ●   ●   ●
                                                                                              ●   ●   ●
                           ●     ●                                          ●    ●   ●   ●
                                     ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●    ●   ●   ●
                   −0.25




                           0.5                                        1.0                                         1.5                                       2.0

                                                                                         price ($)



                                                             Distribution of Chobani Demand Shifts (MR)
                   0.05




                                                                                avg Chobani price=$1.23
share difference




                                                                                                                                                ●   ●   ●   ●
                   −0.10




                                                                                                                                    ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                            ●   ●
                                                                                                                  ●     ●
                                                                                                          ●   ●
                                                                                                  ●   ●
                           ●     ●                                                       ●    ●
                                     ●   ●                                       ●   ●
                                             ●   ●   ●   ●        ●   ●     ●
                                                              ●
                   −0.25




                           0.5                                        1.0                                         1.5                                       2.0

                                                                                         price ($)



                                                             Distribution of Chobani Demand Shifts (LR)
                   0.05




                                                                                avg Chobani price=$1.23
share difference




                                                                                     ●   ●    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●     ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                  ●   ●     ●    ●
                                         ●   ●   ●   ●   ●    ●
                           ●     ●   ●
                   −0.10
                   −0.25




                           0.5                                        1.0                                         1.5                                       2.0

                                                                                         price ($)




                                                                                         44
A   Difference Regressions within Treatment Group

                                Table 15: Difference regressions
                                          Pooled     Cookies Ice cream                        Yogurt
                             constant     0.0765      0.0725       0.2026                     0.0244
                                        (0.0102)    (0.0386)     (0.0280)                   (0.0100)
                       0-6 days -βSR           0.1832         0.4751          0.2425          0.1380
                                             (0.0242)       (0.0855)        (0.0688)        (0.0238)
                     7-27 days-βMR             0.1271         0.1502          0.1433          0.1024
                                             (0.0226)       (0.0867)        (0.0535)        (0.0240)
                  28-157 days-βLR              0.0821         0.0544          0.0122          0.1113
                                             (0.0205)       (0.0798)        (0.0547)        (0.0204)
               linear time trend - γ        -0.00032         0.00014   0.00009             -0.00051
                                           (0.00011)       (0.00046) (0.00029)            (0.00011)
       hh×cat fixed effects −αhc                    X              X               X               X
                              N                  3790            291            1052            2447
                              R2               0.5991         0.7617          0.5662          0.5774
       Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The regressions show the short, medium, and long
       run treatment effects of the blind taste tests on the probability of choosing the private label.
       The regressions account for fixed effects for each combination of panelist and category.
       The pre taste-test window is 150 days.




                                                     45
                                    Table 16: Difference regressions
                                              Pooled     Cookies Ice cream                        Yogurt
                                 constant     0.0938      0.0526       0.2179                     0.0423
                                            (0.0104)    (0.0433)     (0.0276)                   (0.0103)
                           0-6 days -βSR           0.1644         0.4848          0.2292          0.1162
                                                 (0.0244)       (0.0877)        (0.0691)        (0.0239)
                         7-27 days-βMR             0.1068         0.1651          0.1262          0.0809
                                                 (0.0227)       (0.0897)        (0.0531)        (0.0241)
                 28-55 days-β4-8 weeks             0.0765         0.0106         -0.0231          0.1303
                                                 (0.0207)       (0.0800)        (0.0535)        (0.0208)
                56-83 days-β9-12 weeks             0.0358         0.3047         -0.0516          0.0643
                                                 (0.0234)       (0.1175)        (0.0595)        (0.0233)
             84-111 days-β12-16 weeks              0.0277         0.0994         -0.0097          0.0384
                                                 (0.0242)       (0.1027)        (0.0639)        (0.0240)
              112-157 days-β>16 weeks              0.0459         0.0692         -0.0060          0.0722
                                                 (0.0281)       (0.1126)        (0.0729)        (0.0283)
                   linear time trend- γ         -0.00012        -0.00001   0.00022 -0.00028
                                               (0.00012)       (0.00055) (0.00030) (0.00012)
           hh×cat fixed effects −αhc                    X              X               X               X
                                  N                  3790            291            1052            2447
                                  R2               0.5991         0.7732          0.5668          0.5809
           Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The regressions show the short, medium, and long
           run treatment effects of the blind taste tests on the probability of choosing the private label.
           The regression account for fixed effects for each combination of customer and category.
           The pre taste-test window is 150 days.



B     Robustness of Structural Estimates
To assess robustness of our estimates, we re-estimate the multinomial choice demand system for
the Greek Yogurt data using a shorter pre-treatment time window of 150 days. This format con-
forms with the set-up used in the descriptive DID analysis in section 4. The posterior likelihood
estimates in Table 17 confirm our earlier findings. Unobserved heterogeneity in tastes improves fit
substantially, as does the conditioning on the treatment-related variables. In addition, we select the
model without loyalty relative to the model controlling for loyalty based on posterior fit.
    Similarly, our results regarding preferences in Table 18 also confirm our earlier findings. Once
again, we find that the short and medium run treatment effect of the blind taste test on consumers’
mean brand preference for Roundy’s are large and have a close to 100% posterior probability of
being positive. The long run effect is small and has only a 73% posterior probability of being
positive. Unexpectedly, the short run treatment effect on the mean brand preference for Chobani,


                                                         46
                        Table 17: Posterior Likelihood (Greek Yogurt)
                                              posterior log likelihood
                                no loyalty     loyalty     treatment &         treatment
                                                             no loyalty        & loyalty
           homogeneous         -195941.97 -167603.24 -195907.31               -167590.39
           random coefficient -117027.22 -117743.42 -116996.50                -117683.79

                      Table 18: Hyper-parameter estimates (Greek Yogurt)
             Coefficient              Population mean      Population st. deviation
                                   50th 2.5th 97.5th 50th 2.5th            97.5th
             Chobani               -2.54 -2.94 -2.16 5.32 5.08              5.55
             Dannon Oikos          -4.80 -5.27 -4.35 5.96 5.71              6.22
             Fage                  -4.28 -4.75 -3.88 5.39 5.13              5.66
             Roundys               -7.02 -7.44 -6.64 5.61 5.37              5.85
             Noosa                 -5.18 -5.77 -4.62 7.63 7.26              8.02
             Yoplait Greek         -5.16 -5.52 -4.78 5.47 5.26              5.70
             price                 -2.65 -2.95 -2.32 3.94 3.75              4.12
             (SR treat)*Chobani    0.24 0.02       0.52 1.38 1.07           1.62
             (SR treat)*Roundys 2.37 2.05          2.60 1.56 0.82           2.37
             (MR treat)*Chobani -1.15 -1.36 -1.00 1.02 0.82                 1.27
             (MR treat)*Roundys 1.09 0.82          1.46 1.58 1.34           1.78
             (LR treat)*Chobani    0.06 -0.13 0.32 1.29 1.04                1.53
             (LR treat)*Roundys 0.10 -0.22 0.34 1.33 1.08                   1.66


though small, has a 99% posterior probability of being positive. The medium run treatment effect
is, as before, large and has a close to 100% posterior probability of being negative. Also, as before,
the long run effect is very small and has only a 58% probability of being negative. In summary,
most of our qualitative findings from before are robust to the shorter pre-treatment time window.
However, we lose precision in this shorter sample.




                                                 47
