                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE BIG CON – REASSESSING THE "GREAT" RECESSION AND ITS "FIX"

                                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                                      Working Paper 25213
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25213


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




I thank Boston University for research support. This article is forthcoming in Ten Years After the
2008 International Financial Crisis, a special Issue of Acta Oeconomica, Peter Mihályi, ed. 2019.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Laurence J. Kotlikoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Big Con – Reassessing the "Great" Recession and its "Fix"
Laurence J. Kotlikoff
NBER Working Paper No. 25213
November 2018
JEL No. G01,G1,G2

                                           ABSTRACT

Most economists differ, not on the causes of the Great Recession, but on their relative
importance. They concur, though, on the basic problem, namely human, not market failure. This
study applies the evidence, some new, some old, to re-try the usual suspects. It finds none guilty.
Instead, it identifies broadly defined multiple equilibrium, mediated by opacity, false rumors, and
panic, as the real culprit. There are many models of bank runs. But each can trigger firing runs –
firing someone else’s customers for fear that others are firing your customers. Firing runs, in turn,
exacerbate bank runs, producing a vicious cycle. This cycle can be manipulated by those who
benefit from economic distress (short sellers). If the banking system, not the banking players is
the problem, the solution surely lies in fundamental banking reform. This paper concludes by
pointing out that a reform that shifted to 100 percent, equity-financed mutual-fund banking with
government-organized, real-time asset verification and disclosure could preclude financial runs
and their ability to induce firing runs.


Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and The Gaidar Institute for Economic Policy
and also NBER
kotlikoff@gmail.com
Introduction
Ten years after the Great Recession (GR), economists still debate its causes and policymakers still
wonder how to prevent the next financial crisis. MIT finance professor, Andrew Lo (2012),
reviewed 21 books on the financial crisis by economists, bankers and journalists. He concluded
that1

      … (there is) significant disagreement as to what the underlying causes of the crisis were and
      even less agreement as to what to do about it. But what may be more disconcerting for
      most economists is the fact that we can’t even agree on all the facts.

This paper argues that the alleged causes of the GR are either a) unsupported by the facts, b)
disconnected from economic theory or c) descriptions of GR outcomes, not GR causes. Next, it
points out that the “Great” Recession was not particularly great, suggesting that its very title is
part of the recession’s self-generated hysteria. This debunking of the “big con” – the standard
narrative of the GR and the alleged Dodd-Frank fix -- is followed by an alternative and seemingly
obvious view of what produced this latest in a long history of U.S. banking failures and economic
downturns – pure, misinformed panic that flipped the economy’s equilibrium.

To be sure, my take is an outlier relative to the standard diagnosis of the problem and its cure.
The standard view is that the housing market experienced a bubble, that regulators were asleep
at the wheel, letting households and banks overleverage, that Wall Street manufactured and
overvalued dangerous, complex derivatives, that conventional and shadow banks issued and
then sold fraudulent subprime mortgages, that rating companies were routinely bribed, that
financial traders traded too much, that shadow banks operated outside of regulatory scrutiny,
that Congress forced Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to encourage subprimes, and that there was
too much risk taking.

The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission’s Postmortem
The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission’s (FCIC) was established in 2009 to investigate the causes
of the 2007-2010 financial crisis. Its report, delivered in January 2011, includes this summary,

There was an explosion in risky subprime lending and securitization, an unsustainable rise
in housing prices, widespread reports of egregious and predatory lending practices,
dramatic increases in household mortgage debt, and exponential growth in financial
firms’ trading activities, unregulated derivatives, and short-term “repo” lending markets,
among many other red flags. Yet there was pervasive permissiveness; little meaningful
action was taken to quell the threats in a timely manner. 2



1
 Lo, Andrew W. "Reading about the financial crisis: A twenty-one-book review." Journal of economic literature 50,
no. 1 (2012): 151-78.

2
    http://fcic-static.law.stanford.edu/cdn_media/fcic-reports/fcic_final_report_full.pdf


                                                           1
The alliteration, “pervasive permissiveness,” has a nice ring to it. It also sums up in two words the
standard assessment and lays the foundation for the chosen remedy. It implies that the problem
lay with people, not with the intrinsic nature of the economy or the banking system. It also says
that banking’s fix is to ensure that people, including bankers, raters, regulators, investors,
politicians and borrowers, behave.

Liar Loans, No Doc Loans, NINJA Loans and Other Subprime Mortgages
Rashes are a symptom, not the cause of measles. No medical text book would mistake the two.
Yet the causes of the great recession seem largely a description of what transpired, not an
explanation for why events unfolded as they did. Often these descriptions are poorly disguised
exaggerations.

Take subprime mortgages. To read the FCIC report, let alone watch the movie, The Big Short, one
might conclude that a majority of outstanding mortgages prior to the GR were subprimes. Indeed,
the FCIC report features the word “subprime” on 41.5 percent of its 662 pages. It mentions the
word “mortgage” on 69.9 percent of its pages. Hence subprime-mortgage references represent
almost 60 percent of all FCIC references to mortgages.

This dramatically overstates the importance of subprimes. In the run up to Lehman’s bankruptcy,
subprimes never exceeded 14 percent of total outstanding mortgages and their share was below
12 percent on September 15, 2008 when Lehman shut its doors.3 Furthermore, not all subprimes
were subprime when measured by foreclosure rates. At its peak, the subprime foreclosure rate
was only 15 percent.4

Foreclosure rates on prime mortgages peaked at about 3.5 percent.5 Since at most, 14 percent
of outstanding mortgages in 2009 were subprime, at most, 2.1 (.15 x .14) percent of all mortgages
at the height of the Great Recession represented foreclosed subprime mortgages. This seems like
a very small number given the tremendous attention paid to subprimes.

At the recession’s peak, roughly 4.8 percent of all mortgages were in foreclosure. Subprimes
constituted almost half of these foreclosures. This oversized share of subprimes in total
foreclosures suggests they ignited the recession or at least made helped make it “great.” But
subprimes constituted over 60 of all foreclosures in 2004 when the economy was doing just fine.


3
  https://www.frbsf.org/education/publications/doctor-econ/2009/december/subprime-mortgage-statistics/ Note,
the FCIC report suggest that subprimes represented half of all outstanding mortgages in 2008. That’s a huge
difference between the figure cited here, which was calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco based
on data obtain from the Mortgage Bankers Association.
4
  .15 x .14 divided by .05 x .86 equals .488.
https://www.google.com/search?tbm=isch&q=mba+chart+subprime+series+delinquency+chart&chips=q:mba+cha
rt+subprime+series+delinquency+chart,online_chips:delinquency+rates,online_chips:subprime+mortgages&sa=X&
ved=0ahUKEwi_yb-XzMTdAhXOmuAKHfb7BkwQ4lYIKigB&biw=1261&bih=710&dpr=2#imgrc=jmEmu25vcPO3RM:
5

https://www.google.com/search?q=prime+mortgage+mba+delinquency+rates+chart&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa
=X&ved=0ahUKEwiZ46SmzcTdAhUqmuAKHYLZDnYQ_AUIDygC&biw=1261&bih=710#imgrc=HFZyDsi6Gmu9iM:


                                                       2
Subprimes were and are built to be risky. No one was shocked about their high foreclosure rate
in 2004 and it certainly didn’t spark a recession.

Furthermore, one can’t claim subprime defaults caused the GR by considering defaults during
the GR. When the Great Recession began, the default (mortgage delinquencies plus foreclosures)
rate on all mortgages was only 3.7 percent.6 It rose to 11.5 percent over the next two years as
close to 9 million workers lost their jobs.7 I.e., the GR caused defaults, not the other way around.

In 2007, before the GR, the subprime foreclosure rate was 5 percent. It rose by a factor of roughly
3 during the GR. But the 2007 foreclosure rate for prime mortgages was 1 percent and rose by a
factor of more than 4. Hence, one can argue that if bad mortgages caused the GR, it was prime
more than subprime mortgages that were at fault. Yes, there was an increase by 2 percent points
in subprime foreclosure rates in the immediate run up to the GR. But that meant that only 0.3
percent more mortgages were in foreclosure.

Another piece of evidence on the actual as opposed to alleged problems with subprime securities
comes from the Fed’s purchase from JP Morgan (JPM) of $29 billion worth of Bear’s subprime
securities as part of its bribing JPM to buy Bear Stearns for next to nothing. These assets were
placed in a fund called Maiden Lane. The obscure name for this fund references what lays at the
rear end of the NY Federal Reserve, namely Maiden Lane. Was this name an inside-the-Fed joke
suggesting that the Maiden Lane assets were financial excretion? Certainly, JPM had that view.
It refused to purchase Bear Stearns at even $2 per share without the Fed first buying Bear’s
supposedly most toxic subprimes.

In the event, Maiden Lane’s collection of sub subprime mortgages didn’t lose a penny. Indeed,
the Fed’s $29 billion investment repaid $31.5 billion over the following decade for a $2.5 billion
gain.8 The fact that this figure is positive is remarkable given the GR-induced rise in subprime
foreclosures. Moreover, the Fed clearly overpaid for these assets. Certainly, JP Morgan didn’t
want to get anywhere near them. If they were really worth the $29 billion investment, JPM would
have readily acquired and resold them. Suppose that these assets were worth only $15 billion at
the time of their purchase. I.e., suppose that the Fed paid JPM $14 billion through the back door
(with its overpayment another possible explanation for the name Maiden Lane, which literally
lies at the NY Fed’s back door), then the ex-post return earned on these securities was
sensational.

If subprimes were irrationally, if not dramatically undervalued and weren’t the proximate cause
of the GR, what about other alleged boogeymen?


6
  Ibid
7
  https://www.cbpp.org/research/economy/chart-book-the-legacy-of-the-great-recession
8
       https://247wallst.com/banking-finance/2018/09/18/new-york-fed-sees-2-5-billion-profit-on-bear-stearns-in-
final-maiden-lane-sales/ To be precise, the Fed establish an LLC to purchase $30 billion of Bear’s “junk” assets with
a $29 billion loan from the Fed and a $1 billion loan from JP Morgan. (see
https://www.federalreserve.gov/regreform/reform-bearstearns.htm)


                                                         3
The “Unsustainable” Rise in Housing Prices
The FCIC’s statement that the rise in house prices was unsustainable suggests that house prices
can’t keep rising over long periods and were going absolutely crazy prior to the GR. In fact, real
house prices can rise for years, indeed, decades. They did so essentially every year for the 32
years between Q1 1975 and Q1 2007.9 The rise was both smooth and gradual with real house
prices only 64 percent higher in Q1 2007 than they were in Q1 1975 – this despite real GDP rising
by 170 percent over the same interval.

The only period of a rapid rise in real house prices in this 32-year period occurred between Q1
2003 and Q1 2007 when real house prices rose by 22 percent. But over this period real GDP rose
by 14 percent. Hence, real house prices rose only 2 percent faster per year than did the economy
during the period of “unsustainable” house price increases.

One can write down models with a fixed supply of housing in which house prices will rise pari
passu with output, at least in the long run. One can also write down models in which there is a
variable supply of housing and the price of housing stays fixed, while the quantity of housing rises
with output. As our economy has become more urbanized, the fixed supply of housing model,
which partly references fixed central city urban land, is arguably becoming more relevant and
may help explain the more rapid house-price increases that we’ve seen not just prior to the GR,
but in the post-GR period as well.

In short, reasonable economic models can readily debunk or at least strongly question the view
that house prices rising 2 percentage points faster than the economy for four years after rising
far more slowly for the previous 28 years is “unsustainable.” Indeed, what the FCIC viewed as a
housing-price bubble might better be described as a period of normal housing-price increases
following 28 years of abnormally low housing-price increases.

Certainly, a temporary drop in house prices could have produced a contraction in construction.
But contractions in construction have also arisen, indeed they’ve generally occurred, in the
context of rising house prices. Moreover, a decline in a given sector doesn’t augur an economy-
wide recession. Indeed, every expansion features a recession in particular sectors, just as
particular sectors expand during every recession.

Furthermore, a drop in the price of homes does not adversely impact most homeowners. Yes,
the value of their asset falls. But the implicit cost of homeownership (imputed rent) falls as well.
And, if we’re talking about a nationwide decline in house prices, as we are with the GR, even
those who moved experienced no economic harm because their ability to buy at a lower price
offset their need to sell at a lower price.10



9
 https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/USSTHPI
10
  What about people who die and leave a lower priced home. This harms their heirs but those who are buying homes
are benefit by lower house prices. The fact that the house is physically intact implies that there is no overall loss to
the economy from changes in house prices.


                                                           4
As the GR took hold, many homeowners went underwater on their mortgages. This surely led to
the above-documented rise in foreclosures as mortgagees walked away from their obligations.
But foreclosures don’t represent a loss to the economy. The foreclosed house is, after all, still
standing. Its ownership just switches hands. Of course, creditors lose due to the mortgage
default. But homeowners win because they rid themselves of their mortgage liability.

In short, rising house prices are not required to keep the economy out of recession. Nor are
declining house prices, even accompanied by mortgage defaults, an automatic harbinger, let
alone a direct cause of recessions.

The housing-price decline may have been stimulated, in part, by dire statements from supposed
experts. Take Anthony Mozilo’s pronouncement, in July 2007, that “We are experiencing home
price depreciation almost like never before, with the exception of the Great Depression.”
Mozilla was, at the time, the head of Countrywide Financial -- the country’s then largest
mortgage lender. This statement was all the more credible since its making was hardly in
Countrywide’s interest. Where Mozilla got his “facts” isn’t clear, but there is no evidence
in the data of anything like what Mozilla stated. The Case-Shiller national home price
indexed peaked in July 2006. A year later, it was just 2 percent lower – nothing remotely
like Mozilla claimed. 11 Moreover, according to the Federal Reserve’s All-Transactions
House Price Index, house prices were actually higher in the Q3 2007 than Q3 2006. 12 But
here was the country’s top mortgage executive claiming house prices were plummeting
and invoking the D word – the Great Depression. The day of his statement, Countrywide’s
stock dropped 10 percent. 13

Ratings Shopping
The FCIC’s report states that failures of the big-three rating companies were "essential cogs in
the wheel of financial destruction" and "key enablers of the financial meltdown." But a careful
study by economists Efraim Benmelech of Harvard University and Jennifer Dlugosz, of the Federal
Reserve System concludes, “It is not clear that rating shopping led to the ratings collapse as the
majority of the tranches in our sample are rated by two or three agencies.”14 The authors point
out that whereas re-rantings were historically high in 2007 and 2008, they weren’t dramatically
higher than in 2002 and 2003. Moreover, 80 percent of the ratings of structured-finance
securities were done by more than one firm.

Since structured-finance securities represented only 35 percent of the U.S. bond market in 2008,
since only 7 percent of these securities were re-rated, and since, at most, 20 percent were over-
rated due to ratings shopping, overrating affected less than one half of one percent of the U.S.
bond market. Furthermore, this small figure surely overstates the importance of ratings shopping
as many of the downgrades were caused by the GR itself, thanks to the GR’s massive jobs losses.

11
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CSUSHPINSA
12
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/USSTHPI#0
13
   http://fortune.com/2010/12/23/how-the-roof-fell-in-on-countrywide/
14
   http://www.nber.org/chapters/c11794.pdf, p. 203.


                                                     5
Indeed, had there been no recession, there would have been no reason for the rating companies,
who had allegedly been bribed to overrate the securities, to jeopardize future bribes by
downgrading the securities.

Increased Bank Leverage
Sky-high bank leverage is another part of the standard GR explanation. Banks were, we were told,
leveraged 33 to 1 in 2008 compared with 12 to 1 in 2004.15 The only problem with this view is
that it’s not true. Bank leverage actually fell over the period 1988 through 2008.16 Equity rose
from 6 percent of bank assets in Q1 1988 to 10 percent in Q1 2008.

Furthermore, leverage ratios, like mortgage default rates, are endogenous to the economy’s
state. Leverage is the ratio of debt to equity. But equity is the value of a company’s assets less its
debt. Hence, if the value of a company’s assets fall, its leverage ratio rises.

Take a highly opaque and leveraged bank, X, that is being shorted by hedge funds. Suppose the
managers of these funds vigorously talk up their positions, telling all who will listen that they’ve
checked extensively on X’s assets and found them to be deeply “troubled.”17 Further suppose
enough traders of bank X’s assets become convinced that either a) X’s assets are troubled, b)
other traders believe X’s assets are troubled or believe other traders so believe, or c) X needs
critical-mass refunding from multiple funders, many of whom may decline to refund because
they are worried others won’t refund. In this case, the traders will sell the type of assets held by
X because they realize X will need to dump its assets on the market to stay liquid. The result is a
fire sale of X’s assets, a drop, potentially precipitous, in the price of X’s assets, and a rise in X’s
leverage.18

Given the severity of the stock market crash subsequent to Lehman’s failure, one might think
that leverage ratios rose dramatically during the recession. Not the case. Federal Reserve data
shows the equity ratio failing from 10 to just 9 percent – a higher value than was registered in
the prior 16 years.

The Fed data suggest that banks, as a group, were leveraged only 10 to 1 at the beginning of
2008, when the GR officially began. But what about the large investment banks? Was their
leverage exceptionally high prior to the GR? Actually, no. William Cohan debunked this
widespread myth in an Atlantic article entitled, “How We Got the Crash Wrong – Leverage Was
Not the Problem – Incentives Were and Still Are.” 19


15
   https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/06/how-we-got-the-crash-wrong/308984/
16
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/EQTA
17
   “Troubled assets” is, of course, the term the U.S. Treasury and Federal Reserve applied to subprime mortgages and
other securities in seeking support for TARP, the Troubled Asset Relief Program.
18
   This, of course, does what the shorters want – it raises the values of their short positions. Talking up one’s short
is, incidentally, exactly what’s portrayed in The Big Short. What we don’t know and probably never will know is
whether those who shorted the market lied or massaged the truth about the assets they denigrated.
19
    https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/06/how-we-got-the-crash-wrong/308984/


                                                          6
Cohan’s point is supported by an April 2008 paper issued by Lehman Brothers, entitled “Lehman
Brothers – Leverage Analysis.”20 The paper shows that Lehman was no more leveraged in 2007
than in 2003.21 Moreover, Bear Stearns was only slightly more leveraged in 2007 than in 2003.
And, as Cohan points out, Bear Stearns was more leveraged in 1998 than in 2008. Interestingly,
the three large investment banks that didn’t face runs – Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and
Merrill Lynch – did materially increase their leverage in the run up to the GR, but not beyond
leverage rates seen years in the past. Still the fact that the investment banks, which maintained
their leverage, came under attack, but the investment banks that raised their leverage did not,
provides more evidence against increasing leverage as a real, as opposed to misperceived GR
culprit.

Too Little Capital
Another view of GR’s cause is that banks failed due to insufficient capital. Capital references the
ratio of a bank’s equity to its assets.22 A bank with a sufficiently high capital ratio is viewed as
safe from failure. This, after all, is the goal of Dodd-Frank’s stress tests – insuring banks have
sufficient capital to prevent a replay of the 2007-2009 financial crisis.

The Wikipedia entry for Bear Stearns indicates the company was leveraged 36 to 1 leading up to
its collapse.23 That’s a capital ratio of less than 3 percent – far below the regulatory standards of
the time. But Christopher Cox, Chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
at the time, a disagreed. According to Cox, Bear Stearns was well capitalized when it failed, with
a capital ratio over 13 percent and a debt-equity ratio of 6 to 1. Indeed, it appears that Bear
Stearns could have easily passed the current Dodd-Frank stress test immediately prior to its
demise.24 Consider this statement from Chairman Cox.

     The fate of Bear Stearns was the result of a lack of confidence, not a lack of capital. When
     the tumult began last week, and at all times until its agreement to be acquired by JP Morgan
     Chase during the weekend, the firm had a capital cushion well above what is required to
     meet supervisory standards calculated using the Basel II standard.25

The same appears, on careful reading of SEC Chairman, Mary Schapiro’s, 2010 testimony to the
House Financial Services Committee, to have been true of Lehman Brothers. That testimony
includes this statement.

     The immediate cause of Lehman's bankruptcy filing on September 15, 2008 stemmed from
     a loss of confidence in the firm's continued viability resulting from concerns regarding its
     significant holdings of illiquid assets and questions regarding the valuation of those assets.

20
   https://web.stanford.edu/~jbulow/Lehmandocs/docs/DEBTORS/LBEX-DOCID%201401225.pdf
21
   I reference here gross, not net leverage.
22
    Regulators have developed different capital ratio measures, including Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital ratios. See
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/t/tier1capital.asp
23
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bear_Stearns
24
   https://www.sec.gov/news/press/2008/2008-48.htm
25
   Ibid


                                                      7
     The loss of confidence resulted in counterparties and clearing entities demanding increasing
     amounts of collateral and margin, such that eventually Lehman was unable to obtain
     routine financing from certain of its lenders and counterparties.26

There are, of course, different leverage/capital ratio measures. Moreover, these measures can
be manipulated by banks’ accounting practices and risk weighting decisions.27 The complete
disconnect between the Wiki entry and the statement of Chairman Cox may reflect a difference
in facts, a difference in the capital ratio measure, a decision to consider gross, not net debt, or a
difference in risk weighting of assets. The important point, though, is the disagreement. The Wiki
entry as well as Cohan’s article reference debt-equity ratios that are 5 to 6 times the ratio
reported by Chairman Cox. This enormous discrepancy tells us that the public can easily reach
and maintain incorrect conclusions about a bank’s ability to withstand a run.

There is an even more important message in Chairman Cox’s additional statement that “The
market rumors about Bear Stearns liquidity problems became self-fulfilling.”28 Cox is saying
that Bear Stearns had very little debt, but that its actual capital ratio didn’t matter. Creditors,
past and prospective, came to believe, based on rumors, that other creditors were pulling the
plug. This led them to do the same. Since it literally only takes one dollar of overdue debt
repayment to render a bank legally bankrupt, this dynamic can sink any bank, no matter its
capital ratio, at any time. Thus, leveraged banks are unsafe at any speed, i.e., they have and
will fail regardless of their true leverage.

Lehman was also well capitalized prior to its demise. It had tier-1 capital of 11 percent when its
creditors pulled the plug.29 An 11 percent capital ratio is close to the current banking system’s
tier-1 capital ratio of 12.3 percent, calculated based on the Federal Reserve’s recent stress tests.
This indicates that today’s banking system is no safer than was Lehman Brothers when it was
driven out of business.30

Egregious and Predatory Lending
The FCIC cites “egregious and predatory lending” as another of the causes of the GR. Such lending
references adjustable-rate mortgages, mortgages with balloon payments, interest-only
mortgages, piggy-back, and so-called pay-option ARM loans. Loans of these type were and are

26
   https://www.sec.gov/news/testimony/2010/ts042010mls.htm
27
   Lehmans’ Repo 105 transactions is a case in point.
28
   https://www.sec.gov/news/press/2008/2008-48.htm
29
    https://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/richardfuldlehmanbrosbankruptcytestimony.htm Here is Fuld’s
relevant testimony re its 11 to 1 Tier 1 capital. “As far as the leverage, and I spoke about it earlier, there's a very big
difference between the 30 times and where we were when we finished in the third quarter at 10\1/2\. A big piece
of what that 30 was, again, was the match book, which was governments and agencies. So that should not be
considered as an additional piece of risky leverage. Again, I will say that on September 10th we finished with the
best or one of the best leverage ratios on the street and one of the best tier 1 capital ratios on the street. And, even
to your question, that's how I viewed the company, and that's why I viewed it as strong, Mr. Congressman. Those
were the metrics. Those were the metrics that the regulators used. Those were the metrics that all of us in the
industry used, and ours were one of the best.”
30
   https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20180621a.htm


                                                            8
subprimes. There is no doubt that many of these loans were made to borrowers who took on too
much risk or agreed to pay interest rates that were predatorily high. Certainly, if one reads the
views of The Center for Public Integrity, one comes away believing that all subprime loans
involved terms that were impossible for the public to understand.31

But such loans had been in existence since 1982, i.e., 26 years before the GR.32 Moreover, the
share of subprime loans that were predatory could not have been that large since, at most, 15
percent went into foreclosure during the GR. But they did so in the context of an unemployment
rate that reached 10 percent!

As mentioned, in 2007, before the GR, the foreclosure rate was 5 percent. Its lowest value,
between 2002 and 2007, was 3 percent, which was observed in Q3 2005.33 If one assumes that
all of the 2 percentage-point increase in subprimes involved predatory lending, we’re still talking
about predatory lending causing, at most, 0.3 percent more mortgages to definitely default,
namely, enter foreclosure. This is simply too small a figure to matter to the overall economy.
Indeed, given the size of the 2007 mortgage market, it represents just $32 billion.34 In 2007, U.S.
GDP was $14.4 trillion. The economy’s 2007 total net wealth was $68 trillion. Hence, $32 billion
is trivially small compared to the size of the 2007 overall economy or its total net wealth.

Dramatic Increases in Household Mortgage Debt
Another GR “smoking gun” is the pre-GR run up of mortgage debt, which roughly doubled
between 2002 and 2007.35 Surely, the addition of over $750 billion in mortgage debt in the course
of 6 short years must represent a priori evidence that a massive recession was in the works. Not
so. There is nothing in economic theory that suggests that increased borrowing should cause
recessions. The increase in borrowing to purchase homes was not associated with a massive
spending spree on the part of the American public. Indeed, the share of GDP consumed by the
public remained fixed at roughly 67 percent between early 2002 and late 2007.

This means that Americans, as a whole, borrowed more, not to spend, but to invest. Stated
differently, their decision to borrow more on their homes was not accompanied by a decline in
their net wealth. Collectively, they simply borrowed and lent. In fact, Americans’ net wealth rose
by over $6 trillion between 2002 and 2007. This represented an 83 percent increase. And,
although the ratio of mortgage debt to household net wealth rose, it didn’t rise by much – from
17 percent in 2001 to only 20 percent in 2007.



31
     https://www.publicintegrity.org/2009/05/06/5452/predatory-lending-decade-warnings
32
     Ibid.
33

https://www.google.com/search?tbm=isch&q=mba+chart+subprime+series+delinquency+chart&chips=q:mba+cha
rt+subprime+series+delinquency+chart,online_chips:delinquency+rates,online_chips:subprime+mortgages&sa=X&
ved=0ahUKEwi_yb-XzMTdAhXOmuAKHfb7BkwQ4lYIKigB&biw=1261&bih=710&dpr=2#imgrc=jmEmu25vcPO3RM:
34
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/HHMSDODNS
35
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MDOTHIOH


                                                       9
What about household debt payment service as a share of disposable personal income? There
was an increase prior to the GR, but nothing extraordinary. Between Q4 2001 and Q4 2007, the
ratio troughed at 12.1 percent in Q2 2004 and peaked in Q4 2007 at 13.2 percent. A 13.2 percent
ratio is small and the increase from trough to peak is only 9 percent.36

Exponential Growth in Trading Activity by Financial Firms
Here, again, we have a supposed reason for the Great Recession that has no counterpart in
economic theory. If Joe and Sally sell the same share of stock back and forth to each other an
infinite number of times in, say, a second, nothing real will happen to Joe and Sally or the
economy. Both Joe and Sally, as well as the economy, have the same net worth before and after
their infinite number of trades.

Hence, the volume of trade, in securities or anything else, is not evidence of an economic
problem. One might claim that the volume of trade was coincident with an irrational bubble in
financial markets. But the trades being counted are those involving stock and the run up to the
great recession did not reflect unprecedentedly high stock-market valuations.37 The market was
1.5 times GDP in 2000, 1.4 times GDP in 2007, and 1.5 times GDP in 2017. The stock market is
pro-cyclical, but there is nothing in the stock market data that would presage the supposed
greatness of the “Great” Recession.

Unregulated Derivatives and the Repo Market
The GR was marked by the dissemination of news about derivatives with exotic-sounding names,
such as RMBS, CDOs, synthetic CDOs, CDO squareds and CDS. Because many were complex and
not all subject to much regulation, they were singled out repeatedly by the press and
commentators during the GR and included in the FCIC’s favorite list of GR bête noires.

If these securities actually helped cause the GR, one would expect their value to have peaked
before, not during the GR. But net financial derivatives were 126 percent higher at the end of the
GR than at the beginning.38 Furthermore, in the two years leading up to the GR, net financial
derivatives rose only 7.7 percent.

The reigning narrative – that derivatives were misunderstood and over rated by compliant rating
companies – has been questioned in a recent study by economists Juan Ospinal and Harald
Uhlig.39 They examined 8,615 residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) over the period
2007-2013, almost all of which were rated AAA. Through 2013, the cumulative loss on these
“toxic” securities was only 2.3 percent. Some three quarters of the AAA-rated RMBS had
essentially zero losses through 2013. On a principal-weighted basis, the average loss rate was
only 0.42 percent. Moreover, ratings did not worsen closer to the GR. Loss rates for AAA-RMBS
36
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TDSP
37
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DDDM01USA156NWDB
38
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/IIPFINANCNQ
39
   Ospina, Juan, and Harald Uhlig. Mortgage-backed securities and the financial crisis of 2008: a post mortem. No.
w24509. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.




                                                       10
issued between 2006 and 2008 were no higher than those issued in prior years. Most striking,
AAA-rated RMBS actually out preformed the universe of AAA-rated securities.

Yes, losses were far higher for non-AAA rated segments of the RMBS market. But that’s what one
would expect from a “great” recession. However, these securities represented a small fraction of
the RMBS market. In summarizing their findings, the Ospinal and Uhlig state, “these facts
challenge the conventional narrative, that improper ratings of RMBS were a major factor in the
financial crisis of 2008.”

What about REPOs? Did they cause the GR? Well, they certainly increased in the run up to the
GR. But short-term financial-company borrowing has been growing far faster than the economy
for decades.40 The fact that some economic variable rose rapidly prior to the GR is not evidence
that it caused the GR. Smart phone sales tripled between 2005 and 2008, but no one would link
that to the GR.41 Of course, Repos would be implicated in causing the GR had they been part of
excessive leveraging by financial intermediaries. But, as discussed above, overall financial-
company leverage fell, not rose prior to the GR.

Investors Mispriced/Ignored Risk
The Ospinal and Uhlig paper also speaks to the assertion that Wall Street professionals acted like
rank amateurs in the supposed financial lending euphoria leading up to the GR. Had that been
the case, the RMBS assets would not have done so well despite the outsized recession and major
reduction in housing prices starting in 2006. As Lo (2012) points out, in 2007, CDOs paid
significantly higher returns than equally-rated corporate bonds due to their extra risk.

Unaligned CEO Incentives
Yet another explanation for the GR is that CEOs of financial institutions had too little “skin in the
game.” Jimmy Cayne, former head of Bears Stern, would surely disagree. Cayne lost close to $1
billion as his bank collapsed. Ken Lewis, CEO of the Bank of America, had $190 million to lose by
making wrong decisions and succeeded in losing $142 million. Lehman Brothers’ Dick Fuld
received most of his 2007 compensation in the form of Lehman Brothers’ stock.42 Or consider the
2011 study by economists, Rüdiger Fahlenbrach and René M. Stulz, who examined executive
compensation contracts of 95 banks. The stock and option compensation in these contracts
exceeds wages by a factor of eight.43 In short, there is no persuasive evidence that shadow or
conventional bankers had too little skin the game.




40
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/FBREPOA027N
41
   https://www.statista.com/statistics/191985/sales-of-smartphones-in-the-us-since-2005/
42
   https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jel.50.1.151, Green, Joshua (September 12, 2013). "Where Is Dick
Fuld Now? Finding Lehman Brothers' Last CEO". Bloomberg Businessweek.
43
  Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, and René M. Stulz. "Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis." Journal of financial
economics99, no. 1 (2011): 11-26.




                                                      11
Regulatory Capture
This phrase points to regulators being in the future pay of Wall Street thanks to the revolving
door between Wall Street and Pennsylvania Avenue. Yet the biggest factor that regulators
needed to oversee was Wall Street’s leverage. As discussed, it was not historically high
proceeding the GR either across the board or in the large investment banks that failed. One could
well argue that it was always too high, but that doesn’t help us explain the GR.

Democratization of Finance
Under this theory, government sponsored enterprises (Fanny and Freddie) and government
regulators were too permissive with banks in their quest to help the poor get into affordable
housing. One can argue either way, depending on one’s interest in redistribution and preferred
method to redistribute. But if this were the chief or even a major cause of the GR, subprime
mortgages would need to have played a much larger role than they did.

The Federal Reserve Kept Interest Rates Too Low
Many commentators place the blame for the GR squarely on the government, particularly the
FED and Fannie May and Freddie Mac, our major government-sponsored enterprises, which help
insure mortgages. Thirty-year mortgage interest rates were certainly lower between 2000 and
2007 than in the prior quarter century.44 But they weren’t that low especially adjusted for
inflation. In the 1990s, the real 30-year mortgage rate averaged 7.91 percent. It averaged 6.27
between January 2000 and December 2007.45 This decline is hardly something to write home
about, let alone pretend is the underlying GR culprit. Furthermore, the Federal Reserve controls
short-term, actually overnight, interest rates. It doesn’t directly control long-term interest rates,
including long-term mortgage rates. As for adjustable rate 5/1-year adjustable rate mortgages
(ARMs), their real rate averaged between 5 and 6 percent in the two years preceding the GR.
Real rates of this magnitude are not low.46

Summary of the GR’s Usual Suspects
The above interrogation of the standard GR suspects finds none of them guilty. Subprimes that
went into foreclosure weren’t a large enough factor in the mortgage market, the housing price
“bubble,” if you can call it that, was minor, rating shopping wasn’t a big deal given cross rating
and the ex-post performance of rated securities, increased financial leverage is a myth, egregious
and predatory lending was too small to matter, the run up in mortgage debt was in line with the
rise in the country’s net worth and didn’t signal a consumer-spending spree, derivatives were
generally properly rated and not toxic, repos didn’t lead to excessive financial leverage, investors
didn’t ignore risk, CEO incentives to play it safe were in force, regulators did not permit financial
companies to expand their leverage, the democratization of finance did not make a major
difference, and real mortgage interest rates, both short- and long-term, weren’t low.




44
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MORTGAGE30US
45
   See https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MORTGAGE30US#0 and https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/PCEPI.
46
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MORTGAGE5US#0 and https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/PCEPI.


                                                      12
Perhaps the biggest myth of all about the GR is that it was truly “Great.” The decline in real GDP
over the course of the GR was only 3.1 percent. This is not remotely comparable to the 25.9
percent plunge in output recorded during the first four years of the Great Depression. And it’s
less than twice the average percentage decline in output recorded in the prior five recessions.
It’s also not much larger than the 2.5 percent real GDP drop in the 1981-82 recession.

Yes, during the GR, the stock market fell by almost one third and the unemployment rate
doubled. But stock prices fell by a far larger percentage (40 percent) between 2000 and 2002
and, in the 1981-82 recession, the unemployment rate peaked at a higher level than in the GR.
Like the supposed causes of the Great Recession, the size, itself, of the GR appears to have been
hyped.

Stated differently, if one wants to claim the 2008-2009 recession was “great,” the 81-82 recession
should at least be called the “Impressive Recession.” In the Impressive Recession, stocks fell 24.6
percent, real GDP fell 2.5 percent, and unemployment rose by 3.3 percentage points. The
respective Great Recession figures are 43.6 percent, 3.1 percent, and 3.1 percent. Yes, GR figures
are all larger, but not by that much.

And housing prices? They fell between Q1 2007 and Q2 2012 by 19 percent. But, as argued above,
a decline in housing prices doesn’t constitute a macro shock. And for most households it doesn’t
even represent a micro shock. This is readily seen by simply looking at the stock of housing. The
fact that its price changed didn’t move, let alone eliminate a single brick, stone, plank or shingle
on any of the tens of millions of homes across the country.

Multiple Equilibria
If, as argued above, the evidence rules out the usual suspects, what actually caused the GR,
whose size, itself, seems to have been hyped? My answer is multiple equilibrium, broadly
defined. Sheer panic, facilitated by opacity, false rumors, misinformation, exaggeration and a
strong assist from interested parties, flipped the economy to a very bad equilibrium. This
diagnosis implies a deep structural problem in the financial system --- one that seemingly can’t
be addressed by Dodd-Frank or similar reforms proposed or enacted in Europe.47

Economics has many theories of economies rapidly flipping from good to bad. They go under the
headings multiple equilibrium, contagion, self-fulfilling prophecy, panics, coordination failures,
strategic complementarities, sun spot equilibria, collective action, social learning, and herding.
Below I reference all these mechanisms for rapid economic transformation as “multiple
equilibrium,” rather than sticking with a narrow, technical definition of multiple equilibrium as
more than one solution to a given model’s equations.

The fact that the foundational bank-run models --- Bryant (1980), Diamond-Dybvig (1983), Pech
and Shell (2003) and related models – admit multiple equilibrium in which financial-market


47
     See Kotlikoff (2012) for a discussion of the British Vickers Commission reform.


                                                           13
collapse arises absent any fundamental financial- or real-sector problem is striking.48 These
models tell us that a bank run can arise as naturally as not.49 They also tell us that the banking
system is inherently built to fail and that focusing exclusively on the models’ good equilibrium is
folly. I.e., from the perspective of these models, the question is not whether the banking system
will fail, but when. Hence, it’s passing strange that the FCIC report makes no mention whatsoever
of either paper, let alone the theory underlying bank runs. This is akin to the Federal Aviation
Administration investigating a plane crash due to structural failure without referencing the
plane’s blueprints. This, presumably, reflects the makeup of the FCIC whose ten members
included just one economist. The economist, while outstanding, had no background in banking
or finance.

The original bank-run models are now four decades old. Other, more realistic versions have
emerged. They too were ignored by the FCIC. An example is Goldstein and Pauzner (2005), who
model coordination failures in which agents react to publicly available news based, in part, on
their beliefs about how other agents will react. Such news can be about economic fundamentals
or, simply, that a firing run, which will affect fundamentals, is on.50 Bebchuk and Goldstein (2011)
study credit market freezes. Their focus is on banks defunding non-financial firms because they
believe other banks are doing the same. They reference this as self-fulfilling credit freezes (credit
freezes in which beliefs about other defunders are correct in equilibrium.) But their framework
can applied to banks defunding banks.

Another mechanism for drastic economic adjustment involves information cascades. In models,
such as Bikhchandani, et. al., (1992), cascades involve economic agents ignoring their own
information and inferring the “truth” based on the actions other agents are taking.51 This induces
herd behavior as in a stampede in a crowded theatre (financial market) when someone shouts
FIRE (BANKRUPT). The key herding point, for our purposes, is that people can get trampled in the
absence of any fire whatsoever, i.e., regardless of the fundamentals.


48
   Diamond-Dybvig (1983) explain bank runs as depositors collectively running to claim their money, which the bank
invested, on their behalf illiquidly with the promise to give those with unexpectedly high short-term liquidity needs
a higher return on their savings. But the runs on Bear, Lehman, AIG, and most of the other 29 major international
financial companies to fail before and during the GR were creditor defunding runs. They can be easily modeled if
one assumes that leveraged banks need a critical amount of credit to operate. Thus, if no one runs on (i.e., runs away
from) Lehman Brothers in September 2008, it’s safe for everyone to stay with Lehman. But if others run or may run,
it’s best to play it safe and run as well. If enough players fail to provide Lehman sufficient funding, any individual
funder who can’t provide critical funding on their own will chose not to fund.
49
    Multiple equilibria, in the simplest framework, are formally two or more sets of solutions to the same underlying
equations. This means that the economy can flip from one equilibrium, say A, to the other, say B, simply if its
participants all come to believe that the equilibrium is now B. Again, in the simplest framework, this flipping won’t
be based on something fundamental since everything that’s fundamental is included in the equations. Instead, it will
be based on something, like the appearance of a sun spot, that has nothing intrinsically to do with the economy.
50
   In Goldstein and Pauzner (2005), common news is about the productivity of capital. But in a richer model, in which
there are firing runs, the fundamental shock could be that a firing run has started, perhaps triggered by the failure
of one or more major financial institutions.
51
   Intuitively, if someone yells FIRE in a crowded room, everyone runs even if no one smells smoke. The same is true
of bank creditors, when it comes to refinancing a Bear Stearns or a Lehman Brothers.


                                                         14
Chamley (2014) provides a variety of models of financial herding behavior. One of his key
contributions is showing how government policy can rule out bad equilibriums, which is the
central motivation underlying the Limited Purpose Banking proposal referenced below. In
contrast, Dodd Frank’s goal is to reduce, not eliminate the chance of financial system meltdown.

Jackson and Kotlikoff (2018) provide a different and very simple mechanism for landing the
economy in a bad position. They posit a model in which honest bankers provide a variable share
of intermediation services. When this share is low, households defund the banks and, absent
disclosure, will, mistakenly, continue to do so even during periods when the share of honest
bankers is high.

In completely ignoring the theory of bank runs (There is not a single reference to any theoretical
model.), the FCIC pretended that what happened wasn’t intrinsic to how the financial market is
structured. Instead, the commission, for whatever reasons, appears to have rounded up the usual
suspects and held a sham trial. Yet, the commissioners couldn’t simply ignore the panic. In fact,
in the process of fingering multiple apparently innocent culprits, the report used the word panic
100 times. That’s roughly one usage every six pages. Here is the first.

      The crisis reached seismic proportions in September with the failure of Lehman Brothers
      and the impending collapse of the insurance giant American International Group (AIG).
      Panic fanned by a lack of transparency of the balance sheets of major financial institutions,
      coupled with a tangle of interconnections among institutions perceived to be “too big to
      fail,” caused the credit markets to seize up. Trading ground to a halt. The stock market
      plummeted. The economy plunged into a deep recession.

This statement certainly emphasizes irrational fear and links panic to opacity. But if falls far
short of saying that the banking system and economy, as currently constituted, are built to fail
with panic being the catalyst. Lehman’s CEO, Richard Fuld, got closer to this conclusion in this
part of his October 8, 2008 testimony to the House Oversight and Reform Committee. 52

      At Lehman Brothers, the crisis in confidence that permeated the markets led to an
      extraordinary run on the bank. In the end, despite all of our efforts, we were overwhelmed.
      However, what happened to Lehman Brothers could have happened to any financial
      institution.

If it’s true that what happened to Lehman Brothers could have happened to any financial
institution, it means that fundamentals, be they the degree of leverage, the extent of subprime
holdings, rating shopping, lack of bankers’ skin in the game, regulatory under-sight, newfangled
derivatives, housing prices, etc., weren’t a pre-requisite for the GR bank runs. It also means that
established lines of credit are worthless because banks will run on banks at the first sign of a
death throe.


52
     https://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/richardfuldlehmanbrosbankruptcytestimony.htm


                                                     15
Jimmy Cayne’s, Bear Stearns’ former CEO, echoed Fuld’s views in his testimony to the FCIC.

     Bear Stearns's collapse was not the result of any actions or decisions unique to Bear
     Stearns." Rather, he told the committee, "the market's loss of confidence, even though
     it was unjustified and irrational, became a self-fulfilling prophecy.53 Jimmy Cayne
     testimony to the FCIC.

It’s tempting to dismiss Fuld’s and Cayne’s statements as self-serving. But their insider views
coincide with those of then SEC Chairman Cox, the FCIC’s emphasis on panic and
contemporaneous statements of impartial observers. Certainly, there was no fundamental news
in Bear’s last week that drove its stock value from $70 a share on March 10th to $2 a share on
March 16th.54 The only real news was that the bank was experiencing a defunding run and was
desperately trying to stay afloat.

Betting on the Bad Equilibrium
Economists’ models of bank runs incorporate lots of mechanisms and behaviors. What they don’t
include is the possibility that some agents stand ready and able to manufacture financial collapse
because doing so will line their pockets, directly or indirectly. Consider, in this regard, hedge
funds. In the days running up to Bear’s demise, hedge funds pulled the plug on Bear by
withdrawing their deposits en masse from Bear’s prime brokerage. This was discussed by the BBC
in an article entitled, “How Hedge Funds Sank Bear Stearns.”55 What’s not known is whether
these hedge funds also took short positions and, effectively, cornered the short market. Such
actions would, presumably, have been illegal. What is known is that false rumors were planted –
rumors that improved the position of the shorts.56 According to the NY Times,

     Speculation about a cash shortage drove Bear stock down almost 60 percent in a few days,
     a decline that coincided with a surge in short bets against the firm’s stock. Alan D. Schwartz,
     the chief executive of Bear, later said that malicious rumors helped fuel the panic.57

The Washington Post wrote that the SEC was investigating short sales in conjunction with
Bear’s failure.

     An unusual spike in trading of Bear Stearns shares preceded the collapse of the 85-year-
     old Wall Street institution last week, and the Securities and Exchange Commission is
     looking into this activity, said a person familiar with the matter. In particular, the SEC is




53
   http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/05/05/AR2010050505104.html
54
   The $2 price per share was ultimately increased to $10 in reaction to a shareholder class action suit.
55
   http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/thereporters/robertpeston/2008/03/how_hedge_funds_sunk_bear_stea.html
56
   https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2008/06/30/what-really-killed-bear-stearns/
57
   https://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/30/business/30shorts.html


                                                     16
     examining a surge in short selling that occurred days before the trouble at Bear Stearns
     was revealed publicly.58

Shortly after Lehman failed, John Mac, head of Morgan Stanley, memo’d his company that

     What's happening out there? It's very clear to me — we're in the midst of a market
     controlled by fear and rumors, and short sellers are driving our stock down.59

As with hedge funds and banks competing with Bear and Lehman, we may never learn the full
behavior of short sellers. But Vanity Fair described what happened to Bear Stearns as “murder”
– murder facilitated by opacity so deep that teams of potential suitors couldn’t figure out, within
Bear’s survival window, what the Bear’s assets were worth.60 To quote from the article,

     The fall of Bear Stearns wasn’t just another financial collapse. There has never been
     anything on Wall Street to compare to it: a “run” on a major investment bank, caused
     in large part not by a criminal indictment or some mammoth quarterly loss but by rumor
     and innuendo that, as best one can tell, had little basis in fact. Bear had endured more
     than its share of self-inflicted wounds in the previous year, but there was no reason it
     had to die that week in March.61

According to this view, speculators can, with manufactured bad news or simply exaggeration,
take down any bank in the country at any time. Then they can proceed to their next victim.62
Naked short selling – sales of a company’s stock by entities that don’t own the shares they are
selling -- also played and can still play a role in “murdering” banks. Rolling Stone described the
short sales of Bear and Lehman as “Wall Street’s naked swindle.”63 The headline in the 2010
article reads, “A scheme to flood the market with counterfeit stocks helped kill Bear Stearns and
Lehman Brothers — and the feds have yet to bust the culprits.” That’s equally true today. Indeed, the
SEC hasn’t even issued a report on its supposed investigation in the eight years since Rolling Stone
carried its story.

The story merits a careful read. As Bear and Lehman reached the end of their tethers, short sellers
manufactured tens of millions of shares of the two companies and dumped them on the market. The


58
   http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/03/20/AR2008032003515.html
59
   http://content.time.com/time/business/article/0,8599,1842499,00.html
60
   https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2008/08/bear_stearns200808-2
61
   https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2008/08/bear_stearns200808-2
62
   This paragraph from the Vanity Fair suggests this is possibility is a common view on Wall Street. “Even with
subpoena power, I’m not sure the S.E.C. will get to the bottom of this, because the standard of proof is just so
difficult,” says a vice-chairman at another major investment firm. “But I hope they do. Because you can look at this
as just another run on a bank or as a seminal point in the financial history of this country that could bring about a
change, perhaps a drastic change, in the way we govern financial markets. If there is a solution to this kind of thing,
it must be found in the roots of what happened at Bear Stearns. Because otherwise, I can guarantee you, it will
happen again somewhere else.”
63
   https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-news/wall-streets-naked-swindle-194908/


                                                         17
sale of counterfeit shares explains the term “naked” as in no backing.64 Fatok, et. al. (2014) claim the
bulk of the naked short sales occurred when the two companies were already on the ropes. But the
SEC reached a different conclusion. Three days after Lehman failed, the SEC clamped down on most
naked short sales.65

To date, the SEC has engaged in very few enforcement actions against naked short sellers. The same is
true in prosecuting short sellers who transmit false rumors. Paul Berliner is an exception. His case
illustrates the impact of a single rumor. In 2008, Berliner spread a plausible, but false story that
Alliance Data Systems’ sale price was being renegotiated downward due to purported problems
in the company’s consumer banking business. Berliner dispensed this information while selling
the company short.66 Within a half hour of the rumor’s dissemination, the price of Alliance
dropped by 17 percent, letting Berliner cash in and cash out.67

Misinformed or exaggerated statements can also do massive damage. Consider, this extended
quote from the very first page of William Cohan’s House of Cards.68

     The first murmurings of impending doom for the financial world originated 2,500 miles from
     Wall Street in an unassuming office suite just north of Orlando, Florida. There, hard by the
     train tracks, Bennet Sedacca announced to the world at 10:15 on the morning of March 5,
     2008, that venerable Bear Stearns & Co., the nation's fifth-largest investment bank, was in
     trouble, big trouble. “Yep,” Sedacca wrote on the Minyanville Web site, which is dedicated
     to helping investors comprehend the financial world. The great credit unwind is upon us.
     Credit default swaps on all brokers, particularly Lehman and Bear Stearns, are blowing out,
     big time. Sedacca, the forty-eight-year-old president of a $3.5 billion investment
     management company and hedge fund, had been watching his Bloomberg screens on a
     daily basis as the cost of insuring the short-term obligations—known in Wall Street argot
     as “credit default swaps”—of both Lehman and Bear Stearns had increased steadily since
     the summer of 2007 and then more rapidly in February 2008. Now he was calling the end
     of the credit party that had been raging on Wall Street for six years. “I've been talking about
     it for years,” Sedacca said later. “But I started to notice it that fall. Because if you think
     about it, if you have all this nuclear waste on your balance sheet, what are you supposed to
     do? You're supposed to cut your dividends, you're supposed to raise equity, and you're
     supposed to shrink your balance sheet. And they did just the opposite. They took on more
     leverage. Lehman went from twenty-five to thirty-five times leveraged in one year. ...”

Cohan takes Sedacca’s statement, which is a captivating introduction to his book, as
unquestionably true. But what he doesn’t tell his readers is whether Sedacca had shorted Lehman

64
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naked_short_selling
65
   Ibid.
66
   https://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/2008/lr20537.htm
67
   https://www.sec.gov/news/press/2008/2008-64.htm Somehow, the SEC discovered Berliner’s scheme and
prosecuted him. The result was a fine and lifetime banishment from Wall Street.
68
   Cohan (2010)




                                                   18
CDS or other Lehman securities. Nor does he ask whether the use of the term “nuclear waste” to
describe Lehman’s assets had any factual basis or was just Sedacca justifying a successful past
short position. Finally, Cohan doesn’t check if Sedacca’s got his numbers right. According to its
April 7, 2008 paper on leverage – whose release the SEC, which was monitoring Lehman on a
daily basis, surely approved, Lehman's leverage was 29, not 35 times in 2007, on a gross basis,
and 16 on a net basis. Moreover, in her April 10, 2010 testimony, SEC Chair Mary Shapiro stated
that “Throughout the summer (of 2008), Lehman embarked on various strategies to raise capital
and to reduce the size of its exposure to mortgage-related and other illiquid assets.”69 Lehman
didn’t, contrary to Sedacca’s assertion, take on more leverage.

The Spread of Fear to the Public and Real Economy
Models of multiple equilibrium, whether new or old, implicitly feature the spread of fear. The
press is a vector in this process. Consider, for example, the press’ references to recession. The
Economist magazine views its own and other media’s use of the “R word” as economically so
frightening and viral that it’s turned the word’s usage into a leading economic indicator. Here’s
its description.

     Our gauge counts how many stories in the Washington Post and the New York Times use
     the word “recession” in a quarter. This simple formula pinpointed the start of recession in
     1981 and 1990 and 2001. In the past few years the R-word index has been extremely low.
     It began to rise in the second half of 2007 and, measured at a quarterly rate, … soared in
     early 2008. 70

The Economist started writing about its R-word index in 2001 with the title, “Words that Can
Harm You.”71 But how can words harm us unless they coordinate the public to take the wrong
economic decisions? In January 2008, The Economist reported that, “Peddling gloom is the new
parlour game on Wall Street and beyond.”72 Peddling gloom means selling disaster. But who
reaps the profits of gloom? The answer is the press, which always need a fresh story, politicians,
who always need a fresh cause, and short sellers, who benefit from external confirmation of their
positions.

Another indicator of fear is the VIX, which measures market expectations of stock market
volatility. The VIX more than doubled in the year prior to the onset of the GR and then rose by a
factor of three when Lehman failed. This confirmed FCIC Chairman, Phil Agenlides’ analysis that
“panic seized the markets.”73 There was, of course, no change on September 15, 2008 in the
volatility of the real economy – no negative technology shock, no outbreak of world war, no
climatic cataclysm, no announcement of trade war, no fresh revelations of fiscal insolvencies, no
unexpected wage hikes, no announcement of hyperinflation – nothing, just collective,
coordinated, mass panic that sent the financial markets reeling.
69
   https://www.sec.gov/news/testimony/2010/ts042010mls.htm
70
   https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2011/09/16/gauging-the-gloom
71
   https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2002/11/21/words-that-can-harm-you
72
   https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2008/01/10/warning-lights
73
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/VIXCLS


                                                  19
When the public understands that fear, as President Roosevelt so perceptively and succinctly put
it, is the only thing to fear, it becomes very interested in the state of fear. This is why, in the run
up to the GR, media mentions of and Google searches for recession, depression, subprimes, liar
loans, the Vix and other indicators of gloom rose sharply. September 15, 2008 was, of course, the
day Wall Street’s music died, producing a huge surge in searches for the entire panoply of
linguistic gloom and kicking off a 36 percent, 6-month drop in the stock market.74

The index of consumer sentiment led the R-word index in predicting an R. It peaked in January
2007 and fell by almost one quarter over the course of the year. It fell by a roughly equal amount
through June 2008 and then rebounded. But when Lehman collapsed, the index immediately
plunged again despite no immediate changes of any kind to the real economy. I.e., Lehman’s
bankruptcy destroyed not a single Lehman building, file cabinet, computer, or any other type of
capital. And it neither killed nor injured a single Lehman employee.

But the non-financial economy had had enough. In the nine months prior to September 15, 2008,
there had been one major bad financial news story after another. The public had been
bombarded with stories about liar loans, no doc loans, NINJA loans, rating shopping, regulatory
capture, crazy-sounding, hyper-complex derivatives and derivatives of derivatives, extraordinary
leverage, a massive house price bubble in the process of bursting, horribly unaligned CEO
incentives, predatory lending, bank failures, widespread opacity, bonus-based, originate to
distribute75 mortgage securitizations, …

To make matters both worse and highly concrete, Countrywide Financial, Bear Stearns, Fannie
Mae, Freddie Mac, IndyMac, Merrill Lynch – all had been bought up at fire-sale prices or
nationalized. In the days, weeks, and months following Lehman Brothers’ collapse, AIG,
Washington Mutual, Citigroup, and Wachovia all hit the skids. The economy surely saw what was,
fundamentally, just a reshuffling of financial players and asset ownership as a sure sign (a very
bright sunspot, if you will) that bad times were here again. The reaction was shift. Employers laid
off their workers in droves to lower their payrolls before their customers stopped arriving. This
was the worst of the many types of multiple equilibria associated with the GR.

Having the economy flip on the basis of bad news about the financial system is, economically
speaking, old hat. In 1720, insider trading and fraudulent misrepresentation led to collapses of
both the South Sea and Mississippi bubbles. The attempted cornering of the U.S. bond market
kindled the Panic of 1792. The sale of investments in the imaginary Latin American country of
Poyais led to the Panic of 1825. ``Wildcat banking" helped produce the Panic of 1837. The
embezzlement of assets from the Ohio Life and Trust Co. instigated the Railroad Crisis of 1857.
Jay Gould and James Fisk's cornering of the gold market precipitated the 1869 Gold Panic. Cooke
74
   https://trends.google.com/trends/explore?date=all&geo=US&q=great%20depression,Recession;
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/WILL5000INDFC
75
    Even the concern with originate to distribute may have been dramatically overhyped as suggested in
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228168491_Securitization_and_Loan_Performance_A_Contrast_of_Ex
_Ante_and_Ex_Post_Relations_in_the_Mortgage_Market.


                                                  20
and Company's failure to disclose losses on Northern Pacific Railroad stock sparked the Panic of
1873. A failed cornering of United Cooper's stocks instigated the Panic of 1907. The Hatry Group's
use of fraudulent collateral to buy United Steel, the sale of Florida swamp land, the Match King
Hoax, the Samuel Insull fraud and other swindles ushered in the Great Depression. And insider
trading and stock manipulation brought down Drexel Burnham Lambert, precipitating the largest
insurance failure in U.S. history.76

When Lehman failed, all bets were off, including those placed against financial collapse by the
world’s largest insurer, AIG, which was next to go. Suddenly, it became clear that the global
financial    system      could    spontaneously      implode      and     that     there   was
no guarantee governments could stop it. They were lucky and did stop it, but not before 29 of
the world’s largest financial companies were either nationalized, sold off in shot-gun weddings
or went bankrupt. The fact that the panic moved back and forth across the ocean tells us that
financial contagion spreads globally as well as domestically and doesn’t require interconnected
balance sheets. This too represents evidence of multiple equilibrium.

Consider, in this regard, the Cypriot banking crisis of late 2012 and early 2013.77 The possible
failure of two small banks in that tiny country became front page global news for weeks not
because the two banks were important in of themselves. Instead, a failure of these banks, to the
severe detriment of depositors, could have led to a run on Greek banks, followed by a run on
banks in Italy and Spain, followed by a run on … Rather than let the two banks fail, the European
Commission, European Central Bank, and IMF held emergency meetings and provided a bailout.
This was a case of too small to fail – another clear sign of a global financial system that was too
unstable (too prone to multiple equilibrium) to absorb even a seemingly minor jolt.

As the international financial system was effectively taken into receivership by the Federal
Reserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan, the real
economy ground down to a prolonged period of stagnation, and, in Spain and Greece,
depression. In the U.S., the index of consumer sentiment didn’t return to its 2007 peak for an
entire decade. The slow recovery is hard to explain except as the result of everyone expecting a
slow recovery.

Economies can stay in bad equilibriums for very long times until there is enough good economic
news to collectively galvanize animal spirits.78 This can occur, even though, as was the case,
central banks set interest rates close to zero. Such drastic policies were arguably taken as signs
that things were even worse than generally believed and that this was no time to rehire on the
assumption that demand for one’s products was about to pick up.

Banking Crises and Public Goods

76
   This paragraph is taken verbatim from Tim Jackson and Laurence Kotlikoff, Banks as Potentially Crooked Secret
Keepers, NBER working paper, no. 24751, 2018.
77
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2012%E2%80%9313_Cypriot_financial_crisis
78
   The Great Depression lasted a decade until World War coordinated the move to a full employment equilibrium.


                                                      21
The reason that financial crises are economically so deadly is that the banks are not growing
wheat, which can easily be stored or purchased from abroad if there’s a shortage. Banking panics
are economically deadly because the banks are managing/running/providing a public good,
namely the financial marketplace. Banks are intermediaries, i.e., middlemen. They connect
lenders with borrowers and savers with investors. If the banks go down, the financial market fails.
This is akin to gas stations simultaneously failing and preventing us from using a different public
good – the highway system.79 Moreover, if one gas station had borrowed to gamble from
another, the two stations would have interlocking balance sheets meaning the failure of the first
could cause the failure of the second.80

Take, for example, this description, from the Fed, of Bear’s financial-market making prior to its
fall.

     The imminent insolvency of Bear Stearns, the large presence of Bear Stearns in several
     important financial markets (including, in particular, the markets for repo-style transactions,
     over-the-counter derivative and foreign exchange transactions, mortgage-backed securities,
     and securities clearing services), and the potential for contagion to similarly situated firms raised
     significant concern that the stability of financial markets would be seriously disrupted if Bear
     Stearns were suddenly unable to meet its obligations to counterparties, and the extension of
     credit allowed for an orderly resolution of the firm.

In the GR, the financial system froze. After Lehman, every remaining major bank and thousands
of minor banks would likely have failed had the government not intervened in the truly
unprecedented fashion in which it did. The government, in this case, was primarily the Federal
Reserve. It became, for all intents and purposes, the only fully functional bank in the country,
making loans to all manner of financial and non-financial enterprises, from the largest surviving
banks to companies selling mobile homes. The Fed also bailed out, directly or indirectly (through
other central banks), foreign financial entities.

Unsafe at Any Speed
The banks failed because they could. And they could fail because they were leveraged. They
falsely promised to make repayments regardless of the circumstances. The Federal Reserve is
also leveraged. In the aftermath of Lehman’s collapse, the Fed effectively insured not just
checking and saving accounts, but also money market funds. These obligations were officially
and, respectively, FDIC and Treasury obligations. They ran to some $6 trillion.81 But neither
institution had $6 trillion in ready cash to make good on its insurance. Hence, the Fed would have
been on the hook. Indeed, had things gotten worse, there would surely have been a run on the



79
   Gas stations, by the way, are intermediaries between drivers and refineries. Were gas stations to collectively
gamble with their businesses, fail in concert, and leave the public unable to use the roads, Congress would instantly
mandate they operate their businesses on a fully equity-financed basis and that gas station owners gamble, if they
so chose, strictly with their own money.
80
   https://www.federalreserve.gov/regreform/reform-bearstearns.htm
81
   Kotlikoff (2010)


                                                         22
life insurance industry’s cash-surrender value policies, which, at the time, also totaled roughly $6
trillion.82

Now imagine, as discussed in Kotlikoff (2010), that the government’s explicit and implicit pledges
of insurance had been called by the public. I.e., suppose the public had, despite the promises of
government insurance, headed straight to the banks, money market funds, and insurance
companies to empty out their accounts and cash out their cash-surrender value policies. In this
case, the Fed would have had to print $12 trillion virtually overnight. The M1 money supply at
the time was just $1.5 trillion.83 Hence, this would have produced fully justified fears
hyperinflation leading everyone to run for their money before prices soared.

The U.S. has yet to experience a run on its central bank. But this is common in countries like
Argentina, where the public and the financial community are well aware that the government’s
pledge of deposit and related financial insurance can only be honored in the context of the
wholesale printing of money. Such money printing means the pledge won’t be honored in real
terms. Thus, with central banks as with private banks, there are two equilibria – everyone runs
and no one runs.

The Role of Opacity
Opacity is the midwife of financial panics. Bear Stearns was among the first to be picked off by
those who stood to gain by a financial collapse because it was viewed as particularly opaque.
According to Cohan (2010 ), no one on the street or, it seems, inside the bank, knew what its
assets were really worth. What they did know is that its relatively high leverage and opacity made
it vulnerable. So, too, according to Cohan (2010), did Bear CEO, Jimmy Cayne’s reputation for
caring more about his bridge game than his bank and his poor personal relationships with top
Wall Street bankers as well as Treasury Chairman, Hank Paulson.84

The fact that Bear’s stock was valued at $60 per share one week before JP Morgan bought it for
$2 per share (less a $29 billion sale of Bear’s troubled assets to the Fed valued at far less than
$29 billion) tells us that no one knew anything about Bear’s assets, either before it died or when
it died. Its valuation was, it seems, purely a matter of conjecture. Before it didn’t, the market
apparently though Bear’s assets were worth something because everyone else thought its assets
were worth something. This too is the stuff of multiple equilibria.

Samuelson’s (1958) pure consumption loan model, in which the young can’t save for old age,
illustrates the problem. Money, in his model, has value because each young generation thinks
the next young generation will treat it as having value and trade food (chocolate in Samuelson’s
example) for money. This belief makes every generation better off. But if the belief that
successive young generations will make the swap comes to an end, Samuelson’s elegant solution
collapses to the no-money, bad equilibrium in which all current and future elderly starve to

82
   Ibid
83
   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/M1SL
84
   See Cohan (2010 )


                                                23
death.85 The indeterminacy is actually even worse. The Samuelson model admits a continuum of
equilibria based on different assumptions about the path of future rates at which money will
swap for chocolates.86
Of course, it’s hard to prove opacity -- that no one really understood Bear’s book of business
except, perhaps, Jimmy Cayne. Cohan’s (2010) “proof” comes from interviewing insiders at Bear,
but they may have born grudges. For whatever it’s worth, let me relate my own interview, which
I conducted in 2008 with my then brother-in-law, Jim. Jim was a top banker with JP Morgan at
the time and was one of some two hundred JP Morgan bankers who were tasked to spend what
turned out to be Bear’s final weekend valuing Bear’s assets. After Bear sold for less than the value
of its headquarters building, I asked Jim how much he and his colleagues knew about Bear’s
assets before they began looking at its books. His answer was “nothing.” I then asked Jim how
much he and his colleagues knew about Bear’s assets after they spent 24-7 for almost three days
looking at Bear’s books. His answer was “nothing.”

Bear’s collapse showed the market that there was potentially no there there in any of the banks.
If Bear’s mysterious “rock solid” assets were worth a fortune yesterday, but nothing today,
maybe the same was true of other bank’s assets. And as the next most “trustworthy” bank fell,
because, again, it became clear that no one could really understand its assets either, the belief
that yet more “trustworthy” bank’s assets were rock solid declined. The serial failure of the banks,
thus, appears to accord with what opacity and faith-based asset valuations would deliver.

By analogy, if Island A’s kids stop swapping chocolate for money because they think their own
kids won’t swap with them, the failure of the self-fulfilling prophecy in Island A can flip the
behavior of kids in island B who were modeling themselves after Island A’s kids. Next, Island C’s
kids, who were modeling themselves after Island B’s kids, can flip and so forth.

In the event, once the mighty Countrywide Financial and the 85-year-old Bear Stearns fell, other
banks began to collapse. First IndyMac, then Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (the massive
government-sponsored mortgage companies) followed by Merrill Lynch on the same weekend
as Lehman.87 Next came AIG, Washington Mutual, Citigroup, and Wachovia. The serial failures,
over a year, of one huge financial corporation after another, has the feel of an information
cascade.

Eliminating the Twin Pillars of Financial Collapse – Leverage and Opacity
Banks that have zero leverage -- don’t owe anything to anyone -- can’t go bankrupt. Hence, the
obvious way to prevent future banking crises is to preclude all financial corporations from
borrowing. Moreover, if opacity is a major problem, the answer is to have the government
oversee disclosure. Why the government? First, private parties can’t, as we’ve seen, be trusted


85
   As discussed in Kotlikoff, Persson and Swensson (1986), each generation of young can consider printing its own
money. That too, without some other features, can destroy Samuelson’s good equilibrium.
86
   See Kotlikoff (2006)
87
     IndyMac and Merrill Lynch sold themselves. Fannie and Freddie were nationalized.


                                                       24
to provide truthful disclosure. Second, they can be mistrusted even if they are acting in a
trustworthy manner. Third, information is a public good, making its disclosure a public good.

The Dodd Frank reform does very little to alter financial company leverage or limit the financial
system’s opacity. As indicated, today’s banking system has essentially the same capital ratio as
Lehman had the day it died. As for making financial companies transparent, it’s business as usual
on Wall Street. The pass on opacity was implicitly endorsed by the FCIC report. That report runs
633 pages. The word opacity appears once. The word opaque appears seven times.

Conclusion
Standard explanations of the 2008 financial crisis and its associated Great Recession represent
the big con. Like the movie The Big Short, they make bad actors, not intrinsic problems with the
financial system and the economy, namely multiple equilibrium, facilitated by leverage and
opacity, the culprits.

Bad/greedy/lazy/irresponsible actors, we’re told, engaged in all manner of financial malfeasance,
risk taking, negligence, theft and greed. And what we’re told is true. There were plenty of bad
actors – enough to fill up hundreds of books and movie scripts. But the story of these bad actors
is not the real story of the Great Recession. The real story is that both the economy and the
banking system are inherently unstable. They are unstable due to expectations-driven multiple
equilibria. If enough people think enough people think a bank is going down, that bank will go
down regardless of its true condition. If enough people think the economy is going down, the
economy will go down, also regardless of its true condition.

One approach to addressing the problem of financial multiple equilibrium is to replace Dodd-
Frank with more fundamental financial reform, such as Kotlikoff (2010)’s Limited Purpose
Banking (LPB). LPB would transform all financial corporations into 100 percent equity-financed
mutual fund holding companies subject to full and real-time disclosure supervised by the
government.




                                               25
                                          References

Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Itay Goldstein. "Self-fulfilling credit market freezes." The Review of
Financial Studies 24, no. 11 (2011): 3519-3555.

Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch. "A theory of fads, fashion, custom, and
cultural change as informational cascades." Journal of political Economy 100, no. 5 (1992): 992-
1026.

Bryant, John. "A model of reserves, bank runs, and deposit insurance." Journal of banking &
finance 4, no. 4 (1980): 335-344.

Chamley, Christophe. Rational herds: Economic models of social learning. Cambridge University
Press, 2004.

Cohan, William D. House of cards: A tale of hubris and wretched excess on Wall Street. Anchor,
2010.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmström, and Guillermo Ordonez. "Banks as secret
keepers." American Economic Review 107, no. 4 (2017): 1005-29.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. "Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity." Journal
of political economy91, no. 3 (1983): 401-419.

Fotak, Veljko, Vikas Raman, and Pradeep K. Yadav. "Fails-to-deliver, short selling, and market
quality." Journal of Financial Economics 114, no. 3 (2014): 493-516.

French, Kenneth, Martin Baily, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Douglas Diamond, Darrell Duffie,
Anil Kashyap et al. "The Squam Lake report: fixing the financial system." Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 22, no. 3 (2010): 8-21.

Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner. "Demand–deposit contracts and the probability of bank
runs." the Journal of Finance 60, no. 3 (2005): 1293-1327.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. Economic Consequences of the Vickers Commission. Civitas, 2012.
(available at www.kotlikoff.net)

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. Jimmy Stewart is dead: Ending the world's ongoing financial plague with
limited purpose banking. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Torsten Persson, and Lars EO Svensson. "Social contracts as assets: A
possible solution to the time-consistency problem." The American Economic Review (1988): 662-
677.



                                               26
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. "Paul Samuelson’s Amazing Intergenerational Transfer." Samuelsonian
Economics and the twenty-first century (2006): 42-53.
Lo, Andrew W. "Reading about the financial crisis: A twenty-one-book review." Journal of
economic literature 50, no. 1 (2012): 151-78.

Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. "Global games: Theory and applications." Cowles
Foundation Discussion Paper, no. 1275R. (2001).

Peck, James, and Karl Shell. "Equilibrium bank runs." Journal of political Economy 111, no. 1
(2003): 103-123.




                                             27
