                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   FLOATING RATE MONEY? THE STABILITY PREMIUM IN TREASURY FLOATING
                             RATE NOTES

                                      Matthias Fleckenstein
                                      Francis A. Longstaff

                                       Working Paper 25216
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25216


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




We are grateful for the comments and insights of John Cochrane, Douglas Diamond, Mark
Grinblatt, Burton Hollifield, Batchimeg Sambalaibat, Yao Zeng, and seminar participants at the
LAEF OTC Markets and Securities Workshop at UC Santa Barbara, and at UCLA. All errors are
our responsibility. We received no outside sources of research support for this work. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25216.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Floating Rate Money? The Stability Premium in Treasury Floating Rate Notes
Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 25216
November 2018
JEL No. G12,G18

                                         ABSTRACT

We identify a significant premium in the prices of Treasury floating rate notes (FRNs) relative to
both Treasury bills and notes. This premium is directly related to the near-constant nature of FRN
prices and differs from the liquidity and on-the-run premia in Treasury security prices previously
documented in the literature. We find that the premium is related to measures reflecting investor
demand for safe assets such as market volatility and flows into money market funds. Ironically,
some of the variation in FRN prices may actually be due to changes in the premium for their price
stability.


Matthias Fleckenstein
University of Delaware
Lerner College of Business and Economics
310 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE 19716
mflecken@udel.edu

Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
                            1. INTRODUCTION


A number of important recent empirical studies have shown that markets place a
significant premium on the liquidity and safety of near-money assets. Foremost
among these are Treasury securities because of the unique role they play as a store
of value during flights-to-security in financial markets. For example, Treasury
bonds often trade at a large premium relative to other bonds that are likewise
guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United States (Longstaff (2004)
and Lewis, Longstaff, and Petrasek (2017)).
    The empirical evidence also indicates that the premium is larger for some
Treasury securities than for others, suggesting that some Treasuries may be
viewed as “nearer-to-money” than others. For example, liquid on-the-run Trea-
sury bills and bonds trade at a premium to older off-the-run Treasury securities
with similar maturities (Amihud and Mendelson (1991), Kamara (1994), and
Krishnamurthy (2002)).1

     This paper studies the market prices of what may be the nearest-to-money
of all near-money assets—Treasury floating rate notes (FRNs). By nature of
their security design, FRN prices fluctuate far less than those of other Treasury
securities. Furthermore, FRNs represent informationally-insensitive debt in the
sense of Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2015) since their market values are vir-
tually unaffected by either private or public information. Thus, FRNs are among
the most-stable collateral or store-of-value options available in financial markets.
Since their introduction in 2014, FRNs have quickly become one of the most pop-
ular types of Treasury debt with more than $720 billion issued to date. Treasury
FRN auctions have generally experienced bid-to-cover ratios substantially higher
than those of fixed rate Treasury debt with the same maturity. Demand for
FRNs has been particularly strong among broker-dealers and foreign institutions
such as central banks who tend to purchase a far larger share of the total issue
amount in FRN auctions than they do in other Treasury auctions. If investors
view FRNs as nearer-to-money, then their prices may incorporate an additional
premium relative to other Treasury debt.

1
 Other key examples of this literature include Duffee (1996), Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig (2014), Nagel
(2016), and Musto, Nini, and Schwarz (2018).


                                         1
     To address this issue, we study the relative valuation of FRNs and other
Treasury debt. In doing this, we use a no-arbitrage approach in which the pre-
mium is identified as the difference between the FRN price and the value of a
replicating portfolio of Treasury bills or notes. A key advantage of this approach
is that by comparing FRNs to a replicating portfolio with identical cash flows,
duration, and maturity date, we control for any potential credit or refinancing-
rollover risk associated with Treasury financing.2

     We find that the market incorporates a substantial premium into the prices
of FRNs relative to the price of a replicating portfolio of Treasury bills or notes.
This holds true across the entire maturity spectrum as we compare FRN prices
to replicating portfolios using fixed rate securities ranging from three-month on-
the-run Treasury bills to the most-recently-auctioned two-year Treasury notes.
On average, the premium is 5.92 basis points relative to Treasury bills, and 9.82
basis points relative to Treasury notes. These premia, however, vary significantly
through time and can exceed 30 basis points (or, alternatively, more than 40 cents
per $100 par amount). Furthermore, these premia are economically large, almost
uniformly positive, and are orders of magnitude larger than the bid-ask spreads
for these actively-traded and highly-liquid Treasury bills, notes, and FRNs. We
also confirm that these premia differ from the liquidity, safety, and on-the-run
premia in Treasury securities previously documented in the literature.

     Our results also show that the size of the premium is directly related to the
difference in the price volatility of FRNs and matched-maturity Treasury bills
and notes. In particular, we find that the cross-section of premia is significantly
and positively related to the difference in price volatilities. These intuitive results
provide strong support for the view that economic agents value the price stability
of FRNs relative to other near-money assets. Furthermore, these results suggest
that the difference between FRN prices and their no-arbitrage replication values
can be interpreted as an additional premium for their relative price stability.
Accordingly, we denote these premia as “stability premia”.

     We also examine whether the time-series variation in stability premia is
related to measures reflecting investor demand for safe assets. The results in-
dicate that changes in the average premia are strongly related to variables that
proxy for economic uncertainty and systemic risk such as market volatility and
dealer funding liquidity measures. Furthermore, the premia measured relative to
Treasury notes are directly related to flows into the safest types of money market
mutual funds. Consistent with Nagel (2016), the average premia are significantly
related to the opportunity cost of holding money as measured by short-term in-

2
 Given this no-arbitrage approach, the premia we identify can also be interpreted
as violations of the law of one price.


                                          2
terest rates. Finally, we show that the results are not due to the possibility of
mispricing in the swaps used to convert fixed cash flows into floating cash flows
in our approach.

      These results have a number of important implications. First, they suggest
that economic agents place a high value on the store-of-value function of money.
In particular, the results indicate that the market incorporates a large additional
premium into the prices of the near-money assets whose prices fluctuate the
least (the nearest-to-money assets). Second, our findings have implications for
the management of sovereign debt. Specifically, the results suggest that the U.S.
Treasury could potentially reduce its debt financing costs by issuing floating rate
debt with near-constant market values that are largely unaffected by either public
or private information. A simple calculation suggests that the total savings to
the Treasury from the more than $720 billion of two-year FRNs issued to date
could approach a billion dollars. In theory, the potential savings from refunding
all fixed rate Treasury debt with floating rate debt could be orders of magnitude
larger.


                        2. RELATED LITERATURE


There is a rapidly growing theoretical literature focusing on the special role that
safe assets such as Treasury securities play in the economy. Important examples
include Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008), Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(2009), Gorton and Ordoñez (2013), He, Krishnamurthy, and Milbradt (2016a,
2016b), Cochrane (2015), and Duffie (2015). Guiband, Nosbusch, and Vayanos
(2013) present a clientele model of the optimal maturity structure of government
debt. Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2010, 2015) study optimal government
debt maturity in a model where short-term riskless debt provides monetary ser-
vices to agents. Vayanos and Weill (2008) use a search-based model to study the
on-the-run liquidity premium in Treasury securities. Dang, Gorton, and Holm-
ström (2015) consider the role that the informational sensitivity of a security
plays in its valuation. Our empirical results about the existence of an addi-
tional premium related to the price stability of FRNs provide support for the
implications of many of these theoretical models.
      There is also an extensive empirical literature documenting that the prices of
near-money assets such as those of Treasury securities incorporate liquidity and
safety premia. Key examples include Amihud and Mendelson (1991) and Kamara
(1994) who show that liquid Treasury bills trade at a premium relative to older
less-liquid Treasury notes and bonds with similar maturities. Duffee (1996) doc-
uments idiosyncratic variation in the prices of Treasury bills. Longstaff (2004)


                                         3
and Lewis, Longstaff, and Petrasek (2017) show that Treasury securities trade at
a premium relative to agency or corporate bonds that are likewise guaranteed by
the full faith and credit of the United States. Krishnamurthy (2002) finds that
on-the-run Treasury bonds are priced at a premium relative to less-liquid off-the-
run Treasury bonds. Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) find that Treasury supply
affects the expected returns of long-term Treasury securities. Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) show that Treasury bond prices incorporate signif-
icant safety and liquidity premia. Nagel (2016) compares general collateral repo
rates to Treasury bill yields and finds that Treasury bills incorporate a significant
liquidity premium. Furthermore, Nagel (2016) finds that this liquidity premium
is directly related to the opportunity cost of money as reflected by short-term
interest rates, and that controlling for this opportunity cost largely subsumes
Treasury supply-related factors. Our paper extends this literature by showing
that in addition to the liquidity and safety premia previously documented in the
literature, nearer-to-money assets such as FRNs may also incorporate an addi-
tional premium for their price stability or capital-preservation role in financial
markets.

     An important recent paper by Hartley and Jermann (2018) also studies the
valuation of FRNs. They argue that two-year FRNs are priced at a discount
relative to the current and forecasted values of three-month Treasury bills. An
insightful contribution of Hartley and Jermann (2018), however, is the recog-
nition that some portion of the discount they estimate may be related to the
rollover risk induced by the maturity difference between the FRNs and Trea-
sury bills used in their analysis (also see He and Xiong (2012)). In light of this,
our paper conducts an apples-to-apples comparison of the pricing of FRNs to
that of matched-maturity replicating portfolios of Treasury bills and notes. An
important advantage of this no-arbitrage approach is that it allows for a clean
identification of the premium while holding fixed the credit or rollover risk of
Treasury financing.3



               3. TREASURY FLOATING RATE NOTES


Like Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, FRNs are direct obligations of the Treasury
and are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. The key
difference is that the coupon cash flows of FRNs are indexed to the most-recent

3
 Because of the potential credit or refinancing risk of Treasury securities, FRNs
are not equivalent to rolling over a series of three-month Treasury bills. See the
discussion in Duffie (2015), Cochrane (2015), and Bhanot and Guo (2017).


                                         4
13-week Treasury bill auction high rate plus a constant spread.4 Thus, the coupon
accrual rate on these securities varies through time with the weekly auction cycle
for 13-week Treasury bills. FRNs pay quarterly coupon cash flows on the last
calendar day of the corresponding month. The dollar amount of the coupon
payment is the cumulative arithmetic total of the daily interest accrual over the
quarter. The daily interest accrual rate is floored at zero percent. At maturity,
FRNs are redeemed at their par value.

     FRNs are currently issued with a maturity of two years. The first FRN was
issued on January 31, 2014. Since then, the Treasury has auctioned FRNs every
three months in January, April, July, and October, and reopened the FRNs in
the two subsequent months after the original issue. As of March 31, 2018, the
total par amount of all FRNs issued was $720.969 billion.

     Similar to Treasury notes, FRNs are auctioned using a single-price auction
mechanism in which each competitive bidder specifies a discount margin, ex-
pressed in tenths of a basis point, which can be positive, zero, or negative. The
U.S. Treasury first accepts in full all noncompetitive tenders up to $5 million per
submitter. Competitive tenders are accepted in order of discount margin, from
the lowest discount margin to the highest discount margin at which the quantity
of awarded bids reaches the offering amount. The Treasury awards FRNs to both
noncompetitive and competitive bidders at the price equivalent to the highest
accepted discount margin at which bids were accepted. The Online Appendix to
the paper provides additional details about the Treasury FRN market and the
auction process.5



          4. TREASURY FLOATING RATE NOTE PRICES


By nature of their contract design, Treasury FRN prices are very stable and
remain close to their par values. To illustrate this, Table 1 presents summary
statistics for the daily market prices of the individual FRNs issued during the
January 2014 to March 2018 sample period. The sources and description of the
data (and for all other data used in the study) are given in the Online Appendix.

4
 The spread on a FRN is set at the highest accepted discount margin at the initial
auction of the note. For reopening auctions, the spread remains equal to the
spread set at the initial auction. See https://www.treasurydirect.gov/instit/mar
ketables/frn/frn.htm.
5
 The Treasury’s auction rules are available at https://www.treasurydirect.gov/
instit/statreg/auctreg/auctreg.htm.


                                        5
     As shown, the average prices for the individual FRNs are all close to their
par value of $100. The average prices for the FRNs range from 99.980 to 100.202.
The average price taken over all FRNs is 100.060. Furthermore, the FRN prices
display relatively little variation over time. The volatility of the market price
over the entire life of an FRN issue is typically only about two to six cents per
$100 par amount. Thus, the value at risk (VaR) associated with a long-term
investment in an FRN is very modest.

      In addition, Treasury FRNs are far less sensitive to changes in both cur-
rent and expected interest rates than are other Treasury securities with similar
maturities but fixed coupon rates. This is shown in Table 2 which reports the
volatility of daily price changes for FRNs and for matched-maturity Treasury
bills and two-year Treasury notes. For Treasury bills, we include only observa-
tions for which the maturity of the FRN is 12 months or less (beginning one year
after the initial issuance of the two-year FRN), and then identify the matched
Treasury bill as the one with the closest maturity date to the FRN. For two-year
Treasury notes, we use the note with the same maturity date as the FRN. The
results reported in Table 2 are stratified by the number of months to maturity
for the FRNs.
      Table 2 shows that the volatility of daily price changes for FRNs is substan-
tially lower than those of the matched-maturity Treasury bills and notes. This
result holds uniformly across all maturity categories. As an example, for matu-
rities of between three and four months, the volatility of daily price changes is
0.189, 0.381, and 0.468 cents per $100 par amount for FRNs, Treasury bills, and
Treasury notes, respectively. Thus, FRN prices vary far less than Treasury bill
and note prices even for maturities as short as three months. The differences in
price volatilities are even more striking for longer maturities.

     The highly stable nature of FRN prices makes a strong case for why market
participants may view them as attractive capital-preservation vehicles during
turbulent periods in financial markets.6 Furthermore, the limited mark-to-market
variation in the prices of FRNs also implies that these securities could have
important advantages when serving as collateral in secured lending arrangements
between financial institutions such as tri-party or GCF repo contracts. Demand
for FRNs has been particularly strong among broker-dealers and foreign investors

6
 For example, even traditional money market mutual funds had difficulties in
preserving value during the 2008 financial crisis. The Reserve Primary Fund
“broke the buck” when its net asset value fell to 97 cents per share on September
16, 2008. Similarly, the Community Bankers U.S. Government Money Market
Fund was liquidated at 94 cents per share in 1994 after experiencing large losses
in derivatives.


                                        6
who tend to purchase a much higher proportion of the total issue at FRN auctions
than they do at other note auctions.7



           5. IDENTIFYING THE STABILITY PREMIUM


In comparing the values of FRNs with those of other Treasury securities, it is
important to ensure that differences in the risk characteristics of the securities
do not contaminate the results. For example, we cannot simply compare the
yields of two-year FRNs with those of two-year Treasury notes since the two
securities have very different durations or interest rate sensitivities. Similarly, we
cannot directly compare the yields on two-year FRNs with those for three-month
Treasury bills since the two securities differ fundamentally in their exposure to
Treasury credit or rollover risk.

     To address this issue, we use a simple no-arbitrage replication approach to
identify the premium in FRN prices. The key to this approach is that there
is an active over-the-counter swap market in which participants can exchange
a stream of floating payments for a stream of fixed rate payments. Thus, the
floating cash flows from a FRN can be readily swapped out, thereby effectively
transforming the FRN into a synthetic fixed rate bond. The stability premium
is then measured directly by comparing the price of the swapped FRN with
that of a Treasury bond or portfolio of Treasury bills that exactly replicates the
cash flows of the swapped FRN. An important advantage of this no-arbitrage
approach in which we compare two portfolios with identical cash flows is that
the underlying risk characteristics of the two alternatives are also the same. In
the absence of arbitrage, two portfolios with identical cash flows should have
the same value. Thus, the estimated stability premium actually represents an
arbitrage or violation of the law of one price, and is not simply an equilibrium
premium compensating investors for differences in risk characteristics. In this
section, we first discuss how FRNs can be swapped into fixed rate debt. We then
describe how the replication approach is used to identify the premium.


5.1 Swapping FRNs into Fixed

There are large and actively-traded interest rate swap markets in which financial
7
 For example, broker-dealers purchased an average of 53.07 percent of the issue
at FRN auctions during the sample period, but only 34.39 percent of the issue at
Treasury note auctions during the same time period. See https://www.treasury.
gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/Pages/investor class auction.aspx.


                                          7
institutions can exchange a stream of floating cash flows for a stream of fixed
cash flows, and vice versa. In a standard swap, the floating leg of a swap is tied
to either the three-month Libor rate or the overnight index swap (OIS) rate.
However, there is also an active basis swap market that allows institutions to
exchange a variety of other floating indexes such as the 13-week Treasury bill
index for fixed cash flows.
     To convey the intuition, it is useful to illustrate how FRNs can be swapped
into fixed with a simple example. Consider an investor who purchases a FRN
with three months to maturity. In three months, the investor will receive a cash
flow equal to the quarterly floating coupon payment Xt plus the par amount
$100. To swap out the floating cash flow Xt , the investor simply needs to enter
into a zero-cost three-month basis swap in which the investor pays the floating
coupon Xt and receives a market-determined fixed coupon of F . By entering
into this swap, the total cash flow the investor receives in three months is now
F + 100. Since this total cash flow is fixed, the net effect of the transaction
has been to transform the FRN into synthetic fixed rate debt. Furthermore, the
total fixed cash flow of F + 100 from the swapped FRN is identical to the cash
flow from a portfolio of three-month Treasury bills with a total par amount of
F + 100.
     This simple example shows how the basis swap market can be used to swap
short-term FRNs into synthetic fixed rate debt which can then be replicated with
portfolios of matched-maturity Treasury bills.8 The Online Appendix provides
full details and illustrates how this approach can be easily extended to swap
longer-term FRNs into synthetic fixed rate coupon debt, and then replicated
using matched-maturity Treasury bills and notes.


5.2 Estimating the Stability Premium
Once the FRN has been swapped into fixed, the premium is readily identified by
comparing the price of the resulting synthetic fixed rate debt to that of fixed rate
Treasury securities with cash flows that are identical to those of the swapped
FRN. In doing this, we estimate the premium relative to both a replicating
portfolio of Treasury bills and to matched-maturity Treasury notes.

    To estimate the premium relative to Treasury bills, we focus specifically
on FRNs with maturities of less than or equal to one year. Following the same

8
 Alternatively, the reverse approach could be used to swap fixed rate Treasury
securities into synthetic floating rate debt. We note, of course, that the premia
estimates resulting from using this reverse approach are identical to those we
obtain.


                                         8
approach as in the example above, we swap the FRN into fixed. We then identify
the Treasury bills with maturities closest to the coupon payment dates for the
swapped FRNs. As an example, a swapped FRN with a maturity of one year
has two semiannual fixed cash flows—one in 6 months and the other at maturity
in 12 months. These cash flows can be replicated using a portfolio of the on-
the-run 26-week and 52-week Treasury bills with par amounts equal to the cash
flows to be received in 6 months and 12 months, respectively. The premium is
then estimated as the difference between the price of the swapped FRN and the
price of the replicating portfolio of Treasury bills. In replicating the cash flows
of the swapped FRN, we always use the on-the-run or most-recently-auctioned
Treasury bill with maturity date closest to that of the FRN.
     To estimate the premium relative to Treasury notes, we first identify Trea-
sury notes with maturity dates that match those of the FRNs. Fortunately, the
task of finding a matched Treasury note for comparison is straightforward be-
cause the Treasury auctions two-year fixed coupon Treasury notes on virtually
the same cycle as it auctions two-year FRNs. Thus, for each of the FRNs in
the sample, there is a matching two-year fixed coupon Treasury note with an
identical maturity date. Furthermore, the auction date of this matched Trea-
sury note is within a day or two of the auction date of the corresponding FRN.
Once the matched-maturity two-year Treasury note is determined, the premium
is easily identified by comparing the price of the swapped FRN with the price of
the corresponding Treasury note.

     It is important to reemphasize that the stability premia we identify actually
represent violations of the law of one price. This is because the premium is
computed as the difference between the price of the swapped FRN and the price
of a replicating portfolio with identical cash flows to the swapped FRN. This
means that the durations of the swapped FRN and the replicating portfolio are
exactly the same. Thus, the stability premia are not merely equilibrium risk
premia compensating investors for the differences in duration or interest-rate
sensitivity between floating rate and fixed rate Treasury securities. Similarly,
since the FRN and the replicating portfolio have identical maturities, potential
Treasury credit or rollover risk is held fixed in the analysis. Thus, the estimated
stability premia do not include equilibrium credit or rollover risk premia.9



9
 In contrast, approaches that compare two-year FRN yields directly to three-
month Treasury bill rates have the drawback of confounding near-money premia
with credit premia. For a discussion of the implications of rollover risk, see
Hartley and Jermann (2018).



                                        9
                      6. THE ESTIMATED PREMIA


In this section, we use the no-arbitrage approach described above to solve for
the premia in FRNs relative to replicating portfolios of either Treasury bills or
Treasury notes. We will generally express the premium in basis points by first
swapping the FRNs into fixed, and then taking the difference between the yield
on a replicating portfolio of Treasury bills or notes and the yield on the swapped
FRN. Occasionally, however, it will be useful to express the premia in terms of
prices as cents per $100 par amount—we denote premia expressed this way as
price premia.
     Table 3 reports summary statistics for the estimated premia by individual
FRN issue. The first part of the table reports the results from the comparisons
of FRNs to the replicating portfolio of Treasury bills.10 The second part of the
table reports the results from the comparisons of FRNs to the replicating portfolio
using two-year Treasury notes. Both sets of results are based on observations for
which the maturity of the FRN is greater than or equal to three months. Figure
1 plots the time series of the estimated price premia.

      Focusing first on the valuation of FRNs compared to Treasury bills, Table 3
shows that FRN prices incorporate a substantial premium relative to the prices
of Treasury bills. The average premia are all positive (with the exception of the
first FRN) and highly statistically significant. The average premium taken over
all FRNs is 5.92 basis points. The averages for some of the FRNs, however, are
in excess of 15 basis points. These averages are an order of magnitude larger
than the typical bid-ask spread for FRNs. The table also shows that more than
76 percent of the estimated premia are positive. For some of the more-recent
FRN issues, however, 100 percent of the estimated premia are positive.

     Turning next to the valuation of FRNs relative to the matched Treasury
notes, Table 3 shows that the FRNs are uniformly priced at a large premium to
their Treasury note counterparts. The average premium is positive and significant
for all 17 of the FRNs with average values typically in excess of 10 basis points.
The average premium taken over all FRNs is 9.82 basis points. Furthermore,
nearly 89 percent of all of the premium estimates are positive.

     One way of evaluating the economic importance of these results is by esti-
mating the total value of the premium across all FRNs. To do this, we multiply
the average price premium for each FRN by the total par amount issued. This
10
  The premia for the last four FRNs issued are not computed since their matu-
rities exceed one year throughout the sample period and, therefore, cannot yet
be replicated by Treasury bills.


                                        10
simple calculation implies that the total valuation effect of the premium is $309
million relative to Treasury bills, and $992 million relative to the Treasury notes.
These valuation effects are very significant from an economic perspective.

     Given the striking nature of the results, it is important to consider how the
stability premia we estimate are related to the other types of liquidity and near-
money premia documented in previous empirical literature. First, it should be
recognized that the replication approach we use to identify the premium controls
for any potential credit or rollover risk incorporated into Treasury security prices.
There are two reasons for this. Both the FRN and the replicating portfolio of
Treasury securities are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United
States. Thus, the underlying credit risk of the FRN and the replicating Treasury
securities is held fixed in the estimation. In addition, by matching the maturity
of the replicating portfolio to that of the FRN, our approach also holds fixed the
rollover risk of the securities. These considerations imply that the premium we
estimate is likely to be different from the safety premium in Treasury security
prices documented by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and others.

      Second, the liquidity characteristics of the FRNs and matched-maturity
Treasury bills and notes we use to estimate the premia are very similar. To
illustrate this, Table 4 provides summary statistics for a number of liquidity
measures for the FRNs and the corresponding Treasury bills and notes. Specif-
ically, Table 4 shows that the three types of securities mirror each other closely
in terms of their total amounts issued, average bid-ask spreads, and bid-to-cover
ratios at the initial auction of the issues. The similarity in these liquidity mea-
sures suggests that the premium we estimate is also unlikely to be the same as
the liquidity premium identified in the prices of Treasury securities by Amihud
and Mendelson (1991), Kamara (1994), Longstaff (2004), Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), and others.
     Third, the stability premium is also unlikely to be related to the on-the-
run/off-the-run effect studied by Krishnamurthy (2002). Specifically, in esti-
mating the premium relative to Treasury bills, we use the most-recently-issued
Treasury bills in the replication. Thus, we compare off-the-run FRNs to on-
the-run or recently-issued Treasury bills. This means that finding a positive
premium would be inconsistent with the on-the-run/off-the-run effect since it
goes in the opposite direction. Furthermore, in comparing swapped FRNs with
two-year Treasury notes, we are comparing one on-the-run security with another
on-the-run security. As discussed earlier, the auction dates for the FRNs and the
matched-maturity two-year Treasury notes are typically within a day or so of each
other. This means that both the FRNs and the matched Treasury notes used
in the estimation are on-the-run at the same time. Thus, if there is a premium
in FRN prices when measured relative to Treasury notes, then that premium is


                                         11
likely different from the familiar on-the-run/off-the-run liquidity effect.
     Fourth, the stability premium differs from the near-money liquidity premium
in Treasury bill yields documented by Nagel (2016). In particular, he finds that
there is a significant spread between the three-month general collateral govern-
ment repo rate and the three-month Treasury bill rate. Since fully-collateralized
government repo is essentially default free, this spread represents an additional
liquidity premium for the near-money properties of Treasury bills relative to col-
lateralized lending agreements such a repo loans. To establish this point, we will
regress changes in the premia on changes in the repo/Treasury-bill spread later
in the analysis. We find that there is no significant relation between the two
measures, implying that the premium we estimate is distinct from that identified
by Nagel (2016).

     Finally, an important advantage of the approach we use is that swapping
the FRN into synthetic fixed rate debt allows us to make a clean apples-to-apples
comparison to other Treasury securities with identical cash flows. In the absence
of arbitrage, of course, the swapped FRN and the replicating portfolio should
have the same value. In light of this, the premium can be viewed as representing
the additional value (above and beyond the present value of their cash flows)
that economic agents are willing to place on near-money assets with prices that
are nearly constant.


                  7. CROSS-SECTIONAL PROPERTIES


If the estimated premium in FRN prices is in fact related to the role of these
securities as a more-stable store-of-value vehicle relative to other Treasury secu-
rities, then we would expect that the cross-section of premia should be related
to the relative magnitude of the price fluctuations between the FRNs and the
corresponding replicating portfolios of Treasury securities.11
     To examine these empirical implications, Table 5 reports summary statistics
for the premia stratified by time to maturity. As shown, the average premia
are positive and statistically significant across all maturity categories for premia
measured relative to both Treasury bills and notes. Furthermore, the percent-
ages of positive premia are substantially higher than 50 percent across all of the
maturity categories.

     The table indicates that there is a clear relation between the average premia
11
  For a discussion of the interest rate sensitivity of floating rate notes, see Fabozzi
and Mann (2000) and Cochrane (2015).


                                          12
and the maturity of the FRN. For the premia measured relative to Treasury bills,
the lowest average is for the 3- to 4-month category, while the highest average
is for 9- to 12-month category. For the premia measured relative to Treasury
notes, the averages typically increase in maturity up to about 15 months, but
then decline slightly for longer maturities. Thus, while there is a general positive
relation between the average premia and maturity, this relation is not always
exclusively monotonically increasing. We note, however, that one reason for this
non-monotonicity is that we are expressing the premium in terms of yields rather
than prices. In contrast, the relation between average price premia and maturity
is virtually monotonically increasing.
     To provide some additional perspective on the cross-sectional structure of
the stability premia, Figures 2 and 3 present three-dimensional plots of the price
premia as functions of time to maturity over the sample period. As shown,
price premia are strongly related to the maturity of the FRNs and correspond-
ing matched Treasury bills and notes. In particular, there is a strong positive
correlation between the price premium and the time to maturity of the FRN for
the large majority of days in the sample period.

      To examine the cross-sectional relation between the premia and the volatil-
ities of the underlying securities more formally, we use a simple panel regression
approach. Specifically, we compute the standard deviation of daily price changes
for each FRN for each month during the sample period, and do the same for
the matched-maturity Treasury bills and notes used in the replication. We also
compute the monthly averages of the price premia. We then regress the monthly
averages of the price premia on the differences in the standard deviations of
price changes for the FRNs and the matched-maturity Treasury bills or notes.
To control for time-series variation, we include monthly fixed effects in the panel
regression.
      The results from these panel regressions, shown in Table 6, provide strong
evidence that the premia are directly related to the relative price volatility of
the FRNs and Treasury bills and notes. In particular, the coefficient for the
difference in volatilities (measured in cents per $100 par amount) is 7.237 with
a t-statistic of 4.71 in the regression for premia measured relative to Treasury
bills, and 2.289 with a t-statistic of 6.26 in the regression for premia measured
relative to Treasury notes. These intuitive results are consistent with premia
representing the additional value investors are willing to pay for the nearest-to-
money near-money assets.




                                        13
                      8. TIME-SERIES PROPERTIES


The three-dimensional plots in Figures 2 and 3 also indicate that there is consid-
erable variation in the premia over time. To show this more clearly, we construct
indexes of the premia by taking simple averages of the premia across FRNs for
each date in the sample. We construct separate indexes for the premia measured
relative to Treasury bills and for premia measured relative to Treasury notes and
denote them as the FRN/T-bill and FRN/T-note indexes, respectively.

     As discussed earlier, the premia may reflect the additional value that in-
vestors place on FRNs relative to other near-money assets because of the unique
role they play as a store-of-value or capital-preservation option. In that case,
we would anticipate that changes in the premia would be related to changes in
investor demand for safe assets. To explore this hypothesis, our approach is to
regress changes in the indexes on several categories of explanatory variables. In
particular, we focus on a number of explanatory variables motivated by the lit-
erature on safe assets, systemic risk, and market liquidity. We acknowledge, of
course, that this regression approach does not allow us to make definitive causal
statements about the source of the premia. Despite this, however, we believe
that this approach represents an important first step towards identifying rela-
tionships between the premia and other fundamental variables, and providing
intuition about potential underlying economic mechanisms. The Online Appen-
dix describes the data sources and definitions of these variables.

    The first of these variables is the near-money liquidity premium in short-
term Treasury securities studied by Nagel (2016). He estimates this liquidity
premium as the difference between the three-month general collateral government
repo rate and the three-month Treasury bill rate. We include this variable as
a way to examine whether the premia we estimate are different from the Nagel
(2016) near-money liquidity premium.
     The second category of variables is also motivated by Nagel (2016) who
presents a model in which the premium in near-money assets is directly related
to the opportunity cost of holding money. He shows that the near-money liquidity
premium in Treasury bills is significantly related to the level of short-term interest
rates. Furthermore, he shows that this relation subsumes many of the supply
effects previously documented in the literature. Paralleling Nagel (2016), we
include the three-month Libor rate as a measure of the short-term opportunity
cost of holding money. To capture potential longer-horizon opportunity costs,
we also include the one-year constant maturity Treasury rate in the analysis.

    The third category is motivated by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) who
present a model in which funding frictions faced by dealers in the financial mar-


                                         14
kets can generate liquidity premia in security prices. Similar implications emerge
from other theoretical models such as Xiong (2001), Gârleanu and Pedersen
(2011), and others. Following Cui, In, and Maharaj (2016), Schwartz (2017),
and others, we use the OIS spread as a proxy for dealer funding illiquidity. This
spread is computed as the difference between the three-month Libor rate and the
three-money OIS swap rate (which is tied to the overnight fed funds rate).
     The fourth category consists of several key volatility measures. The inclusion
of volatility measures in the analysis is also motivated by the previous literature.
The first measure is the VIX index of stock market volatility implied from options
on the S&P 500 Stock Index. The second is the volatility of inflation implied from
the prices of ten-year inflation straddles (put and call options with the same strike
price) actively traded in the over-the-counter interest rate derivatives market.12

     The fifth category measures the flow of investor funds into money market
mutual funds. The intuition for including this category is that we would expect
investors concerned about financial safety to allocate more funds to liquid short-
term money substitutes such as money market mutual funds. This intuition
is consistent with recent results by Strahan and Tanyeri (2015) and Schmidt,
Timmermann, and Wermers (2016). Specifically, we include the weekly flows
into Treasury money market mutual funds which are funds that hold primarily
short-term Treasury securities. We denote these as Treasury money market flows.
We also include the weekly flows into other types of money market mutual funds
which may hold larger proportions of other types of short-term liquid assets. We
designate these as non-Treasury money market flows.
     Finally, we include several other variables that proxy for “flight” risk—the
risk that a systemic shock to the financial markets leads to a flight-to-quality
or a flight-to-liquidity in which there is a large increase in the demand for safe
assets. In particular, we include changes in the credit default swap (CDS) spread
for contracts protecting against the default of the U.S Treasury. Similarly, we
include changes in the average CDS spread for a set of major Wall Street dealers.
We also include changes in the Bloomberg U.S. Dollar Index which is calculated
by averaging the exchange rates between the dollar and major world currencies.
Lastly, we include changes in an index of the prices of precious metals (gold,
silver, and platinum). Flights-to-quality and flights-to-liquidity are discussed
in Longstaff (2004), Beber, Brandt, and Kavajecz (2009), and others. Table 7
reports the results from the regression of weekly changes in the two indexes on
the corresponding changes in the explanatory variables.
     As shown, changes in the repo spread measure are not significant in either the
12
  See Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig (2017) for a discussion of the inflation
options market.


                                         15
FRN/T-bill or FRN/T-note index regressions. This indicates that the stability
premium in FRN prices is not the same as the near-money liquidity premium
in Treasury bill prices studied in Nagel (2016). This result is important since
it suggests that financial markets value multiple facets of safe assets. This is
consistent with the view that money plays a variety of fundamental roles in the
economy.
     The three-month Libor rate is not significant in either regression. However,
the one-year rate is highly significant in both the FRN/T-bill and FRN/T-note
index regressions. In particular, the coefficients for the change in the one-year
rate are positive with t-statistics of 3.91 and 3.88, respectively. These results
provide support for Nagel (2016) who argues that near-money premia should
be directly related to the opportunity cost of holding money. Our results also
extend his results by showing that the opportunity costs associated with longer-
horizon Treasury securities also influence the near-money premium that market
participants place on them.
     The coefficients for the OIS spread are positive and significant in both regres-
sions. This result is consistent with investors placing a larger premium on FRNs
at times when market participants face greater liquidity and funding uncertainty.
This intuitive result is also consistent with the implications of a number of recent
models that focus on the role that intermediaries play in financial markets. For
example, see Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009),
and Gârleanu and Pedersen (2011).
     Table 7 provides strong support for the hypothesis that the stability pre-
mium is related to the amount of uncertainty in the financial markets. In partic-
ular, both measures of volatility have significant explanatory power for changes
in the indexes. These results are again intuitive since we would expect that in-
vestors place a greater value on the safety of near-money assets precisely when
the values of other investments begin to fluctuate more.

      The results also show that there is a significant relation between the FRN/T-
note index and flows into both types of money market mutual funds. In particu-
lar, the coefficient for flows into Treasury money market funds is positive and sig-
nificant at the five-percent level, while the coefficient for flows into non-Treasury
money market funds is positive and significant at the ten-percent level. These
results suggest a direct link between near-money premia and investor demand for
safe assets. Flows into money market funds are not significant for the FRN/T-
bill index. Finally, none of the additional flight-risk variables are significant in
the regressions.




                                         16
                        9. ROBUSTNESS RESULTS


In this section, we present robustness results showing that the results are not
due to swap mispricing or the daily interest rate accrual floor for FRNs.


9.1 Are the Results Due to Swap Mispricing?
The results indicate that swapped FRNs trade at a premium relative to fixed rate
Treasury bills and notes. A natural question that arises, however, is whether the
results are due to the actual pricing of the FRNs, or to the possibility that the
swaps used in our estimation approach may themselves be mispriced. If the
results are due to the presence of a unique near-money premium in FRN prices,
then we would not expect to find the same type of premia in the prices of other
floating rate securities when the same set of swap prices is used in the analysis.
On the other hand, if the results are due to swap mispricing instead, then our
methodology would lead to spurious evidence of premia in other types of floating
rate securities in which we would not expect a near-money premium.

     To test the robustness of our results to the possibility of swap mispricing,
we apply our methodology to two alternative classes of floating rate notes. For
the first, we collect data on matched-maturity pairs of floating and fixed rate
corporate notes during the 2014 to 2018 study period. We then swap the floating
rate corporate notes into fixed rate corporate debt using the same data set of
swap prices used in swapping FRNs into fixed rate Treasury debt. Finally, we
compare the yield on the swapped corporate floating rate notes with the yield
on the replicating portfolio of fixed rate corporate debt.
     We find no evidence of systematic pricing differences between the swapped
floating rate and fixed rate corporate bonds. In particular, the average yield
difference across all 38 pairs of matched-maturity floating and fixed rate corporate
notes is −0.13 basis points which is not statistically significant. In addition,
the median yield difference is only −0.06 basis points. Furthermore, the yield
differences are nearly evenly divided between positive and negative values; 50.35
percent of the yield differences are positive. Thus, when we use the same swap
rate data that we use in estimating the stability premium in Treasury FRNs,
we find no significant differences between swapped floating rate and fixed rate
corporate debt. These results suggest that swap mispricing is not the reason why
swapped FRNs trade at a premium to fixed rate Treasury notes.

    Second, we also collect data on 32 pairs of matched-maturity floating rate
and fixed rate Federal Farm Credit Bank securities and use the same swap rates
and methodology as before. We again find that the average difference in yields
across all pairs is small. In fact the average difference of −3.08 basis points has

                                        17
the opposite sign to the averages for the FRNs. This provides additional evidence
that the estimated premia for FRNs are not simply artifacts of the mispricing of
the swaps.

     The results described above for the premia computed for corporate bonds
and Federal Farm Credit Bank bonds are summarized in the Online Appen-
dix. As an additional robustness check, we also compare the average Treasury-
bill/Libor basis swap spreads with the realized Treasury-bill/Libor spread. The
average basis swap spreads during the 2014–2018 sample period are 30.25, 31.13,
32.36, and 33.69 basis points for the 6-, 12-, 18-, and 24-month tenors, respec-
tively (see the Online Appendix). These values are all very close to the realized
Treasury-bill/Libor spread of 30.86 basis points over the same period. Thus, the
swaps appear to be priced fairly in terms of economic fundamentals.


9.2 Are the Results Due to the Interest Rate Accrual Floor?
As described earlier, the daily interest rate accrual for FRNs is floored at zero.
In theory, this raises the possibility that there could be a small option premium
embedded into the prices of FRNs to reflect the value of this floor. In reality,
there are a number of reasons why such a premium would be negligible. First,
if there was a floor premium, its value would be negatively correlated with the
level of Treasury bill rates, since the option moves deeper out of the money as
rates increase. In contrast, we find that there is a strong positive correlation of
0.441 between the average premium and the level of Treasury bill rates during
the sample period. Second, the largest values of the average premium occur when
the Treasury bill rate is near its highest values during the sample period. Third,
the results in Table 7 confirm that the premium is positively related to the level
of Treasury interest rates. Finally, the historical record shows that three-month
Treasury bill auction rates have rarely, if ever, been negative. Thus, it is unlikely
that market participants would place any material probability weight on negative
realizations for three-month Treasury bill auction rates.



                              10. CONCLUSION


Money serves three key roles as a medium of exchange, a store of value, and as a
unit of account. Near-money assets such as Treasury securities can play similar
roles in the economy. In particular, the high liquidity of Treasury securities
ensures that they can readily be converted into money, either through direct
sale or through collateralized financing transactions such as tri-party or GCF
repo contracts. Similarly, the full faith and credit guarantee of U.S. Treasury


                                         18
securities allows them to serve as safe havens during flights-to-quality and global
financial crises.
     In this paper, we extend the literature on the pricing of safe assets by show-
ing that agents place an additional premium on the near-money assets whose
nominal prices fluctuate the least. In particular, we use a no-arbitrage replica-
tion approach to show that Treasury FRNs are valued at a significant premium to
matched-maturity fixed rate Treasury bills and notes. This premium is directly
related to the stability of FRN prices relative to those of the matched-maturity
Treasury bills and notes. Since the stability of FRN prices ensures that they
can always be converted or financed via repo into money at or close to their par
value, this additional premium can be interpreted as a price-stability or store-of-
value premium. We show that this premium is distinct from the liquidity, safety,
and on-the-run premia previously documented in the literature. Furthermore,
we show that the stability premia are related to measures that proxy for the
demand by investors for safe assets.
     These results also have important implications for Treasury debt manage-
ment. In particular, they raise the possibility that the Treasury could reduce
its cost of debt financing significantly—without increasing the rollover risk of its
debt portfolio—by issuing debt securities such as FRNs with values that fluctuate
far less than other Treasury securities.




                                        19
                               REFERENCES


Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1991, Liquidity, Maturity, and the Yields
on U.S. Treasury Securities, Journal of Finance 46, 1411-1425.

Bhanot, Karan, and Liang Guo, 2017, The New Market for Treasury Floating
Rate Notes, The Journal of Fixed Income 27 (2), 52-64.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2009, Market Liquidity and
Funding Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.

Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008,
An Equilibrium Model of Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates, American
Economic Review 98, 358-393.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2009, Global Imbalances and
Financial Fragility, American Economic Review 99, 584-588.
Cochrane, John H., 2015, A New Structure for U.S. Federal Debt, Hoover Insti-
tution, Economics Working Paper 15108.

Cui, Jin, Francis In, and Elizabeth Ann Maharaj, 2016, What Drives the Libor-
OIS Spread? Evidence from Five Major Currency Libor-OIS Spreads, Interna-
tional Review of Economics & Finance 45, 358-375.

Dang, Vi Tri, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, 2015, Ignorance, Debt and
Financial Crises, Columbia University Working Paper.
Duffee, Gregory R., 1996, Idiosyncratic Variation of Treasury Bill Yields, Journal
of Finance 51, 527-551.

Duffie, Darrell, 2015, Discussion of ‘A New Structure for U.S. Federal Debt’ by
John H. Cochrane, Brookings Institution Press.

Fabozzi, Frank J., and Steven V. Mann, 2000, Floating-Rate Securities, Frank J.
Fabozzi Associates, New Hope, PA.
Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis A. Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig, 2014, The TIPS-
Treasury Puzzle, Journal of Finance 69, 2151-2197.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis A. Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig, 2017, Deflation
Risk, Review of Financial Studies 30, 2719-2760.
Gârleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2011, Margin-Based Asset Pricing and
Deviations from the Law of One Price, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4259-4299.



                                       20
Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo L. Ordoñez, 2013, The Supply and Demand for
Safe Assets, NBER Working Paper No. 18732.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy C Stein, 2010, A Gap-Filling
Theory of Corporate Debt Maturity Choice, Journal of Finance 65, 993-1028.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2015, A Compara
tive-Advantage Approach to Government Debt Maturity, The Journal of Finance
70, 1683-1722.

Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2014, Bond Supply and Excess Bond
Returns, Review of Financial Studies 27, 663-713.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets
with Financial Constrained Arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
361-407.
Guibaud, Stephane, Yves Nosbusch, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2013, Bond Market
Clienteles, the Yield Curve, and the Optimal Maturity Structure of Government
Debt, Review of Financial Studies 26, 1914-1961.

Hartley, Jonathan, and Urban J. Jermann, 2018, Should the U.S. Government
Issue Floating Rate Notes?, Wharton School Working Paper.

He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt, 2016a, A Model
of Safe Asset Determination, NBER Working Paper No. 22271.
He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt, 2016b, What
Makes US Government Bonds Safe Assets?, American Economic Review 106,
519-523.

He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong, 2012, Rollover Risk and Credit Risk, Journal of
Finance 67, 391-429.

Kamara, Avraham, 1994, Liquidity, Taxes, and Short-Term Treasury Yields,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29, 403.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2002, The Bond/Old Bond Spread, Journal of Financial
Economics 66, 463-506.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, The Aggregate
Demand for Treasury Debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, 233-267.
Lewis, Kurt, Francis Longstaff, and Lubomir Petrasek, 2017, Asset Mispricing,
NBER Working Paper No. 23231.

Longstaff, Francis A., 2004, The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury

                                     21
Bond Prices, Journal of Business 77, 511-526.
Musto, David, Greg Nini, and Krista Schwarz, 2018, Notes on Bonds: Liquidity
at all Costs During the Great Recession, Review of Financial Studies 31, 2983-
3018.

Nagel, Stefan, 2016, The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 131, 1927-1971.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-
Definite Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,
Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Schmidt, Lawrence, Allan Timmermann, and Russ Wermers, 2016, Runs on
Money Market Mutual Funds, American Economic Review 106, 26252657.

Schwarz, Krista, 2017, Mind the Gap: Disentangling Credit and Liquidity in
Risk Spreads, Wharton School Working Paper.

Strahan, Philip E., and Basak Tanyeri, 2015, Once Burned, Twice Shy: Money
Market Fund Responses to a Systemic Liquidity Shock, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 50, 119-144.
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Pierre-Olivier Weill, 2008, A Search-Based Theory of the
On-the-Run Phenomenon, Journal of Finance 63, 1361-1398.

Xiong, Wei, 2001, Convergence Trading with Wealth Effects: An Amplification
Mechanism in Financial Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 247-292.




                                      22
           60

           40
   Cents



           20

             0

           -20
                     2015            2016           2017            2018


           60

           40
   Cents




           20

             0

           -20
                     2015            2016           2017            2018




Figure 1. Price Premia. The top panel plots the time series of the price
premia measured relative to Treasury bills. The lower panel plots the time series
of the price premia measured relative to Treasury notes. The price premia are
expressed in cents per $100 par amount.




                                       23
Figure 2. Time Series of Price Premia Measured Relative to Treasury
Bills by Time to Maturity. This figure plots the time series of the price
premia measured relative to Treasury bills as a function of the time to maturity
for the FRNs. Price premia are expressed as cents per $100 par amount.




                                      24
Figure 3. Time Series of Price Premia Measured Relative to Treasury
Notes by Time to Maturity. This figure plots the time series of the price
premia measured relative to Treasury notes as a function of the time to maturity
for the FRNs. Price premia are expressed as cents per $100 par amount.




                                      25
                                                            Table 1

Summary Statistics for Treasury Floating Rate Note Prices. This table presents summary statistics for the clean prices (without
accrued coupon) of the two-year Treasury FRNs issued during the sample period. The FRN spread is measured in basis points. The summary
statistics are based on prices for the FRNs from their issue date until three months before their maturity date. N denotes the number of
observations. The sample period is daily from January 31, 2014 to March 29, 2018.




     FRN           Maturity       Spread                Mean        Std Dev           Min       Median           Max           N


         1        1–31–2016          4.50              99.992         0.015        99.953        99.997       100.022         456
         2        4–30–2016          6.90             100.017         0.013        99.992       100.015       100.055         457
         3        7–31–2016          7.00             100.017         0.015        99.984       100.012       100.062         454
         4       10–31–2016          5.30              99.987         0.021        99.900        99.991       100.016         455
         5        1–31–2017          8.40             100.017         0.022        99.933       100.022       100.063         441
         6        4–30–2017          7.40              99.990         0.050        99.766       100.003       100.045         452
         7        7–31–2017          7.70              99.981         0.075        99.673       100.002       100.083         444
         8       10–31–2017         16.80             100.069         0.081        99.725       100.099       100.169         446
         9        1–31–2018         27.20             100.202         0.064       100.042       100.224       100.309         453
        10        4–30–2018         19.00             100.131         0.055        99.979       100.129       100.219         450
        11        7–31–2018         17.40             100.131         0.060        99.987       100.143       100.234         411
        12       10–31–2018         17.00             100.156         0.067        99.997       100.172       100.252         343
        13        1–31–2019         14.00             100.155         0.054        99.996       100.173       100.226         297
        14        4–30–2019          7.00             100.073         0.040        99.983       100.078       100.145         235
        15        7–31–2019          6.00             100.068         0.045       100.000       100.075       100.151         174
        16       10–31–2019          4.80             100.061         0.032       100.000       100.069       100.115         107
        17        1–31–2020          0.00              99.980         0.015        99.928        99.978       100.000          41


       All                —            —              100.060         0.088        99.673       100.029       100.309       6,116
                                         Table 2

Volatility of Daily Changes in Treasury Security Prices. This table reports the standard
deviation of daily price changes for FRNs where the results are stratified based on the number of
months to maturity for the FRNs. The table also reports the standard deviation of daily price
changes for Treasury bills and two-year Treasury notes with maturity dates matched to those of
the individual FRNs. The standard deviations are computed using only data for days on which
price change observations are available for the individual FRN as well as both the matched-maturity
Treasury bill and two-year Treasury note (or only the two-year Treasury note for horizons longer
than one year). Standard deviations are expressed as cents per $100 notional. The sample period is
daily from January 31, 2014 to March 29, 2018.



       Months to Maturity

       From              To                FRN          T-Bill        T-Note            N


           3              4                0.189         0.381          0.468          209
           4              5                0.251         0.639          0.690          247
           5              6                0.262         0.644          0.659          237
           6              9                0.354         0.926          0.911          743
           9             12                0.422         1.358          1.251          798
          12             15                0.589            —           1.890          863
          15             18                0.659            —           3.262          903
          18             21                0.652            —           4.199          983
          21             24                0.783            —           5.025        1,026
                                                                   Table 3

Summary Statistics for the Premia. This table presents summary statistics for the premia in FRN prices measured relative to Treasury
bills and Treasury notes. The premia are computed as the difference between the yield on the replicating portfolios using matched-maturity
Treasury bills or notes and the yield on the swapped FRN. Yield differences are measured in basis points. A positive yield difference implies
that the yield on the replicating portfolio is higher than the yield on the swapped FRN. Std Dev denotes the standard deviation. N denotes
the number of observations. The sample period is daily from January 31, 2014 to March 29, 2018.



                                            Relative to T-Bills                                       Relative to T-Notes

                                     Std                          Percent                      Std                          Percent
  FRN        Maturity       Mean     Dev       Min     Max        Positive     N     Mean      Dev       Min     Max        Positive     N


      1    1–31–2016        −4.31    2.85   −11.25     3.09          6.70     194     0.62     3.17    −8.01    10.59         56.36     456
      2    4–30–2016         1.99    5.45   −10.96    21.26         66.29     178     3.87     5.04    −6.48    23.46         80.74     457
      3    7–31–2016         6.25    7.94   −11.76    27.85         84.24     184     5.72     8.23    −8.88    34.08         79.30     454
      4   10–31–2016         2.22    6.72   −14.65    25.46         63.30     188     8.39     8.14    −4.46    33.70         89.89     455
      5    1–31–2017         6.61    5.92    −7.33    21.20         89.67     184     9.86     8.52    −5.42    31.30         90.48     441
      6    4–30–2017         7.15    4.64    −4.88    15.83         92.18     179    12.37     6.80    −2.76    27.91         96.68     452
      7    7–31–2017         5.28    6.38   −11.28    16.03         73.91     184    12.86     7.69   −10.26    26.18         91.44     444
      8   10–31–2017         6.33    6.15    −6.24    19.11         85.19     189    14.13     6.60    −5.28    24.85         97.98     446
      9    1–31–2018         0.95    3.28    −8.89     7.22         66.67     195    12.29     6.66    −3.29    25.86         97.13     453
     10    4–30–2018         7.76    3.16     2.62    18.45        100.00     181    11.26     4.57    −0.24    22.21         99.78     450
     11    7–31–2018        15.75    6.72     5.08    29.07        100.00     162    11.07     6.38    −1.44    29.13         98.54     411
     12   10–31–2018        18.68    5.07     1.46    27.73        100.00     103    12.14     9.44    −3.16    34.13         95.92     343
     13    1–31–2019        23.61    4.11    12.58    28.53        100.00      42    10.30    12.03    −7.30    34.56         81.14     297
     14    4–30–2019           —       —        —        —             —       —     10.91    12.28    −7.71    33.38         83.40     235
     15    7–31–2019           —       —        —        —             —       —     12.27    10.91    −3.64    30.46         81.03     174
     16   10–31–2019           —       —        —        —             —       —     16.99     6.90    −0.80    26.66         99.07     107
     17    1–31–2020           —       —        —        —             —       —     17.34     2.40    10.87    21.75        100.00      41


    All                      5.92    8.15   −14.65    29.07         76.28    2,163    9.82     8.59   −10.26    34.56         88.65    6,116
                                                                   Table 4

Liquidity Measures for Treasury Floating Rate Notes and Matched-Maturity Treasury Bills and Notes. This table reports the
total amount issued, the bid-ask spread, and the bid to cover ratio for the two-year FRNs issued during the sample period, along with the
same measures for the matched-maturity Treasury bills and two-year Treasury notes. Amount issued denotes the total par amount issued by
the Treasury and is measured in billions of dollars. Bid-ask spread denotes the average bid-ask spread in cents per 100 dollar par amount of
the indicated securities. Bid to cover denotes bid to cover ratio for the security at the initial auction. The sample period is daily from January
31, 2014 to March 29, 2018.



                                           Amount Issued                         Bid-Ask Spread                         Bid to Cover

    FRN         Maturity           FRN        T-Bill     T-Note           FRN       T-Bill     T-Note           FRN       T-Bill       T-Note


       1       1–31–2016           41.00      25.00        32.00         0.377       0.334        1.115          5.67       3.81         3.30
       2       4–30–2016           41.00      25.00        32.00         0.358       0.324        1.116          4.69       4.11         3.35
       3       7–31–2016           41.01      25.00        29.01         0.355       0.372        1.113          4.45       3.37         3.22
       4      10–31–2016           41.00      12.00        29.00         0.378       0.340        1.114          4.00       4.03         3.11
       5       1–31–2017           41.00      18.00        26.00         1.158       0.325        1.254          4.34       3.59         3.74
       6       4–30–2017           41.05      20.00        26.10         1.134       0.327        1.113          4.01       3.17         3.30
       7       7–31–2017           41.00      20.00        26.00         1.114       0.323        1.102          3.93       3.65         3.42
       8      10–31–2017           41.00      20.00        26.00         1.121       0.339        1.098          3.48       3.35         3.01
       9       1–31–2018           41.27      20.00        26.47         1.136       0.415        1.112          3.67       3.48         2.90
      10       4–30–2018           44.99      20.00        32.91         1.123       0.642        1.103          3.57       3.23         2.64
      11       7–31–2018           42.84      20.00        27.82         1.163       0.873        1.141          3.82       3.17         2.52
      12      10–31–2018           41.91      20.00        27.57         1.285       1.170        1.252          3.80       3.34         2.53
      13       1–31–2019           43.53      20.00        27.65         1.419       1.008        1.386          3.43       3.36         2.68
      14       4–30–2019           44.63         —         29.55         1.537          —         1.506          3.35         —          2.85
      15       7–31–2019           42.53         —         28.64         1.666          —         1.631          3.46         —          3.06
      16      10–31–2019           42.38         —         26.65         1.784          —         1.736          3.69         —          2.74
      17       1–31–2020           49.85         —         29.82         1.899          —         1.852          3.38         —          3.22
                                                                  Table 5

Summary Statistics for the Premia Stratified by Months to Maturity. This table presents summary statistics for the premia in
FRN prices measured relative to Treasury bills and Treasury notes, where the premia are stratified by number of months to maturity for the
FRNs. The premia are computed as the difference between the yield on the replicating portfolios using matched-maturity Treasury bills or
notes and the yield on the swapped FRN. Yield differences are measured in basis points. A positive yield difference implies that the yield
on the replicating portfolio is higher than the yield on the swapped FRN. Std Dev denotes the standard deviation. N denotes the number of
observations. The sample period is daily from January 31, 2014 to March 29, 2018.



                                          Relative to T-Bills                                      Relative to T-Notes
  Months to Maturity
                                   Std                          Percent                     Std                       Percent
  From           To       Mean     Dev       Min     Max        Positive      N     Mean    Dev       Min     Max     Positive      N


      3            4       0.92    6.08   −11.76    15.93         57.42      209     3.48   6.37    −8.88    19.17       68.42     209
      4            5       4.97    8.34   −11.25    29.07         70.45      247     7.73   7.90    −7.72    29.13       87.85     247
      5            6       4.81    6.36   −11.28    24.22         79.75      237     6.37   6.19   −10.26    26.62       86.92     237
      6            9       5.40    8.33   −14.65    27.85         75.53      748    10.71   8.05    −5.28    34.13       91.71     748
      9           12       8.60    7.98    −8.89    28.53         83.33      722    13.34   8.85    −5.18    34.56       95.04     826
     12           15         —       —        —        —             —        —     12.79   9.17    −6.48    33.38       93.01     873
     15           18         —       —        —        —             —        —     11.09   8.66    −5.44    30.46       90.93     915
     18           21         —       —        —        —             —        —      8.79   8.06    −5.78    27.93       87.36     997
     21           24         —       —        —        —             —        —      6.38   7.00    −7.71    25.17       81.77   1,064


    All                    5.92    8.15   −14.65    29.07         76.29     2,163    9.82   8.59   −10.26    34.56       88.65   6,116
                                               Table 6

Results from Panel Regressions of Average Premia on the Difference in Treasury Security
Volatilities. This table reports the results from regressing the monthly averages of the price premia (ex-
pressed as cents per $100 par amount) on the difference between the standard deviation of daily changes in
the corresponding matched-maturity Treasury bill or note and the standard deviation of daily changes in
the price of the FRN (the difference in standard deviations is expressed as cents per $100 par amount). The
regression includes monthly fixed effects. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West (1987) heteroskedas-
ticity and autocorrelation consistent estimate of the covariance matrix (four and five lags, respectively). The
superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the five-percent level. The sample period is monthly from February
2014 to March 2018.



                                         Relative to Treasury Bills           Relative to Treasury Notes

     Variable                            Coefficient       t−Stat             Coefficient        t−Stat


     Difference in Volatilities               7.2370          4.71                2.2892            6.26


     Monthly Fixed Effects                                     Yes                                   Yes

     Adj. R2                                                 0.576                                 0.643
     N                                                         105                                   286
                                               Table 7

Results from Regressions of Changes in Premia on Explanatory Variables. This table reports the
results from regressing weekly changes in the FRN/T-bill and FRN/T-note indexes of premia on changes
in the indicated explanatory variables. Premia are expressed in basis points. Repo Spread denotes the
weekly change in the difference between the three-month repo rate and the secondary market three-month
Treasury bill rate. Libor denotes the weekly change in the three-month Libor rate. One-Year Rate denotes
the weekly change in the Treasury one-year constant maturity rate. OIS Spread denotes the weekly change
in the spread between the three-month Libor rate and the three-month overnight index swap rate. VIX
Volatility Index denotes the weekly change in the VIX index of S&P 500 index volatility. Inflation Volatility
Index denotes the weekly change in the implied basis point volatility for a ten-year inflation straddle with
exercise price equal to two percent. Treasury Money Market Flows denotes the weekly net flow of funds into
Treasury money market funds. Non-Treasury Money Market Flows denotes the weekly net flow of funds into
non-Treasury money market funds. Treasury and non-Treasury money market flow of funds are expressed
in billions of dollars. Treasury CDS denotes the weekly change in the two-year Treasury CDS spread. CDS
denotes the weekly change in an index of CDS spreads for major Wall Street dealers. Dollar denotes the
weekly change in the Bloomberg U.S. Dollar Index which is calculated by averaging the exchange rates
between the dollar and major world currencies. Precious Metals denotes the weekly change in an index of
prices for precious metals including gold, silver, and platinum. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West
(1987) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent estimate of the covariance matrix (four lags). The
superscript ∗ denotes significance at the ten-percent level; the superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the
five-percent level. The sample period is weekly from January 31, 2014 to March 29, 2018.



                                                   FRN/T-Bill Index               FRN/T-Note Index

    Variable                                     Coefficient     t−Stat          Coefficient    t−Stat


    Intercept                                        0.0642        0.26             0.0724        0.44
    Repo Spread                                     −0.0215       −0.82            −0.0212       −1.51
    Libor                                           −0.2487       −1.28            −0.2031       −1.33
    One-Year Rate                                    0.3482        3.91∗∗           0.2505        3.88∗∗
    OIS Spread                                       0.4064        2.20∗∗           0.4103        2.85∗∗
    VIX Volatility Index                             0.1885        2.33∗∗           0.1225        2.21∗∗
    Inflation Volatility Index                       0.0313        2.17∗∗           0.0285        2.64∗∗
    Treasury Money Market Flows                      0.0003        0.80             0.0004        2.26∗∗
    Non-Treasury Money Market Flows                  0.0001        1.21             0.0001        1.87∗
    Treasury CDS                                    −0.0195       −0.15            −0.1183       −1.12
    Dealer CDS                                       0.0399        0.91             0.0119        0.36
    Dollar Index                                    −0.1107       −0.45             0.0420        0.24
    Precious Metals                                  0.0001        0.01             0.0019        0.39


    Adj. R2                                                       0.145                           0.145
    N                                                               163                             216
           ONLINE APPENDIX




  FLOATING RATE MONEY?      THE STABILITY

PREMIUM IN TREASURY FLOATING RATE NOTES




           Matthias Fleckenstein
           Francis A. Longstaff
A.1 Data Sources


Table A1 provides a description of the data and variables used in the study along
with their definitions and corresponding sources for the data.



A.2 The U.S. Treasury Floating Rate Note Market


The U.S. Treasury floating rate note (FRN) market had its inception in January
2014. FRNs are issued with a maturity of two years and their coupon cash flows
are indexed to the most recent 13-week Treasury bill auction high rate plus a con-
stant spread (for details, see https://www.treasurydirect.gov/instit/marketables
/frn/frn.htm). The Treasury auctions FRNs every three months in January,
April, July, and October, and reopens each FRN issue in the two subsequent
months after original issuance. When an FRN is reopened, it has the same ma-
turity date, spread, and coupon dates as the original issue, but a different issue
date and issue price. Original issue offerings are issued on the last calendar day
of a month, or the first business day thereafter. Reopening offerings are issued
on the last Friday of a month, or the first business day thereafter.

     Similar to Treasury notes, FRNs are auctioned using a single-price auction
mechanism in which each competitive bidder specifies a discount margin, ex-
pressed in tenths of a basis point, which can be positive, zero, or negative. The
Treasury first accepts in full all noncompetitive tenders up to $5 million per sub-
mitter. The Treasury announces its auction schedule at https://www.treasury
direct.gov /instit/instit.htm?upcoming. Competitive tenders are accepted in or-
der of discount margin, from the lowest discount margin to the highest discount
margin at which the quantity of awarded bids reaches the offering amount. The
Treasury awards FRNs to both noncompetitive and competitive bidders at the
price equivalent to the highest accepted discount margin at which bids were
accepted. Thus, all bidders receive the same discount margin at the highest
accepted bid. For example, if 80.15 percent is the announced percentage at
the highest discount margin, the Treasury awards 80.15 percent of the amount of
each bid at that discount margin. The usual Treasury proration rules apply if the
amount of tenders at the highest accepted discount margin exceeds the amount
of the remaining offering amount. The Treasury’s auction rules are available at
https://www.treasurydirect.gov/ instit/statreg/auctreg/auctreg.htm.

    FRNs pay quarterly coupon cash flows on the last calendar day of the month
from the dated date to and including the maturity date. The dollar amount of
the coupon payment is the cumulative total of daily interest which accrues at


                                        1
a rate equal to the most recent 13-week Treasury bill auction high yield plus a
spread which is determined at the initial auction. The spread on a FRN at the
initial auction is set at the highest accepted discount margin in that auction,
and when an FRN is reopened, the spread remains equal to the spread set at the
initial auction. The daily interest accrual rate is floored at zero percent and at
maturity, FRNs are redeemed at their par amount.
     For a given time t, let rt denote the 13-week Treasury bill auction high yield
from the last T-bill auction at least two business days prior to time t (expressed
as a money-market equivalent yield). Let S denote the spread on a FRN which
is determined at the initial auction and expressed in tenths of a basis point. The
conversion formulas are published in the Treasury’s Uniform Offering Circular
at https://www.treasurydirect.gov/instit/statreg/auctreg/2013-18178.pdf. Ac-
crued interest at time t per dollar of par amount is max [0, (rt + S)/360] . When
the auction rate from the most recent 13-week Treasury bill auction becomes ef-
fective within two business days of a coupon date (lock-out period), then interest
on the days prior to the coupon payment accrues at the auction rate from the
auction prior to the start of the lock-out period. Each accrual period is from and
including last coupon cash flow date (or the dated date) to, but excluding the
next coupon payment date (or the maturity date). FRNs follow the actual/360
daycount convention. The dated date is always the last calendar day of a month.

     The first Treasury FRN was auctioned on January 29, 2014 and issued on
January 31, 2014. The size of the FRN market has grown significantly since its
inception. As of the end of March 2018, the total FRN dollar amount outstanding
is $334 billion which represents 2.28 percent of total marketable Treasury debt,
3.75 percent of total Treasury notes, and 16.07 percent of the total amount
of Treasury bills outstanding. The total par amount of FRNs issued from the
inception of the market through March 2018 is $720.969 billion. Table 4 of the
paper shows the total par amount for each of the FRN issues auctioned through
March 2018.


A.3 The Basis Swap Market
In a standard interest rate swap, counterparties exchange a stream of quarterly
floating payments tied to three-month Libor for a stream of fixed semiannual pay-
ments. In many cases, however, a counterparty may prefer floating rate payments
to be linked to a different index than three-month Libor. Rather than introduc-
ing fixed-for-floating swaps using a variety of floating indexes (which would likely
be far less liquid than a standard swap), an important side market has emerged
which is known as the basis swap market. In a basis swap, counterparties ex-
change one stream of floating cash flows for another stream of floating cash flows.
For example, in a three-month/six-month Libor basis swap, a counterparty pays

                                         2
three-month Libor quarterly in exchange for receiving six-month Libor semian-
nually (plus a fixed basis swap spread). Combining a three-month/six-month
Libor basis swap with a standard interest rate swap results in a structure with
the same cash flows as if the original floating coupon payments for the interest
rate swap were tied to six-month Libor. The basis swap market allows coun-
terparties to exchange streams of floating cash flows tied to any of the following
indexes: one-month Libor, three-month Libor, six-month Libor, the Treasury bill
rate, the overnight index swap rate (OIS), the prime rate, and others.

      A Treasury bill basis swap is a floating-for-floating exchange of (netted) cash
flows where the quarterly cash flows on both legs reference a distinct floating rate
index. One leg of the basis swap pays quarterly cash flows that are calculated
from the Treasury bill secondary market rate over the previous three months plus
a market-determined spread F , and the other leg pays quarterly cash flows based
on the three-month Libor rate set at the beginning of the three-month period.
The reason for the market-determined spread is that the streams of floating cash
flows from the two legs of a basis swap need not have the same present value.
Thus, to set the present values of the two legs equal to each other, the basis
swap requires that one leg of the swap pay a fixed spread F in addition to the
floating cash flows. This fixed spread is known as the basis swap spread. Market
prices in the basis swap markets are quoted in terms of the basis swap spread. To
illustrate, the basis swap spread for a 13-week Treasury bill/three-month Libor
basis swap with a two-year horizon was 41.59 basis points on February 23, 2018.
Thus, a counterparty in this basis swap would pay quarterly floating payments
based on the 13-week Treasury bill yield plus a fixed spread of 41.59 basis points,
and receive quarterly floating payments based on the three-month Libor rate. To
provide some perspective, Table A2 reports summary statistics for the 13-week
Treasury bill/three-month Libor basis swap spreads for various tenors.
      Suppose that an investor enters into a Treasury bill basis swap with notional
amount of one at time zero, agreeing to pay the T-bill rate plus a fixed spread,
and to receive three-month Libor Lt each quarter until the contract ends. Cash
flows are calculated using standard money-market convention (actual/360). At
time zero, no cash flows are exchanged. After the first three-month period at time
t = 0.25, the investor pays the cumulative daily simple interest between t = 0
and t = 0.25 from the secondary market Treasury bill yields plus the spread. To
illustrate, suppose that at time t, the Treasury bill secondary market rate is rt .
The simple interest at t is then rt /360. At the end of the three-month period, the
             Pt=.25
cash flow is 0       rt /360+0.25×F . Thus, the end-of-quarter cash flow X0.25 on
the T-bill leg is essentially an arithmetic average of daily Treasury bill secondary
market yields from the beginning to the time of the cash flow plus the spread. In
exchange for this payment, the investor receives a cash flow of 0.25 × L0 at time
t = 0.25 which is calculated from the three-month Libor rate set at t = 0, the

                                         3
beginning of the three-month period, and similarly for all subsequent quarters
until the swap ends.
     After executing the Treasury bill basis swap, the investor receives Libor cash
flows on a quarterly basis. Finally, in order to replicate the semi-annual fixed
cash flows of a Treasury note, the investor enters into a plain-vanilla interest
rate swap in which the investor pays quarterly Libor and receives semi-annual
fixed cash flows. The interest rate swap market is one of the largest and most
liquid financial markets in existence. Around the start of our sample period
in 2014, the total notional amount of outstanding contracts was $ 563 trillion,
representing 81 percent of the over-the-counter global derivatives market, and
the gross market value of interest rate derivatives totaled $ 13 trillion. See,
OTC Derivatives Statistics at End-June 2014 at https://www.bis.org/publ/otc
hy1411.pdf. The net result of taking a combined position in a Treasury bill basis
swap and a standard interest rate swap is that the investor receives semi-annual
fixed cash flows which is precisely the cash flow that would be received from a
plain-vanilla fixed-rate semi-annual coupon bond. To provide some perspective,
Table A3 reports summary statistics for the 13-week Treasury bill/fixed swap
spreads for various tenors.



A.4 Swapping FRN Cash Flows into Fixed Cash Flows


To convey the intuition, we illustrate how FRNs can be swapped into fixed rate
coupon debt using a simple example. In doing so, we abstract from some im-
plementation details, and defer the discussion of these details to section A.4.1.
Our methodology essentially boils down to a simple two-step approach. First,
we use prices from the active basis swap market to convert the underlying in-
dex for the stream of quarterly floating coupon payments on the FRN from the
13-week Treasury bill yield to three-month Libor. Second, we use prices from
the standard Libor interest rate swap market to convert the resulting stream of
Libor coupon payments into semiannual fixed rate payments.

     Consider an investor who purchases a two-year FRN. Table A4 shows the
timing and amounts of the cash flows received by this investor, where Xt denotes
the floating 13-week Treasury bill index on which quarterly coupon payments are
based, and S denotes the fixed spread for the floating rate note. As described
in section A.3, there is a large and actively-traded interest rate swap market in
which financial institutions can exchange a stream of floating cash flows for a
stream of fixed cash flows. In a standard swap, the floating leg of the swap is
tied to the three-month Libor rate. However, there is also an active basis swap
market that allows the institution to exchange a wide variety of floating indexes

                                        4
for a stream of fixed cash flows. Thus, to swap out the floating exposure to the
Treasury bill index Xt , the investor simply needs to enter into a zero-cost interest
rate swap in which he pays the index Xt and receives a market-determined fixed
coupon rate of F .


A.4.1 Methodology
This section describes implementation details of our methodology to swap FRN
cash flows into fixed cash flows. Before swapping the floating cash flows from
a FRN into fixed cash flows, it is important to first take into account the dif-
ferences in the daycount conventions between FRNs, basis swaps, Libor interest
rate swaps, and Treasury notes. In particular, basis swaps use the actual/360
daycount convention and both legs have quarterly cash flows. Libor interest rate
swaps use the actual/360 daycount convention for the quarterly cash flows on
the floating leg and use the 30/360 daycount convention for the semiannual cash
flows on the fixed leg. FRNs accrue interest using the actual/360 daycount con-
vention and have quarterly cash flows. In contrast, Treasury notes accrue interest
using the actual/actual daycount convention and have semiannual coupon cash
flows. We control for these differences by converting all rates and spreads to
actual/actual daycounts.
      The first step in swapping the floating cash flows of a FRN into fixed cash
flows is to enter into a T-Bill/Libor basis swap with the same maturity as the
FRN. In this basis swap, we receive the floating Libor rate and pay the floating
coupon from the FRN plus a fixed basis swap spread. The combination of the
FRN and the basis swap creates a synthetic FRN with floating cash flows based
on Libor instead of the T-bill rate. In doing this, a small adjustment is needed
to the basis swap spread. Specifically, the quarterly FRN coupon cash flows are
the cumulative total arithmetic sum of daily accrued interest calculated from
the most-recent 13-week Treasury bill auction high rate. The quarterly cash
flows on a Treasury bill basis swap, however, are calculated by accruing daily
simple interest using the 13-week Treasury bill secondary market rate. Thus,
the two Treasury bill indexes are slightly different. We verify, however, that the
differences between the auction high rates and the secondary market Treasury
bill rates are on the order of a small fraction of a basis point. Specifically, the
average weekly difference between the most-recent Treasury bill auction high
yield and the secondary market yield for the 2009-2013 pre-sample period is
only 0.226 basis points in money market terms. Although very small, we adjust
the Treasury basis swap rate by this difference. Using alternative pre-sample
windows has virtually no impact on our results.

    The second step in swapping the floating cash flows for a FRN into fixed
cash flows is to enter into a standard Libor interest rate swap in which we pay

                                         5
floating Libor and receive fixed coupon payments. The net effect of entering
this swap is to replace the stream of floating Libor coupon payments from the
synthetic FRN created in the first step with a stream of quarterly fixed coupon
payments. Thus, the result of these two steps is to transform the original FRN
into a synthetic fixed rate Treasury note, where the coupon rate is determined
by the total of the original FRN spread, the fixed basis swap spread, and the
interest rate swap rate.

     When the maturity of the FRN is an integer multiple of a quarter, then
the two-step procedure described above is straightforward. For other maturities,
however, we need to make a small adjustment for the stub period. We do this
by simple interpolation. To illustrate, consider a 13-month swap and let today
be time t = 0. The swap has five cash flows at times t = 1, 4, 7, 10, 13 months.
At each of these times, we pay the average Treasury bill rate over the prior three
months, Xt , where Xt is the average Treasury bill rate from time t − 3 months
to time t. In exchange, we receive a fixed spread, say s13m . Next, consider a
12-month and a 15-month swap. In a 12-month swap, we make four payments
Xt at times t = 3, 6, 9, 12 months and receive four fixed cash flows s12m . In a
15-month swap, we make five payments Xt at times t = 3, 6, 9, 12, 15 months and
receive five fixed cash flows s15m . Neither the 12-month nor the 15-month swap
has time t = 0 cash flows.

      Now, suppose we have a modified 12-month swap in which we exchange cash
flows at time zero. Specifically, at time t = 0, we pay X0 and receive the spread
s̃12m . This swap has five cash flows at times t = 0, 3, 6, 9, 12 months. Thus, the
13-month swap is a five-payment swap with the first cash flows at time t = 1
month. The 15-month swap is a five-payment swap with the first cash flow at
time t = 3 months and the modified 12-month swap is a five-payment swap with
first cash flow at time t = 0. In order to find s13m , we simply interpolate between
s15m and s̃12m .

    The spread s̃12m is easy to determine simply by setting the present values of
cash flows from the 12-month and modified 12-month swaps equal to each other.
The spread s̃12m is
                     L(0) − T (0) + s12m (D(3) + D(6) + D(9) + D(12))
           s̃12m =
                             1 + D(3) + D(6) + D(9) + D(12)

where D(t) denotes the discount factor for times t = 3, 6, 9, 12 months. The stub
adjustments for other swap tenors are analogous.
     To compare the yield to maturity of the swapped fixed-coupon FRN to the
yield of a matched-maturity Treasury note, we convert the quarterly fixed cash
flows from the swapped FRN to semi-annual cash flows with dates that precisely

                                         6
match those of the Treasury note. The swapped FRN yield minus the Treasury
note yield is the measure of the yield premium.
     We also compare Treasury note prices to the prices of the swapped FRNs.
For price comparisons, however, we account for differences in coupon rates of
the matched-maturity pairs by entering into positions in Treasury STRIPS. The
difference between the price on the swapped two-year FRN note and the price on
the matched-coupon/matched-maturity two-year Treasury note (swapped FRN
minus the Treasury note price) is the measure of the price premium.


A.4.2 A Specific Example
To illustrate how an FRN can be swapped into a synthetic fixed rate bonds, con-
sider an investor who purchases the first FRN (Cusip 912828WK2) on February
3, 2014. This two-year FRN was issued on January 31, 2014 with maturity of
January 31, 2016 and fixed spread of S = 4.563 basis points (expressed using
the actual/actual daycount convention). The quarterly floating rate cash flows
are on 4/30/2014, 7/31/2014, 10/31/2014, 1/31/2015, 4/30/2015, 7/31/2015,
10/31/2015, and 1/31/2016. On February 3, 2014, the market price of the FRN
is P = 100.004 and accrued interest is 0.001111196.
     On February 3, 2014, the spread on a Treasury bill basis swap to swap
quarterly floating Treasury bill cash flows into three-month Libor cash flows
is FB = 25.970 basis points. Since Treasury bill basis swaps pay cash flows
calculated from the secondary market 13-week T-bill rate and Treasury FRN
pay cash flows calculated from the auction high yield of the most recently issued
13-week T-bill, we adjust the market swap rate by the average difference between
the secondary market and auction high yields during the period from 2009 to
January 2014 of 0.226 basis points. We note, however, that this adjustment is
very robust to the choice of estimation window. Thus, the spread on the Treasury
bill basis swap is 26.196 basis points.

     On February 3, 2014, the fixed rate on a two-year Libor interest rate with
quarterly cash flows that matches the maturity of the FRN is FL = 43.260 basis
points. By entering into both swaps, we swap the quarterly floating rate cash
flows from the Treasury FRN into fixed cash flows at a fixed rate of F = 17.064
basis points. As a result, the investor receives a quarterly net cash flow of
S + F = 17.064 + 4.563 = 21.63 cents per $100 notional. Since Treasury FRNs
pay quarterly cash flows and Treasury Notes have semiannual cash flows, we re-
annuitize the quarterly coupon cash flows to semiannual coupon cash flows. The
equivalent semiannual coupon rate is 21.793 basis points. Since, the swapped
floating rate note is equivalent to a semiannual fixed rate bond, we can calculate
its yield to maturity of 21.591 basis points using standard methods.


                                        7
     On February 3, 2014, the matched-maturity two-year 0.375 percent Trea-
sury note (Cusip 912828B41) has a price of 100.15625 with accrued interest of
0.0031077. It has a yield to maturity of 29.626 basis points. The yield difference
between the swapped FRN and the matched-maturity Treasury note is 8.035
basis points which implies that the FRN trades at a premium relative to the
Treasury note.
     We also calculate the price premium. To make a direct comparison be-
tween the swapped FRN and the matched-maturity Treasury note, we adjust
for the difference in coupon rates. This is straightforward because there is a
large and liquid market in Treasury STRIPS. For each coupon payment date, we
simply buy a small notional amount of Treasury STRIPS to make the coupon
cash flows exactly equal. On February 3, 2014 the investor pays 31.32 cents for
this adjustment. The swapped FRN that exactly matches the cash flows of the
matched-maturity Treasury note has a (full) market price of 100.31896. The price
the investor pays for the matched-maturity Treasury note is 100.15936. Hence,
the price premium the investor pays for the Treasury FRN is 16.09 cents.



A.5 Robustness to Swap Mispricing


To test whether the estimated FRN premia might be driven by the basis swap
and/or interest rate swap data that we use in swapping the floating FRN cash
flows into fixed, we apply our methodology to two alternative classes of floating
rate notes—pairs of floating/fixed rate corporate notes and Federal Farm Credit
Bank (FFCB) securities. We use two sets of securities to show that neither
the Treasury bill basis swaps, nor the plain-vanilla Libor interest rate swaps are
driving the near-money premium in FRN prices.

     First, the floating rate cash flows on corporate FRNs are based on 3-month
Libor rates. We apply the same interest rate swaps to swap these notes into
fixed rate bonds. Analogous to how we compute FRN premia, we then compare
the yields of the swapped notes to those of matched-maturity fixed rate notes
from the same firm. Finding no evidence of statistically significant premia would
suggest that the standard Libor interest rate swaps we use in our main analysis
are fairly priced.

     Second, the floating rate cash flows on FFCB notes are indexed to 13-week
Treasury bills. Analogous to how we swap Treasury FRNs into fixed rate debt,
we first enter into a Treasury bill basis swap and then swap the floating Libor leg
from the basis swap into fixed using plain-vanilla interest rate swaps. In doing
so, we use not only the same basis and interest rate swap prices as in the main

                                        8
text, but we also keep all adjustments that we describe in Appendix A.4 fixed.
Again, finding no statistically significant premia in the prices of FFCB floating
rate notes would suggest that the Treasury bill basis swaps that we use in our
main analysis are not driving our FRN stability premia estimates.

     Our data on floating and fixed rate corporate debt consist of 38 matched-
maturity pairs of two-year floating/fixed rate corporate notes during the 2014 to
2018 period from Amgen, Apple, Berkshire Hathaway, Caterpillar, Chevron, CVS
Health, Daimler, Discovery, Ford Motor, Gilead Sciences, Honeywell, HP, Honda
Motor, IBM, Met Life, PepsiCo, Shire, Toyota, Walmart, and Wells Fargo. We
identified these corporate notes in the Bloomberg system by searching for floating
rate corporate debt that was issued with two years to maturity during our sample
between 2014 and 2018 and for which there was a fixed rate note with the same
maturity. This criterion helps us to identify corporate debt that is similar in
terms of time to maturity and issuance dates to our set of Treasury FRNs.
     Our data on Federal Farm Credit notes consist of 32 pairs of two-year floating
and fixed rate notes during the 2014 to 2018 period. Similar to Treasury FRNs,
the floating rate notes pay quarterly coupon cash flows based on the 13-week
Treasury bill rate during the quarter plus a constant spread expressed in basis
points. For each of the 32 floating rate notes we identify a matching fixed rate
note that is closest in maturity to the floating rate issue.

     Table A5 shows summary statistics of the yield differences for the corporate
floating/fixed rate note pairs and for the FFCB floating/fixed rate pairs. As
shown, the average yield differences between the swapped two-year U.S. corporate
bonds and the matched-maturity fixed rate bonds of the same firm taken over
all 38 floating/fixed rate corporate bond pairs, is −0.13 basis points which is not
statistically significant. In addition, the median yield difference is only −0.06
basis points. Furthermore, the yield differences are nearly evenly divided between
positive and negative values; 50.35 percent of the yield differences are positive.
Thus, when we use the same plain-vanilla Libor interest rate swap data that we
use in estimating the stability premium in Treasury FRNs, we find no significant
differences between swapped floating rate and fixed rate corporate debt.
     Next, turning to the FFCB results, Table A5 shows that the average dif-
ference in yields across all pairs is small. In fact the average difference of -3.08
basis points has the opposite sign to the averages for the FRNs. This provides
additional evidence that the estimated premia for FRNs are not simply artifacts
of the mispricing of the swaps. It is important to reemphasize that we use not
only the same basis and interest rate swap prices as in the main text and apply
them to FFCB notes, but we also keep all adjustments that we describe in Ap-
pendix A.4 fixed. Again, finding no statistically significant premia in the prices
of FFCB floating rate notes suggests that the Treasury bill basis swaps and Libor

                                         9
interest rate swaps that we use in our main analysis are fairly priced. The lack of
statistically significant premia in corporate floating rate debt and FFCB notes,
provides additional evidence that the estimated premia for Treasury FRNs are
not simply artifacts of the mispricing of the swaps.




                                        10
                                                                Table A1

Data Definitions and Sources. This table summarizes the datasets used in this study. Frequency shows at what intervals the data are available.
Description and Source show the data source and its definition. All data are for the period from January 2014 through March 2018.


        Data                                      Frequency    Description and Source

  1     Treasury Floating Rate Note Prices        Daily        Two-year U.S. Treasury floating rate notes end-of-day closing mid, bid, and ask
                                                               prices, floating rate spreads, issue and maturity dates from the Bloomberg
                                                               system and from Thomson/Reuters Eikon.
  2     Treasury Floating Rate Reference Index    Daily        Two-year U.S. Treasury floating rate notes reference index. Treasury FRNs are
                                                               indexed to the most recent 13-week Treasury bill auction High Rate prior to the
                                                               lockout period, which is the highest accepted discount rate in a Treasury bill
                                                               auction. The U.S. Treasury publishes this index at https://www.treasurydirect.
                                                               gov/instit/annceresult/annceresult frn.htm
  3     Treasury Note Prices                      Daily        Two-year U.S. Treasury notes end-of-day mid, bid, and ask prices, yields,
                                                               coupon rates, issue and maturity dates from the Bloomberg system and from
                                                               Thomson/Reuters Eikon.
  4     Treasury Bill Prices                      Daily        U.S. Treasury bill end-of-day mid, bid, and ask prices,
                                                               and issue and maturity dates from the Bloomberg system
                                                               and the U.S. Treasury auction tables. Data consists of
                                                               Treasury bills with tenors of 4-, 13-, 26-, and 52-weeks to maturity.
  5     Treasury Auction Data                     Monthly      Two-year U.S. Treasury floating rate notes, two-year Treasury notes and Treasury
                                                               bill auction results from the website of U.S. Treasury at
                                                               https://www.treasurydirect.gov/instit/annceresult/press/press.htm. For Treasury
                                                               floating rate notes, data are the floating rate auction spread, the auction high
                                                               discount margin, and the floating rate index determination date. For two-year
                                                               Treasury notes, the auction data are the coupon rate and the auction high yield
                                                               and for 4-, 13-, 26- and 52-week Treasury bills the auction high yield.
                                                               In addition, the auction results include prices and accrued interest at auction,
                                                               auction announcement and auction dates, dated dates, issue dates, and maturity
                                                               dates, amounts bid by competitive and non-competitive bidders, amounts issued,
                                                               and bid-to-cover ratios.
  6     Repo Rates                                Daily        General collateral overnight, and one-week, two-week, three-weeks, one month to
                                                               three month term repo rates from the Bloomberg system.
  7     Treasury Strips                           Daily        Zero coupon rates of U.S. Treasury Strips for six months, one year, and two years
                                                               to maturity from the Bloomberg system.
  8     Discount Function                         Daily        Discount function out to two years calculated from GC repo rates and U.S.
                                                               Treasury Strips data as described in Liu, Longstaff, Mandell (2006).
  9     Treasury Bill Basis Swap Spreads          Daily        Thirteen-week US Treasury bill yield into three-month Libor basis swap spreads.
                                                               Spreads on US Treasury basis swaps with quarterly cash flows are quoted on the
                                                               Bloomberg system for tenors of 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, and 24 months.
  10    Libor Interest Rate Swap Spreads          Daily        Three-month Libor into fixed interest rate swap rates. Cash flows on the fixed
                                                               leg are semi-annual, and the floating leg pays three-month Libor each quarter.
  11    Thirteen-week Treasury Bill Yields        Daily        Discount yields of the on-the-run 13-week U.S. Treasury bill.
                                                Table A1 - Continued


     Data                            Frequency      Description and Source

12   Treasury CMT Rate               Daily          One-year constant maturity Treasury rate from Federal Reserve H.15 Selected
                                                    Interest Rates Release.
13   OIS Spread                      Daily          The spread between three-month Libor and the three-month U.S. Overnight
                                                    Indexed Swap (OIS) rate.
14   Libor                           Daily          The 3-month London Interbank Offered rate from the Bloomberg system.
15   VIX                             Daily          The CBOE Volatility Index of option-implied volatilties from S&P 500 index
                                                    options, obtained from the Bloomberg system.
16   Treasury Volatility             Daily          The Merrill Lynch MOVE index of implied basis point volatilities on one-month
                                                    Treasury options from the Bloomberg system.
17   Inflation                       Monthly        The U.S. non-seasonally-adjusted Consumer Price Index of All Urban Consumers
                                                    (CPI-U) published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
18   Inflation Volatility            Daily          Implied basis point volatility for a two-year inflation option straddle with exercise
                                                    price equal to two percent. The straddle is a long position in a zero-coupon infla-
                                                    tion cap and inflation floor with two-year maturity and strike price equal to two
                                                    percent. Data obtained from the Bloomberg system.
19   Precious Metals Index           Daily          The return on the UBS Bloomberg CMCI Precious Metals constant maturity
                                                    total return index of gold, silver, and platinum futures contracts obtained from
                                                    the Bloomberg system.
20   Dollar Index                    Daily          The ICE index of the value of the U.S. dollar against a basket of major world
                                                    currencies obtained from the Bloomberg system.
21   Money Market Flows              Biweekly       Total net assets and fund flows of U.S. Government (USS) and U.S. Treasury
                                                    Money Market Funds (UST) from Thomson/Reuters Eikon. These funds invest
                                                    99.5% of total assets in cash, U.S. government securities and/or repurchase
                                                    agreements that are collateralized solely by government securities or cash with a
                                                    weighted average maturity of sixty days or less, and keep constant net asset value.
                                                    Data include closed- and open-end funds and ETFs.
22   Treasury CDS                    Daily          The two-year sovereign credit default swap spread on U.S. Treasury debt from
                                                    the Bloomberg system.
23   Dealer CDS                      Daily          The five-year credit default spread on primary dealers to the New York Fed.
                                                    The list of primary dealers is available at https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/
                                                    primarydealers.
24   Floating Rate Corporate Bonds   Daily          Two-year U.S. corporate floating rate notes end-of-day closing mid, bid, and ask
                                                    prices, floating rate spreads, issue and maturity dates from the Bloomberg
                                                    system. All bonds are issued between January 2014 and March 2018, have two-
                                                    years maturity at issue, no embedded options, and pay off par at maturity.
25   FFCB Bonds                      Daily          Federal Farm Credit Bank (FFCB) floating rate notes end-of-day closing mid, bid,
                                                    and ask prices, floating rate spreads, issue and maturity dates from the Bloomberg
                                                    system. All FFCB bonds are indexed to three-month Treasury bills, are issued
                                                    between January 2014 and March 2018, have no embedded options, and pay off par
                                                    at maturity.
                                                Table A2



Summary Statistics for Treasury Bill Basis Swaps. This table presents summary statistics for Treasury
bill basis swaps. Treasury bill basis swaps exchange the floating 13-week Treasury bill market rate plus a
spread F for three-month Libor on a quarterly basis over the life of the contract. The spread F is annualized
and measured in basis points. The column titled Months to Maturity lists the tenors of the basis swap
contracts in months. The columns titled Mean, Median, Min and Max show the average, median, smallest,
and largest spreads F over the sample period. The column titled Std Dev shows the sample standard
deviation of F . N denotes the number of observations. The sample period is daily from January 2014 to
March 2018.



      Months to
       Maturity              Mean         Std Dev         Min        Median          Max            N


               3              29.45          11.57       12.59          23.93       70.81       1,085
               6              30.25          10.52       14.73          25.01       63.34       1,085
               9              30.48          10.05       15.72          25.53       56.65       1,085
              12              31.13           9.74       16.29          26.67       55.92       1,085
              15              31.75           9.42       16.68          27.88       55.75       1,085
              18              32.36           9.13       16.90          29.08       55.58       1,085
              21              33.03           9.15       17.28          29.89       55.42       1,085
              24              33.69           9.21       17.66          30.61       55.26       1,085
                                                Table A3



Summary Statistics for Treasury Bill Interest Rate Swaps. This table presents summary statistics
for swap rates from taking a position in a Treasury bill basis swap and simultaneously executing a standard
3-month Libor interest rate swap with the same maturity. The combined swap is a floating-for-fixed swap
that converts quarterly floating cash flows from the Treasury FRN into semi-annual fixed cash flows over
the life of the swap. The rate on the floating leg is the 13-week Treasury bill index rate. The table shows
summary statistics for the rate on fixed leg denoted by F . The spread F is annualized and measured in basis
points. The columns titled Mean, Median, Min, and Max show the average, median, smallest, and largest
rates F over the sample period. The column titled Std Dev shows the sample standard deviation of the fixed
swap rate. The column titled Months to Maturity lists the tenors of the swap contracts in months and N
denotes the number of observations. The sample period is daily from January 2014 to March 2018.



      Months to
       Maturity              Mean        Std Dev         Min        Median          Max            N


               3             43.74          47.47        0.71         25.87       165.28       1,085
               6             47.84          50.16        1.33         29.34       173.50       1,085
               9             52.71          51.51        0.44         33.57       182.82       1,085
              12             57.49          52.12        3.39         35.99       189.60       1,085
              15             62.57          51.84        4.94         40.08       197.97       1,085
              18             68.01          51.24        7.63         44.77       205.68       1,085
              21             73.52          50.35       11.98         51.33       211.27       1,085
              24             79.09          49.32       17.24         57.22       216.14       1,085
                                               Table A4



Example of the Cash Flows from Swapping a Floating Rate Note into Fixed. This table illustrates
the cash flows from swapping a two-year FRN into fixed. P denotes the current market price of a two-year
FRN, Xt denotes the floating 13-week Treasury bill index rate, and S denotes the fixed spread on the FRN.
F denotes the market-determined fixed rate on the interest rate swap. The column titled Timing Of The
Cash Flow shows the time at which cash flows on the FRN are paid or received. The column titled FRN
Cash Flow shows the cash flows paid by a FRN. The column titled Swap Cash Flows shows the cash flows
from a swap in which the investor pays quarterly floating rate cash flows and received quarterly fixed cash
flows. The column titled Net Cash Flow shows the sum of the FRN cash flows and the swap cash flows.



          Timing
          Of The                 FRN                        Swap                  Net
          Cash Flow              Cash Flow                  Cash Flow             Cash Flow


          0.00                   −P                         0                     −P
          0.25                   X0.25 + S                  F   − X0.25           F +S
          0.50                   X0.50 + S                  F   − X0.50           F +S
          0.75                   X0.75 + S                  F   − X0.75           F +S
          1.00                   X1.00 + S                  F   − X1.00           F +S
          1.25                   X1.25 + S                  F   − X1.25           F +S
          1.50                   X1.50 + S                  F   − X1.50           F +S
          1.75                   X1.75 + S                  F   − X1.75           F +S
          2.00                   X2.00 + S + 100            F   − X2.00           F + S + 100
                                                               Table A5



Summary Statistics for the Corporate and Federal Farm Credit Bank Bond Premia. The first row labeled Corporate presents
summary statistics for the average premia in corporate floating rate notes measured relative to fixed rate notes of the same firm. The premia
are computed as the difference between the yield on the fixed rate note and the yield on the swapped corporate floating rate note. Yield
differences are measured in basis points. A positive yield difference implies that the yield on the corporate fixed rate note is higher than the
yield on the swapped floating rate note. The second row labeled FFCB presents summary statistics for the average premia in Federal Farm
Credit Bank (FFCB) notes measured relative to FFCB fixed rate notes. The premia are computed as the difference between the yield on the
fixed rate FFCB note and the yield on the swapped floating rate FFCB note. Yield differences are measured in basis points. A positive yield
difference implies that the yield on the fixed rate FFCB note is higher than the yield on the swapped floating rate FFCB note. Std Dev denotes
the standard deviation. N denotes the number of observations. The sample period is daily from January 31, 2014 to March 29, 2018.



                      Number                                                                                   Percent
                      of Pairs             Mean        Std Dev            Min        Median         Max        Positive                N


     Corporate              38             −0.13            9.14       −22.19          −0.06       21.41          50.35             6,637


         FFCB               32             −3.08          25.64       −129.04          −9.05       71.44          39.64             4,659
