                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE CRUCIAL ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE
                               CHANGE

                                       Christophe Gouel
                                        David Laborde

                                      Working Paper 25221
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25221


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2018




The authors are grateful to Eddy Bekkers, Antoine Bouet, Jonathan Colmer, Dave Donaldson,
Alexandre Gohin, Thomas Hertel, Chantal Le Mouel, Will Martin, Obie Porteous, and seminar
audiences at the FAO conference on "Climate change, agricultural trade, and food security", 2017
IATRC annual meeting, NBER Trade and Agriculture conference, INRA-AgroParisTech Public
Policies in the Context of Global Changes Conference, Middlebury College, North Carolina State
University, Paris School of Economics, University of California, Berkeley and Davis, and US
International Trade Commission for helpful comments. Christophe Gouel thanks the INRA-Cirad
metaprogramme GloFoodS and the Convergence Institute CLAND for research support. This
work has been undertaken as a part of the CGIAR Research Programs on Policies, Institutions,
and Markets (PIM), which is led by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and
funded by the CGIAR Fund Donors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Christophe Gouel and David Laborde. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Crucial Role of International Trade in Adaptation to Climate Change
Christophe Gouel and David Laborde
NBER Working Paper No. 25221
November 2018
JEL No. D58,F18,Q17,Q54,R14

                                          ABSTRACT

Climate change effects on agricultural yields will be uneven over the world with a few countries,
mostly in high latitudes, that may experience gains, while most will see average yield decrease.
This paper aims at quantifying the role of international trade in attenuating the effects of climate
change by allowing the expression of the new climate-induced pattern of comparative advantages.
To do this, we develop a quantitative general equilibrium trade model where the representation of
acreage and land use choices is inspired from modern Ricardian trade models but also consistent
with theoretical and empirical literature on land use choices. The model is calibrated on spatially
explicit information about potential yields before and after climate change coming from the
agronomic literature. The results show that the climate-induced yield changes generate large price
movements that incentivize adjustments in acreage and trade. The new trade pattern is very
different from the current one, showing the important role of trade flows in adapting to climate
change. This is confirmed by larger welfare losses from climate change when adjustments in
trade flows are constrained versus when they are not.


Christophe Gouel
INRA, Economie Publique
AgroParisTech
16 rue Claude Bernard
75005 Paris
France
christophe.gouel@inra.fr

David Laborde
1201 Eye St NW
Washington, DC 20005
United States
d.laborde@cgiar.org
1     Introduction
Climate change will widely impact agriculture, but this impact may be very different between countries. Northern
countries with currently cold temperatures and short growing seasons may benefit from higher yields in some crops,
while tropical countries may see reduced yields because of extreme temperatures (see table 1 for the extent of region-
and crop-specific variations). These differential changes in crop productivity correspond to changes in comparative
advantages; therefore, one could expect a large role of international trade in mitigating the negative effects of climate
change. The role that international trade may play is, however, a function of the size of the other adjustments, such as
the changes in crop choices or demand adjustments. For example, reallocating crop production within a country to
areas where yields increase, despite adverse effects on average, may go a long way in attenuating the initial yield loss.
Similarly, growing different crops, more adapted to the new climate, may contribute to reducing the adverse effects of
climate change if crop demand for feeding people and livestock can move easily between different crops. If these other
margins of adjustments are important enough, the disequilibrium between domestic supplies and demands caused by
climate change may be low and the role of international trade to balance it limited. If, on the other hand, reallocation of
crop area and demand substitutability between crops is limited, then international trade may play a large role in demand
and supply adjustments.

    Table 1: Climate change impacts on crop yields, accounting for carbon dioxide fertilization (percentage change)

Region                                                  Maize                Rice           Wheat              Other crops              All crops
Asia                                                    15.3                  3.9           −53.5                 −12.8                    −8.9
Commonwealth of Independent States                      −9.7                                 −1.5                  −2.0                    −2.3
Europe                                                 −15.1               51.5              −8.2                 −11.6                   −11.1
Latin America                                            3.3              −36.9             −35.3                 −38.9                   −35.4
Middle East and North Africa                           115.5              −87.2             −25.9                 −29.1                   −23.0
Northern America                                       −15.7                9.1              −5.1                 −18.4                   −16.2
Oceania                                                 20.9              −32.4             −40.0                 −16.7                   −19.8
Sub-Saharan Africa                                       0.0              −15.3             −76.3                 −42.6                   −38.7
World                                                    1.5                3.2             −33.3                 −17.2                   −13.2
Source: GAEZ project (IIASA/FAO, 2012), aggregated by crop and region based on the first-order contribution of each pixel to welfare (see sections 3
and 4 for details).


     The objective of this paper is to quantify the contribution of the various margins of adjustment to climate change in
agriculture and to understand how they affect the role of international trade. The question of the role of international
trade in climate change adaptation is above all an empirical question, whose answer depends on the flexibility of all
the other adjustment margins. Answering this question requires a theoretical framework that integrates the various
margins in a consistent way. This framework is a general equilibrium trade model with a focus on the agricultural sector.
The model builds on recent developments in the trade literature on assignment models (Costinot and Vogel, 2015) that
have been extended to agricultural settings in Costinot et al. (2016, hereafter CDS) and Sotelo (2015). It uses gridded
information from crop science on potential yields under the current climate and under climate change for calibration and
counterfactual simulations. Each margin of adjustment is parameterized separately in the model. On the demand side,
the parameters are the price elasticity of total agricultural demand and the elasticities of substitution between agricultural
products for food and feed demand. On the supply side, the parameters are the acreage elasticity and the yield elasticity
(in sensitivity analysis). Finally, the trade elasticity governs the flexibility to adjust between demand and supply. We rely
on the vast agricultural economics literature devoted to the estimation of supply and demand elasticities to propose a
realistic calibration for the model and to assess the uncertainty around these parameters for the sensitivity analysis.
     The question of the role of international trade in adaptation to climate change was recently addressed in CDS. Using
counterfactual simulations, they show that restricting acreages under climate change to stay the same as current acreages


                                                                         2
would severely aggravate the impacts of climate change, tripling the welfare losses, while forcing the exported share of
crops under climate change to be the same as the current share would affect welfare only marginally. So, they concluded
that acreage changes play an important adaptive role, while international trade adjustments play a limited role.
     This is a surprising result given the very heterogeneous effects of climate change illustrated in table 1. The present
paper challenges this conclusion. We show that CDS’ conclusion is related to their experimental design that involves a
very specific definition of the constrained trade counterfactual, and a combination of model assumptions and parameter
estimations leading to very elastic demand and supply for food, three times higher than usual estimates in the literature.
With large domestic adjustments, trade adjustments play a small role. On the modeling side, the demand function
uses a form implying a unit price elasticity for the entire food bundle, and it is assumed for supply that cropland can
be extended over “unused” lands without any other opportunity costs than the production costs, neglecting the fact
that lands not used for planting the crops under study have valuable uses and will not be used for these crops without
significant opportunity costs. For the estimations, they estimate the three key behavioral parameters of the model on
cross-sectional information using the restrictions imposed by the model equations. The simplicity of the model implies
that the mapping between theory and data leaves many gaps that likely explain the unusually elastic demand and supply
parameters. We discuss the challenges related to such an estimation bridging theory and data in the paper, which
motivates our choice of calibrating our model on a literature review. The inelasticity of agricultural good demand is a
well-established empirical result (Fally and Sayre, 2018; Roberts and Schlenker, 2013) and a necessary piece to explain
the observed large price changes in these markets for apparently small reductions in supply. Similarly, except for the few
tropical countries that still have a land frontier, future supply adjustments coming from changes in total agricultural land
(cropland plus pasture land) are expected to be marginal (Alexandratos and Bruinsma, 2012). This combination of
highly elastic demand and supply that is not supported empirically explains the limited role of international trade in
their study. If demand and supply for agricultural goods are very elastic, then a reduction in yields translates into a
reduction in final demand and an adjustment in acreages but does not change the relative prices enough to trigger large
trade changes.
     Our model framework presents the following elements. Three types of goods are represented: crops, livestock, and
a non-agricultural product. Though our modeling of livestock is very simple, the inclusion of livestock is crucial for the
question at hand through its use of pastures, the single largest human use of land, and through its demand for feed, which
is likely to be more elastic than food demand and so should constitute an influential margin of adjustment. The model
aims to represent all crops with a significant role in final demand and agricultural land use and thus includes 35 crops.
Representing almost all crops allows us to make a clear connection with the literature estimating calorie-price elasticities
(Subramanian and Deaton, 1996) and makes sure that the opportunity costs of converting land between its various
agricultural uses are accounted for. All goods are considered as imperfectly substitutable based on their countries of
origin and trade is subject to iceberg trade costs. Our modeling of acreage choice builds on CDS’ approach, itself
inspired from Eaton and Kortum’s (2002) modeling of trade in homogeneous goods (an acreage modeling also recently
used in Sotelo, 2015). Its key element is the assumption that potential yields follow an extreme value distribution, which
delivers a simple expression of acreage choice. In our land-use modeling, because we assume no production cost for
pasture, pasture can be considered as the default choice for lands where yields of other crops are low compared to their
production costs. We do not consider the possibility of extending agricultural land over forest or over protected areas,
contrary to CDS, because of the difficulty of properly modeling these decisions in a static framework (see Scott, 2014,
for the example of a dynamic modeling of land-use extension). However, given that we represent pastures and almost all
crops, we account for the bulk of the likely counterfactual land use changes.
     This paper can be linked to the recent literature evaluating gains from trade using a large class of models delivering
structural gravity equations (Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare, 2014). In this literature, Fally and Sayre (2018) and
Farrokhi (2017) show that accounting for the specificities of commodities leads to higher measured gains from trade.
Commodities—in our case, livestock and crops—tend to be produced using sector-specific, non-tradable resources—in
our case land. These commodities have low supply elasticities because of their use of specific assets and low demand
elasticities because of their essential role in downstream sectors. These features explain why commodities could


                                                             3
contribute comparatively more to gains from trade than other sectors. We rely on similar arguments to show the
importance of the role of international trade in adaptation to climate change. The recent quantitative trade literature uses
exact hat algebra (Dekle et al., 2007) to identify the minimum set of information necessary for obtaining counterfactual
results. We show in this paper how to use this method to calibrate a spatially-explicit model on a limited set of spatial
information, using the country-level aggregate information and the potential productivity of land to infer where crops
are planted in the initial equilibrium.
     The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 connects the dots between this paper and two related
literatures: the one on acreage/land-use choice that deals with how landowners assign their land to particular uses and
the other on international adaption to climate change in agriculture. Section 3 develops the general equilibrium model
and makes clear, using exact hat algebra, what information is needed for its calibration. Section 4 then describes the
data used for calibration, distinguishing between the behavioral parameters that are selected from an extensive literature
review and the baseline equilibrium values, which are constructed from various sources. The calibrated model is used in
section 5 to simulate the counterfactual effects of climate change under the main calibration assumptions. In section 6,
different calibrations are considered, varying the flexibility of each adjustment margin, which allows us to analyze its
influence on the role of international trade in adaptation to climate change. Section 7 offers some concluding remarks.


2     Related literature
2.1     Acreage and land-use choice
One of the key theoretical problems in the representation of a landowner who allocates his land to its most profitable uses
is to avoid corner solutions where all the land is allocated to one use or crop. Corner solutions are a challenge for applied
modeling and are unrealistic when the focus is larger than one small field. In this paper, following CDS, the problem
is dealt with by recognizing that the available data on potential yields at the field level (field being considered here
generically as an extended area) represent only the expected yields for the whole field, but that there is an unobserved
within-field heterogeneity explaining why the specialization is not complete. Then, assuming that the within-field
heterogeneity is described by a Type-II extreme value distribution delivers simple expressions of acreage choice.
     While being inspired by the trade literature, our representation of crop choice shares many features with the
approaches previously adopted in the agricultural economics and land-use literatures. A first approach (e.g., Feng and
Babcock, 2010; Lichtenberg, 1989; Stavins and Jaffe, 1990) emphasizes the heterogeneity of land and represents it in
theoretical models of agricultural land use with probability distributions. A key distinction with our approach is in the
choice of the probability distribution. With distributions other than an extreme value distribution (e.g., a lognormal in
Stavins and Jaffe, 1990), it is necessary to order land uses by land quality so that their shares correspond to a compact
support of the distribution (an approach similar to Dornbusch et al., 1977, Ricardian trade model). This makes working
with more than two crops cumbersome. Using an extreme value distribution solves this problem and makes acreage and
land-use choices easy to model.
     Among the other justifications for a diversified crop portfolio are crop rotations (Hennessy, 2006) and risk
diversification (Chavas and Holt, 1990). While both justifications are realities of agricultural production, these issues
being inherently dynamic and stochastic, they cannot be adequately represented in a static and deterministic model like
the one under consideration.
     For the static analysis of crop choices, two main strategies have been pursued. First, multicrop models, built on
duality theory (Chambers and Just, 1989), prevent full specialization on some crops with a convex cost function,
implying decreasing return to scale when specializing in one crop. This strategy yields very flexible representations,
but the convexity of the costs tends to be difficult to interpret. Second, models where acreage or land-use shares are
represented with systems of multinomial logit equations.1 These models have two origins. They have emerged either as
   1Carpentier and Letort (2013) have recently proposed a compromise between the flexible multicrop models and the multinomial logit models by
developing a deterministic multicrop model yielding multinomial logit acreage shares.


                                                                      4
convenient reduced form approach for estimating allocation in shares (Wu and Segerson, 1995) or as outcomes from the
maximization of random profit functions where the stochastic component follows a Type-I extreme value distribution
(Chomitz and Gray, 1996). Multinomial logit models obtained from random profit maximization have been used mainly
for analyzing land-use choices, but not for acreage choices.
    So, using extreme value distributions is not new and has a long empirical tradition in the literature on land-use
choices. However, there is one key difference in the approach pioneered by CDS and applied here with earlier work using
extreme value distributions. The role of the stochastic specification is fundamentally different than earlier approaches.
The stochastic term is not introduced for econometric purposes but has a clear theoretical interpretation, which is to
add within-field heterogeneity in yields to prevent complete specialization. The stochastic term eventually disappears
from the equilibrium conditions of the model after being integrated. In addition, since the stochastic term enters
multiplicatively and follows a Type-II extreme value distribution, it implies that the share equations do not strictly follow
a logit form. However, the implications of this difference are likely limited, since an exponential transformation allows
recovery of a logit.
    One can also note that applied simulation models have faced the same issue of allocating the land factor to its various
uses. However, in most applications, this was done without any connection to the acreage/land-use literature. For
example, computable general equilibrium models usually follow the approach adopted in the GTAP model of allocating
land with a Constant Elasticity of Transformation (CET) function. This choice leads to equations similar to those in this
paper, with one big difference. A CET function, like its Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) counterpart, allocates
shares in value but does not enforce equilibrium in volume in the sense that individual land uses do not add up to total
available land. This limit makes this CET approach unsuitable for applications to environmental issues where a clear
connection to physical land areas is necessary.


2.2    International trade and climate change
Questions of international trade and adaptation to climate change in agriculture started to be addressed in the early
1990s with partial equilibrium (Reilly and Hohmann, 1993) or general equilibrium models (Randhir and Hertel, 2000;
Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994; Tsigas et al., 1997). While these studies often emphasized the role of international trade
in justifying the use of models of the global economy, they do not specifically analyze the role of international trade in
adaptation to climate change. Randhir and Hertel (2000) are an exception, reaching the counterintuitive conclusion that
the adjustments facilitated by international trade could have detrimental welfare effects. This result illustrates potential
outcomes in a second-best world because climate change leads to increase production in developed countries with
high level of agricultural support; therefore, it aggravates preexisting distortions. While it is a valid and interesting
point, agricultural policies empirically tend to evolve with comparative advantages and market conditions (Anderson
et al., 2013). Thus, they are unlikely to stay the same with climate change. Consequently, our model abstains from
representing agricultural policies, despite their prevalence.
     These first works on international trade and adaptation to climate change all share the assumption that land is
uniform within countries, neglecting the role that within-country heterogeneity of climate change effects may play in
opening new adaptation possibilities. An additional difficulty is that, when land is uniform, defining crop yields after
climate change involves assuming a weighting scheme for the local yield changes. The weighting scheme adopted is
usually based on current crop production, which negates the possibility of more favorable yields under climate change
elsewhere than where crops are currently produced.
     The within-country heterogeneity of land, and its interaction with climate change, has recently received a lot of
interest with papers using either gridded information or different land classes based on agroecological zones frameworks
(see, for example, Ahammad et al., 2015; Costinot et al., 2016; Leclère et al., 2014; Nelson et al., 2014; Wiebe et al.,
2015). However, except for CDS, these more recent studies present the previously discussed limit of approaching
land-use modeling with little connection with the theoretical and empirical land-use literature. Reciprocally, the land-use
literature dealing with climate change tends to neglect market, especially international trade, adaptations (Mendelsohn


                                                             5
et al., 1994). A couple of papers using global models emphasize that trade patterns in agricultural products are likely to
change a lot with climate change, without precisely analyzing the adaptive role of international trade (Ahammad et al.,
2015; Leclère et al., 2014). Only CDS do it and show that its role is likely limited.


3      Model
In this section, we develop a static general equilibrium model for analysis of global agricultural trade and land use.
The model modifies and extends CDS’ model by representing explicitly the elasticity of final demand for agricultural
products, by considering almost all agricultural land uses without possibility of extension over other land uses, and by
representing livestock with the associated feed consumption, in particular pastures that account for a large part of land
uses.


3.1      Model setup
Consider a world economy composed of multiple regions indexed by i ∈ I. Goods are indexed by k ∈ K, where the
non-agricultural bundle is indexed by k = 0. Agricultural goods include crops gathered in the set K c ⊂ K and one
sector of livestock products indexed by k = l. Crops are defined here extensively as anything that requires land to grow.
The production of livestock requires land only indirectly through its demand of crops for feed. One crop, which we
call grass and index by k = g, is assumed to be not tradable, because it represents forage crops that are directly grazed
by animals and fodder crops (e.g., alfalfa hay) that have too low of a value-to-weight ratio to be tradable.2 Grass is
only used to feed livestock. Agricultural goods that are internationally traded, crops and livestock, and object of final
consumption are gathered in the set K a ⊂ K. Each region is endowed with two factors of production, labor and land,
                                                                                                                        f
land being only used to grow crops. Land in region i comprises Fi heterogeneous fields indexed by f ∈ Fi of surface si ,
each being composed of a continuum of parcels indexed by ω ∈ [0, 1]. The outside good is freely traded and plays the
role of a numeraire.

Preferences The representative household in country i has quasi-linear preferences over the consumption of the
non-agricultural good, denoted Ci0 , and of the bundle of agricultural goods, Ci :
                                                                         (
                                                                             Ci1−1/ /(1 − 1/) if  , 1,
                                              Ui =   Ci0   +     βi1/                                                     (1)
                                                                             ln Ci                            if  = 1,

where  > 0 is the opposite of the price elasticity of demand for the agricultural bundle and βi > 0 parameterizes the
demand for the agricultural bundle. With these preferences, the consumption of the agricultural good is inelastic to
income. This is consistent with the situation in developed countries because the income elasticity of the demand for
primary products for food consumption converges to zero with income per capita (Gouel and Guimbard, forthcoming).
In poor countries, however, the income elasticity of food consumption can be expected from Engel’s law to be positive
but inferior to one. This means that in very poor countries, where the income elasticity of food is the highest, the
assumption of quasi-linear preferences underestimates the reduction in food consumption caused by climate change.
    The bundle of agricultural goods is a CES composite:
                                                           "                                               # κ/(κ−1)
                                                                Õ              1/κ           (κ−1)/κ
                                                  Ci =                   βik             Cik                           ,   (2)
                                                               k ∈K a

    2International trade of hay is growing but remains sufficiently low that we can neglect it here.




                                                                                     6
where κ > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between agricultural products, Cik is the final consumption of product k, and
βik ≥ 0 is an exogenous preference parameter.
    Following the Armington assumption, the final consumption of each agricultural good, but not the non-agricultural
good, is itself a CES function of the consumption of varieties from different origins:

                                          Õ                                σ/(σ−1)
                                                      1/σ        (σ−1)/σ 
                                         =      β ji                                 for all k ∈ K a,
                                          
                                   Cik           k           k
                                                            C ji            
                                                                                                                                   (3)
                                           j ∈I                            
                                                                           

where σ > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between varieties from different regions, C jik is the export for final
consumption from region j to region i of good k, and βkji ≥ 0 is an exogenous preference parameter.

Technology

    Non-agricultural good         The non-agricultural good is produced with labor only and constant return to scale:

                                                              Q0i = A0i Ni0,                                                        (4)

where Q0i is the quantity produced, Ni0 is the corresponding labor demand, and A0i > 0 is labor productivity.

    Crops Crops are produced by combining land and labor. Land and labor are complementary, so, on every parcel
ω, if the crop k ∈ K c is planted, the production per unit of land is given by
                                                                              
                                           fk               fk        fk
                                         Qi (ω) = min Ai (ω) , Ni (ω) /νik ,                                (5)

          fk                                                             fk
where Ai (ω) ≥ 0 is the productivity of land (the yield), Ni (ω) is the quantity of labor used in production, and
νik is the unit labor requirement per unit of land. Following CDS, we assume that yields are i.i.d. from a Fréchet
                                               fk                                                                       fk
distribution with shape θ > 1 and scale γ Ai > 0, where γ ≡ (Γ (1 − 1/θ))−1 is a scaling parameter such that Ai is
                                                  fk       fk
the unconditional average yield of the field, Ai = E[Ai (ω)], and Γ (·) is the Gamma function.3 θ characterizes the
heterogeneity within fields, with a higher θ indicating more homogeneity.
     We assume that the production of grass does not require any labor. This assumption makes grass the default choice
when the productivity of the other crops is not high enough and the corresponding labor costs are too high for growing
them. This is consistent with the fact that pastures are more likely to be located on lands that are not the most suitable
for crop production because of short growing seasons, limited water access or steep slope. However, this assumption
neglects the fact that pastures and hay fields are actively managed and are not simply rangelands. This problem goes
beyond this model. Agricultural statistics usually have a hard time distinguishing rangelands, pastures, and hay fields, as
they concern similar plants along a continuum of management practices, so little information would be available to
make the distinction in the model.
                                                                                                       f
     There is no need for representing other land uses in the model because the surface of each field si is restricted to its
surface initially used for growing crops or for pastures. This choice implies that we neglect any extensive margin of
land use. In the model, one cannot extend, or reduce, agricultural land use over forests, protected areas, or urban areas.
Indeed, such choices are inherently dynamic—for example, foregoing annual benefits from crop production to receive
future benefits from timber exploitation—they involve switching costs, and they strongly depend on local institutions
and legal enforcement of illegal deforestation activities. These decisions would be challenging to model and to estimate
   3The
       cumulative
                  distribution function of a Fréchet distribution with shape parameter θ and scale parameter s is given by Pr (X ≤ x) =
exp − (x/s)−θ if x > 0.




                                                                    7
at a global scale (Scott, 2014) and so are neglected here. This choice could create a possible bias by not representing
one margin of adaptation to climate change. But this margin of adjustment creates other problems because it involves an
adaptation strategy going against the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions. Indeed, forest are important stocks of
carbon that would be released in the atmosphere upon clearing. So, rather than a biased estimate, one can see the results
here as a counterfactual where adaptation is done without deforestation (Erb et al., 2016).
    Since here the only choice of a landowner is which crop to grow on a parcel, this model neglects the possibility of
changes in land management, for example by investing in irrigation, adopting new seeds, switching to double cropping,
or increasing the use of fertilizers. With very heterogeneous estimation results, the size of the elasticity of yield to
producer price is a contentious issue in agricultural economics that was at the heart of the recent debate on the indirect
land use change effects of biofuels policies (Keeney and Hertel, 2009). In addition to their variability, available estimates
concern only a small subset of the planted crops. So, we adopt the pessimistic side of the literature by assuming no yield
intensification. However, we assess the sensitivity of the results to this crucial assumption.

    Livestock    Livestock products are produced by combining feed and labor:
                                                                 !
                                                          xi Nil
                                                Qi = min
                                                  l
                                                            ,      ,                                                     (6)
                                                          µi νil

where xi is the demand for feed and the parameter µi is known in zootechnics as the feed conversion ratio: the quantity
of feed necessary to produce one unit of animal output.
    The animal feed is produced competitively from a combination of the various crops that can be used to feed
animals. The animal feed itself is not internationally traded, but its production can be made from imported crops.
The composition of the feed mix depends on the country-specific composition of the livestock bundle, the animals’
physiological requirements (for example the protein/fat/carbohydrate content), the local environment (temperature,
humidity, public policies on manure), and the local rearing practices. Accounting for these constraints, producers of feed
mix minimize their production costs that are a function of crop prices and quantities. To represent these unobservable
elements, we assume that the feed mix technology takes a CES form:
                                              "                                                   # ς/(ς−1)
                                                   Õ                  1/ς           (ς−1)/ς
                                       xi =                βik,feed             xik                           ,          (7)
                                                  k ∈K c


where ς > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between the various feed crops and βik,feed ≥ 0 is an exogenous technological
parameter. For the sake of parsimony, the bundles of imported and domestic crops used to produce the animal feed, xik ,
are obtained using the same Armington aggregator used for composite final goods, given by equation (3).

Market structure and trade costs All markets are perfectly competitive. Despite the land heterogeneity between
fields, we neglect domestic trade costs and assume that all producers in a region receive the same price for a crop. This
is also the case for grass, which is only assumed to be non-tradable internationally. This assumption greatly simplifies
the modeling of livestock by avoiding the need to represent livestock production by field.
     Except for the outside good, international trade entails trade costs. We consider iceberg trade costs. τikj ≥ 1 units
must be shipped from country i to country j to sell a variety of sector k. The absence of arbitrage opportunities implies
that
                                               pikj = τikj pik for all k ∈ K a,                                        (8)
where pik is the producer price of gook k in region i and pikj is its import price in region j.
    Agricultural products, having a higher average level of protection than products in other sectors, support a
disproportionate share of trade and domestic policies in the world. We do not represent them here because maintaining


                                                                        8
these policies constant with the new pattern of comparative advantages caused by climate change would make little
economic sense.


3.2    Equilibrium in levels
Good demand Given the households quasi-linear preferences in equation (1), utility maximization implies the
following demand for the bundle of agricultural products:
                                                      (
                                                           βi Pi−       if Ei ≥ βi Pi1− ,
                                               Ci =                                                                  (9)
                                                          Ei /Pi         if Ei < βi Pi1− ,

where Ei is the country expenditures and Pi is the price of the bundle of agricultural goods given by
                                                      "                                # 1/(1−κ)
                                                           Õ                   1−κ
                                               Pi =                βik Pik                         ,               (10)
                                                          k ∈K a

where Pik is the composite price of imports of good k.
   From equation (2), the demand of the bundle of product k ∈ K a is given by
                                                                               ! −κ
                                                                         Pik
                                                      Cik    =     βik                Ci .                         (11)
                                                                         Pi

    The demand for the outside good is given by the household’s budget constraint:

                                                           Ci0 = Ei − Pi Ci .                                      (12)

It can possibly be equal to 0 if Ei < βi Pi1− .

Production     Zero profit, absence of trade barriers, and the numeraire assumption in the non-agricultural sector imply

                                                                   A0i = wi ,                                      (13)

which will be used below to substitute wi away.
   From equations (6) and (7), cost minimization in the livestock feed sector implies for k ∈ K c :

                                                      pli = νil A0i + µi Pifeed,                                   (14)
                                                                          ! −ς
                                                          k,feed    Pik
                                                 xi = βi
                                                  k
                                                                               µi Qli ,                            (15)
                                                                   Pifeed
                                                                         1−ς 1/(1−ς)
                                                    "                            #
                                                       Õ
                                                               k,feed
                                           Pi =
                                            feed
                                                              βi        Pik
                                                                                        ,                          (16)
                                                      k ∈K c

where Pifeed is the price index corresponding to the demand for the feed bundle xi = µi Qli .
    The Leontief structure of crop production in equation (5) implies for parcel ω the following factor demands per unit
of land if the parcel is planted with k ∈ K c :
                                               fk                fk                   fk
                                             Qi (ω) = Ai (ω) = Ni (ω) /νik .                                       (17)



                                                                         9
The difference between the revenue from crop production and the labor cost is the land rent. The rent accruing to the
parcel of land ω when used to grow k is
                                                                       
                                      fk            fk                    fk
                                 pik Qi (ω) − A0i Ni (ω) = pik − A0i νik Ai (ω) ,                                (18)

                                                                                                                   fk
which is distributed according to a Fréchet with parameters θ and γrik Ai if rik > 0 and where

                                                                   rik ≡ pik − A0i νik                                                             (19)

is the land rent per unit of production at the country level.
                                                                                                                     fk
     To maximize its profit, the landowner plants a parcel with the crop delivering the highest land rents, rik Ai (ω).
Given that the land rents follow a Type-II extreme value distribution, the acreage choice is a discrete choice problem and
the probability that crop k is the most profitable crop is given by
                                                                                                     θ
                                                                                                 fk
                                                                                       rik Ai
                                                           fk
                                                         πi =                                                  θ .                               (20)
                                                                   Í                      l fl
                                                                          l ∈K c ,ril ≥0 ri Ai

                                                                                                                                              fk
Since on each field there is a continuum of parcels with the same probability of acreage choice, πi is also the share of
field f in country i planted with crop k.
    Total output of crop k by field f is given by the product of the surface of the field, the share of acreage devoted to
crop k, and the average yields conditional on the crop having been chosen for production:
                                                                                         
                                 fk     f fk      fk      k fk                  l fl
                                Qi = si πi E Ai (ω) |ri Ai (ω) ∈ arg max ri Ai (ω) .                                  (21)
                                                                                                                l ∈K c

From the standard properties of the Fréchet distribution we have
                                                                                                                                        1/θ
                                                                                                         Õ 
                                                                                                                                 θ 
                                    fk             fk                         fl                                             f l
                                                                                                  (ω) =                ri Ai  ,
                                                                                                         
                       E       rik Ai    (ω) |rik Ai    (ω) ∈    arg max ril Ai                                           l
                                                                                                                                                   (22)
                                                                   l ∈K c                                l ∈K c ,r l ≥0              
                                                                                                                  i                  
so                                                                                                   (θ−1)/θ
                                                            fk            f       fk            fk
                                                           Qi = si Ai                       πi                     ,                               (23)

and country-level production is
                                                                 Õ                                     (θ−1)/θ
                                                                              f        fk         fk
                                                        Qik =             si Ai                 πi                      .                          (24)
                                                                 f ∈ Fi

Similarly, the total land rents from growing crop k are
                                Õ                                                     
                                     f fk        fk          fk                   fl
                         Rik =      si πi E rik Ai (ω) |rik Ai (ω) ∈ arg max ril Ai (ω) = rik Qik .                                                (25)
                                   f ∈ Fi                                                                      l ∈K c


     Based on the previous equations, one can calculate the own-price supply elasticity for crops which is given by

                                                ∂ ln Qik                          pik Õ                                 Qf k
                                                                                                                  fk       i
                                                           = (θ − 1)                                  1 − πi                      .                (26)
                                                ∂ ln pik                          rik    f ∈ Fi
                                                                                                                            Qik




                                                                                   10
θ appears as the parameter governing supply elasticity. A higher θ, which corresponds to more homogeneous fields,
implies also a more elastic supply. The second term, the ratio of producer price to land rent pik /rik , allows conversion of
the supply elasticity with respect to land rents into the own-price elasticity. It is greater than 1, as it equals 1 plus the
                                                                      fk   fk
ratio of unit labor costs to land rents. The last term, f ∈ Fi (1 − πi )Qi /Qik , shows that the elasticity is non-constant
                                                       Í
                                                                        fk
and depends on the acreages. For a crop with very small acreages, πi ≈ 0, the elasticity is (θ − 1) pik /rik . The elasticity
                                                                     fk
decreases when acreages increase, eventually reaching 0 when πi ≈ 1.

International trade Preferences over the countries of origin have been assumed similar for final consumption and for
livestock feed, so based on equation (3), the index price that aggregates the price of varieties from various origins is

                                           Õ                            1/(1−σ)
                                                                1−σ 
                                    Pik =       βkji τjik pkj                  for all k ∈ K a,
                                           
                                                                       
                                                                                                                        (27)
                                            j ∈I                      
                                                                      
and total import demand is equal to the sum of demand for final consumption and for livestock feed, if relevant:
                                                               
                                      Xik /Pik = Cik + 1k ∈K c xik for all k ∈ K a                               (28)

where Xik is the value of imports and 1(·) is the indicator function. Lastly, the value of exports of good k ∈ K a from
country j to country i is given by
                                                                     ! 1−σ
                                                            τjik pkj
                                                X ji = β ji
                                                  k     k
                                                                           Xik .                                    (29)
                                                             Pik

Market clearing conditions The market equilibrium for goods is given by the equality between the value of production
and export demand from all countries:                    Õ
                                               pik Qik =   Xikj .                                               (30)
                                                                   j ∈I


Budget constraint      Final expenditure in country i is the sum of labor income, land rents, and trade deficits denoted ∆i :
                                                              Õ
                                              Ei = A0i Ni +       rik Qik + ∆i .                                       (31)
                                                                k ∈K c

      From the above we can define the competitive equilibrium as follows

Definition. A competitive equilibrium is a vector of consumption of the bundle of agricultural goods (Ci ), price of the
bundle of agricultural goods (Pi ), final consumption of goods (Cik ), production (Qik ), feed demand (xik ), aggregate feed
                                                                          fk
price (Pifeed ), land rent per unit of production (rik ), acreage share (πi ), consumption price (Pik ), total imports (Xik ),
                       k                    k
bilateral exports (Xi j ), producer price (pi ), and expenditures (Ei ) such that equations (9)–(12), (14)–(16), (19), (20),
(24), and (27)–(31) hold.


3.3     Equilibrium in relative changes
To make the data necessary to calibrate this model explicit, we express the model in relative changes, with v̂ ≡ v 0/v the
relative changes of any variable v between the baseline and the counterfactual equilibria. We consider one source of
exogenous shocks: changes in crop productivity.
    The model presents two situations where regime changes could occur, which should prevent expressing the equations
in relative changes. First, with a quasi-linear utility, the consumption of the outside good can reach zero if income is not


                                                                11
high enough compared to relative prices. This is an exceptional situation, possible only for extreme calibration/shocks,
so we neglect its possibility and verify after the simulations that we are still in the interior solution. Second, the
production of crop k is undertaken in country i only if the land rent per unit of production, rik , is positive. Because of
the Armington assumption, we should not expect any regime change after counterfactual shocks to crop productivity.
Even after an increase in potential yields, a crop that is not initially produced in a country will not be planted, because it
would find no local or foreign demand (preference parameters, βkji , are initialized to 0 without initial production in j).
Similarly, if potential yields are not zero in all fields, an initially positive production cannot be stopped by a decrease in
potential yield, since a country’s crop is considered imperfectly substitutable for the same crop from other countries. So,
we can safely ignore the possibility of regime changes and express the model in relative changes.
    To express the equations in relative changes, we introduce share parameters. αik = Pik Cik /Pi Ci is the budget share of
product k in the consumption of all agricultural goods. αik,feed = Pik xik /Pifeed xi is budget share of crop k in livestock
feed. α kji = X jik /Xik is the bilateral trade share. Finally, we introduce φik,labor , φik,land , and φik,feed the budget shares of
each input of production: labor, land, and feed. They allow to express the zero-profit condition in the same way for all
sectors as
                                              p̂ik = φik,labor + φik,land r̂ik + φik,feed P̂ifeed .                              (32)
   To allow for the possibility that fields may have zero potential yields in some crops in the baseline but positive yields
under climate change, we express changes in crop productivity in levels and not in relative changes. Consequently, after
substitution of the acreage share, the equation associated with crop production is
                                                                                                θ−1
                                                                                        fk0
                                                                       
                                                       0
                                        Õ s f Af k                         rik r̂ik Ai
                                           i i
                               Q̂ik =                                                                                 for all k ∈ K c .   (33)
                                                 Qik                                           θ  (θ−1)/θ
                                                           
                                                                                          fl0
                                                                            
                                        f ∈ Fi
                                                                                ril r̂il Ai
                                                               Í
                                                                   l ∈K c


    After removing the trade deficits, all the other equations follow simply from their expression in levels, and if not
otherwise precised, the following equations hold for all i, j ∈ I, k ∈ K:
                                                               "                                      # 1/(1−κ)
                                                                   Õ                          1−κ
                                                    P̂i =                   αik        P̂ik                       ,                       (34)
                                                                k ∈K a
                                                             −κ   κ−
                                                 Ĉik =       k
                                                            P̂i        P̂i       for all k ∈ K a,                                         (35)
                                                                                        1−
                                                     Pi0 Ci0 Ĉi0 = Ei Êi − Pi Ci P̂i        ,                                           (36)
                                                                      −ς
                                                 x̂ik = P̂ik /P̂ifeed       Q̂li for all k ∈ K c ,                                        (37)
                                                                                 1−ς 1(1−ς)
                                                             "                           #
                                                                Õ
                                                                       k,feed
                                                 P̂ifeed =          αi           P̂ik            ,                                        (38)
                                                               k ∈K c
                                                            Õ                     1/(1−σ)
                                                                          1−σ 
                                                    P̂ik =       α kji p̂kj              ,
                                                            
                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                         (39)
                                                             j ∈I               
                                                                                                 
                                            Xik X̂ik = Pik Cik P̂ik Ĉik + 1k ∈K c Pik xik P̂ik x̂ik ,                                    (40)
                                                                             1−σ
                                                         X̂ jik = p̂kj /P̂ik        X̂ik ,                                                (41)
                                                                           Õ
                                                       pik Qik p̂ik Q̂ik =       Xikj X̂ikj ,                                             (42)
                                                                                         j ∈I




                                                                                  12
                                                                                     Õ
                                                           Ei Êi = A0i Ni +               Rik r̂ik Q̂ik .                                (43)
                                                                                  k ∈K c

    These equations make clear the information needed for calibrating the model, and the mapping with the data is
discussed in section 4. Only one aspect deserves further discussion here: the calibration of the land rent per unit of
production, rik , and the volume of crop production, Qik , in equation (33). We show now that given field-level potential
         fk
yields, Ai , and aggregate moments, we can uniquely recover these initial values. Using equations (20), (24), and (25),
we have
                                                                                    θ (1−θ)/θ
                                                                    "                 #
                                  −θ   −1 Õ                  θ Õ 
                                                        f     f k              f l
                                 rik    = Rik         si Ai               ril Ai               .                    (44)
                                                                 f ∈ Fi                    l ∈K c

Using the contraction mapping theorem, we show in appendix A that this equation has a unique solution. So, for each
                                          f        fk
country, given positive values for Rik , si , and Ai , from any set of initial positive land rents, rik > 0|k ∈ K c , Rik > 0 ,
                                                                                                   

one can do a fixed-point iteration between the right-hand side and the left-hand side, which will converge to the
                                                                                                                      fk
equilibrium value of land rents. From the equilibrium values of rik , we can calculate the acreage shares, πi , from
                                                     k
equation (20) and the initial production levels, Qi , from equation (24).
     The model results would be similar if a country-crop productivity shifter was used to adjust the potential yields
  fk
Ai (see proof in appendix B). This is an important result because the potential yields we rely on for calibration can
be very different from the realized yields. They can differ, for example, because of yield gaps, multiple cropping, or
technological changes with respect to the time period of the data underlying the crop model calibration. The invariance
to the presence of productivity shifters implies that the model is robust to these measurement errors in the potential
yields. It also means that the model does not need to account for the economic and institutional reasons that may explain
the low levels of yields in low-income countries. Consequently, what matters for calibrating field-level information is
the difference between fields for a given country-crop couple.
     Equations (32)–(43) represent a square system of nonlinear equations and can be solved with any solver for systems
of nonlinear equations. In this paper, the model is solved using the solvers available under GAMS.

3.4     Welfare
Welfare changes from climate change are evaluated by calculating the equivalent variation.4 The household expenditure
function is                                                (
                                                     P1− /(1 − )            if  , 1,
                         e Pi , Pi , Ui = Pi Ui + βi Pi
                              0            0           0
                                                             i                                                 (45)
                                                              1 − ln βi Pi /Pi
                                                                         0         if  = 1.
                                                                               

The equivalent variation expressed in terms of variables in relative changes is
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                      1−1/
                                                                                                                  /(1 − 1/) if  , 1,
                                                                                               
                                                                                            Ĉ       − 1
            EVi = e Pi0, Pi , Ui0 − e Pi0, Pi , Ui = Pi0 Ci0                  Ĉi0 − 1 + Pi Ci
                                                                                               
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                          (46)
                                                                                                ln Ĉi
                                                                                                                            if  = 1.
                                                                                               
    To help interpret the welfare results, we approximate the equivalent variation at the first order (see appendix C).
Neglecting changes in trade deficits that will be removed before simulating the effects of climate change, it gives the
following decomposition:
                                   Õ                                      Õ
                                                                                    fk       fk
                        d EVi =            Xikj d ln pik − X jik d ln pkj +    rik Qi d ln Ai .                    (47)
                                       k ∈K a , j ∈I                                             f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c
                                       |                        {z                         } |                      {z              }
                                                       Terms-of-trade effects                                Productivity effects

   4In this setting of a de facto partial equilibrium model where the price of the outside good is constant and the representative household has
quasi-linear utility, the equivalent variation is equal to the consumer surplus and the compensating variation.


                                                                                13
In the absence of any distortion in the model, this decomposition is very simple with two terms. The first is the welfare
effect of changes in terms of trade. They sum to zero at the world level. The second is the welfare effect of changes in
crop yields at the initial acreage choices and prices.
    This decomposition approximates the welfare changes for small changes. The changes in yield from climate change
are large, on average −13.2%, and values such as −50% or +50% are not unusual, so these are not marginal changes that
would make the first-order approximation in equation (47) valid. With these large changes, the first-order approximation
is very imprecise. To obtain a precise decomposition of the welfare changes, we follow Harrison et al.’s (2000) method
and integrate the welfare decomposition along a line:
                                                                                                                                          fk
                                                                        d ln pkj
                                                                                 !
                                     1              d ln pik                                                   1                    d ln Ai
                     Õ           ∫                                                            Õ            ∫
                                                                                                                           fk
         EVi =                           Xikj   (t)              k
                                                             − X ji (t)            dt +                            rik (t) Qi (t)           d t,   (48)
                                 t=0                   dt                  dt                              t=0                         dt
                 k ∈K a , j ∈I                                                            f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c

where t parameterizes the yield changes. The resulting decomposition is known to be path-dependent, as terms-of-trade
and productivity effects could react differently depending on which countries or crops are affected first. Without any
information on the timing of yield changes, we simply divide yields regularly between their initial and final values:
   fk0            fk
t Ai + (1 − t) Ai . We will complement the interpretation of this decomposition with other results going in the same
directions, mitigating concerns about the path-dependency.


4     Taking the model to the data
When calibrating the model, it is important to represent most agricultural commodities for several reasons. First, if
almost all the sources of calories are included in the model, then the top elasticity  can be interpreted as the opposite of
the price elasticity of food demand, for which there is an abundant literature (e.g., Gao, 2012; Subramanian and Deaton,
1996). With a small subset of agricultural commodities, this elasticity would be more difficult to interpret as it would be
a composite of the price elasticity of food demand and of the elasticity of substitution between crops in the model and
the non-represented crops. Secondly, some crops may make a minor contribution to global crop production but be of
crucial importance in some countries. For example, roots and tubers such as cassava, sweet potatoes, or yams are staple
foods in many African countries even if they represent a small share of global crop production and an even smaller share
of trade. Lastly, climate change will affect all crops differentially. So, neglecting some crops with non-negligible land
use would imply not taking into account the opportunity cost of reallocating production on the land they were previously
grown.
    The model is calibrated on 35 crops and 50 countries/regions with a 2011 base year for the data. Table 2 lists the
countries and crops included in the sample and indicates their respective share of world agricultural area and world
output in value. For computational reasons, all countries are not included separately, but countries that are not are
aggregated in 9 regions based on their geographical location (mapping between regions and countries available in
table A1). The countries represented separately have been chosen based on their share of world output in crops and
their share of world agricultural area, but also chosen to illustrate a diversity of exposures to climate change. All crops
from the GAEZ project with a mapping with FAOSTAT crops have been included in the model, but some have been
aggregated. Excluding grass, the crops represented in the model correspond to 88% of the 2011 global harvested areas
in FAOSTAT and therefore to an even higher share of agricultural land uses when pastures are accounted for.


4.1    Behavioral parameters
After having properly harmonized the concept and definition of the parameters in the model and available estimates, we
rely on a literature review to select the behavioral parameters. We have chosen this strategy because there are important
difficulties that probably make it impossible to estimate these parameters in a cross-country setting structurally. These
difficulties, which have not been addressed in CDS, likely explain why their estimated demand and supply elasticities far


                                                                          14
                                           Table 2: List of sample countries and crops

                                Share of      Share of                                                          Share of            Share of
                               world ag.         world                                                         world ag.               world
Country                        area (%)a   output (%)b     Country                                             area (%)a         output (%)b
Argentina                           3.27          1.21     Pakistan                                                 0.73                 1.37
Australia                           6.87          1.33     Peru                                                     0.53                 0.44
Bangladesh                          0.22          0.46     Philippines                                              0.24                 0.83
Brazil                              5.71          5.10     Poland                                                   0.40                 0.79
Canada                              1.10          1.47     Romania                                                  0.32                 0.50
China (including Hong Kong)         9.97         21.18     Russia                                                   3.90                 2.42
Colombia                            0.88          0.65     Senegal                                                  0.20                 0.05
Egypt                               0.10          0.60     South Africa                                             2.11                 0.55
Ethiopia                            0.88          0.37     Spain                                                    0.59                 1.58
France                              0.74          2.44     Sri Lanka                                                0.06                 0.10
Germany                             0.42          2.20     Thailand                                                 0.40                 0.89
Greece                              0.10          0.45     Turkey                                                   0.87                 1.47
India                               4.39          8.18     Ukraine                                                  1.03                 0.74
Indonesia                           1.55          2.94     United Kingdom                                           0.39                 1.15
Iran                                1.32          0.94     United States                                            8.58                11.09
Italy                               0.25          1.71     Viet Nam                                                 0.23                 0.68
Japan                               0.10          2.53     Caribbean                                                0.31                 0.49
Kazakhstan                          5.06          0.47     Central America                                          0.57                 0.61
Kenya                               0.68          0.21     Rest of Asia                                             3.57                 1.67
Korea, South                        0.03          0.79     Rest of Commonwealth of Independent States               2.13                 1.06
Malaysia                            0.19          0.68     Rest of Europe                                           1.40                 4.04
Mexico                              2.37          1.32     Rest of Middle East and North Africa                     2.45                 2.21
Morocco                             0.57          0.35     Rest of Oceania                                          0.28                 0.60
Netherlands                         0.05          0.82     Rest of South America                                    2.91                 1.48
Nigeria                             1.48          1.30     Rest of Sub-Saharan Africa                              17.48                 3.49
Crop                                                       Crop
Banana                                            1.58     Olive                                                                         0.59
Barley                                            0.83     Onion                                                                         0.91
Beans                                             0.61     Other pulses                                                                  0.46
Buckwheat                                         0.03     Peas                                                                          0.11
Cabbage                                           0.53     Rapeseed                                                                      0.97
Carrot                                            0.35     Rice                                                                          8.86
Citrus fruits                                     1.70     Rye                                                                           0.08
Cocoa                                             0.23     Sorghum                                                                       0.43
Coconut                                           0.31     Soybean                                                                       3.20
Coffee                                            0.58     Sugar crops                                                                   3.08
Cotton                                            2.51     Sunflower                                                                     0.52
Flax                                              0.03     Tea                                                                           0.34
Grass                                            47.75     Tobacco                                                                       0.52
Groundnut                                         0.92     Tomato                                                                        2.47
Maize                                             6.55     Tropical roots and tubers                                                     3.24
Millet                                            0.27     Wheat                                                                         5.05
Oat                                               0.12     White potato                                                                  2.93
Oil palm                                          1.35
Sources: a Based on agricultural area in Ramankutty and Foley (1999) extended to 2007.   b Model   values for the initial equilibrium based on
FAOSTAT and GTAP as described in Appendix D.


exceed usual estimates. The main difficulty is related to the fact that the mapping between the model and the available
data leaves too many gaps.
    On the demand side, while it makes sense in the model to abstract from existing policies, that are unlikely to stay
the same, and from income effects, that are likely to be small, it is not reasonable to neglect them in the estimation
of elasticities, given that both drive a lot of the variations in final demand. Despite decades of trade negotiations,
distortions remain prevalent in the agricultural sector and should not be neglected when estimating gravity equations for
these sectors. Ad-valorem equivalents of these policies can be calculated but are poor proxies for the existing policies


                                                                     15
that often take the form of specific tariffs and tariff-rate quotas, two features specific to agricultural goods that prevent
the transmission of import prices to the domestic markets and that are inconsistent with a multiplicative representation
of distortions. So, building consumer prices from producer prices as done in CDS is likely to lead to biased estimates of
the prices actually faced by consumers. Domestic demand policies are also an important driver of the differences of
demand across countries. One obvious example is the biofuel policies that are active in many countries. By mandating
that large amounts of crop supply be directed to fuel consumption, these policies artificially raise demand with very
large effects on some crops (e.g., one-third of U.S. maize production and one-third of E.U. vegetable oil supply). Lastly,
it is well identified that diets evolve with income toward higher consumption of animal-based food products, oil and fats,
and sweeteners (Gouel and Guimbard, forthcoming). Given that animal-based food products require crops for their
production, differences in their demand have large effects on the total demand for many crops, explaining a lot of the
differences in crop consumption between rich and poor countries.
     On the supply side, the main problem is the absence of statistics at the global level on physical acreages by crop that
could be mapped to the model variables. The only available statistics, from FAOSTAT and used in the estimations in
CDS, concern harvested areas, that is, the physical areas planted with a crop multiplied by the number of times they
are harvested in the year. In tropical countries, the same fields can be planted and harvested several times a year, so
physical and harvested areas can be very different. In the case of Bangladesh in 2010, the sum of all harvested areas
(which does not include pastures) is 15.2 million hectares, more than the country area and almost double the FAOSTAT
figure for area under arable land and permanent crops. So, each field is harvested twice a year on average, but the
cropping intensity by crop is unknown. Our modeling framework is robust to multiple cropping as long as the cropping
intensity is uniform across the fields within a country, because it can be represented by a crop-country productivity
shifter (Appendix B). However, without information about the cropping intensity by crop, it is not possible to estimate
the supply-side of the model. The estimation in CDS suffers from this problematic mapping between model and data.
     Since cross-section estimations are not feasible for this model, we rely on existing estimations, mostly at the country
level, of the elasticities of interest and detail below their sources and how they map to the elasticities in the model.

Price elasticity of agricultural good demand Given that the model includes almost all agricultural products and
that these products are mostly consumed as food, with the exception of fibers (cotton and flax) and tobacco, it proceeds
that the elasticity  can be approximated as a food demand elasticity. We have identified two sets of literature related to
food demand elasticities relevant to this study. The first is the literature on the elasticity of the calorie consumption with
respect to total expenditure, in which papers occasionally also report elasticities of calorie price. Studying demand for
calories in six developing countries, Knudsen and Scandizzo (1982, Table 3) show that the elasticity of calorie price
decreases in absolute value with income. In the lowest quartiles, the elasticities are between −0.88 and −0.45 depending
on the countries, while in the highest quartiles they are between −0.11 and −0.07. Based on a survey of rural Indian
households, Subramanian and Deaton (1996, Figure 5) find elasticities between −0.4 and −0.3, also decreasing with
income. However, this literature does not provide aggregate elasticities at the country level. The second set of relevant
literature does, since it is concerned with country-level estimates of final demand for food. Seale and Regmi (2006) and
Gao (2012) estimate, respectively, a complete demand system and a reduced-form food demand at the country level on
cross-sectional ICP data. They confirm that the price elasticity decreases in absolute value with income also at the
country level. Seale and Regmi (2006, Table 4) report uncompensated elasticities ranging from −0.76 for Vietnam to
−0.09 for the United States. Gao’s (2012, Table A1) elasticities are similar: from −0.76 for the Democratic Republic of
Congo to −0.16 for the United States.
     Final food demand elasticities tend to be higher in absolute value than calorie elasticities. Gao’s food demand
elasticities for Bangladesh, India, and Morocco are −0.7, −0.66, and −0.63. They are close to Knudsen and Scandizzo’s
calorie elasticities for the lowest quartiles 30 years before, and higher for India than Subramanian and Deaton’s calorie
elasticities for rural households. Aside from the different periods, a likely reason for higher values for final food demand
elasticities in Gao’s research is that the elasticities concerned processed food products; while it is natural that households
try to protect their caloric intake from adverse price shocks, they have more flexibility to adjust the level of processing in


                                                             16
their food demand. The elasticity  in the model is likely to be closer to a calorie elasticity than to a final food demand
elasticity, since the model represents the demand for unprocessed agricultural products. It is not exactly a calorie
elasticity because the CES nested below the quasi-linear utility function precludes a perfect representation as calories.
    Following these considerations, we adopt  = 0.2. This parameter plays a crucial role in the results because it
determines whether adaptation to climate change occurs through a reduction in demand for agricultural products or
through higher prices that would trigger other margins of adjustment. Its role will be assessed in section 6, facilitated by
the fact that the literature gives us clear lower and upper bounds.

Elasticity of substitution between agricultural products for final demand To choose the elasticity of substitution
between agricultural products for final demand, one should first note that this elasticity determines the price elasticity of
final demand for agricultural goods jointly with the price elasticity of demand for the agricultural bundle and the budget
shares. From equations (34)–(35), this elasticity is

                                                ∂ ln Cik
                                                           = −κ + (κ − ) αik .                                         (49)
                                                ∂ ln Pik

This formula implies that the demand elasticity is bounded between −κ for a budget share close to 0 and − for a budget
share close to 1.
     Food demand elasticities are a topic that have been studied extensively. A meta-analysis of U.S. price elasticities
for food products (Andreyeva et al., 2010) finds mean elasticities between −0.75 and −0.27 (excluding beverages and
food away from home). Similar elasticities have been found in a meta-analysis on China (Chen et al., 2016) with
elasticities between −0.86 and −0.33. These meta-analyses are based on estimations using household survey data, but
the elasticities estimated at the country-level using ICP data by Seale and Regmi (2006) are very close. Based on this
literature, we assume κ = 0.6, which targets the typical elasticity in this literature.

Elasticity of substitution between agricultural products for feed demand We proceed similarly for the elasticity
of substitution between agricultural products for feed demand. Let first note that it governs the price elasticity of feed
demand. From equations (37) and (38):
                                              ∂ ln xik      
                                                                    k,feed
                                                                           
                                                       = −ς   1 − αi         .                                        (50)
                                              ∂ ln Pik
So, feed demand elasticities vary between −ς and 0.
    From the literature on the estimation of feed demand, one can note that feed demand elasticities tend to be higher
than food demand elasticities, which is consistent with feed choice being more a matter of economic and technical choice
rather than a matter of individual preferences as food choice can be. These elasticities also vary substantially between
sources and between livestock sectors. Beckman et al. (2011) estimate feed demand elasticities on data simulated from a
least-cost ration model of the U.S. feed market. Their estimates vary between −1.9 and −0.05, depending on the feed
products and the livestock sectors. Peeters and Surry (1993) and Rude and Meilke (2000) estimate feed input demand
equations on time-series. On Belgian data, Peeters and Surry (1993) find feed demand elasticities, aggregated over all
livestock sectors, to be between −0.79 and −0.21. On European data, Rude and Meilke (2000) find elasticities between
−2.13 and −0.32. We follow this literature by assuming ς = 0.9.

Elasticity of substitution between varieties For the elasticity of substitution between varieties, we retain the
estimation of CDS of 5.4. This estimation is also close to what the meta-analysis of Head and Mayer (2014, section 4.2)
has found to be the typical trade elasticity (1 − σ in the model), −5. But, we should note that there is a large variety of
estimates in the gravity literature. For example, Caliendo and Parro’s (2015) preferred estimate of the trade elasticity for
agricultural products is −9, almost twice as large CDS’ estimate, which would lead to even higher trade reallocations, a
situation considered in section 6.


                                                               17
Degree of within-field heterogeneity From equation (26), θ, the degree of within-field heterogeneity, is the parameter
governing the acreage elasticity, a reasonably well studied elasticity in agricultural economics, at least in developed
countries and for the most important crops. There is no recent survey on this question. The most recent one (Rao, 1989),
thirty years ago, pointed to crop-specific long-run elasticities between 0.3 and 1.2 in developing countries. More recent
evidence is available on the acreage elasticities of maize and soybean in the U.S., which have been studied extensively.
We adapt and extend in table 3 the table 1 of Miao et al. (2016) that reports these elasticities from different studies.
These estimates display a large variability, part of which is likely related to the regular changes in farm policies and
thus farmers’ incentives. Nevertheless, the estimates are all below 1, and the most recent estimates have settled on
values around 0.3–0.4. From this literature, we target an average world acreage elasticity, weighted by the value of
                                                                                       fk       fk
production, of 0.5. To calculate the elasticities, one needs the values of pik /rik , πi , and Qi /Qik . pik /rik is not observed,
                                                                                                                           fk
but pik Qik /rik Qik = 1/φik,land is available from GTAP database (more on data for calibration in Appendix D). πi and
  fk
Qi /Qik can be calculated from the calibrated values of rik as explained in section 3.3. The chosen elasticity target leads
to θ = 1.1. For this calibration, the acreage elasticities of maize and soybean in the U.S. are 0.33 and 0.38, respectively,
values that are comparable to recent estimates. The sensitivity of the results to the value of θ is assessed in section 6.2.

                         Table 3: Estimates of acreage elasticities in the U.S. in different studies

Study                                                                          Maize                                    Soybean
Lee and Helmberger (1985)                                                       0.05                                      0.25
Tegene et al. (1988)                                                            0.20
Chavas and Holt (1990)                                                          0.15                                      0.45
Chembezi and Womack (1992)                                                      0.10
Orazem and Miranowski (1994)                                                    0.10                                      0.33
Miller and Plantinga (1999)                                                     0.95                                      0.95
Lin and Dismukes (2007)                                                      0.17–0.35                                    0.30
Hendricks et al. (2014, long-run elasticities)                                  0.29                                      0.26
Miao et al. (2016)                                                              0.45                                      0.63



4.2     Data for initial equilibrium
Expressing the model in deviation from benchmark in section 3.3 allows us to identify the minimum set of information
needed to calibrate the model. As with any general equilibrium model, we need aggregate value information at the
country or sector level, such as final expenditures, trade flows, production values, and various budget shares. Information
on potential yields under current climate and under climate change are taken from the GAEZ project (IIASA/FAO,
2012), which provides this information at the 5-arcminute level. Since this level of detail would result in a very large
and difficult-to-solve model, we aggregate the yield information at the 1-degree level, which results in 11,801 fields, and
test the effect of this aggregation in sensitivity analysis. Most agricultural statistics are taken from FAOSTAT, but we
also need additional information not available in FAOSTAT datasets. We use Ramankutty and Foley (1999) for the
extent of each field that is devoted to agricultural land. All other data comes from the GTAP database, in particular the
value of livestock production and the share of land in production costs. Details about the various data and how they are
combined are provided in Appendix D.




                                                               18
5     Quantitative results
5.1    Main counterfactual results
                                                                        fk
The main counterfactual consists in changing the potential yields, Ai , from their values under current climate to their
values at the 2080s horizon under climate change from the emission scenario A1FI. The welfare results are presented in
table 4. Column 1 reports the share of crop output in GDP, which will prove useful to interpret welfare results as countries
with a high share of GDP devoted to agriculture are more likely to be affected by changes in this sector. Column 2 reports
the net agricultural trade as a share of the value of agricultural production ([ k ∈K a ( j ∈I Xikj − Xik )]/ k ∈K a pik Qik ).
                                                                                 Í       Í                   Í

By measuring the direction of the dependence on foreign markets, this indicator helps interpret the changes in terms of
trade. Columns 3 to 5 report welfare changes in percentage of GDP and its decomposition following equation (48)
between terms-of-trade and productivity effects. The last nine lines report the average results for regional aggregates
and for the world, with welfare calculated for the world (indexed w), and similarly for aggregates, as
                                                            Í
                                                    EVw           EVi
                                                         = i ∈I       .                                                  (51)
                                                     Ew        Ew

     The welfare decomposition shows us that few countries experience gains related to productivity changes (column 4),
and if there are gains, they tend to be rather small, with a maximum of 0.75 for Argentina. But there are countries that
can benefit a lot from climate change. In these cases, the welfare gains do not come from increased yields caused by
climate change but from improvements in their agricultural terms of trade. This appears clearly for Argentina, Ethiopia,
and Kenya. Because of the inelasticity of demand for food, the reduction in yields triggered by climate change requires
large changes in prices to clear markets and, thus, large terms-of-trade effects. One implication is that the countries
that initially export a large proportion of their agricultural production (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, Canada, France, the
United States) tend to gain from climate change, even if they suffer from productivity losses, by shifting the burden
of the adjustment to climate change to consuming countries through international prices. The opposite is also true:
net-food-importing countries suffer from terms-of-trade related losses. Overall, for more than half of our individual
countries, the welfare impact of terms-of-trade effects is larger than the productivity impact. The same pattern can be
observed for regional aggregates: net-food-exporting regions (Latin and Northern America, and Oceania) have welfare
gains because of their agricultural terms-of-trade gains. Countries with large welfare gains are not present in CDS
because their elastic demand implies that price adjustments are too small for terms-of-trade effects to compensate for
the productivity losses.
     Because of these various effects, food-importing, poor, tropical countries are particularly vulnerable to climate
change. Their high share of crops in GDP makes them more sensitive to yield shocks. Their reliance on imports exposes
them to detrimental terms-of-trade shocks. And their geographical location is the most exposed to the negative effects
of climate change on yields. Bangladesh, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka are examples of this in the model.
     We turn now to the specific situation of Sub-Saharan Africa, the region experiencing the largest losses, with an
average loss of −21.57%. One obvious explanation for this large welfare loss is the large decrease in potential yields on
some of key African crops such as cocoa and tropical roots, combined with the high share of agriculture in GDP in
these countries. But that is not enough to explain these very large welfare losses. A specificity of African agriculture is
its reliance on crops that are scarcely traded (and sometimes not at all according to official statistics), such as tropical
roots (cassava, sweet potatoes, and yams) and tropical cereals (millet and sorghum), because of perishability or because
of the high trade costs in the region (Porteous, forthcoming). For example, starchy roots contribute to 23% of Nigerian
caloric intake with almost no international trade. When the productivity of such a crop is severely hit by climate change,
the model leaves little scope for adaptation. Without initial trade, no trade can be created under an Armington structure.
Because of the low flexibility of demand, domestic prices increase dramatically, driving up the planted areas despite the
lower productivity, which aggravates the severity of the initial shock as more resources are pulled into producing a crop
that now requires relatively much more land to produce than before. Things would have played out differently with


                                                             19
                          Table 4: Benchmark counterfactual welfare results (welfare as % of GDP)

                                                                                 Welfare decompositionb                  No adjustment on
                                        Crop output as    Net ag. trade        Ag.                                            bilateral
                                          % of total        as % of         terms of    Productivity              acreage      import       export
                                            GDP            ag. prod           trade       change          Total    shares      shares       shares
Countrya                                     (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)       (6)         (7)          (8)
Argentina                                   8.30             60.64           13.26         0.75         14.02      46.12      16.30        21.14
Australia                                   3.62             34.72            1.82        −0.46          1.36       4.31       2.64         2.13
Bangladesh                                 15.52            −31.46          −14.74        −7.18        −21.94     −44.49     −44.93       −31.23
Brazil                                      7.62             38.01            7.07        −3.94          3.12       8.69       9.67         4.36
Canada                                      3.04             25.38            2.36         0.49          2.85       6.92      −0.28         3.65
China (including Hong Kong)                 9.58             −4.96            0.32        −0.96         −0.64      −6.76      −1.74        −0.41
Colombia                                    7.17              4.46            3.07        −7.29         −4.25      −9.54      −3.62        −5.77
Egypt                                       7.79            −48.13           −6.58        −3.07         −9.67     −18.66     −13.61       −12.67
Ethiopia                                   47.42              0.66           33.50        −1.13         32.39      93.10      −7.23        36.35
France                                      3.25             17.65            0.93        −0.16          0.77       1.33       0.67         1.52
Germany                                     2.23             −6.76           −1.03         0.04         −0.99      −2.55      −1.84        −1.04
Greece                                      5.82             −9.92           −6.14       −13.99        −20.23     −42.83     −28.61       −27.61
India                                      16.60              4.78           −1.21       −12.97        −14.25     −19.59     −19.58       −18.62
Indonesia                                  13.15             −7.88           −0.75        −9.03         −9.81     −17.37     −15.51       −13.82
Iran                                        6.24            −14.54           −2.67        −2.32         −5.00     −13.30     −10.14        −7.95
Italy                                       2.88            −23.40           −2.35        −1.51         −3.87      −8.99      −4.90        −4.84
Japan                                       1.59            −31.66           −0.79        −0.11         −0.90      −2.52      −1.35        −1.24
Kazakhstan                                  9.64             −1.12           −0.35        −0.63         −0.97      −0.36      −2.85        −1.71
Kenya                                      24.91              4.81           29.92        −4.88         25.05      47.15     −14.90        19.26
Korea, South                                2.30            −48.81           −2.08        −0.12         −2.19      −6.38      −3.45        −3.23
Malaysia                                    8.86            −30.10          −10.50        −1.04        −11.53     −23.95     −16.93       −15.58
Mexico                                      3.88            −17.17           −0.35        −1.23         −1.59      −4.21      −1.92        −2.36
Morocco                                    13.04            −27.36          −11.88        −8.22        −20.14     −41.47     −29.58       −27.75
Netherlands                                 3.49            −16.07           −7.04        −0.01         −7.04     −17.06     −10.73        −7.38
Nigeria                                    10.63             −9.98           −7.72       −40.55        −48.57     −76.11     −94.64       −62.30
Pakistan                                   24.80              1.86            2.38        −2.19          0.19       0.75      −1.56         2.87
Peru                                        8.66             −6.52            1.51        −3.89         −2.40      −6.51      −3.76        −2.81
Philippines                                13.77             −0.76            7.17        −9.80         −2.68      16.99      −2.87        −3.24
Poland                                      5.45              2.37           −0.12         0.19          0.07       0.95      −1.49         0.47
Romania                                     9.60             −1.96           −0.30        −0.90         −1.20      −1.24      −1.65        −0.95
Russia                                      4.67             −9.17           −0.55        −0.10         −0.64      −1.73      −2.09        −0.48
Senegal                                    13.93            −45.21          −20.90        −9.27        −30.19     −72.88     −72.04       −52.24
South Africa                                5.04              1.43            2.15        −1.63          0.52       1.98       0.54         1.98
Spain                                       3.78              1.11            1.25        −1.45         −0.21      −2.12      −0.14        −0.02
Sri Lanka                                   6.76            −38.64          −11.47       −13.01        −24.57     −46.08     −40.14       −34.76
Thailand                                    8.81             20.56            0.33        −6.55         −6.25     −15.22      −5.90       −14.60
Turkey                                      6.61             −7.26            0.62        −1.38         −0.76      −8.20      −2.05        −0.96
Ukraine                                    14.73             30.53           10.64        −1.90          8.75      28.10      14.29        14.32
United Kingdom                              1.70            −38.73           −1.03         0.03         −1.00      −2.57      −1.78        −1.36
United States                               2.54             15.24            0.33        −0.22          0.11       0.84       0.44         0.46
Viet Nam                                   17.94             −1.74            0.03       −14.15        −14.18     −27.49     −17.65       −22.24
Asia                                        7.66             −5.93           −0.56        −2.52         −3.09      −7.72      −4.93        −4.18
Commonwealth of Independent States          6.66             −1.68            0.11        −0.22         −0.11       0.22      −1.31         0.34
Europe                                      3.01             −5.15           −0.85        −0.49         −1.35      −3.73      −2.37        −1.42
Latin America                               7.00             23.86            5.06        −3.65          1.39       5.53       4.14         2.04
Middle East and North Africa                4.67            −38.46           −4.17        −1.61         −5.78     −14.70      −9.43        −8.54
Northern America                            2.59             16.47            0.54        −0.15          0.39       1.47       0.36         0.79
Oceania                                     4.61             37.30            2.26        −0.62          1.64       4.74       2.70         2.82
Sub-Saharan Africa                         15.06             −3.09            0.45       −21.57        −21.24     −34.21     −46.58       −29.60
World                                       5.03              0               0           −1.72         −1.72      −3.71      −3.02        −2.18
Notes:     a Only countries represented individually in the model are presented here.    b From equation (47), the sum of columns 3 and 4 gives

approximately column 5. Decomposition obtained by dividing the yield shocks linearly in 800 shocks. It is almost exact for countries with limited
welfare changes, but little discrepancies appear when absolute welfare changes exceed 10%.




                                                                       20
enough initial trade: acreage in tropical roots would have been reduced, and the country would have specialized in other
production and relied more on imports. With large welfare gains, Ethiopia and Kenya are two exceptions, which are also
visible in figure A1 where these countries are part of the small African regions experiencing yield gains on average. For
the other African countries, the lack of international trade aggravates the productivity loss by preventing reallocations to
more profitable crops (this claim is proved in section 6.3).
     To illustrate the role of international trade in allowing large adjustments to climate change between countries, figure 1
plots the changes caused by climate change in the export shares in total trade of the main cereals, maize, rice, and wheat.
Shares in world trade vary greatly with climate change. Shares of maize and rice in particular bear little resemblance to
their current market shares. For the maize market, traditional exporters such as the U.S., Brazil, France, and Ukraine
suffer strong yield reduction and consequentially reduce their exports. Canada, Germany, and China, located in northern
latitudes, have higher maize yields. They step in to fill the gap, with the world production of maize even increasing
by 19%. The effects are similar for rice. The traditional rice exporters are tropical countries that are severely hit by
climate change. Rice production moves north, and new exporters emerge: China, Korea, and Japan. The export shares
in the wheat market change less with decreases in some traditional exporters (Argentina, Australia, France, United
States) and increases in others, located in northern latitudes (Canada, Germany, Russia). These results show that pattern
of international trade flows in agricultural products may look extremely different from now because of the effects of
climate change.


          Simulation

Maize

            Baseline                   USA                              BRA           ARG         FRA    UKR           Other




          Simulation

Rice

            Baseline             THA                           IND                    VNM          USA         PAK             Other




          Simulation

Wheat

            Baseline         USA               FRA             AUS            CAN       RUS       ARG DEU              Other




                       0.0              0.2                       0.4                       0.6                  0.8                   1.0

                                                     Export share in global exports

                                              Figure 1: Changes in export shares




                                                                   21
5.2    The role of acreage adjustments
To assess the role of acreage changes in adaptation to climate change, we follow CDS and consider a scenario where
acreages cannot adjust and are fixed to their initial values. In this case, the counterfactual production is given by
                                                                                            
                               0                     fk0
                                   Õ
                                         f fk                     fk                    fl
                            Qik =      si πi E Ai (ω) |rik Ai (ω) ∈ arg max ril Ai (ω) ,                              (52)
                                    f ∈ Fi                                                            l ∈K c


                   fk0         fk            fk0          fk
which using that Ai      (ω) = Ai (ω) Ai /Ai gives
                                                                                                (θ−1)/θ
                                                                               fk0
                                                           0
                                                                Õ                    
                                                                           f              fk
                                                    Qik =                 si Ai          πi                ,          (53)
                                                                f ∈ Fi

and in exact hat algebra
                                                                                        fk
                                                                                   f k Qi
                                                                           Õ
                                                               Q̂ik   =          Âi             .                    (54)
                                                                          f ∈ Fi
                                                                                       Qik

    This counterfactual where acreage shares stay the same is presented in column 6 of table 4. At the world level,
preventing adjustments on production more than doubles the initial welfare losses. This constraint does not reverse
the sign of most welfare results, it just amplifies them. Countries that tend to gain from climate change without the
constraint tend to gain more with it, and vice versa for countries that tend to lose from climate change. Since gains are
mostly related to terms-of-trade gains, this result implies that preventing supply adjustments from occurring exacerbates
the terms-of-trade change for the benefits of the net-food-exporting countries.


5.3    The role of trade adjustments
We turn now to analyzing the role that adjustments to international trade patterns may play in alleviating the consequences
of climate change. We can note that there are various ways in which trade adjusts and so various legitimate counterfactual
exercises to capture the trade adjustments’ role. We could consider restricting the adjustments in bilateral import shares,
the adjustments in bilateral export shares (or total export shares, as in CDS), or the changes in trade flows (volume or
values). This is in contrast with the role of acreages changes that can be captured by simply fixing the initial acreages.
So, we use different counterfactuals to measure the role of trade. To see how much costlier climate change would be if
trade changes were limited, we restrict trade adjustments through two approaches. One approach follows CDS and fixes
the shares of exports for agricultural goods to their initial values. This is imposed by the following equation that states
that changes in domestic trade are proportional to changes in domestic production:

                                                          X̂iik / p̂ik = Q̂ik for all k ∈ K a .                       (55)

This equation holds by adding ad-valorem export taxes (or subsidies), denoted δik , to the model. Three of the model
equations must be adjusted accordingly: equation (39) that defines the consumer price index,

                                                             Õ                             1/(1−σ)
                                                                                   1−σ 
                                                          =       α ji δ̂ j p̂ j
                                                             
                                                   P̂ik               k     k   k         
                                                                                                   ;                 (56)
                                                              j ∈I                       
                                                                                         
equation (41) that defines bilateral imports,
                                                                                     1−σ
                                                           X̂ jik = δ̂ kj p̂kj /P̂ik       X̂ik ;                     (57)



                                                                               22
and equation (43) that defines the representative agents’ budget constraint and where the tax revenues now appear as a
lump sum transfer,
                                                                                              X k X̂ k
                                                                                                 ij ij
                                              Õ                        Õ
                            Ei Êi = Ai Ni +
                                      0
                                                    Ri r̂i Q̂i +
                                                     k k k
                                                                                      δ̂i − 1
                                                                                        k
                                                                                                         .       (58)
                                             k ∈K c              k ∈K a , j ∈I, j,i
                                                                                                  δ̂ik

    Another approach to restrict trade adjustments is to fix the bilateral import shares to their initial values. Given the
model Armington structure, fixing the bilateral trade shares is symmetric to what is done for land by fixing the acreage
shares. This is done by simply replacing equation (41) with X̂ jik = X̂ik .
    The welfare results when trade adjustments are limited are presented in columns 7 and 8 of table 4. The two
constraints lead to very different welfare results, with much larger welfare losses in column 7, where bilateral import
shares are fixed to their initial values, than in column 8, where welfare results are much closer to the benchmark results.
This difference suggests that fixing the bilateral import shares is a stronger constraint on international trade than fixing
the share of total exports and therefore a more appropriate counterfactual. We postpone the detailed comparison of the
two approaches to section 6.3. Until this comparison, we present both measures of the role of trade for comparison with
CDS, but we privilege the scenario that fixes the bilateral import shares for comparison with the role of acreage changes.
The role of trade adjustments in adaptation to climate change, as measured in column 7, is smaller than the role of
acreage adjustments but also much more heterogeneous. For example, trade adjustments play a much bigger role for
Sub-Saharan Africa than acreage adjustments.


5.4    Aggregate yield shocks
To better understand how changes in potential yields affect acreages, trade, and welfare, we decompose the yield shocks
into different components and apply them separately. We start by applying the average global change in potential
yields to each field. To be able to average yield shocks from different crops, we need a weighting scheme. We use the
welfare metric and calculate the average shock by weighting each field-level shock by its first-order welfare contribution:
                               fk fk Í                           fk
Â = i ∈I, f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c rik Qi Âi / i ∈I, f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c rik Qi . Calculated in this way, the global average yield shock due to
     Í

climate change is −13.2%. The new counterfactual potential yields are then calculated as
                                                           fk0            fk
                                                         Ai      = ÂAi .                                                    (59)

The other counterfactual simulations with aggregate shocks are for the average yield shocks at the country level, at the
crop level, and at the country-crop level, with the averages calculated as above. Table 5 reports the results of these
simulations.
    This way of aggregating yields shocks present two limits that should be understood. First, since the weights used to
aggregate yield shocks are based on a first-order approximation based on the baseline equilibrium values, they do not
account for the fact that the economic weight of each crop and each field changes with climate change. Second, since
equation (59) is multiplicative in the initial yields, it cannot account for pairs field-crop where productivity was initially
zero and becomes positive after climate change. To make things comparable, table 5 reports the benchmark results
in column 6 but also the benchmark where this extensive margin is shut down in column 5. Comparing the last two
columns shows that allowing new crops in fields has a huge impact. Climate change will reduce the productivity in
many fields but will also make new production possible, reducing global welfare losses by one quarter.
    To save on space, welfare results are reported for regional aggregates (defined in table A1). The amount of change
in acreages and in trade flows is assessed using measures of mean absolute deviation (MAD), reported in the last three
rows. For acreages, it is calculated on acreage shares weighted by initial areas:

                                                                                        f fk     fk
                                                                  i ∈I, f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c si πi   π̂i − 1
                                                              Í
                                MAD of acreage shares =                                         f fk
                                                                                                         .                   (60)
                                                                          i ∈I, f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c si πi
                                                                      Í



                                                                 23
                 Table 5: Results under various counterfactual aggregate yield shocks (percentage change)

                                                                                                                      Benchmark
                                                        World    Country       Crop         Country-crop              without new
                                                       average   average      average         average                crop on fields   Benchmark
Variable                                                 (1)       (2)          (3)             (4)                       (5)            (6)
Welfare change
 Asia                                                  −0.92      −0.87        −4.39              −6.93                     −6.33       −3.09
 Commonwealth of Independent States                    −0.04       0.29        −3.34               0.02                      0.11       −0.11
 Europe                                                −0.27      −0.47        −3.39              −3.21                     −2.95       −1.35
 Latin America                                          1.11       0.36         6.22               4.76                      4.47        1.39
 Middle East and North Africa                          −1.58      −2.91       −10.77             −12.92                    −11.96       −5.78
 Northern America                                       0.31       0.46         0.92               1.26                      1.17        0.39
 Oceania                                                0.88       1.19         3.29               4.27                      4.00        1.64
 Sub-Saharan Africa                                    −1.11      −8.48       −18.95             −30.13                    −29.43      −21.24
 World                                                 −0.25      −0.52        −2.40              −3.30                     −3.05       −1.72
 World - No acreage shares adjustment                  −0.28      −0.57        −2.64              −3.66                     −3.71       −3.71
 World - No bilateral import shares adjustment         −0.26      −0.76        −2.56              −4.49                     −4.53       −3.02
 World - No export shares adjustment                   −0.26      −0.61        −2.50              −3.71                     −3.45       −2.18
MAD of acreage shares                                  26.09      31.05        37.04              39.62                     60.34       63.35
MAD of between-country acreage shares                  25.06      29.98        35.77              38.30                     33.58       41.04
MAD of international trade volumes                     16.05      50.46        49.55              68.45                     69.06      104.80


It represents the average absolute percentage change in crop acreages. Another interesting measure of changes in
acreages is the between-country changes that consider only the acreage changes aggregated at the country-level:
                                                                             Í                   
                                                                                           f fk
                                                                                   f ∈ Fi si πi     π̂ik − 1
                                                               Í
                                                                 i ∈I,k ∈K c
                   MAD of between-country acreage shares =                                      f fk
                                                                                                             ,  (61)
                                                                         i ∈I, f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c si πi
                                                                      Í

                         f fk Í         f
with πik ≡       f ∈ Fi si πi / f ∈ Fi si .
             Í
                                              For trade flows, we weight the change in the volume of trade by the initial trade
value:
                                                                                                 X jik X̂ jik / p̂kj − 1
                                                                        Í
                                                                            i, j ∈I,i,j,k ∈K c
                            MAD of international trade volumes =                                                           .               (62)
                                                                                                          X jik
                                                                                 Í
                                                                                     i, j ∈I,i,j,k ∈K c

It represents the average absolute percentage change in trade volumes.
     From column 1 to 5, the world is exposed to the same aggregate yield shock, but the shock is applied differently
across the columns. Depending on how the yield shock is applied, it has dramatically different effects. If the shock is
uniform across countries, the global welfare losses are the lowest. Under this configuration, climate change is much less
costly for countries from the Middle East, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa, while results are weakly changed for
Northern and Latin America. Despite a uniformly negative shock, the three regions that win from climate change in the
benchmark still win because of their terms-of-trade gains. Because the shock is the same, prices tend to move similarly
everywhere, which induces much less trade change than in other scenarios. In this scenario, there is almost no role for
acreage or trade adjustments: welfare losses are almost the same whether these margins are active or not, which is
consistent with the fact that this aggregate shock creates little change in relative prices and so little change in acreage
and trade.
     In the second column, the shock is specific to each country and therefore affects the countries’ comparative
advantages in crop production. One mechanism explains the higher welfare losses compared to a uniform shock. The
shock now affects countries differentially, but countries do not have the same capacity to adapt to the shock. In this
model, one of the key adaptation mechanisms is international trade. From equation (39), the change in consumer prices


                                                                   24
is a power mean of import prices weighted by initial trade shares. If the initial trade shares (excluding trade to self) are
small, the consumer price is very dependent on the domestic producer price, which increases sharply in the case of
adverse shock if there are no exports to reduce. Sub-Saharan Africa is both exposed to a larger shock than the mean and
is less connected through international trade so less able to adapt to the shock, which aggravates the mean effect. In this
setting, there is heterogeneity within a country between crops and fields, so acreage adjustments do not matter, but trade
adjustments do.
     In column 3, the shock is specific to each crop but affects countries similarly. So, it affects the countries’ comparative
advantages only because their initial crop specialization differs. This creates slightly fewer trade opportunities than a
country-specific shock given that a crop is affected uniformly everywhere, but it leads to more acreage reallocations.
The same mechanism operates to explain the different welfare gains: some crops tend to create more welfare losses than
others because of the lack of adaptation through trade.
     Column 4 of table 5 reports the results when the average country-crop shock is applied for each couple field-crop.
This shock is closer to the benchmark climate change shock than either of the three previous scenarios. This shock is
also similar to what would be obtained with a model with one field per country (and so to the early literature on the
topic), since it neglects all within-country changes. In this case, comparative advantages change between countries and
for all crops, but without within-country differentiation, outside of the initial field heterogeneity. This is the scenario
with the highest global welfare loss, higher even than in the benchmark without new crops. Comparing the last rows of
columns 4 and 5 shows that having shocks that are heterogeneous within countries affects the amount of change in
international trade volumes little, consistent with the idea that countries should have the same comparative advantages
between the two columns. In column 5, more adjustments take place on the supply side, with much more change in
acreages allowed by the within-country heterogeneity.
     In the absence of within-country heterogeneity in the climate-change shock (columns 1–4), the acreage adjustments
take place mostly between countries, with negligible within-country adjustments, and the role of acreage adjustments is
small. With within-country shock heterogeneity (columns 5–6), the share of within-country adjustments increases to
close to one-third. Common to all the scenarios without within-country heterogeneity is the fact that they neglect the
possibility of planting new crops on fields. For a better comparison with the benchmark, the benchmark simulation
without this possibility of planting new crops is presented in column 5 and shows a crucial result. Preventing new crops
from being planted increases the welfare losses of climate change by 77% with respect to the benchmark. Going one
step further and preventing all acreage adjustment increases the losses further but by less than preventing new crops.
This shows that the most important part of the supply-side adaptation to climate change is the possibility of planting
crops that could not grow before climate change. Adjusting the acreages within the set of crops that can be grown
initially has a much smaller effect.


6     Sensitivity to the behavioral assumptions
In this section, we analyze how our behavioral assumptions affect our conclusions about the respective role of acreage
and trade adjustments. We do this by varying the flexibility of each adjustment margin, which clarifies the inner
workings of the model and the mechanisms that trigger more or less role of a role for international trade adjustments.
We also parameterize the model with local behaviors as close as possible to those used in CDS to clarify what drives the
differences between our conclusions. The various models are presented in table 6. For comparison, the last row displays
CDS’ benchmark results.

6.1    Demand
Price elasticity of agricultural good demand To understand the role of the price elasticity of agricultural good
demand, we repeat the counterfactual analysis with different values. We consider an elasticity  of 0.5 in model 3, a
value that could be found in poor populations as discussed in section 4.1, and in model 4 we consider an elasticity of 1


                                                             25
                      Table 6: Role of each adjustment margins in welfare changes (as % of world GDP)

                                                                                                                          No adjustment on
                                                                                                                                bilateral
                                                                                               Full             acreage          import         export
                                                                                            adjustment           shares          shares         shares
Model                                                                                           (1)                (2)             (3)            (4)
1. Benchmark calibration ( = 0.2, κ = 0.6, ς = 0.9, θ = 1.1, η = 0, σ = 5.4)                 −1.72             −3.71            −3.02          −2.18
2. Benchmark calibration – 5-arcminute modeling                                               −1.58             −4.30            −2.82          −2.01
3.  = 0.5                                                                                    −1.00             −1.59            −1.30          −1.09
4.  = 1                                                                                      −0.74             −1.12            −0.89          −0.78
5. κ = 0.4                                                                                    −3.98            −11.88            −8.59          −5.44
6. κ = 1.2                                                                                    −0.67             −1.22            −1.14          −0.77
7. κ = 2.82                                                                                   −0.32             −0.58            −0.49          −0.36
8. ς = 0.6                                                                                    −1.82             −3.90            −3.60          −2.31
9. ς = 1.8                                                                                    −1.58             −3.45            −2.98          −1.99
10. ς = 2.82                                                                                  −1.50             −3.31            −2.82          −1.90
11. θ = 1.05                                                                                  −1.85             −3.67            −3.54          −2.33
12. θ = 1.2                                                                                   −1.53             −3.80            −2.75          −1.92
13. η = 0.02                                                                                  −1.49             −2.91            −2.43          −1.82
14. η = 0.04                                                                                  −1.31             −2.40            −2.03          −1.57
15. η = 0.06                                                                                  −1.18             −2.05            −1.75          −1.39
16. σ = 10                                                                                    −1.32             −3.12            −2.62          −1.82
17. κ = ς = 2.82                                                                              −0.27             −0.48            −0.40          −0.30
18.  = 1, κ = ς = 2.82                                                                       −0.21             −0.31            −0.25          −0.22
19. θ = 1.2407                                                                                −1.47             −3.83            −2.65          −1.84
20.  = 1, κ = ς = 2.82, θ = 1.2407                                                           −0.20             −0.32            −0.23          −0.20
21.  = 1, κ = ς = 2.82, θ = 1.2407 – 5-arcminute modeling                                    −0.19             −0.35            −0.22          −0.20
Costinot et al. (2016) benchmark results                                                      −0.26             −0.78             −             −0.27
Notes:  is the price elasticity of demand for the bundle of agricultural goods, κ is elasticity of substitution between agricultural products for final
demand, ς is the elasticity of substitution between agricultural products for feed demand, θ is shape parameter of the Fréchet distribution used for
crop yields, η is the elasticity of crop output to the input of the non-agricultural good, and σ is the elasticity of substitution between varieties.


as implicitly adopted in CDS, a value that should be considered an upper bound as it slightly exceeds what can be found
in the literature even for the poorest populations.
    Welfare losses decrease with a more elastic demand. However, these changes in welfare results are not straightforward
to interpret, as expected when preferences and behaviors are changed simultaneously. With a more elastic demand, the
contribution of changes in acreages decreases. Instead of a doubling of the global welfare losses in the benchmark,
losses increase by 51% if  = 1. The effect is similar if considering the counterfactual where bilateral import shares
are fixed: the role of import shares in adaptation to climate change decreases, but the contribution of import shares
to adaptation relative to the contribution of acreage adjustments stays the same. This result proceeds from a simple
intuition: a more elastic demand reduces the size of the price adjustments, so it reduces the adaptive role of the supply
and trade margins that are triggered by changes in relative prices. This intuition holds for the other demand parameters
analyzed below: these parameters matter a lot for the size of the welfare results but reduce the role supply and trade
adjustments similarly.

Final demand elasticity of substitution between agricultural products In our baseline model, the elasticity of
substitution between agricultural products for food is calibrated at 0.6, consistent with the widespread estimations of
inelastic demand for food products. While the literature on food demand mentioned in section 4.1 robustly finds inelastic
food demand with elasticities that rarely exceed 1 in absolute value, this literature is mostly concerned with short-run
elasticities, even if short run is understood as annual. When considering the effects of climate change and neglecting


                                                                          26
the transitional dynamics to the 2080s, we are interested in long-run elasticities, but to our knowledge, these have not
been studied. In two papers, Atkin (2013, 2016) touches on this issue by showing that food demand is affected by habit
formation and how habits could affect the nutritional effects of trade liberalization and migration. Tastes for certain
foods evolve depending on how much they were consumed in the past, especially as a child, and therefore depending on
their past prices. This mechanism would point toward higher demand elasticities in the long run than in the short run
as tastes gradually evolve toward the foods that are the cheapest locally. However, Atkin (2013) also notes that tastes
evolve slowly, with a doubling in the price of a staple a decade earlier reducing the budget share of that food by just 3
to 5%. This slow adjustment is in the context of poor Indian households that could be expected to have higher food
demand elasticities, and thus a higher propensity to tastes adjustment, than affluent households in rich countries where
the budget share of primary products is small.
    To explore the quantitative importance of this possibility of a higher long-run substitution between food products,
we consider a scenario with an elasticity of substitution of 1.2 in model 6, the double of the benchmark value. We also
report the results with an elasticity lower than benchmark (model 5) and with the elasticity used in CDS: 2.82 (model 7).
This substitution elasticity plays a key role in determining the size of the welfare losses with an order of magnitude
between the smallest and the highest losses. Climate change is much less costly with more substitution between food
products, since not all food products are affected alike and some even show higher potential yields under climate change,
allowing the consumption to reallocate to cheaper products. However, this parameter influences the respective role of
changes in acreage and in trade little.

Feed demand elasticity of substitution between agricultural products The literature on feed demand elasticities
is limited and displays a lot of variations from −0.05 to −2.13 according to the papers reviewed previously. Since
demand for feed is unlikely to be as inelastic as food demand, we use the elasticity of substitution between agricultural
products for final demand as a lower bound in the sensitivity analysis. For the upper bound, we consider the double
of the benchmark elasticity, which would put the feed demand elasticities in the high end of the literature. We also
consider the substitution elasticity used for final demand in CDS: 2.82. Models 8–10 of table 6 report the results for
these alternative values. As expected, a more elastic demand for feed implies less welfare loss. However, this effect is
much lower than for final demand, despite a large share of 31% of feed demand in total demand for crops. This lower
effect stems from the fact that the demand for feed is concentrated into far fewer crops than the demand for food (e.g.,
in the U.S., grass, maize, and soybean represent 80% of feed demand), which greatly decreases the opportunity for
substitution. The respective role of production and trade adjustments are not affected by the choice of this parameter.


6.2    Supply
Acreage choice We vary the acreage elasticity around its benchmark value, halving and doubling it. Since the acreage
elasticity is proportional to θ − 1, halving it decreases θ to 1.05 and doubling it increases θ to 1.2. Corresponding to
these values, the acreage elasticity of maize and soybean in the U.S. are 0.17 and 0.19 for the lower θ and 0.66 and 0.75
for the higher θ. When the value of θ is changed, the calibration of the initial rents should be done for the new value
according to equation (44). The aggregate values of production, trade, and final demand stay the same, but a different θ
implies slightly different initial land rents and thus different field acreages.
    Models 11 and 12 of table 6 report the results of this exercise. Varying the degree of within-field heterogeneity from
1.05 to 1.2 influences welfare changes, with lower aggregate losses for a higher θ. Despite the large variations that it
implies in the supply elasticities, the welfare changes remain modest compared to the fact that welfare losses more than
double if acreage shares are forced to stay the same. This is explained by what was discussed in section 5.4: the largest
contribution to production adjustments comes from the possibility of planting new crops on fields, which is not affected
by θ. Despite limited welfare effects, θ affects the respective role of acreage and trade adjustments. With θ = 1.2,
there are more acreage adjustments in the full adjustment setup, which decreases the welfare losses and increase the
contribution of acreage adjustments. The balance between acreage and trade adjustments is also affected: with a lower


                                                           27
θ, their contribution is almost identical, while with a higher θ, acreage adjustments contribute much more to adaptation,
although the contribution of trade adjustments remains substantial. This points to some substitution between these two
margins of adjustment: if one is more flexible, it decreases the need for the other. The less flexible domestic supply is,
the wider the imbalances between domestic supply and demand are, which would call for more international trade to
reduce the imbalances.

Yield elasticity For the sake of parsimony and because of the difficulty of obtaining reliable estimates of yield
elasticities at the world level, we have assumed inelastic yields in the benchmark model. However, in addition to changing
acreages, intensifying crop production could be a strategy to adapt to climate change. The increase in agricultural prices
caused by climate change could make increasing inputs used for crop production profitable. Such a reaction is likely to
be heterogeneous across fields, countries, and crops, depending on the existing gaps with respect to maximum yields,
among other things. For this sensitivity analysis, we abstract from this complexity by assuming that yields can be
expressed as isoelastic functions of input levels (the outside good being used as input), using the same elasticity η for all
crops and all countries. Appendix F details the changes to be made to the model to accommodate elastic yields. The
model with elastic yields nests the benchmark model when yields are assumed to be inelastic, which corresponds to
η = 0. Having elastic yields decreases the acreage elasticities for the same θ. So, to maintain the same elasticities as
in the benchmark model, the degree of within-field heterogeneity is taken equal to θ̃ = θ + η/(1 − η), where θ is the
benchmark value.
    The debates about the indirect land-use changes caused by biofuel policies revolved a lot around the price elasticity
of yields, since more elastic yields imply less land-use changes and consequentially less carbon emissions from planting
crops on new lands. Berry (2011) and Berry and Schlenker (2011) argue that GTAP-based models use too large
of yield-price elasticities, and that credible estimates are often not significant. Based on their review and some IV
estimations, they consider that these elasticities should not exceed 0.1 for the main U.S. crops. Recent estimates in
Scott (2013) and Haile et al. (2016) confirm this order of magnitude, while Miao et al. (2016) find a non-significant
yield-price elasticity for U.S. soybean and an elasticity around 0.25 for U.S. maize, 0.25 also being the high value used
in GTAP models and criticized by Berry (2011). Models 13-15 of table 6 report the counterfactual results with elastic
yields assuming η = 0.02, 0.04, and 0.06, which correspond to yield-price elasticities for U.S. maize of 0.11, 0.21,
and 0.33. With η = 0.06, model 15 corresponds to a situation where the yield-price elasticities are not far from the
acreage-price elasticities, an extreme calibration according to this literature. Having elastic yields increases the total
supply elasticity and, thus, the extent of supply-side adaptations, reducing welfare losses and the potential adaptive role
of acreage and trade adjustments without affecting their relative contribution.

Degree of spatial aggregation Data on potential yields are available at the 5-arcminute level, the level at which
CDS model is built. In this paper for reducing the computational burden of solving the model, we have aggregated
the potential yields information to the 1-degree level. This significantly reduces the number of fields to account for,
but it also reduces the spatial heterogeneity and the corresponding possibility to reallocate crops between fields. It
is important to verify that this assumption is not behind the results that trade matters for adaption by decreasing the
supply-side adaptation margin. One hint that the spatial aggregation may bias the results is provided in column 4 of
table 5. In the limit, if fields are aggregated to one per country and all within-country heterogeneity is neglected, the
role of acreage adjustments decreases grealy, becoming inferior to the role of trade adjustments.
    To verify the role of this specification, we solve the model at the 5-arcminute level for two calibrations: the
benchmark calibration and the closest calibration to CDS (see section 6.4 for details). The results are available in
models 2 and 20 and can be compared to models 1 and 19 that have the same calibrations. For CDS calibration, the
difference is very small, but for the benchmark calibration, keeping as much spatial detail as possible matters. With
more spatial heterogeneity, there are more supply-side adjustments, which decreases welfare losses and increases the
role of acreage changes. The role of trade adjustments also decreases but remains sizable. From this exercise, we
can conclude that a setting with more detailed spatial information is important to capture the extent of supply-side


                                                             28
adjustments better. However, for the purpose of this paper, yields are sufficiently spatially correlated that an aggregation
at the 1-degree level is unlikely to reverse the paper’s conclusions.


6.3    International trade
To better understand the role of trade adjustments, we consider two alternative models. First, we consider a model
with a higher Armington elasticity of 10, the value estimated in Caliendo and Parro (2015) for agricultural products.
Second, we consider a situation of integrated world markets, which can be considered as an upper bound of what
international trade can contribute to adaptation to climate change, because it amounts to neglecting all trade costs and
preferences for varieties associated with countries of origin. This situation reflects the reality that many agricultural
products are actually commodities with very little differentiation regarding what is produced between countries. In such
a case, which is not relevant for all agricultural products (e.g., livestock), the Armington assumption we have adopted
for convenience may be unduly restrictive, and the hypothesis of homogeneous goods would be more appropriate (as
adopted for crops by Sotelo, 2015). Properly modeling international trade in homogeneous goods is costly because of
the need for extensive data on trade costs and the accounting in the model for all possible trade flows, even if initially
null. So, we adopt the hypothesis of integrated world markets without trade costs, which simplifies the modeling of
homogeneous products for this exercise and provides an upper bound for a model with trade costs. All products are
assumed perfectly integrated, except grass, which remains non-tradable (but its price is pinned down in each country by
the world price of livestock). We discuss the changes to be made to have integrated world markets in the model below.
    The changes to be made to the model to transform it to a model with integrated world markets are relatively simple:
bilateral trade variables (X jik ) are removed as they are now irrelevant, consumer prices and producer prices are equal
(Pik = pik = pk ), and market clearing equations for consumer prices (40) and producer prices (42) are collapsed and
summed over all countries. Only one model change is less obvious. Because of the Armington assumption, in the
benchmark model, a crop is always produced in a country as long as there are positive potential yields. This is no longer
the case if products are assumed homogeneous, so we need to account for the possibility of some land rents (and thus
some production) being zero under climate change but positive in the baseline. This is done by expressing equation (32)
for crops as a complementarity slackness condition:
                                                                            
                                            r̂ik ≥ 0 ⊥ r̂ik ≥ p̂k − φik,labor /φik,land .                            (63)

Changes in land rents completely follow changes in the corresponding world prices. We allow for the possibility of
a land rent becoming zero in the counterfactual but not for the opposite situation of a land rent becoming positive
after being zero. Because of equation (63), the model with integrated world markets is solved numerically as a mixed
complementarity problem using the solver PATH.
    Model 16 of table 6 reports the results with a higher Armington elasticity. With more elastic trade, there are more
trade reallocations under full adjustments and lower welfare losses. The adaptive roles of acreage and trade decline
accordingly without changes in their respective role. However, the interpretation of this result is not trivial, given that
changing the trade elasticity also involves changing the preferences for varieties. For the integrated world markets, we
report only the results under full adjustment in column 1 of table 7. If all markets except grass are integrated, global
welfare losses are reduced by one third, falling from 1.72% to 0.57%. The reduction is especially strong for Sub-Saharan
Africa, which suffers a 0.63% welfare loss instead of a 21.24% loss. This demonstrates that one of the main reasons
for the large welfare losses in Africa in the benchmark model is the low tradability of some of its key agricultural
commodities (roots or coarse grains) and its high trade costs. Northern America, which enjoys welfare gains in the
benchmark because of terms-of-trade gains in agricultural products, is barely affected in welfare terms under integrated
world markets by climate change as agricultural prices and the associated terms of trade evolve much less.
    We would like now to compare the two counterfactuals with restrictions on trade. In all model variations, the
counterfactual exercise proposed by CDS where export shares are fixed using trade taxes leads to more moderate welfare


                                                            29
                   Table 7: Effects of the assumptions about international trade (percentage change)

                                             Integrated world                Benchmark        Fixed ex-     Fixed bilateral
                                                 markets          σ = 10      σ = 5.4        port shares    import shares
Variable                                            (1)             (2)         (3)              (4)             (5)
Welfare change
  Asia                                            −0.98            −2.30        −3.09          −4.18            −4.93
  Commonwealth of Independent States              −0.33            −0.16        −0.11           0.34            −1.31
  Europe                                          −0.77            −1.11        −1.35          −1.42            −2.37
  Latin America                                    0.46             0.87         1.39           2.04             4.14
  Middle East and North Africa                    −2.19            −4.48        −5.78          −8.54            −9.43
  Northern America                                −0.00             0.28         0.39           0.79             0.36
  Oceania                                          0.45             1.14         1.64           2.82             2.70
  Sub-Saharan Africa                              −0.63           −14.89       −21.24         −29.60           −46.58
  World                                           −0.57            −1.32        −1.72          −2.18            −3.02
Agricultural good consumption                     −7.59           −13.96       −16.66         −19.41           −21.43
Agricultural good price                           49.87           133.40       187.13         275.49           506.68
MAD of acreage shares                             69.42            63.79        63.35          64.17            62.95
MAD of between-country acreage shares             51.99            42.16        41.04          41.22            39.68
MAD of international trade volumes                                120.07       104.80          73.71            60.40


losses than the restriction we have adopted, which fixes the bilateral import shares. In the case of the benchmark
calibration, we can compare the restrictions’ effects in columns 4 and 5 of table 7. Since both counterfactuals restrict
trade adjustments, countries are obliged to rely more on their baseline trade patterns, so they experience much larger
price increases than in the benchmark and larger decreases in the consumption of the agricultural good bundle, with a
smaller effect for fixed export shares. However, in contrast with the counterfactual on acreage that blocks all acreage
changes, the counterfactuals on trade do not block all trade adjustments. We measure how much they restrict trade
changes through the MAD of international trade volumes. The MAD of international trade volumes is 105% in the
benchmark simulation. It decreases to 74% if export shares are fixed and 60% if bilateral export shares are fixed. We
draw two conclusions from this observation. Firstly, fixing bilateral import shares maintains trade flows closer to their
initial values than fixing export shares. It is a stronger constraint, and therefore a more legitimate way to measure the
role of trade in climate change adaptation. Secondly, despite the strong restrictions imposed on trade, the MAD of
international trade volumes are large at 60%, showing that a lot of trade adjustments still take place even if the bilateral
import shares have been fixed. This counterfactual delivers what should be considered a lower bound of the contribution
of trade to climate change adaptation. In our simulations, the role of acreage changes is always more important than the
one of trade changes, but we must keep in mind that one is a measure where all adjustments have been prevented while
the other has only prevented 60% of the adjustments. Given the proximity of the two measures, it is not unreasonable to
think that the role of trade in climate change adaptation is as large or larger than the role of acreage changes.


6.4    Costinot et al. (2016) calibration
To understand better the differences between CDS’ results and ours, we have also simulated our model using their
behavioral assumptions, mostly combining parameter values previously tested. On the demand side, it suffices to assume
higher elasticities: a unitary demand elasticity for the food bundle and a substitution elasticity equal to 2.82 for final
demand and demand for feed. Regarding the supply-side, and so the degree of within-field heterogeneity, θ, even if this
parameter has the same interpretation in their model and ours, it does not have the same quantitative effect. To make the
two models comparable, we select θ to target their aggregate supply elasticity. From equation (8) in CDS, their supply



                                                            30
elasticities can be derived:

               ∂ ln Qik               Õ                   Qf k               Õ             Õ              Õ                    Qf k
                                                     fk      i                                      fk            fk        fk      i
                          = (θ − 1)            1−   πi             = (θ − 1)            1−         πi    +       πi    −   πi             .   (64)
               ∂ ln pik               f ∈ Fi
                                                            Qik                f ∈ Fi          k             k
                                                                                                                                   Qik
                                                                                        |     {z        } |        {z        }
                                                                                            Extensive            Intensive

This expression differs from equation (26) by the ratio of the producer price to the land rents, pik /rik , because our model
allocates land according to the land rents, not according to the producer price. From their programs, we can calculate an
average world acreage elasticity, weighted by the value of production, equal to 1.39. To reproduce the same average
elasticity for the same set of crops in our model requires θ = 1.2407, well below their value of 2.46, in part because of
the role of pik /rik . Since supply elasticities are proportional to θ − 1, increasing θ from 1.1 to 1.2407 amounts to more
than double the elasticities from our benchmark.
    Models 17–21 of table 6 present calibrations using combinations of CDS behavioral assumptions. Assuming an
elasticity of substitution of 2.82 for final demand and demand for feed in model 17 is enough to bring down the welfare
losses to the order of magnitude in CDS. However, it does not change the respective role of production and trade
adjustments. Adopting in addition the assumption of a unitary elasticity for the final demand (model 18) further reduces
the losses and slightly reduces the role of trade. In model 19, where only CDS supply-side behavior is reproduced,
the role of trade starts to decline significantly but remains sizable, despite more reallocation between crops. So, it is
really the combination of very flexible demand and supply that reduces the role of trade so strongly (models 20 and 21).
Indeed, despite large within-field reallocations in model 19, important trade adjustment are still required because the
new production patterns do not necessarily match the local preferences. With more flexible preferences (a higher κ), this
is no longer a problem, and local food demand adjusts to local production, reducing the need for trade adjustments.
    To better understand the rest of the results, we must note that even when adopting CDS calibration, there are
irreducible differences between the two models mostly related to the modeling of crop production. CDS assume that
the climate change shock is a shock to the total factor productivity, while we follow to what agronomists can predict:
the effect of climate change on yields, so on the partial productivity of land. Since, in GTAP data, land accounts for
one-fifth of production costs on average, this assumption reduces the size of the shock by the same amount. On the other
hand, we include many more crops in the model than they do. The subset of CDS crops represents just 38% of the
production value of all our crops. After combining these two differences, we should expect a lower climate change
shock in our model, which explains why welfare losses under full adjustments are lower when we adopt their behavioral
assumptions (models 20 and 21) than in their benchmark (−0.26). Under the same behavioral assumptions, we can
replicate CDS results that trade adjustments do not matter much (whatever the measure of trade adjustment one adopts).
We also find that production adjustments matter, but a key difference with CDS is that production adjustments matter
much less than in their model, where welfare losses triple without production adjustment, a result that can be achieved
in our case only by assuming a smaller elasticity of substitution as in model 5.
    There is one last difference between the two models that could explain this large difference in the role of production
adjustments. CDS supply elasticity can be decomposed as in equation (64) between an extensive margin (the contribution
to production of the extension over “unused” land) and an intensive margin (the substitution between crops for a given
area of agricultural land). If we consider the same set of crops, our model also includes an extensive margin over the
other crops, in particular grass. A key difference is that this extension has an opportunity cost in our case because the
land has an alternative valuable use. In CDS, the “unused” land on which crops can expand has no opportunity cost. So,
there is a factor supply of land only restricted by the availability of land and the labor cost to put land into production.
Even if calibrated to have the same local behavior, the two models differ a lot; in our case, production adjustments only
come from reallocation between crops, while in CDS, they mostly come from adjustments to total agricultural areas
(decomposing the supply elasticities shows that the extensive margin is the principal component).
    To summarize, CDS finding that trade adjustments matter little to adaptation to climate change while production
adjustments account for most of the adaptation can be explained mostly by the following features of their model. Firstly,


                                                                       31
the combination of demand and supply schedules that are very flexible with respect to the crop relative prices—three
times more than usual estimates—implies that acreages are very reactive to the new climatic and market conditions
while local diets adjust to match this new production pattern. Secondly, using a situation where total export shares are
maintained constant as counterfactual for measuring the role of trade minimizes the role of trade by imposing a small
constraint on trade adjustments.


7    Conclusion
This paper estimates how climate change in the agricultural sector will affect the world economy, focusing on the role of
production and trade adjustments as margins of adaptation. Using an Armington quantitative trade model with spatially
explicit land uses that builds on Costinot et al. (2016), we simulate a counterfactual scenario of climate change where
the shock on crop yields at the 2080 horizon is based on simulations from crop science. In our benchmark calibration,
climate change reduces welfare globally by 1.72%, with a lot of heterogeneity as net-food-importing tropical countries
lose from the negative productivity shocks and increased global food prices, while countries exporting agricultural
products tend to gain thanks to improved terms of trade.
    These welfare changes are the results of demand-side, supply-side, and trade adjustments that all contribute to
mitigate the adverse shock. Supply-side adjustments are crucial, allowing production to relocate where it is more
profitable. The most important supply-side adaptation appears to be the ability to introduce crops that were not productive
before climate change to a field, a feature made possible by the functional forms used in our spatially explicit modeling.
Since these adjustments reallocate crop production between countries, as well as within countries, international trade
plays a strong role in balancing the new domestic supply and demand schedules. If the trade adjustments are prevented
from occurring by forcing bilateral import shares to stay constant, welfare losses increase by 76%. This result is in
contrast with Costinot et al.’s (2016) result that only production adjustments matter in adaptation to climate change
while trade adjustments would barely reduce welfare losses. The key difference between our models is in demand and
supply elasticities. Our elasticities are taken from the literature, which consistently finds that food demand and supply
are inelastic, while Costinot et al. estimate these elasticities in cross-section despite the loose mapping existing between
their model and the available data (e.g., a lot of the between-country differences in agricultural good consumption can
be explained by income effects, biofuel policies, and trade policies that are neglected in their model and estimation).
    Adaptation to climate change in agriculture is often synonymous with investments in irrigation infrastructure,
development of new crop varieties, or as confirmed by our paper, farm-level decisions regarding planting decisions and
adjusting the crop mix to the new climate, which are indisputably important supply-side adjustments. But this paper
demonstrates that these adjustments will not prevent the creation of large imbalances in domestic markets, which can
only be resolved by large reallocations in international trade. These reallocations may not happen as smoothly as in
our stylized model. Allowing a completely different pattern of trade to emerge involves large investments in transport
infrastructures that will have to be planned years in advance.
    In addition, agriculture is the sector with the highest prevalence of distortionary public interventions, a fact that is
neglected in the model. The domestic political economy at stake, not today, but in the next 70 years, is clearly beyond
the scope of our analysis. Changing demographic and political weights will impact which groups will be favored by
public policies, in particular regarding price distortions. By altering incentives, these policies have the potential to put
agricultural systems into maladaptative pathways by locking in specializations that no longer make sense. Our results
have also serious implications regarding the governance of the global trading system. Indeed, we find major welfare
redistribution effects driven by changes in terms of trade. Historically, multilateral and regional trade agreements have
been driven by the need of addressing terms-of-trade effects originated by non-cooperative policies. Therefore, without
the proper policies in place to address the root of the issue—climate change agreement—and the resilience of existing
trading institutions, political pressure to use trade policy instruments to mitigate the terms-of-trade impact of agricultural
productivity shock may in fact exacerbate the initial efficiency shock.



                                                             32
    Given the model parsimony, some margins of adaptation have been neglected, such as irrigation or deforestation,
which could constitute interesting developments of the land-use theory sketched here. While these margins could
contribute to reducing the welfare losses, they are unlikely to significantly change the role of international trade. On the
contrary, this paper may understate the true benefits of international trade in climate change adaptation. The adopted
Armington assumption, while common in international trade theory, presents the drawback shared with many modern
trade theories (except for Helpman et al., 2008) of neglecting the extensive margin associated with new trading partners.
The climate change shocks affect comparative advantages so much that trade patterns in agricultural products may be
radically different. At the same time, the Armington assumption of imperfect substitutability between the same crop
from two different countries may prevent the emergence of trade patterns that are much different structurally from
current patterns. This problem raises the challenges of the development of a new trade theory compatible with observed
bilateral trade flows, perfect competition, and zero trade flows across pairs of countries.




                                                            33
                                                                             Appendix

A     Proof of existence and uniqueness of land rents per unit of production
To prove that equation (44) has a unique solution, let define ρik = −θ ln rik and rewrite the equation in log:
                                                                                       "                                      # (1−θ)/θ 
                                            
                                            
                                                      −1 Õ                    θ       Õ                           θ              
                                                                    f        fk                     −ρil          fl
                                 ρik = ln                                                                                                            = hik (ρi ) ,
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                        
                                                 Rik               si       Ai                      e            Ai                                                                                   (A1)
                                                                                                                                              
                                            
                                                         f ∈ Fi                           l ∈K c                                              
                                                                                                                                               

where ρi is the vector of ρik , k ∈ K c and Rik > 0.
   We define the mapping hi : Rni → Rni , where ni is the number of crops grown in country i (i.e., the crops for which
Ri > 0). Now, we calculate the elements of the Jacobian of hi :
 k


                                                   !                                                                                      "                                             # 1/θ−2
             ∂hik (ρi )          θ−1      1            −1 Õ
                                                                    f
                                                                                             
                                                                                                  fk
                                                                                                        θ
                                                                                                                 −ρil
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                              fl
                                                                                                                                   θ          Õ
                                                                                                                                                            −ρil
                                                                                                                                                                   0   
                                                                                                                                                                            f l0
                                                                                                                                                                                   θ
                               =                      Rik          si                            Ai          e               Ai                         e                  Ai                     ,   (A2)
                 ∂ ρli            θ  exp hik (ρi )          f ∈ Fi                                                                            l0 ∈K c
                                                   !                                                                    "                                          # (1−θ)/θ
                                 θ−1      1            −1 Õ
                                                                    f
                                                                                             
                                                                                                  fk
                                                                                                        θ
                                                                                                              fl
                                                                                                                             Õ
                                                                                                                                        −ρil
                                                                                                                                             0   
                                                                                                                                                      f l0
                                                                                                                                                             θ
                               =                      Rik          si                            Ai          πi                       e              Ai                             .                 (A3)
                                  θ        k
                                     exp hi (ρi )           f ∈F                   i                                        l0 ∈K c

     According to the mean value theorem, for any ρi,0 and ρi,1 ∈ Rni there exists some ti ∈ [0, 1] such that
ρ̃i = ti ρi,0 + (1 − ti ) ρi,1 satisfies

                                                                       Õ ∂hk ( ρ̃i )             
                                                                             i
                                                hik ρi,1 − hik ρi,0 =                  ρl
                                                                                              ρi,0 .
                                                                                               l
                                                                  
                                                                                        i,1 −                                                                                                         (A4)
                                                                      l ∈K c
                                                                             ∂ ρ̃li

Under the sup norm, k ρk = maxk ρk , we have

                                                                             Õ ∂hk ( ρ̃i )
                                                                                   i
                                        hi ρi,1 − hi ρi,0 ≤ ρi,1 − ρi,0 max                .
                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (A5)
                                                                         k
                                                                            l ∈K c ∂ ρ̃li

                          fl
                         πi = 1, we have
             Í
Using that    l ∈K c
                                                                   Õ ∂hk ( ρ̃i )                    θ−1
                                                                       i
                                                                                              =         < 1,                                                                                          (A6)
                                                                              ∂ ρ̃li                 θ
                                                                   l ∈K c

so hi is a contraction mapping and the contraction mapping theorem implies the existence of a unique fixed point ρi for
hi and a unique solution to equation (44). 


B     Effects of a crop productivity shifter
We aim here to prove that adjusting the GAEZ potential yields by a constant country-crop productivity shifter does not
                                                                                                                          fk
alter the results. For this, we assume now that, in a parcel, yields are distributed Fréchet with shape θ and scale γδik Ai ,
where δi is a country- and product-specific productivity shifter. This change leads to the following new equations
         k




                                                                                           34
replacing equations (20) and (24):
                                                                                        θ
                                                                                     fk
                                                                           rik δik Ai
                                                             fk
                                                           πi =                                  θ ,                                               (A7)
                                                                    Í
                                                                                     r l δl A f l
                                                                     l ∈K ,ri ≥0 i i i
                                                                         c    l

                                                                    Õ                      (θ−1)/θ
                                                                          f fk          fk
                                                          Qik = δik      si Ai πi                      ,                                             (A8)
                                                                       f ∈ Fi

and to a slightly different calibration for the land rents, where equation (44) is replaced by
                                                                                                    "                               # (1−θ)/θ
                                            −θ             −1 Õ                       θ           Õ                     θ
                                                                             f        fk                                  fl
                                  δik rik          = Rik                    si       Ai                          δil ril Ai                     ,    (A9)
                                                                   f ∈ Fi                               l ∈K c


which defines a contraction mapping in δik rik .
                                                                                 fk
    Values for δik rik consistent with (A9) lead to unique benchmark values for πi and Qik /δik . If the productivity shifters
δi are not changed in counterfactual simulations, the values of δi do not affect the results, because the relative changes
 k                                                                 k

of production are now given by
                                                                                                                        θ−1
                                                                                                                 fk0
                                                                                          
                                                   Õ δk                                       δik rik r̂ik Ai
                                                      i            f   fk0
                                      Q̂ik =                      si Ai                                                                 .           (A10)
                                                            Qik                                                          θ  (θ−1)/θ
                                                                             
                                                                                                                  fl0
                                                                                                
                                                   f ∈ Fi
                                                                                                    δil ril r̂il Ai
                                                                                 Í
                                                                                     l ∈K c


    Without incidences on the results, δik could be calibrated so that Qik replicate the physical production values in tons
in FAOSTAT.


C     Welfare decomposition
From the definition of the equivalent variation and equation (45), we have:

                                                       ∂e Pi0, Pi , Ui
                                                                       
                                               d EVi =                   d Ui = Pi0Ui d ln Ui .                                                     (A11)
                                                           ∂Ui

Then from the definition of the expenditure function and Shephard’s lemma:

                                                   ∂e Pi0, Pi , Ui          ∂e Pi0, Pi , Ui
                                                                                           
                                            d Ei =                   d Pi +                   d Ui ,                                                (A12)
                                                         ∂Pi                    ∂Ui
                                                 = Ci d Pi + d EVi ,                                                                                (A13)

and so
                                                          d EVi = Ei d ln Ei − Pi Ci d ln Pi .                                                      (A14)
    From now on, we assume no trade deficits, so from equation (31):
                                                        Õ
                                           Ei d ln Ei =      Rik d ln Rik .                                                                         (A15)
                                                                                 k ∈K c




                                                                                     35
Land rents can be further decomposed using equation (25), for k ∈ K c :

                                                                    d ln Rik = d ln rik + d ln Qik .                                                                                              (A16)
                                                                    fk                                 fk
From equations (20) and (24) and using d ln Ai (ω) = d ln Ai , we get for d ln Qik :

                      Õ Qf k
                                    "                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                    Õ                                                      
                         i                      fk                                                     fk                                 fl                             fl
       d ln Qik   =                     d ln   Ai    + (θ − 1)              d ln rik   + d ln         Ai         −             (θ −   1) πi        d ln ril   + d ln    Ai            .           (A17)
                      f ∈Ki
                              Qik                                                                                     l ∈K c


Now we can sum Rik d ln Rik over k:
                                                                    "                                                                                                                     #
           Õ                                   Õ                                                                        Õ                                                          
                                                              fk                                             fk                               fl                              fl
                   Rik   d ln Rik   =                    rik Qi         θ         d ln rik   + d ln         Ai        −            (θ −   1) πi          d ln ril   + d ln   Ai               ,
          k ∈K c                        f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c                                                                    l ∈K c
                                                                                                  "                                                            #
                                               Õ                                                                                          Õ
                                                                                        fk                  fk                         fk                 fl
                                    =                        d ln rik   + d ln         Ai             θrik Qi         − (θ −       1) πi             ril Qi         .                             (A18)
                                        f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c                                                                                      l ∈K c

                                                 fk    fk Í            fl
Combining equations (20) and (24), we obtain πi = rik Qi / l ∈K c ril Qi , which allows us to simplify equation (A18)
in                            Õ                     Õ                               
                                                              fk                  fk
                                   Rik d ln Rik =        rik Qi d ln rik + d ln Ai .                            (A19)
                                           k ∈K c                              f ∈ Fi ,k ∈K c

   Now from labor market clearing we have:

                                                                   Õ                             Õ              ©Õ k ª
                                                     wi Ni =                  wi Nik =                φik,labor ­     Xi j ® .                                                                    (A20)
                                                                   k ∈K                          k ∈K           « j ∈I ¬
Multiplying equation (A20) by d ln wi = 0 and using (32), we get

                                                      Õ ©Õ ª                                                                 
                         0 = wi Ni d ln wi =               ­      Xikj ® d ln pik − φik,land d ln rik − φik,feed d ln Pik,feed .                                                                  (A21)
                                                      k ∈K « j ∈I      ¬
   Then, we can decompose final consumption:

                                                                      © Õ
                                                Pi Ci d ln Pi = Pi Ci ­              αik α kji d ln pkj ® ,
                                                                                                        ª

                                                                      «k ∈K a , j ∈I                    ¬
                                                                   Õ                          
                                                              =              Xi − Pi xi α ji d ln pkj .
                                                                                 k      k k       k
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (A22)
                                                                              k ∈K a , j ∈I


    Finally, from equation (A14), we combine equations (A19), (A21), and (A22). Terms in d ln rik and terms related to
feed demand (d ln Pik,feed and Pik xik ) cancel, and we get equation (47).




                                                                                             36
D     Data sources and description
D.1    Potential land productivity under the current climate and under climate change
For calibrating the potential yields under the current climate and under climate change, we rely on the GAEZ project
from IIASA/FAO (2012). This project makes gridded information at the 5-arcminute level about land resources, climate,
land cover, potential yields, and other statistics for 49 crops publicly available. Potential yields are calculated for each
pixel using a simplified crop growth model that makes use of information on the soil types and climate, and assumed
input and water levels. For our initial equilibrium, we use the potential yields calculated from these crop models for the
average climate over the period 1961–1990, called “Baseline” in the GAEZ project. For the yields under climate change,
we adopt a 2080s horizon, corresponding to an average of the years 2071–2100, a climate simulated by the UK Met
Office Hadley Centre coupled model under the emission scenario A1FI. The scenario A1FI corresponds to a narrative of
rapid economic growth and a convergent world with an emphasis on fossil-fuels. It belongs to the set of SRES scenarios
(Special Report on Emission Scenarios) developed by the IPCC. These scenarios have been superseded in 2014 by the
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) scenarios. The A1FI scenario could be mapped to the more recent
RCP8.5. Both are the most pessimistic climate change scenarios with a global average surface warming of 4◦ C for the
A1FI at the end of the 21st century (3.7◦ C for the more recent RCP8.5), and so the welfare results in this paper should be
considered upper bound. However, these scenarios are also the closest scenarios to the current path of emissions.
    The model does not account for different types of land management, so it cannot make use of the available information
in the GAEZ project about input and water levels. Consequently, only the scenario of high inputs under rain-fed
conditions is used. The fact that the input levels differ between countries, explaining parts of productivity differences
between countries, is implicitly accounted for in the calibration by the insensitivity of the model to a country-crop
productivity shifter (Appendix B).
    In our model, we use all the GAEZ crops that have a corresponding product in FAOSTAT, which excludes only
jatropha, pasture legume, miscanthus, switchgrass, and reed canary grass. Grass does not correspond to any FAOSTAT
product but is included here to represent pastures. Some crops are aggregated together to reduce the model size or
because they correspond to varieties for which FAOSTAT does not provide separate information. Appendix E provides
details about the aggregation procedure and the underlying theoretical assumptions. To put it simply, we use the acreage
choice equations detailed in section 3.2 and assume that the crops aggregated have the same land rents. Because of the
underlying assumption of identical land rents, the aggregation is done only for similar crops. Cassava, sweet potatoes,
and yams have been aggregated into the bundle crop “Tropical roots.” Chickpeas, cowpeas, gram, and pigeon peas
have been aggregated into “Other pulses.” Foxtail millet and pearl millet have been aggregated into “Millet” because
FAOSTAT does not make a distinction between these varieties. Rice and sugar crops are not aggregated in this way.
GAEZ provides potential yield for dryland and wetland rice. Since this distinction corresponds to different production
methods and not to varieties, the “Rice” aggregate is constructed by taking the maximum of the two values. Sugar crops,
cane and beet, are grown for their sugar content. They are internationally traded once transformed into sugar but not as
raw products. Hence, we convert their potential yields from ton per hectare of sugar crops to ton per hectare of sugar,
using conversions of 1 ton of cane to 0.095 ton of sugar and 1 ton of beet to 0.144 ton of sugar, based on the average
world rate of conversion in FAOSTAT. Then, the aggregate “Sugar crops” is created by taking the maximum of the two
values.
    Finally, GAEZ crops are mapped to similar crops in FAOSTAT, not just to the exact crops as indicated in the GAEZ
documentation. This extended mapping allows us to account for a larger share of agricultural land uses. For example,
GAEZ citrus fruits are mapped to all kind of citrus fruits in FAOSTAT, not just oranges. The mapping between crops in
the model and crops in GAEZ and FAOSTAT is available in table A2.
    Some adjustments to the potential yield data are done. First, under the model assumptions, as long as a field presents
a positive potential yield for a crop, this crop will be planted in the field, even if the potential yield is extremely low.
To avoid planting crops with unrealistically low productivities, we truncate all potential yields to 5% of the world



                                                            37
maximum yield for the corresponding crop, except for grass, since it plays the role of the default choice in the model.
Second, there is no information on potential yield under climate change for cocoa. Since cocoa tends to be grown in
similar agroecological areas as coffee, we instead use the relative changes in the potential yields of coffee. Last, because
the Armington assumption for representing trade tends to be conservative with respect to initial trade shares, large
yield reduction under climate change can result in very large price movements, which makes finding the new market
equilibrium challenging. To avoid this problem, if average country yields are reduced by more than 90%, then the
reduction in field-level yields are capped at 10% of the initial yields.
      Given the distributional assumption, the potential yields from GAEZ in tons per hectare can be linked to the variable
   fk
Ai in the model. Potential yields are available in GAEZ at the 5-arcminute level. However, they present a degree of
high spatial correlation, so there are few benefits from working at such a detailed level compared to a more aggregated
level. Little information is lost with aggregation, but there are high costs in the size of the resulting model if the
5-arcminute level is used. To reduce the size of the model, we represent fields at the 1-degree level. Average potential
yields are calculated from the 5-arcminute level by weighting the original data by the share of land used for agriculture
(see next section). Figure A1 represents the relative changes in aggregate potential yields at the field level along with
the borders of the regions represented in the model. Crop yields are aggregated according to their contribution to
                                                                                f                fk fk Í            fk
GDP following the first-order welfare approximation of equation (47): Âi = k ∈K c rik Qi Âi / k ∈K c rik Qi . This
                                                                                    Í

approach allows the aggregate first-order effect of climate change on yields to be visualized. However, being based on a
first-order approach, it neglects the fact that the loss of productivity of a currently cultivated crop may be compensated
by the increased productivity of a crop not currently produced. With higher temperatures and longer growing periods,
the Northern and Southern-middle latitudes could experience large productivity gains. The tropics would be the most
affected regions, with very strong reductions in current yields. The Northern middle latitudes would be in between,
with relative changes closer to 0 and some regions, often mountainous regions like the Alps or the Himalayas, even
displaying gains.




    Not initially used for agriculture

  Change in aggregate potential yield (%)
    −100 to −75
    −75 to −50
    −50 to −25
    −25 to 0
    0 to 25
    25 to 50
    50 to 75
    75 to 100
    100 or more




Figure A1: Relative changes in aggregate potential yields. Gray areas indicate areas not used for agriculture in 2007.



D.2               Spatial extent of agricultural land
The model requires information about the share of the cells used for agriculture for two purposes. First, it is used
to weight the GAEZ potential yields when they are aggregated at a coarser spatial level. Second, it is used so the
model avoids allocating crops on areas that are currently urbanized, forested, or under other land uses not immediately


                                                            38
compatible with agriculture. For this, we use the extension to 2007 of Ramankutty and Foley’s (1999) data on agricultural
land cover.5 Ramankutty and Foley (1999) provide gridded information at the 30-arcminute level regarding the share of
each cell in cropland or pastures. We add up these shares to obtain the share of agricultural land use.
     To determine the surface of each field in the model, we proceed as follows. We overlay each cell of the gridded yield
data with countries’ borders from Natural Earth data and calculate the surface of the cell in each country. It is possible
that a cell is located across borders and so should be allocated to different countries. In such cases, it means that a field
 f can be shared between several countries, which would all have the same potential yields. However, in each country,
               f
the surface si would be different. We multiply the surfaces obtained by the intersection of the cells and borders with the
                                           f
share of agricultural land use to obtain si .
     This procedure results in 11,801 fields with areas between 100 hectares and 1.2 million hectares and a median of 0.3
million hectares, depending on the latitude of the fields, their share of agriculture land use, and the intersection with
the countries’ borders. Of these 11,801 fields, 1,328 are shared between countries. The smallest number of fields on
a country is 12 for the Netherlands and the highest is 1,731 for the region “Rest of Sub-Saharan Africa.” From this
approach, total agricultural area in the model is 4.12 billion hectares. FAOSTAT indicates an agricultural area of 4.92
billion hectares for 2007 and 4.88 for 2011. Such a large discrepancy is typical of the large uncertainties in global land
cover data (Fritz et al., 2011).


D.3     Agricultural production, final demand, feed demand, and trade
Most of the other agricultural data used in the model comes from FAOSTAT. To remove the influence of outliers or the
effects of particular weather events, data are taken to be the average over 2010–12. The value of crop production, pik Qik
for k ∈ K c and k , g, comes from the FAOSTAT value of agricultural production database and is expressed in current
million US$. If this information is missing, which occurs if producer prices are missing, then the value of production is
estimated by multiplying the produced quantities in tons with the world price. The world price at farm gate is calculated
by averaging producer prices available in other countries weighted by produced quantities.
     Trade values, Xikj for i , j, k ∈ K c and k , g, come from FAOSTAT, which aggregates them from COMTRADE to
its product nomenclature. By default, we take the value of trade from importers’ declaration, but if missing, we use the
value declared by the exporter. For oil crops, the trade value is the sum of the values for the crops and their derived
products (oil and meal). For sugar crops, sugar being traded under various forms, we sum together the trade values of
“Sugar raw centrifugal” and “Sugar refined.”
     The demand of a crop for feed, Pik xik for k ∈ K c and k , g, is calculated using FAOSTAT commodity balances.
Commodity balances report the balance sheets of supply (imports and production), demand (processing, food, feed,
seed, losses, exports, and other uses), and stock variations of each agricultural product in tons. The monetary value of
feed demand is obtained by, first, calculating from the balance sheets the share of feed demand over supply, and then, by
multiplying this share by the monetary value of production and total imports previously calculated. This approach
makes the implicit assumption that producer prices and consumer prices are the same, which, for this purpose and
given that most agricultural products are commodities, is rather innocuous. For some products, such as oilcrops, it is
necessary to consider the demand for feed for the products derived from the crop in addition to the crop itself. For
example, soybeans are used as feed directly, but 10 times more tons are consumed under the form of soybean meal.
     The value of crop final consumption, Pik Cik for k ∈ K c and k , g, is calculated simply as the residual, if positive,
between the value of production plus the imports minus the demand for feed and the exports. We can also deduce the
value of domestic trade from the value of production and exports: Xiik = pik Qik − j ∈I, j,i Xikj .
                                                                                     Í

   5Downloaded from http://landuse.geog.mcgill.ca/pub/Data/Histlanduse/NetCDF/ on June 29, 2017.




                                                             39
D.4    Other data
The rest of the data comes from the GTAP database version 9.2 with base year 2011 (Aguiar et al., 2016). The value
of livestock production is the sum of the value of production in the GTAP sectors “Bovine cattle, sheep and goats,
horses” (CTL), “Animal products nec” (OAP), “Raw milk” (RMK), “Wool, silk-worm cocoons” (WOL), “Bovine meat
products” (CMT), “Meat products nec” (OMT), and “Dairy products” (MIL), from which we remove the intermediate
consumption of the sectors producing primary products that are mostly traded once processed: CTL, OAP, and RMK.
The value of livestock trade is the sum of trade in the seven GTAP livestock sectors. Final consumption is calculated as
the residual between production and trade.
    The share of land in crop production costs, φik,land for k ∈ K c and k , g, is calculated from the corresponding share
in GTAP after mapping the model crop to the GTAP sectors. For the value of grass production, we rely on the share of
value added accruing to land in the GTAP sectors CTL, OAP, and RMK, which corresponds to pastures, since other
sources of feed are counted as intermediate consumption in the input-output matrix.
    Non-agricultural value added, corresponding to wi Ni0 in the model, is calculated as a residual to target the countries’
GDP. Similarly, bilateral trade in the non-agricultural good is calculated as a residual to target total bilateral trade.
    The resulting database is not perfectly consistent with a market equilibrium because trade data may be inconsistent
with data on production and feed demand, resulting in negative values for final consumption. Using a cross-entropy
procedure (Golan et al., 1994), the data are adjusted to satisfy an equilibrium. Then trade imbalances as present in the
world in 2011 are removed, and the resulting equilibrium allows us to calibrate the model on an initial equilibrium.


E     Crop aggregation
Here, we show under which conditions and how crops can be aggregated together. We define a set K κ ⊂ K c of crops to
be aggregated. We refer to the aggregate crop by k = κ and to the new set of crops that include the aggregate crop but
no longer include the crops that have been aggregated by K̃ c .
    Given equation (20), for the aggregate crop to use the same share of land in each field as the sum of the individual
crops, we need
                                                            θ                      θ
                                                                                 fκ
                                                                        
                                                                           riκ Ai
                                                         fk
                                       Õ           rik Ai
                                                               θ = Í                 θ ,                      (A23)
                                                          l  fl                   l  fl
                                      k ∈K κ
                                             Í
                                              l ∈K c ri Ai            l ∈ K̃ c ri Ai

                 fκ
where riκ and Ai are the land rent and potential yield of the crop aggregate and need to be determined. The crop
aggregation should not affect the expected return from a field, so
                                              Õ                 θ            Õ                 θ
                                                            fl                               fl
                                                      ril Ai           =               ril Ai            ,           (A24)
                                             l ∈K c                         l ∈ K̃ c

which together with equation (A23) implies
                                                                       θ                θ
                                                                                      fκ
                                                Õ                              
                                                                               = riκ Ai
                                                                  fk
                                                        rik Ai                              ,                        (A25)
                                               k ∈K κ

which defines the aggregate potential yield given the aggregate land rent:
                                                                                        θ  1/θ
                                                                                    fk
                                                                               rik Ai
                                                            Í
                                                                k ∈K κ
                                                fκ
                                             Ai =                                                    .               (A26)
                                                                               riκ



                                                                       40
    The equality of field-level production implies from (23)
                                                                             θ−1                                 θ−1
                                                                                              fκ            fκ
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       riκ Ai
                                              Õ
                                                        fk             fk
                                                      Ai         rik Ai              = Ai                                ,       (A27)
                                             k ∈K κ

Equations (A26) and (A27) can hold together only if riκ = rik for all k ∈ K κ , which implies the following expression for
the aggregate potential yield
                                                                    θ 1/θ
                                                    "                 #
                                              fκ
                                                       Õ 
                                                                fk
                                            Ai =              Ai           .                                        (A28)
                                                                          k ∈K κ


F     Elastic yields
We now assume that yields are elastic through a simple isoelastic specification:
                                             h                     η              i
                                  fk           fk      fk        fk        fk
                                 Qi (ω) = min Ai (ω) Ii (ω) / I¯i      , Ni (ω) /νik ,                                           (A29)

        fk
where Ii (ω) is the level of (fertilizer) inputs of the non-agricultural good and 0 ≤ η < 1 − 1/θ is the elasticity of crop
output to the input of the non-agricultural good. The upper bound on η is necessary to ensure that the Fréchet-distributed
land rents have finite mean.
    From the Leontief structure, if the parcel ω is planted with k ∈ K c , we have
                                                                  η
                                     fk       fk      fk        fk        fk
                                    Qi (ω) = Ai (ω) Ii (ω) / I¯i      = Ni (ω) /νik .                                            (A30)

                                                                                         fk
    We can express the parcel land rent for a planted crop, Ri (ω), as the residual of crop revenue after subtracting
labor costs and non-agricultural input costs:
                                        fk                        fk                      fk                      fk
                                      Ri (ω) = pik Qi (ω) − wi Ni (ω) − Pi0 Ii (ω) .                                             (A31)

Maximization of land rents with respect to non-agricultural inputs gives

                                                       fk                  pik − wi νik            fk
                                                      Ii (ω) = η                               Qi (ω) .                          (A32)
                                                                                   Pi0
                                          1/η
               fk         fk   fk   fk                                     fk
Substituting Ii (ω) by I¯i Qi (ω) /Ai (ω)       leads to an expression of Qi (ω) as a function of prices only:

                                                                                                                 ! η/(1−η)
                                      fk
                                                       
                                                            fk
                                                                           1/(1−η)           pik − wi νik
                                     Qi      (ω) =         Ai     (ω)                     η           fk
                                                                                                                             ,   (A33)
                                                                                                   I¯i Pi0

from which we can derive the land rents:
                                                   1/(1−η)           η/(η−1)
                                                                                 (1 − η) ηη/(1−η) .
                                fk           fk                   fk
                               Ri (ω) = rik Ai (ω)             I¯i Pi0                                                           (A34)

                                                                                              fk
From the properties of the Fréchet distribution, it follows that Ri (ω) is distributed Fréchet with parameters (1 − η) θ
              1/(1−η)           η/(η−1)
                                            (1 − η) ηη/(1−η) . The probability that the crop k is the most profitable crop on the
           fk                fk
and γ rik Ai              I¯i Pi0




                                                                              41
parcel ω is given
                                                                                       h                            −η i θ
                                                                                                 fk            fk
                                                                                           rik Ai           I¯i
                                                                 fk
                                                               πi =                                 h                            −η i θ .              (A35)
                                                                                                               fl           fl
                                                                                                        ril Ai           I¯i
                                                                           Í
                                                                             l ∈K c ,ril ≥0

        The production at the field level is given by
                                                           η                         
                         fk     f fk        fk       fk   fk      fk               fl
                      Qi = si πi E Ai (ω) Ii (ω) / Ii   ¯       |Ri (ω) ∈ arg max Ri (ω) ,                                                               (A36)
                                                                                                                                     l ∈K c
                                                               ! η/(1−η)
                                                    ηrik
                                                                                                        1/(1−η)                                  
                                         f fk                                               fk                                fk               fl
                                  =     si πi         fk
                                                                             E         Ai (ω)                               |Ri (ω) ∈ arg max Ri (ω) .   (A37)
                                                   I¯i Pi0                                                                                    l ∈K c


From the standard properties of the Fréchet distribution we have

                                                                                                                               1/(1−η)θ
                                                         Γ (1 − 1/(1 − η) θ)  0  η/(η−1)          Õ h l f l  f k  −η i θ 
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
         fk         fk                    fl
                                                   (ω) =                      ηPi          (1 − η)                                       .
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                              
E       Ri    (ω) |Ri    (ω) ∈   arg max Ri                                                                         ri Ai I¯i
                                   l ∈K c                    Γ (1 − 1/θ)                           
                                                                                                    l ∈K c ,r l ≥0           
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                             i               
                                                                                                                              (A38)
So

                                                                   Γ (1 − 1/(1 − η) θ)  f k  1/(1−η)  f k  −1/(1−η)θ
                           1/(1−η)                           
                    fk                    fk               fl
          E        Ai (ω)               |Ri (ω) ∈ arg max Ri (ω) =                      Ai              πi               ,                               (A39)
                                                    l ∈K c             Γ (1 − 1/θ)

and                                                        ! η/(1−η)
                                fk           f    ηrik                     Γ (1 − 1/(1 − η) θ)  f k  1/(1−η)  f k  1−1/(1−η)θ
                               Qi       =   si      fk
                                                                                                Ai              πi                .                      (A40)
                                                 I¯i Pi0                       Γ (1 − 1/θ)

From (A40), the elasticity of production to output price is

                                                                                                              fk
                                                                     "                                             #
                                             ∂ ln Qik          pik         η    θ (1 − η) − 1 Õ          f k Qi
                                                         =                    +                      1 − πi          .                                   (A41)
                                             ∂ ln pik          rik       1−η        1−η                       Qik
                                                                         |{z}                 f ∈ Fi
                                                                                |               {z               }
                                                                         Yield
                                                                                                                      Acreage

It is the sum of a yield and an acreage elasticity. Since [θ (1 − η) − 1] /(1 − η) ≤ θ − 1, for the same θ, the acreage
                                                                                              fk
elasticity is reduced in presence of elastic yields compared to equation (26). For πi ≈ 0, the total elasticity is
                                                                                                 fk
(θ − 1) pik /rik , the same elasticity as the model with inelastic yields. However, for πi ≈ 1, the total elasticity
corresponds to the yield elasticity and is pi /ri η/(1 − η) ≥ 0 while it is zero in the absence of a yield response. If
                                                k   k
                                                      
                   
                 fk    fk
   f ∈ Fi 1 − πi      Qi /Qik is not dependent of the calibration (which is not the case but the differences are too small to
Í

matter), to maintain the same acreage elasticity when yields are elastic, one should adjust the degree of within-field
heterogeneity so that θ̃ = θ + η/(1 − η). One limit of this approach is that because of its simplicity, all crops react
similarly to input levels, even grass.
      From the above, the demand for input and the field-level land rents can be derived:

                                                                                      fk            rik        fk
                                                                                  Ii        =η              Qi ,                                         (A42)
                                                                                                    Pi0
                                                                                 fk                                   fk
                                                                            Ri = (1 − η) rik Qi .                                                        (A43)




                                                                                                 42
    Using that limn→0 nn/(1−n) = 1, it is easy to verify that with η = 0 all the equations in this appendix are the same as
those of the benchmark model and the model with elastic yields nests the benchmark model.
    In exact hat algebra, equations (32), (33), and (40) are now replaced by
                                                                  
                                                          k,inputs
                                       p̂ik = φik,land + φi          r̂ik + φik,feed P̂ik,feed,                       (A44)
                                                                                 1/(1−η)                                      −η i θ  1−1/(1−η)θ
                                                                            fk0                                         f k 0 ¯f k
                               ! η/(1−η)                                                                          h
                                                                      f
                                                                                                             rik r̂ik Ai
                                                                                                             
                    rik r̂ik               Γ (1 − 1/(1 − η) θ)  Õ   s i   Ai
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                             Ii                
                                                                                                                                                
    Q̂ik = η                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                
                      fk                                                                                                                 −η   θ
                                                                                                                                                            (A45)
                   I¯i Pi0                     Γ (1 − 1/θ)                   Qik                                               0
                                                                                                                    h                     i
                                                                                                         l ∈K c ril r̂il Aif l I¯if l
                                                                                                         Í                                     
                                                               f ∈F     i
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                       !
                                                                                         Õ                                          
                                           Xik X̂ik = Pik Cik P̂ik Ĉik + 1k=0             Pi0 Iil Iˆil + 1k ∈K c Pik xik P̂ik x̂ik ,                       (A46)
                                                                                        l ∈K c

and the aggregate demand for inputs is given by
                                                                                     Iˆik = r̂ik Q̂ik .                                                     (A47)
For the calibration, in the absence of any information on inputs level in the GAEZ database that we could have used
                                                                                                             fk
in calibration, we assume that inputs are the same for all fields for a given country-crop couple: I¯ik = I¯i . Then, by
combining equations (A40) and (A43), one gets

                  −η # −θ                                                                                                                       # θ  1/(1−η)θ−1
                                                                                                                              Õ ril I¯il −η f l 
  "                                                                                                                                   "
      rik I¯ik                                                      Γ (1 − 1/(1 − η) θ) Õ f  f k  θ
                                            −1                                                                             
                                                                                                                                          
                               = Pi0 Rik           (1 − η) ηη/(1−η)                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                         si Ai                                                Ai
          Pi0                                                           Γ (1 − 1/θ)
                                                                                                          f ∈ Fi
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                              l ∈K c   Pi0          
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                              (A48)
                                     −η                                                                               fk
So for given Pi0 , rik I¯ik                /Pi0 can be found by fixed-point iteration. Since πi                             can also be expressed as a function of
          −η 0
rik I¯ik     /Pi :
                                                                            n       −η 0  f k o θ
                                                                           rik I¯ik     /Pi Ai
                                                           fk
                                                          πi    =                 n  l l  −η 0  f l o θ ,                                                (A49)
                                                                                     ri I¯i
                                                                  Í
                                                                   l ∈K c ,r l ≥0             /Pi Ai
                                                                                 i

                                                                  fk
the values assumed for Pi0 have no effect on                     πi .
                                                     However, in equation (A45), Q̂ik depends apparently on rik , Pi0 , and I¯ik .
                                                                                       fk
In reality, the only effect of these initial values is to scale the initial values of Qi and thus of Qik , but they have no
counterfactual influence.
    To calibrate the model with elastic yields, one needs η, which in addition to determining the yield elasticity is also
equal from equation (A42) to the budget share of the non-agricultural input in crop revenues less labor cost. When
calibrating the model with elastic yield, we increase θ to maintain the acreage elasticity constant. Another issue is how
the initial input costs should be allocated. For crops other than grass, the input costs are taken from the labor share. For
grass, it is taken from land.


G        Supplementary tables




                                                                                           43
Table A1: Mapping between aggregate regions, countries in the model, and countries in GTAP database version 9.2

Aggregate region     Model country             Country in GTAP database
Asia                 Bangladesh                Bangladesh
                     China (including Hong     China; Hong Kong
                     Kong)
                     India                     India
                     Indonesia                 Indonesia
                     Japan                     Japan
                     Korea, South              Korea
                     Malaysia                  Malaysia
                     Pakistan                  Pakistan
                     Philippines               Philippines
                     Sri Lanka                 Sri Lanka
                     Thailand                  Thailand
                     Viet Nam                  Viet Nam
                     Rest of Asia              Mongolia; Taiwan; Rest of East Asia; Brunei Darussalam; Cambodia; Lao People’s Democratic
                                               Republic; Singapore; Rest of Southeast Asia; Nepal; Rest of South Asia
Commonwealth of      Kazakhstan                Kazakhstan
Independent States   Russia                    Russian Federation
                     Ukraine                   Ukraine
                     Rest of Commonwealth      Belarus; Rest of Eastern Europe; Kyrgyzstan; Tajikistan; Rest of Former Soviet Union; Armenia;
                     of Independent States     Azerbaijan
Europe               France                    France
                     Germany                   Germany
                     Greece                    Greece
                     Italy                     Italy
                     Netherlands               Netherlands
                     Poland                    Poland
                     Romania                   Romania
                     Spain                     Spain
                     United Kingdom            United Kingdom
                     Rest of Europe            Austria; Belgium; Cyprus; Czech Republic; Denmark; Estonia; Finland; Hungary; Ireland;
                                               Latvia; Lithuania; Luxembourg; Malta; Portugal; Slovakia; Slovenia; Sweden; Switzerland;
                                               Norway; Rest of EFTA; Albania; Bulgaria; Croatia; Rest of Europe
Latin America        Argentina                 Argentina
                     Brazil                    Brazil
                     Colombia                  Colombia
                     Mexico                    Mexico
                     Peru                      Peru
                     Caribbean                 Dominican Republic; Jamaica; Puerto Rico; Trinidad and Tobago; Caribbean
                     Central America           Costa Rica; Guatemala; Honduras; Nicaragua; Panama; El Salvador; Rest of Central America
                     Rest of South America     Bolivia; Chile; Ecuador; Paraguay; Uruguay; Venezuela; Rest of South America
Middle East and      Egypt                     Egypt
North Africa         Iran                      Iran Islamic Republic of
                     Morocco                   Morocco
                     Turkey                    Turkey
                     Rest of Middle East and   Georgia; Bahrain; Israel; Jordan; Kuwait; Oman; Qatar; Saudi Arabia; United Arab Emirates;
                     North Africa              Rest of Western Asia; Tunisia; Rest of North Africa
Northern America     Canada                    Canada; Rest of North America
                     United States             United States of America
Oceania              Australia                 Australia
                     Rest of Oceania           New Zealand; Rest of Oceania
Sub-Saharan Africa   Ethiopia                  Ethiopia
                     Kenya                     Kenya
                     Nigeria                   Nigeria
                     Senegal                   Senegal
                     South Africa              South Africa
                     Rest of Sub-Saharan       Benin; Burkina Faso; Cameroon; Cote d’Ivoire; Ghana; Guinea; Togo; Rest of Western Africa;
                     Africa                    Central Africa; South Central Africa; Madagascar; Malawi; Mauritius; Mozambique; Rwanda;
                                               Tanzania; Uganda; Zambia; Zimbabwe; Rest of Eastern Africa; Botswana; Namibia; Rest of
                                               South African Customs Union; Rest of the World




                                                                 44
                     Table A2: Product mapping between the model, GAEZ, and FAOSTAT

Model crop              GAEZ crop                            FAOSTAT item
Banana                  Banana                               Bananas; Plantains and others
Barley                  Barley                               Barley
Beans                   Beans                                Beans, dry
Buckwheat               Buckwheat                            Buckwheat
Cabbage                 Cabbage                              Cabbages
Carrot                  Carrot                               Carrot
Citrus fruits           Citrus fruits                        Oranges; Tangerines, mandarins, clementines, sat-
                                                             sumas; Lemons and limes; Grapefruit (inc. pome-
                                                             los); Fruit, citrus nes
Cocoa                     Cocoa                              Cocoa beans
Coconut                   Coconut                            Coconuts
Coffee                    Coffee                             Coffee green
Cotton                    Cotton                             Seed cotton
Flax                      Flax                               Linseed; Flax fibre and tow
Grass                     Grass
Groundnut                 Groundnut                          Groundnuts, with shell
Maize                     Maize                              Maize; Maize, green
Millet                    Pearl millet; Foxtail millet       Millet
Oat                       Oats                               Oats
Oil palm                  Oilpalm                            Palm kernels; Oil, palm
Olive                     Olive                              Olives
Onion                     Onion                              Onions, dry
Other pulses              Chickpea; Cowpea; Gram; Pigeon-    Chick-peas, dry; Cow peas, dry; Pigeon peas;
                          pea                                Pulses nes
Peas                      Peas                               Peas, dry
Rapeseed                  Rapeseed                           Rapeseed or colza seed
Rice                      Wetland rice; Dryland rice         Rice, paddy
Rye                       Rye                                Rye
Sorghum                   Sorghum                            Sorghum
Soybean                   Soybeans                           Soybeans
Sugar crops               Sugarcane; Sugarbeet               Sugar cane; Sugar beet
Sunflower                 Sunflower                          Sunflower seed
Tea                       Tea                                Tea
Tobacco                   Tobacco                            Tobacco, unmanufactured
Tomato                    Tomato                             Tomatoes, fresh
Tropical roots and tubers Sweet potatoes; Cassava; Yam and   Sweet potatoes; Cassava; Yautia (Cocoyam); Taro
                          cocoyam                            (Cocoyam); Yams; Roots and tubers, nes
Wheat                     Wheat                              Wheat
White potato              White potatoes                     Potatoes




                                                    45
References
Aguiar, A., B. Narayanan, and R. McDougall (2016). “An Overview of the GTAP 9 Data Base”. Journal of Global
   Economic Analysis, 1(1), pp. 181–208.
Ahammad, H., E. Heyhoe, G. Nelson, R. Sands, S. Fujimori, T. Hasegawa, D. van der Mensbrugghe, E. Blanc, P. Havlík,
   H. Valin, P. Kyle, D. M. d’Croz, H. van Meijl, C. Schmitz, H. Lotze-Campen, M. von Lampe, and A. Tabeau (2015).
   “The role of international trade under a changing climate: Insights from global economic modelling”. In: Climate
   Change and Food Systems: Global Assessments and Implications for Food Security and Trade. Ed. by A. Elbehri.
   Rome: FAO. Chap. 10, pp. 292–312.
Alexandratos, N. and J. Bruinsma (2012). World Agriculture Towards 2030/2050: The 2012 Revision. Rome: Food and
   Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Anderson, K., G. C. Rausser, and J. F. Swinnen (2013). “Political Economy of Public Policies: Insights from Distortions
   to Agricultural and Food Markets”. Journal of Economic Literature, 51(2), pp. 423–477.
Andreyeva, T., M. W. Long, and K. D. Brownell (2010). “The Impact of Food Prices on Consumption: A Systematic
   Review of Research on the Price Elasticity of Demand for Food”. American Journal of Public Health, 100(2),
   pp. 216–222.
Atkin, D. (2013). “Trade, Tastes, and Nutrition in India”. The American Economic Review, 103(5), pp. 1629–1663.
— (2016). “The Caloric Costs of Culture: Evidence from Indian Migrants”. The American Economic Review, 106(4),
   pp. 1144–1181.
Beckman, J., R. Keeney, and W. Tyner (2011). “Feed demands and coproduct substitution in the biofuel era”. Agribusiness,
   27(1), pp. 1–18.
Berry, S. T. (2011). Biofuels Policy and the Empirical Inputs to GTAP Models. Report. California Air Resources Board.
Berry, S. T. and W. Schlenker (2011). Empirical evidence on crop elasticities. Report. International Council on Clean
   Transportation.
Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015). “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA”. The Review of Economic
   Studies, 82(1), pp. 1–44.
Carpentier, A. and E. Letort (2013). “Multicrop Production Models with Multinomial Logit Acreage Shares”.
   Environmental and Resource Economics, 59(4), pp. 537–559.
Chambers, R. G. and R. E. Just (1989). “Estimating Multioutput Technologies”. American Journal of Agricultural
   Economics, 71(4), pp. 980–995.
Chavas, J. and M. Holt (1990). “Acreage Decisions under Risk: The Case of Corn and Soybeans”. American Journal of
   Agricultural Economics, 72(3), pp. 529–538.
Chembezi, D. M. and A. W. Womack (1992). “Regional Acreage Response For U.S. Corn and Wheat: The Effects Of
   Government Programs”. Southern Journal of Agricultural Economics, 24(1), pp. 187–198.
Chen, D., D. Abler, D. Zhou, X. Yu, and W. Thompson (2016). “A Meta-analysis of Food Demand Elasticities for
   China”. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 38(1), pp. 50–72.
Chomitz, K. M. and D. A. Gray (1996). “Roads, Land Use, and Deforestation: A Spatial Model Applied to Belize”. The
   World Bank Economic Review, 10(3), pp. 487–512.
Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and C. B. Smith (2016). “Evolving Comparative Advantage and the Impact of Climate
   Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from 1.7 Million Fields around the World”. Journal of Political Economy,
   124(1), pp. 205–248.
Costinot, A. and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2014). “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of
   Globalization”. In: Handbook of International Economics. Ed. by E. Helpman, K. Rogoff, and G. Gopinath. Vol. 4.
   Amsterdam: Elsevier. Chap. 4, pp. 197–261.
Costinot, A. and J. Vogel (2015). “Beyond Ricardo: Assignment Models in International Trade”. Annual Review of
   Economics, 7, pp. 31–62.
Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum (2007). “Unbalanced Trade”. The American Economic Review, 97(2), pp. 351–355.


                                                          46
Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. A. Samuelson (1977). “Comparative Advantage, Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian
    Model with a Continuum of Goods”. The American Economic Review, 67(5), pp. 823–839.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). “Technology, Geography, and Trade”. Econometrica, 70(5), pp. 1741–1779.
Erb, K.-H., C. Lauk, T. Kastner, A. Mayer, M. C. Theurl, and H. Haberl (2016). “Exploring the biophysical option space
    for feeding the world without deforestation”. Nature Communications, 7(11382).
Fally, T. and J. Sayre (2018). Commodity Trade Matters. Working Paper 14965. NBER.
Farrokhi, F. (2017). “Global Sourcing in Oil Markets”. job market paper.
Feng, H. and B. A. Babcock (2010). “Impacts of Ethanol on Planted Acreage in Market Equilibrium”. American Journal
    of Agricultural Economics, 92(3), pp. 789–802.
Fritz, S., L. See, I. McCallum, C. Schill, M. Obersteiner, M. van der Velde, H. Boettcher, P. Havlík, and F. Achard
    (2011). “Highlighting continued uncertainty in global land cover maps for the user community”. Environmental
    Research Letters, 6(4). 044005.
Gao, G. (2012). “World Food Demand”. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 94(1), pp. 25–51.
Golan, A., G. Judge, and S. Robinson (1994). “Recovering Information from Incomplete or Partial Multisectoral
    Economic Data”. Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(3), pp. 541–549.
Gouel, C. and H. Guimbard (forthcoming). “Nutrition transition and the structure of global food demand”. American
    Journal of Agricultural Economics.
Haile, M. G., M. Kalkuhl, and J. von Braun (2016). “Worldwide Acreage and Yield Response to International Price
    Change and Volatility: A Dynamic Panel Data Analysis for Wheat, Rice, Corn, and Soybeans”. American Journal of
    Agricultural Economics, 98(1), pp. 172–190.
Harrison, W., J. Horridge, and K. Pearson (2000). “Decomposing simulation results with respect to exogenous shocks”.
    Computational Economics, 15(3), pp. 227–249.
Head, K. and T. Mayer (2014). “Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook”. In: Handbook of International
    Economics. Ed. by E. Helpman, K. Rogoff, and G. Gopinath. Vol. 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Chap. 3, pp. 131–195.
Helpman, E., M. J. Melitz, and Y. Rubinstein (2008). “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners and Trading Volumes”.
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), pp. 441–487.
Helpman, E., K. Rogoff, and G. Gopinath, eds. (2014). Handbook of International Economics. Vol. 4. Amsterdam:
    Elsevier.
Hendricks, N. P., A. Smith, and D. A. Sumner (2014). “Crop Supply Dynamics and the Illusion of Partial Adjustment”.
    American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 96(5), pp. 1469–1491.
Hennessy, D. A. (2006). “On Monoculture and the Structure of Crop Rotations”. American Journal of Agricultural
    Economics, 88(4), pp. 900–914.
IIASA/FAO (2012). Global Agro-ecological Zones (GAEZ v3.0). IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria and FAO, Rome, Italy.
Keeney, R. and T. W. Hertel (2009). “The Indirect Land Use Impacts of United States Biofuel Policies: The Importance of
    Acreage, Yield, and Bilateral Trade Responses”. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 91(4), pp. 895–909.
Knudsen, O. K. and P. L. Scandizzo (1982). “The Demand for Calories in Developing Countries”. American Journal of
    Agricultural Economics, 64(1), pp. 80–86.
Leclère, D., P. Havlík, S. Fuss, E. Schmid, A. Mosnier, B. Walsh, H. Valin, M. Herrero, N. Khabarov, and M.
    Obersteiner (2014). “Climate change induced transformations of agricultural systems: insights from a global model”.
    Environmental Research Letters, 9(12), p. 124018.
Lee, D. R. and P. G. Helmberger (1985). “Estimating Supply Response in the Presence of Farm Programs”. American
    Journal of Agricultural Economics, 67(2), pp. 193–203.
Lichtenberg, E. (1989). “Land Quality, Irrigation Development, and Cropping Patterns in the Northern High Plains”.
    American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 71(1), pp. 187–194.
Lin, W. and R. Dismukes (2007). “Supply Response under Risk: Implications for Counter-Cyclical Payments’ Production
    Impact”. Review of Agricultural Economics, 29(1), pp. 64–86.



                                                          47
Mendelsohn, R., W. D. Nordhaus, and D. Shaw (1994). “The impact of global warming on agriculture: a Ricardian
    analysis”. The American economic review, 84(4), pp. 753–771.
Miao, R., M. Khanna, and H. Huang (2016). “Responsiveness of Crop Yield and Acreage to Prices and Climate”.
    American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 98(1), pp. 191–211.
Miller, D. J. and A. J. Plantinga (1999). “Modeling Land Use Decisions with Aggregate Data”. American Journal of
    Agricultural Economics, 81(1), pp. 180–194.
Nelson, G. C., H. Valin, R. D. Sands, P. Havlík, H. Ahammad, D. Deryng, J. Elliott, S. Fujimori, T. Hasegawa, E. Heyhoe,
    P. Kyle, M. V. Lampe, H. Lotze-Campen, D. M. d’Croz, H. van Meijl, D. van der Mensbrugghe, C. Müller, A. Popp,
    R. Robertson, S. Robinson, E. Schmid, C. Schmitz, A. Tabeau, and D. Willenbockel (2014). “Climate change effects
    on agriculture: Economic responses to biophysical shocks”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
    111(9), pp. 3274–3279.
Orazem, P. F. and J. A. Miranowski (1994). “A Dynamic Model of Acreage Allocation with General and Crop-Specific
    Soil Capital”. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 76(3), pp. 385–395.
Peeters, L. and Y. Surry (1993). “Estimating feed utilisation matrices using a cost function approach”. Agricultural
    Economics, 9(2), pp. 109–118.
Porteous, O. C. (forthcoming). “High Trade Costs and Their Consequences: An Estimated Model of African Agricultural
    Storage and Trade”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Ramankutty, N. and J. A. Foley (1999). “Estimating historical changes in global land cover: Croplands from 1700 to
    1992”. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 13(4), pp. 997–1027.
Randhir, T. O. and T. W. Hertel (2000). “Trade Liberalization as a Vehicle for Adapting to Global Warming”. Agricultural
    and Resource Economics Review, 29(2), pp. 159–172.
Rao, J. M. (1989). “Agricultural supply response: A survey”. Agricultural Economics, 3(1), pp. 1–22.
Reilly, J. M. and N. Hohmann (1993). “Climate Change and Agriculture: The Role of International Trade”. The American
    Economic Review, 83(2), pp. 306–312.
Roberts, M. J. and W. Schlenker (2013). “Identifying Supply and Demand Elasticities of Agricultural Commodities:
    Implications for the US Ethanol Mandate”. The American Economic Review, 103(6), pp. 2265–2295.
Rosenzweig, C. and M. L. Parry (1994). “Potential impact of climate change on world food supply”. Nature, 367(6459),
    pp. 133–138.
Rude, J. and K. Meilke (2000). “Implications of CAP Reform for the European Union’s Feed Sector”. Canadian Journal
    of Agricultural Economics, 48(4), pp. 411–420.
Scott, P. T. (2013). “Indirect Estimation of Yield-Price Elasticities”.
— (2014). Dynamic Discrete Choice Estimation of Agricultural Land Use. Working Paper TSE-526. TSE.
Seale Jr., J. L. and A. Regmi (2006). “Modeling International Consumption Patterns”. Review of Income and Wealth,
    52(4), pp. 603–624.
Sotelo, S. (2015). Domestic Trade Frictions and Agriculture. Discussion Paper 641. University of Michigan.
Stavins, R. N. and A. B. Jaffe (1990). “Unintended Impacts of Public Investments on Private Decisions: The Depletion
    of Forested Wetlands”. The American Economic Review, 80(3), pp. 337–352.
Subramanian, S. and A. Deaton (1996). “The Demand for Food and Calories”. Journal of Political Economy, 104(1),
    pp. 133–162.
Tegene, A., W. E. Huffman, and J. A. Miranowski (1988). “Dynamic Corn Supply Functions: A Model with Explicit
    Optimization”. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 70(1), pp. 103–111.
Tsigas, M. E., G. B. Frisvold, and B. Kuhn (1997). “Global climate change and agriculture”. In: Global Trade Analysis:
    Modeling and Applications. Ed. by T. W. Hertel. Cambridge University Press. Chap. 11, pp. 280–304.
Wiebe, K., H. Lotze-Campen, R. Sands, A. Tabeau, D. van der Mensbrugghe, A. Biewald, B. Bodirsky, S. Islam,
    A. Kavallari, D. Mason-D’Croz, C. Müller, A. Popp, R. Robertson, S. Robinson, H. van Meijl, and D. Willenbockel
    (2015). “Climate change impacts on agriculture in 2050 under a range of plausible socioeconomic and emissions
    scenarios”. Environmental Research Letters, 10(8), p. 085010.


                                                          48
Wu, J. and K. Segerson (1995). “The Impact of Policies and Land Characteristics on Potential Groundwater Pollution in
  Wisconsin”. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 77(4), pp. 1033–1047.




                                                         49
