NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM R&D INVESTMENT AND EXPORT MARKET EXPOSURE
Bettina Peters
Mark J. Roberts
Van Anh Vuong
Working Paper 25228
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25228

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We are grateful to Pere Arque-Castells, Bronwyn Hall, Eric Bartelsman, Jordi Jaumandreu, Hans
Lööf, Florin Maican, Jacques Mairesse, Marc Melitz, Pierre Mohnen, Matilda Orth, Stephen
Redding, Jo Van Biesebroeck, Daniel Xu, Stephen Yeaple, and Hongsong Zhang for helpful
comments and discussions. We thank the ZEW-Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research
for providing data access and research support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Bettina Peters, Mark J. Roberts, and Van Anh Vuong. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm R&D Investment and Export Market Exposure
Bettina Peters, Mark J. Roberts, and Van Anh Vuong
NBER Working Paper No. 25228
November 2018, Revised July 2020
JEL No. F14,L25,O3
ABSTRACT
We study differences in the returns to R&D investment between German manufacturing firms
that sell in international markets and firms that only sell in the domestic market. Using firm-level
data for five high-tech manufacturing sectors, we estimate a dynamic structural model of a firm's
decision to invest in R&D and use it to measure the difference in expected long-run benefit from
R&D investment for exporting and domestic firms. The results show that R&D investment leads
to a higher rate of product and process innovation among exporting firms and these innovations
have a larger impact on productivity improvement in export market sales. As a result, exporting
firms have a higher payoff from R&D investment, invest in R&D more frequently than domestic
firms and, subsequently, have higher rates of productivity growth. We use the model to simulate
the introduction of export and import tariffs on German exporters, and find that a twenty-percent
export tariff reduces the long-run payoff to R&D by 24.2 to 46.9 percent for the median firm
across the five industries. Overall, export market participation contributes significantly to the
firm's return on R&D investment, which in turn, raises long run productivity and firm value
providing a source of dynamic gains from trade.
Bettina Peters
ZEW
Postfach 103443
D-68034 Mannheim
Germany
b.peters@zew.de
Mark J. Roberts
Department of Economics
513 Kern Graduate Building
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
mroberts@psu.edu

Van Anh Vuong
Maastricht University
School of Business and Economics
Tongersestraat 53
Office A2.15
6211 LM Maastricht
The Netherlands
v.vuong@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Firm R&D Investment and Export Market Exposure∗
Bettina Peters
ZEW-Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research
and University of Luxembourg
Mark J. Roberts
Pennsylvania State University, NBER, and ZEW

Van Anh Vuong
Maastricht University

June 2020

Abstract
We study differences in the returns to R&D investment between German manufacturing
firms that sell in international markets and firms that only sell in the domestic market.
Using firm-level data for five high-tech manufacturing sectors, we estimate a dynamic structural model of a firm’s decision to invest in R&D and use it to measure the difference in
expected long-run benefit from R&D investment for exporting and domestic firms. The
results show that R&D investment leads to a higher rate of product and process innovation among exporting firms and these innovations have a larger impact on productivity
improvement in export market sales. As a result, exporting firms have a higher payoff from
R&D investment, invest in R&D more frequently than domestic firms and, subsequently,
have higher rates of productivity growth. We use the model to simulate the introduction
of export and import tariffs on German exporters, and find that a twenty-percent export
tariff reduces the long-run payoff to R&D by 24.2 to 46.9 percent for the median firm across
the five industries. Overall, export market participation contributes significantly to the
firm’s return on R&D investment, which in turn, raises long run productivity and firm
value providing a source of dynamic gains from trade.

1

Introduction

One source of the dynamic gains from international trade is its impact on firm innovation and
long-run productivity growth. The theoretical literature on growth and trade (Grossman and
Helpman 1990, 1995), has emphasized the role of international trade in affecting the speed
∗
We are grateful to Pere Arque-Castells, Bronwyn Hall, Eric Bartelsman, Jordi Jaumandreu, Hans Lööf,
Florin Maican, Jacques Mairesse, Marc Melitz, Pierre Mohnen, Matilda Orth, Stephen Redding, Jo Van Biesebroeck, Daniel Xu, Stephen Yeaple, and Hongsong Zhang for helpful comments and discussions. We thank the
ZEW-Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research for providing data access and research support. Contact
information: Peters (b.peters@zew.de), Roberts (mroberts@psu.edu), Vuong (v.vuong@maastrichtuniversity.nl)

1

and direction of technological improvements resulting from firm investments in innovation.1
A firm exporting to a large international market may innovate at a higher rate than a firm
operating solely in a domestic market for at least three reasons. An exporter can draw on
a larger knowledge base and may benefit from knowledge spillovers across countries.

An

exporter may be pressured to innovate more frequently to withstand the higher competition in
foreign markets.

Finally, it may have a larger payoff to innovation resulting from sales in a

larger market. These forces, associated with exporting, elevate the firm’s expected return to
innovation and increase its incentive to invest in innovation activities such as R&D.
Quantifying the dynamic impact of exporting on innovation activities requires a model of
firm investment in innovation. In this article, we develop and estimate a dynamic structural
model of firm R&D investment that recognizes the differences in the R&D decision, innovation
outcomes, productivity, and profit growth between exporting and non-exporting firms. We
measure how the expected returns to R&D investment vary with the firm’s trade exposure.
Counterfactual analyses are used to quantify how contractions of the export market due to
tariffs alter the firm’s R&D investment decision and firm value, providing a measure of the
dynamic losses from trade restrictions. We estimate the model using firm-level data for five
high-tech German manufacturing industries.
Empirical studies using firm-level data consistently find that exporting firms, particularly
high-productivity firms, are more likely to invest in innovative activities, such as R&D, patenting, and introducing new products and production processes, than their non-exporting counterparts.2

One explanation for this positive correlation can be the causal process running

from innovation to trade, because innovation can improve the firm’s ability to compete in
international markets. This pathway has been well documented. R&D investment causes pro1

Constantini and Melitz (2008), Atkeson and Burstein (2010) and Long, Raff, and Stähler (2011) develop
models of endogenous productivity growth and show that reductions in trade costs can increase firms’ incentives
to invest in R&D or new technologies. Burstein and Melitz (2013) comprehensively review this literature
and develop a dynamic, industry-equilibrium model to analyze how a reduction in export costs impacts industry
output, firm entry, average industry productivity, export participation, and innovation investments. Akcigit, Ates,
and Impullitti (2018) develop a dynamic general equilibrium model that incorporates international competition
and firm investment in innovation to improve product quality.
2
This literature includes Bernard and Jensen (1997), Baldwin and Gu (2004), Aw, Roberts, and Winston
(2007), Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2008), Van Beveren and Vandenbussche (2010), Cassiman and Golvko (2011),
Becker and Egger (2013), Altomonte, Aquilante, Bekes, and Ottaviano (2013), and Damijan, Kostevc, and Rojec
(2017).

2

ductivity improvements (Cohen, 2010, and Syverson 2011) and higher productivity increases
the probability of exporting.3
An alternative explanation, which has been less studied, is the causal chain that runs from
exporting to investments in innovation. The empirical literature has utilized two approaches
to quantify this linkage. The first uses exogenous export market shocks, often from a trade
liberalization episode, to identify a causal effect of export activities on firm innovation.4 Bustos
(2010) shows an increase in expenditure on technology upgrading by Argentine firms facing a
tariff reduction. Lileeva and Trefler (2010) find that Canadian firms, which expand their exports
in response to U.S tariff reductions, increase their product innovation and technology adoption
rates. Coelli, Moxnes, and Ultveit-Moe (2016) use data from 60 countries and find a positive
effect of trade liberalization in the 1990s on firm patenting. Aghion, Bergeaud, Lequien, and
Melitz (2017) find a mixed response: high-productivity French firms increase their patenting
activity in response to positive export market shocks while low-productivity firms decrease their
patenting. This pattern is the result of both the export market expansion, which differentially
benefits high-productivity firms, and an increase in competition in the destination markets,
which disadvantages low-productivity firms.
The second approach that has been used to measure the effect of exporting on investment
in innovation is to model the firms’ export and R&D decisions structurally.

This has three

key advantages. First, it can provide a measure of the expected long-run return to R&D for
both exporting and non-exporting firms.

Second, it can identify the pathways linking R&D

investment to innovation, productivity, and long-run profits. Finally, estimates of the dynamic
decision rule for R&D investment can be used to simulate the effect of trade liberalization or
tariff changes on firm R&D choices and long-run firm value, a direct measure of an important
3

A recent review of the empirical literature on productivity, exporting, and importing is given by Shu and
Steinwender (2018). The theoretical literature, much of it based on the model by Melitz (2003), has shown how
exogenous differences in underlying firm productivity can lead to differences in the incentives to export, import,
or invest in FDI, and the self-selection of firms into these activities.
4
A related literature has studied how exogenous import market shocks, often from China’s expansion into
new markets after it joined the WTO, affected innovation. Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenan(2016) find a positive
effect on firm patents, IT spending, and R&D spending for 12 European countries. In contrast, Autor, Dorn,
Hanson, Pisano, and Shu (2017) find a negative effect on patenting and R&D expenditure for U.S. firms. Using
U.S. data, Xu and Gong (2017) find a negative effect on R&D spending for low-productivity firms but a positive
impact for high-productivity firms.

3

source of the dynamic gains from trade.

Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) estimate a dynamic,

structural model of firm export choice and R&D investment using firm-level data for Taiwanese
electronics producers. They find that, conditional on current productivity, exporters have larger
productivity gains than non-exporters. An expansion of the export market leads to a substantial
increase in the probability of investing in R&D. The resulting endogenous increase in R&D
investment contributes to the productivity gap between exporting and pure domestic firms.5
Building on the dynamic, structural model of R&D investment by Peters, Roberts, Vuong,
and Fryges (2017) (hereafter, PRVF), we quantify three components in the pathway linking
R&D investment to the firm’s expected long-run return. First, R&D investment can change the
probability of developing new products or process innovations. Second, these innovations can
improve future firm productivity and, hence third, improve the path of future profits and firm
value. We allow each stage in this innovation process to differ between exporting and domestic
firms.

This flexibility is important because differences in the incentives to invest between

exporting and non-exporting firms can reflect differences in innovation outcomes, the economic
return to innovation, or the cost of innovation.

We measure how each stage contributes to

differences in the expected return to R&D investment and focus on how this affects the extensive
margin of firm R&D investment.

We extend the model of Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) by

incorporating product and process innovations, allowing R&D to have completely different
impacts on export and domestic productivity, and studying a range of high-tech manufacturing
industries in an economy that has both high innovation rates and heavy dependence on the
export market.
The empirical results reveal substantial differences in the innovation process between exporting and domestic firms. Exporting firms that invest in R&D are more likely to realize product
and process innovations. This most likely reflects the learning effects through technological
5

Lim, Trefler, and Yu (2018) use a calibrated structural model to focus on the roles of export market expansion
and competition on the patterns of patenting, R&D spending, and new product sales for Chinese manufacturing
firms. They find that market expansion positively impacts innovation measures while competition negatively
impacts them, but firms can escape the competition effects if they are able to innovate into less competitive
market niches. Using their general equilibrium model calibrated to U.S. data, Akcigit, Ates, and Impullitti
(2018) find that import tariffs provide small welfare gains in the short run, but reduce the incentives to innovate
resulting in large welfare losses in the long run. They also find that R&D subsidies are effective in promoting
R&D investment for new and incumbent firms.

4

spillovers or knowledge transmissions from abroad. On average, these innovations have a larger
impact on future productivity and profits from export sales compared to sales in the domestic
market. The reason for this can be the larger size of international markets and/or the larger
set of innovative opportunities for firms selling abroad. Both forces, a higher rate of innovation
outcomes and a larger impact of the innovation outcome on future productivity, lead to higher
expected benefits from R&D investment and hence a higher investment rate for exporting compared to pure domestic firms. The resulting endogenous R&D investment contributes to the
divergence in performance observed between exporting and domestic firms. These micro-level
findings are consistent with the mechanism underlying the endogenous growth models.
Focusing on the exporting firms, we simulate the impact of changes in export and import
tariffs and subsidies to R&D costs on both the return to R&D and the probability of investing
in R&D. An increase in tariffs shrinks the profitability of the export market and substantially
reduces the payoff to R&D. A twenty percent tariff on German export sales, reduces the
expected return to R&D by 24.2 to 46.9 percent for the median firm in these five high-tech
industries.

This leads to a reduction in the probability of investing in R&D by between 5.0

and 16.0 percentage points.

This results in lower productivity growth, thus reducing the

magnitude of the dynamic gains from exporting. Overall, the simulations show a substantial
impact of tariffs on the return to R&D for the German exporters.
In the next section, we extend the PRVF model of R&D choice to recognize variations in the
innovation process between exporting and domestic firms. In the third section, we discuss the
data, which is drawn from the Mannheim Innovation Panel. In the fourth section, we present
the empirical model and estimation method. Section five presents the empirical results and
section six provides concluding remarks.

2

Theoretical Model

This section develops a theoretical model of a firm’s dynamic decision to undertake R&D
investment while accounting for their involvement in international markets.

The model is

structured into three stages. In the first stage, the firm makes a choice of whether or not to
invest in R&D. The second stage describes the effect of a firm’s R&D choice on their probability

5

of receiving a product or process innovation.

In the third stage, the realized innovations

can improve the distribution of firm productivity, affecting its short-run output and profits.
Moreover, if productivity improvements are long-lived, an innovation also impacts the stream
of future profits.6

A firm that invests in R&D to maximize the discounted sum of expected

future profits will recognize that the expected benefits of the R&D choice made in stage one
depend on the expected innovations in stage two and productivity improvement in stage three.
The dynamic model of firm R&D choice developed in PRVF ties together all three stages of this
innovation framework and measures the expected long-run benefits of R&D investment. The
next section develops the theoretical model for each stage, beginning with the linkage between
productivity and profits and working backward to the firm’s choice of R&D.

Our framework

extends the model of PRVF, which only treats firms as selling in a single market, to allow R&D
to have a different impact on innovation and firm sales in the export and domestic market.
Through its R&D investment the firm may differentially affect the future path of sales in each
market.

This will lead to a difference in the incentive for firms to invest in R&D and their

subsequent long-run performance based on their exposure to the export market.

2.1

Profits, Productivity, and Innovation

We start by defining firm productivity and linking it to the firm’s profits. Firm i’s short-run
marginal production cost is represented by
cit = βt + βk kit + βa ait − ψit ,

(1)

where cit is the log of marginal cost, kit is the log of firm capital stock, and ait is firm age.
The intercept βt is allowed to vary over time to reflect changes in the market price of variable
inputs that are assumed to be the same for all firms in period t. The firm-specific, time-varying
production efficiency ψit captures differences in technology or managerial ability that are known
6
Griliches (1979) developed the ”knowledge production function” framework linking R&D with firm output.
In his model, R&D investment creates a stock of knowledge that enters as an input into the firm’s production
function. This was extended to the three-stage process which includes innovation outcomes by Crepon, Duguet,
and Mairesse (1998). Their model has been widely used in empirical studies using firm data on R&D, innovation
outcomes, and productivity. Recent surveys of the empirical literature are provided in Hall, Mairesse, and
Mohnen (2010) and Hall (2011).

6

by the firm but not observable to the econometrician.7 The capital stock is treated as a fixed
factor in the short-run. Thus, we allow for three sources of cost heterogeneity across firms:
capital stock, firm age, and unobserved production efficiency.8
Each firm can sell in two markets, the home market (h) and the foreign market (f ). A
h in the home market given by:
domestic firm i faces the demand for its product qit

h
qit

=

Qht



phit
Pth

η h

h

exp(φhit ) = Φht (phit )η exp(φhit ),

(2)

where Qht is the aggregate domestic output in period t and Pth is the domestic price index for the
industry in which the firm operates. These are combined into the industry aggregate Φht . The
firm-specific variables are the domestic output price phit and a demand shifter φhit that reflects
product desirability, product appeal or product quality in the domestic market. This demand
shifter is known by the firm but also not observed by the econometrician. The elasticity of
demand η h is negative and assumed to be constant for all firms in the industry.
Exporting firms face a similar demand structure for their product in the home market,
where the demand parameters η h and Φht are allowed to differ between exporting and domestic
firms. Exporting firms additionally face a demand curve in the foreign market given by:
f
qit

=

Qft

pfit
Ptf

!ηf
f

exp(φfit ) = Φft (pfit )η exp(φfit ).

(3)

Importantly, the firm-level demand shifter in the foreign market φfit is different than the one
operating on domestic sales. An exporting firm can have a product with high appeal in the
home market but low appeal in the export market or vice-versa.
Assuming the firm operates in a monopolistically competitive market, it maximizes its shortrun profit by setting the price for its output in each market l equal to a constant markup over
7

Variation in input quality, which leads to variation in input prices across firms, is also captured in ψ. We
model this source of quality variation as part of the unobserved firm efficiency.
8
Equation (1) implies that, in the short run, the firm can expand or contract output at constant marginal
cost. This is a reasonable assumption if, along with the variable inputs, the firm can also adjust the utilization of
its fixed capital stock in order to expand or contract its output in the short run. In addition, in micro panel data
of the type we utilize, most of the variation in firm sales is in the across-firm rather than within-firm dimension.
To account for this, our marginal cost model relies on three factors, the capital stock, firm age, and production
efficiency, that primarily vary across firms. Economies or diseconomies of scale are unlikely to be the source of
the firm sales variation we observe in the data.

7

marginal cost: plit = [η l /(1 + η l )] exp(cit ) where l = h, f.

Given this optimal price, the log of

the firm’s revenue in each market l = h, f is
l
rit
= (1 + η l )ln (



ηl
l
l
l
)
+
ln
Φ
+
(1
+
η
)
β
+
β
k
+
β
a
−
ω
a it
t
k it
t
it .
1 + ηl

(4)

l denotes the revenue productivity in market l = h, f . It is a combination
The term ωit
l = ψ − [1/(1 + η l )]φl . Equation (4)
of cost-side and demand-side shocks, defined as ωit
it
it

implies that, for a given level of capital stock and firm age, heterogeneity in the firm’s revenue
in each market is driven by differences in production efficiency ψ and the demand shifter in
h and ω f simply as
that market φh or φf . We refer to the unobserved revenue productivity ωit
it

productivity.

These will be the key state variables the firm can affect through its choice of

R&D. Since revenue productivity contains demand shocks that can vary by market, the level
of productivity itself, and its evolution over time, can be different for sales in each market.
For example, a firm may have a product that is especially well-suited to domestic customers
and invest in R&D to improve its product appeal at home, but not have a product of equal
attractiveness to foreign buyers.
Given the firm’s pricing rule, there is a simple relationship between the firm’s short-run
profits and its revenue in each market l = h, f :
l
l
πit
= πtl (ωit
, kit , ait ) = −

1
l
exp(rit
).
ηl

(5)

The total per-period profits of the firm depend on the markets it sells to. The profit of a
firm that sells in only the domestic market will depend on only the domestic market revenue
productivity (in addition to capital and age), whereas the firm that operates in both markets
will have total profits that reflect productivities in both markets. The total short-run profit
for a domestic market firm D and an exporting firm X is therefore defined as:
D
h
h h
ΠD
it = Πt (ωit , kit , ait ) = πt (ωit , kit , ait )

ΠX
it

(6)

f
f
f
h
h h
= ΠX
t (ωit , ωit , kit , ait ) = πt (ωit , kit , ait ) + πt (ωit , kit , ait )

In our German data for high-tech manufacturing firms, virtually all of them sell either
solely in the domestic market or in both the domestic and export market in all years they are
8

observed. None of the firms sell only in the foreign market and only very few firms move in or
out of the foreign market.9 Because there is virtually no entry or exit from the export market
in the data, we cannot estimate the fixed or sunk costs of exporting or analyze the extensive
margin of exporting as in Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007) or Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011).
Instead, we treat each firm as either a domestic producer with profits given by ΠD
it , determined
only by conditions in the home market, or an exporting firm whose total short-run profits ΠX
it
depend on conditions in both the home and foreign market.
We link the firm’s R&D choice to domestic and export profits in two steps.

In the first

step, the firm makes a discrete decision to invest in R&D, rdit ∈ {0, 1}, and this affects the
probability the firm realizes a process or product innovation in year t + 1, denoted zit+1 and
dit+1 , respectively. Both are discrete variables equal to 1 if firm i realizes a process or product
innovation in year t + 1 and 0 otherwise. We allow this linkage between R&D and innovation
to differ between domestic and exporting firms. The linkage between R&D and innovation is
represented by the cumulative joint distribution of product and process innovations, conditional
on whether or not the firm invests in R&D and whether or not it sells in foreign markets,
F (dit+1 , zit+1 |rdit , I(fi )). In this specification, I(fi ) is a discrete variable equal to 1 if the firm
sells in foreign markets and 0 if it is a pure domestic seller.
This specification of the innovation process is simple and recognizes the key feature that
R&D investment does not guarantee innovation success and, furthermore, that innovations
may occur even without formal R&D investment by the firm.

This latter effect can result

from luck, the effect of expenditures on R&D in the more distant past even if the firm is not
currently investing, ideas that are brought to the firm by hiring experienced workers or other
spillover channels, or changes in the production process that result from learning-by-doing
without formal R&D investment. The specification also recognizes that a firm that operates in
foreign markets may benefit from alternative pathways for innovations including learning effects
through spillovers or knowledge transmission from abroad. It may have both the opportunity
and the incentive to introduce product innovations in one of its foreign markets but not in its
9
Of the firms that export, 98.4 percent remain exporters in all years. Of the nonexporters, 95.3 percent never
enter the export market. For the small number of firms that switch status, we treat them as different firms
during the two periods. We have also estimated the model after dropping these firms and it has no effect on
the results.

9

domestic market. The firm’s R&D investment may also result in product innovations that are
variations of the domestic product but designed for consumers in the foreign market.
In the second step, firm productivity in each market is treated as a state variable that
evolves over time as a Markov process, and is shifted by product or process innovations. Using
the discrete innovation indicators, zit and dit , we model the evolution of revenue productivity
in market l = h, f for firms that sell in both markets as:

l
l
l 2
ωit+1
= α0l + α1l ωit
+ α2l (ωit
) + α3l zit+1 + α4l dit+1 + α5l zit+1 dit+1 + εlit+1 .

(7)

The parameters α0 , α1 , ...α5 differ between the export and domestic market sales, which allows
for different patterns of productivity evolution in the two markets.

The parameters α1 and

α2 capture the persistence in firm productivity over time, ∂ωt+1 /∂ωt , while α3 , α4 , and α5
measure how the mean of future productivity shifts when the firm realizes one or both types of
innovation. An innovation can operate through two channels, impacting productivity differentially in both the home and foreign markets. The randomness in the productivity processes
is captured by (εhit+1 , εfit+1 ), which we assume are iid draws across time and firms from a joint
normal distribution with zero mean and variance-covariance matrix Σ. Notice that shocks to
productivity are not transitory, but rather persist and affect future productivity levels through
the coefficients α1 and α2 .
A similar parametric structure is adopted for productivity evolution for the firms that sell
only in the domestic market. In this case, the firm’s home market productivity evolves as:
h
h
h 2
ωit+1
= β0h + β1h ωit
+ β2h (ωit
) + β3h zit+1 + β4h dit+1 + β5h zit+1 dit+1 + εhit+1 .

(8)

In the empirical model, we estimate the coefficients of equations (7) and (8), recognizing that the
parameters of the productivity process can differ for sales in the home market between domestic
and exporting firms and between home and foreign market sales for exporting firms. This allows
substantial flexibility in the link between innovation and the evolution of productivities. To
simplify notation in the dynamic model described in the next section, we denote the domestic
h
h, d
firms’ productivity evolution process by a cdf GD (ωit+1
|ωit
it+1 , zit+1 ) and that of exporting
f
h , ωf , d
h
firms by GX (ωit+1
, ωit+1
|ωit
it it+1 , zit+1 ), respectively.

10

2.2

The Firm’s Dynamic Decision to Invest in R&D

This section develops the firm’s decision rule for whether or not to invest in R&D. In contrast
to the majority of the empirical innovation literature that aims at measuring the correlation
between R&D investment and observed firm and industry characteristics, we structurally model
the firm’s optimal R&D choice. The firm’s investment choice depends on both the effect of R&D
on the firm’s expected future profits and the cost the firm has to incur for the productivity
improvement. In this model, the firm’s cost is the expenditure it must make to generate a
process or product innovation. This cost may vary across firms for many reasons such as the
nature of the investment project, the firm’s expertise in creating innovation, its ability to access
capital, differences in the type of new products that are desirable in foreign markets versus the
domestic market, as well as its prior R&D experience.

The fact that some firms are better

in the innovation process or have a larger set of technological opportunities for innovation is
captured in this model by lower innovation costs.
To capture this heterogeneity in firms’ innovation cost, we assume that firm i’s cost is a
random draw from an exponential distribution which has a mean that depends on the firm’s
export status, represented by I(fi ), prior R&D experience, rdit−1 , and other observable firm
characteristics Wit .

The indicator variable for whether or not the firm invested in R&D

in the previous year, rdit−1 , takes the value 1 if the firm engaged in R&D in t − 1 and 0
otherwise.

This captures differences in the cost of innovation between maintaining ongoing

R&D operations and starting new ones. Wit will include industry dummy variables and the
firm’s capital stock to capture variation in innovation costs with firm size.10 We represent the
parameter of the innovation cost distribution, which is the mean of the distribution, faced by
firm i as γ(I(fi ), rdit−1 , Wit ). The innovation cost for firm i in year t is therefore modeled as
an iid draw from the following exponential distribution:
Cit ∼ exp(γ(I(fi ), rdit−1 , Wit )).

(9)

The timing of the firm’s decision problem is assumed to be the following: at the start of
10
Peters, Roberts, and Vuong (2017) included an indicator of the firm’s financial strength measured by its
credit rating. We simplify the framework here to focus on the differences between exporting and nonexporting
firms by industry.

11

h and, if it is an exporter
period t, the firm observes its current domestic sales productivity ωit
f
X
also the foreign sales productivity ωit
, its short-run profits ΠD
it or Πit , the process for pro-

ductivity evolution in each market, equation (7) or (8), and the probability of an innovation
h
F (dit+1 , zit+1 |rdit , I(fi )). The state variables for a pure domestic firm are sD
it = (ωit , rdit−1 ) and
f
h
for an exporting firm are sX
it = (ωit , ωit , rdit−1 ), and they evolve endogenously as the firm makes

its decision whether or not to conduct R&D.11 The value function differs for pure domestic
firms and exporting firms.
An exporting firm chooses its R&D to maximize the sum of future discounted expected
profits. Before its innovation cost is realized, its value function can be written as:

f
X
h
V X (sX
(10)
it ) = Πt (ωit , ωit ) +
Z


f
f
h
X X
h
max βEt V X (sX
it+1 |ωit , ωit , rdit = 1) − Cit ; βEt V (sit+1 |ωit , ωit , rdit = 0) dC.
C rd∈{0,1}

where β denotes the firm’s discount factor. The exporting firm’s expected future value is defined
as an expectation over possible future levels of domestic and foreign market productivity and
innovation outcomes:

Et V

X

f
h
(sX
it+1 |ωit , ωit , rdit )

=

XZ
h
f
(d,z) ω , ω

f
f
X
h
h
V X (sX
it+1 )dG (ωit+1 , ωit+1 |ωit , ωit , dit+1 , zit+1 )(11)

·F (dit+1 , zit+1 |rdit , I(fi ) = 1)).
Using these equations, we can characterize the exporter’s optimal R&D choice rdit . If it does
f
h
not invest in R&D, its discounted expected future profits are βEt V X (sX
it+1 |ωit , ωit , rdit = 0). If
f
h
it does invest in R&D, the discounted expected future profits are βEt V X (sX
it+1 |ωit , ωit , rdit = 1)

and it will incur innovation cost Cit . The marginal benefit of investing in R&D is the difference
in the two expected future profits:
f
f
f
h
h
X X
h
∆EV X (ωit
, ωit
) ≡ βEt V X (sX
it+1 |ωit , ωit , rdit = 1) − βEt V (sit+1 |ωit , ωit , rdit = 0).
11

(12)

Firm capital stock, age, and variables that shift the cost of innovation are exogenous state variables as
X
well. We omit them from sD
it and sit to simplify the notation and to focus on the role of R&D, innovation,
and productivity. In the empirical model, we define different firm types based on the exogenous variables and
calculate the profit and value functions separately for each type.

12

The difference between these two measures of expected future profits is driven by the effect of
R&D on the firm’s future productivity in both markets.

The firm will choose to make the

h , ωf )
investment if the marginal benefit of R&D is greater than or equal to its cost: ∆EV X (ωit
it

≥ Cit . This condition will be the key to the empirical model of R&D choice developed below.
A firm operating in only the domestic market has an analogous value function given by:
D
h
(13)
V D (sD
it ) = Πt (ωit ) +
Z


h
D D
h
max βEt V D (sD
it+1 |ωit , rdit = 1) − Cit ; βEt V (sit+1 |ωit , rdit = 0) dC,
C rd∈{0,1}

where the expected future value is defined as:
Et V

D

h
(sD
it+1 |ωit , rdit )

=

XZ
(d,z)

ωh

D
h
h
V D (sD
it+1 )dG (ωit+1 |ωit , dit+1 , zit+1 )F (dit+1 , zit+1 |rdit , I(fi ) = 0).

(14)
The marginal benefit of investing in R&D is the difference in the expected future value when
the firm invests in R&D versus when it does not:
h
h
D D
h
∆EV D (ωit
) ≡ βEt V D (sD
it+1 |ωit , rdit = 1) − βEt V (sit+1 |ωit , rdit = 0).

(15)

The domestic firm makes the same benefit-cost comparison as the exporting firm and will
choose to invest in R&D if the expected marginal benefit is greater than or equal to the cost,
h) ≥ C .
∆EV D (ωit
it

Compared to an exporting firm, the domestic firm can have a different

probability of an innovation and its productivity in the home market can evolve in a different
way, both in terms of its persistence and how it responds to product and process innovations.
A key difference in the return to R&D activities between a pure domestic and an exporting
firm is the additional gain from innovation in the foreign market.12 This difference, along with
12

Though currently not exporting, domestic firms might invest in R&D to improve ω f to be sufficiently
profitable to enter the foreign market in future periods. In this case, ω f is a state variable when the firm decides
to enter the export market. The return to R&D, ∆EV D , would also include the future gain from foreign markets
rather than only the improved stream of home market profit. If we observed export market entry and exit in our
data, we could measure this additional contribution of R&D. However, this requires measuring foreign market
productivity for domestic firms. In their models of export market entry, Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007) and
Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) do this by imposing structure on the relationship between the evolution of domestic
and foreign market productivity. Given that we do not observe export market entry in our data, we do not
need to impose any restrictions on the relationship between productivity evolution in the domestic and export
markets.

13

possible differences in the cost of innovation, drives the disparity in firms’ R&D choices and
leads to differences in their productivity growth, sales, and profits.
Overall, this model endogenizes the firm’s choice to undertake R&D investments allowing
it to depend on the net expected gain in long-run profits of each option. This model places
structure on the firm’s decision rule and ties the firm’s choice to invest in R&D explicitly to
the resulting expected innovation and productivity outcomes.

The key structural components

that we estimate from the data are (i) the firm revenue functions in both markets, equation
(4), (ii) the process for productivity evolution in each market, equations (7) and (8), (iii)
the innovation rates F (dit+1 , zit+1 |rdit , I(fi )), and (iv) the γ parameters describing the cost
of innovation, equation (9).

The complete model can be estimated with data on the firm’s

discrete decision to invest in R&D, rd, discrete indicators of innovation, d and z, sales in the
home and foreign markets, rh and rf , the firm’s capital stock and age, k and a, and other cost
variables W. In the next two sections we describe the data and develop the empirical model.

3

Data

The data we use to analyze the role of R&D in the productivity evolution of German firms
are taken from the Mannheim Innovation Panel (MIP), an annual survey collected by the
Centre for European Economic Research (ZEW). This survey is the German component of the
Community Innovation Survey which is administered in all EU countries.13 We use a sample
of firms from five high-tech manufacturing sectors: chemicals (NACE rev 1.1 codes 23, 24),
nonelectrical machinery (29), electronics (30, 31), instruments (33), and motor vehicles (34,
35).

Our sample covers the years 1994-2008 and includes 540 observations (after taking lags)

from 247 domestic firms and 2590 observations from 1041 exporting firms.
For estimation of the model, we use data on firm sales in the German domestic market
and total sales in all of its export markets, variable costs, capital stock, firm age, innovation
expenditures and product and process innovations.

The firm’s total revenue is the sum of

domestic and export sales. Total variable cost is defined as the sum of expenditure on labor,
materials and energy. The firm’s short-run profit is constructed as the difference between total
13

Details of the sampling design are discussed in PRVF and Rammer and Peters (2013).

14

revenue and total variable cost. The firm’s value is the discounted sum of the future short-run
profits and thus measures the long-run resources available to pay its capital expenses plus the
economic profits.
The measures of both innovation inputs and innovation outputs are collected in the Community Innovation Survey. The firm’s innovation input is based on the firm’s expenditure on
innovative activities which includes R&D plus spending on worker training, acquisition of external knowledge and capital, marketing, and design expenditures for producing a new product
or introducing a new production process. The discrete R&D variable that we analyze in the
empirical model (rdit ) takes the value one if the firm reports a positive level of spending on
innovation activities and zero otherwise. We also utilize two discrete variables for innovation
output. In the survey in year t, the firms are asked whether they introduced new or significantly improved products or services during the years (t − 2), (t − 1), or t. The discrete variable
product innovation dit takes the value one if the firm reports yes to the question. The discrete
variable for process innovation zit equals one if the firm reports new or significantly improved
internal processes during the years (t − 2) to t.14
An important goal of this paper is to quantify how the endogenous investment in R&D
contributes to the differences in performance between exporting and nonexporting firms and
among exporting firms based on their exposure to the international market. Table 1 summarizes
two dimensions of heterogeneity. The first two columns report the median level of firm sales
per unit of capital for the domestic and exporting firms in each industry.15

Across all the

industries, the median is 5.20 for the exporting firms and 4.42 for the domestic firms.

In

four of the five industries, this value is larger for the exporting firms, with the ratio between
exporting and domestic firms varying from 1.13 to 1.71. In one industry, electronics, the median
14

In the empirical model, this outcome is related to R&D spending in the previous year (t − 1), so there is
not a perfect match between the timing of the R&D and the realization of the innovations. This may lead us
to overestimate the effect of R&D on innovation since the innovation variable could be capturing outcomes from
two years earlier. Attempting to use more distant lags of R&D spending exaggerates the problems caused by
sample attrition and reduces the number of observations containing the necessary current and lagged variables.
Sample attrition is due to nonreporting and not due to firm death (see PRVF for a discussion).
15
In all the industries, the mean (median) sales of the exporting firms is substantially higher than the mean
(median) sales of the domestic firms. Much of this difference is due to larger capital stocks in the exporting
firms. Here we are interested in the role of endogenous productivity in contributing to these differences and sales
per unit of capital better reflects the potential role of productivity differences than differences in total sales.

15

exporting firm has a lower sales-capital ratio than the median domestic firm, but overall the
two distributions are very similar for the exporting and domestic firms in this industry. This
difference in sales-capital ratios suggests a role for differences in revenue-productivity between
exporting and domestic firms to be part of the explanation in many of the industries. The last
three columns summarize the distribution of export intensity across exporting firms. Across all
industries, the export intensity ranges between 4.7 percent (10th percentile) and 72.1 percent
(90th percentile) implying substantial heterogeneity across firms in the relative importance of
the export market. There is a substantial number of firms that are most active in the domestic
market (the median export intensity is 32.5 percent) while other firms have the export market as
their main source of revenue. This heterogeneity within the group of exporting firms suggests
that differences in a firm’s revenue productivity between the export and domestic markets, ω h
and ω f , may be a contributing factor to differences in export market integration.

Table 1: Firm Sales in Domestic and Export Markets (millions of euros)
Domestic Firms
Exporting Firms
(Sales/K)
(Sales/K)
Export Sales/Total Sales
Median
Median
10th percentile Median 90th percentile
Chemicals
2.683
4.041
0.051
0.325
0.724
Machinery
4.361
4.920
0.045
0.361
0.769
Electronics
7.105
5.873
0.033
0.278
0.643
Instruments
4.227
6.255
0.057
0.341
0.732
Vehicles
3.194
5.455
0.032
0.291
0.697
Total Sample
4.421
5.200
0.047
0.325
0.721

If productivity differences are a contributing factor to differences in firm performance, then
firm’s may be able to affect their performance through R&D investment and innovation. Table
2 summarizes the differences in R&D investment rates and innovation rates between domestic
and exporting firms for each industry. Overall, there is a very clear and robust pattern between
the two groups across all five industries: exporters are more likely to invest in R&D and have
higher realization rates for innovations. We focus on the average across all industries reported
in the final row.

The second and third columns give the fraction of firm-year observations

that report positive spending on R&D and other innovation inputs.

The rate for domestic

firms is 0.422, while it is substantially higher, 0.855, for exporters.

This is likely to be an

important source of the often-observed productivity difference between exporting and domestic
16

firms. The fourth and fifth columns present the rates of product innovation for the two groups
of firms and there is a substantial difference here as well. On average, the proportion of firmyear observations with product innovations is 0.370 for domestic firms and 0.787 for exporters.
Finally, the rates of process innovation, while lower than the rates of product innovation, show
a similar pattern, with the rate for exporters being much larger than the rate for domestic firms,
0.309 versus 0.586. The model developed in the previous section allows innovations to occur
at different rates for exporting and domestic firms.

Moreover, it allows innovation to have

different impacts on the future productivity of domestic and export sales. These two features
contribute to the differences in the expected benefits of R&D between exporting and domestic
firms and subsequently help explain the difference in the proportion of firms engaging in R&D.

Table 2: Firm Rates of R&D Investment and Product and Process Innovation
R&D Investment Rate Product Innovation
Process Innovation
Domestic Exporter Domestic Exporter Domestic Exporter
Chemicals
0.596
0.800
0.472
0.726
0.449
0.577
Machinery
0.360
0.837
0.315
0.766
0.275
0.574
Electronics
0.495
0.909
0.477
0.842
0.385
0.601
Instruments
0.387
0.922
0.340
0.882
0.226
0.602
Vehicles
0.276
0.801
0.241
0.702
0.207
0.589
Average
0.422
0.855
0.370
0.787
0.309
0.586

4
4.1

Empirical Model
Productivity Evolution

We estimate the probability of innovation directly from the data as the fraction of observations
reporting each of the four combinations of dit+1 and zit+1 conditioning on previous R&D choices
rdit ∈ {0, 1} and the firm’s export status I(fi ) ∈ {0, 1} . The innovation probabilities are
estimated separately for each industry. For exporting firms we estimate the industry elasticity
of demand for home and foreign sales using the method in Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007).
We regress the firm’s total variable cost (the sum of expenditure on labor, materials and energy)
on the sales in each market and the coefficient on the sales variable in market l can be interpreted
as 1 + (1/η l ). For domestic firms, this is equivalent to the mean of the ratio of total variable
cost to total sales.
17

Unlike the data on firm exports, domestic sales, and capital stock, which are observable to
us, firm productivity in each market is not. We use the proxy variable approach of Olley and
Pakes (1996) as applied by Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013) and PRVF (2017) to estimate
the parameters of the revenue function, equation (4), and the productivity process, equation
(7), and construct estimates of productivity in each market. Implementing their methodology
for the exporting firms requires a control variable for each market that will depend on firm
productivity. In general, firms with high productivity in the domestic market will have large
output and thus large material expenditures for domestic production mhit . Similarly, high
productivity in foreign market sales will result in large production for the export market and
large expenditures on materials for export production mfit . We do not directly observe mhit and
mfit but construct them by dividing total material expenditures, which we observe, into these two
components using the markup-weighted share of sales in each market. The markup-weighted
share of sales in market l is equal to the physical quantity of sales in market l. Specifically,
the share of material expenditure allocated to sales in market h is:
f

smhit

=

h )( η )
exp(rit
1+η f
f

h

h )( η ) + exp(r f )( η )
exp(rit
it 1+η h
1+η f

and smfit = 1 − smhit . This assumption is restrictive, because it assumes that the expenditure
on materials is used in fixed proportion to the quantity of output in each market, but it is a
practical way to incorporate information on the firm’s relative size in the domestic and export
market. Our constructed material variables will contain information on both the firm’s total
size and its relative size in each market.
Using the structure of our model, we can solve for the demand functions for the material
inputs. The factor demand equation for the log of materials used for production in each market
l = h, f is:
l
mlit = βtl + (1 + η l )βk kit + (1 + η l )βa ait − (1 + η l )ωit
.

(16)

In this equation, the intercept βtl depends on the common time-varying components in the
model which include the intercept of the demand function in market l and the variable input
prices. The material demand depends on the observed capital stock, age, and unobserved

18

market productivity. Solving equation (16) for productivity gives:
l
ωit
=(

1
1
)βtl + βk kit + βa ait − (
)ml .
l
1+η
1 + η l it

(17)

We substitute this expression into the productivity evolution process, equation (7), lag it one
l in the revenue equations (4). This allows us to express revenue
period and substitute it for ωit

in each market as a function of current and lagged capital, lagged age, lagged materials, and
the product and process innovations.
l
rit
= λl0 + λlt + (1 + η l )(βk kit + βa ait )
h
i
l
−α1 βt−1
+ (1 + η l )βk kit−1 + (1 + η l )βa ait−1 − mlit−1
i2
α2 h l
l
l
l
−(
)
β
+
(1
+
η
)β
k
+
(1
+
η
)β
a
−
m
a it−1
k it−1
t−1
it−1
1 + ηl
h
i
l
−(1 + η l ) α3l zit + α4l dit + α5l zit dit − (1 + η l )εlit + υit
.

(18)

l is a transitory shock to the firm’s revenue function that is not observed
The error term υit

by the firm prior to choosing its variable inputs or making its R&D decision. For estimation
l is
we utilize the moment conditions implied by the fact that the error term −(1 + η)εlit + υit

uncorrelated with all right-hand side variables, ait−1 , kit , kit−1 , mlit−1 , zit , dit , and zit dit .

The

intercept λl0 is a combination of the intercepts of the revenue function and the productivity
evolution equation α0l . We can separately identify the α0l parameter from the revenue function
intercepts using the moment condition that εlit has a zero mean. The time coefficients λlt and
l
βt−1
are functions of the common time-varying variables including the demand intercept and
l
factor prices. The βt−1
coefficients are identified, up to a base-year normalization, and can be
l
distinguished from the λlt coefficients because of the higher-order power on ωit−1
in equation

(7). We allow the intercept λl0 to vary across the two-digit industries in each group, reflecting
industry differences in the revenue functions and include the industry-specific estimate of the
demand elasticity as data. We also allow the βk and βa parameters to differ in the two markets,
rather than constraining them to be equal as in the theoretical model, to allow for possible
differences in the marginal cost of production in each market.16 Finally, using the estimated
16

The revenue function for domestic firms is estimated using non-linear least squares. The domestic and
foreign revenue functions for exporting firms are estimated using non-linear seemingly unrelated regressions.

19

residuals in the productivity evolution equations, we estimate the variance and covariance
of the productivity shocks.

After estimation of the revenue function parameters, firm-level

productivity in each market is constructed from the inverted material demand function equation
(17). The same estimation procedure is used for domestic firms except that we use the total
material expenditures of the firm as the control function.

4.2

Value Function and the Dynamic Choice of R&D

Given estimates of the state variables and structural parameters described in the last section, we
can solve for the value functions, equations (10) and (13) and, importantly, the expected payoff
h ) for domestic firms and ∆EV X (ω h , ω f ) for
to each firm from investing in R&D, ∆EV D (ωit
it
it

exporting firms. We use the nested fixed-point algorithm developed by Rust (1987) to estimate
the structural parameters. At each iteration of the structural parameters, we approximate each
of the value functions as a weighted sum of Chebyshev polynomials and include the weights as
additional parameters to estimate.

We use separate approximations for the domestic firms,

h
X
whose state space is sD
it = (ωit , rdit−1 ) and exporting firms, which have the state space sit =
h , ω f , rd
(ωit
it−1 ). Exogenous state variables that shift the profit and cost function; age, capital
it

stock, and industry, are treated as fixed firm characteristics in the value function calculation.17
The probability that a firm chooses to invest in R&D is given by the probability that its
innovation cost Cit is less than the expected payoff. For domestic firms this is:
h
i

D
h
P r rdit = 1|sD
=
P
r
C
≤
∆EV
(ω
)
it
it
it ,

(19)

and for exporting firms it is
h
i

f
X
h
P r rdit = 1|sX
it = P r Cit ≤ ∆EV (ωit , ωit ) .

(20)

Assuming the firm’s state variables sD or sX are independent of the cost draws and that
the costs are iid draws from the distributions in equation (9), across all firms and time, the
likelihood function for the firms’ discrete R&D choice can be expressed as:
L(γ|rd, s) =

Ti
N Y
Y

P r(rdit |sit ; γ),

(21)

i=1 t=1
17

The profit function also depends on year dummies. After estimation there is no trend in the time estimates.
We treat the value functions as stationary and use the average over the time coefficients when calculating the
value function.

20

where γ is the vector of innovation cost function parameters. The vectors rd and s contain
every firm’s R&D choice and state variables for each period, respectively. The total number of
firms is denoted by N and Ti is the number of observations for firm i.

5

Empirical Results

The next subsection reports the estimated relationships from the first-stage model linking R&D,
innovation, and productivity. The second subsection reports results from the dynamic model
for the cost and the long-run expected benefits of R&D, and the third subsection reports results
of the counterfactual analysis.

5.1

R&D, Innovation, and Productivity

Table 3 summarizes the estimated probability a firm introduces successful innovations conditional on its R&D choices and export status, F (dit+1 , zit+1 |rdit , I(fi )). If a firm does not invest
in R&D in period t, columns (2) - (5) report the probability of realizing either no innovation,
only product innovation, only process innovation, or both types of innovations in period t + 1.
On average, domestic firms that do not invest in R&D report no innovation with a frequency of
0.827 and at least one type of innovation with a frequency of 0.173 (sum of columns (3) to (5)).
The equivalent estimates for exporting firms are 0.736 for no innovation and 0.264 for at least
one type of innovation. In addition, in every industry exporting firms have a higher frequency
of innovation than domestic firms. In the case where the firm invests in R&D, the innovation
probabilities are reported in columns (6) - (9).

When investing, the frequency of innovation

(sum of columns (7) to (9)) increases substantially to 0.768 for domestic and 0.913 for exporting
firms. In every industry, exporters have a higher frequency of innovation than domestic firms.18
This higher rate of innovation contributes to exporters having higher productivity levels and
profits.
How these differences in the innovation rates affect a firm’s incentive to invest in R&D
depends on how ∆EV in equations (12) and (15) is affected by the difference in innovation
18
For firms that report innovations, realizing both product and process innovations is the most common
outcome for all industries. Stand alone product innovations are realized with a higher frequency than process
innovations for both exporting and nonexporting firms, regardless of their R&D investments.

21

rates when rdt = 0 versus rdt = 1. In this case, there is a minor difference between exporters
and domestic firms.

The probability of an innovation increases, on average, by 0.595 (from

0.173 to 0.768) for domestic firms if they invest in R&D. The increase in this probability for
exporters is slightly larger, 0.649 (from 0.264 to 0.913) than for domestic firms. There is a
larger difference when we separate product and process innovations.

In the case of product

innovations (d = 1, z = 0 or d = 1, z = 1), R&D increases the probability of innovation by
0.669 for exporters but only 0.524 for domestic firms. For process innovations, the difference
is modest, 0.468 for exporters and 0.421 for domestic firms. Overall, for both domestic and
exporting firms, investment in R&D substantially increases the probability of innovation. The
impact of R&D, however, is larger for exporters than domestic firms, especially with respect
to product innovation. However, whether this leads to a higher R&D investment rate or not
will also depend on how much the realized product and process innovations impact the level of
productivity.

Table 3: Probability of Innovation Conditional on Past R&D: Pr(dt+1 , zt+1 | rdt , I(fi ))
rdt = 0
rdt = 1
Product innovation d = 0 d = 1 d = 0 d = 1
d=0 d=1 d=0 d=1
Process innovation z = 0 z = 0 z = 1 z = 1
z=0 z=0 z=1 z=1
Domestic Firms
Chemicals
0.833 0.042 0.042 0.083
0.154 0.179 0.179 0.487
Machinery
0.841 0.024 0.008 0.127
0.271 0.200 0.100 0.429
Electronics
0.786 0.089 0.000 0.125
0.153 0.186 0.051 0.610
Instruments
0.836 0.055 0.018 0.091
0.315 0.315 0.056 0.315
Vehicles
0.824 0.020 0.039 0.118
0.263 0.158 0.053 0.526
Average
0.827 0.042 0.016 0.115
0.232 0.216 0.087 0.465
Exporting Firms
Chemicals
0.766 0.054 0.054 0.126
0.097 0.223 0.036 0.644
Machinery
0.721 0.096 0.059 0.125
0.089 0.258 0.034 0.619
Electronics
0.625 0.075 0.075 0.225
0.084 0.285 0.025 0.605
Instruments
0.821 0.026 0.000 0.154
0.059 0.301 0.007 0.633
Vehicles
0.735 0.122 0.020 0.122
0.127 0.186 0.059 0.629
Average
0.736 0.077 0.048 0.139
0.087 0.258 0.030 0.625
The next stage of the empirical model uses equation (18) to estimate the parameters of the
revenue functions and the processes of productivity evolution. The estimation results, together
with the estimates of the demand elasticities, are reported in Table 4.
22

Table 4: Productivity Evolution and Profit Function Parameters (standard errors)
Exporting Firms
Domestic Firms
Domestic Revenue Export Revenue Domestic Revenue
Productivity Evolution
d
0.027 (0.011)*
0.061 (0.018)**
0.016 (0.029)
z
0.046 (0.020)*
0.012 (0.033)
0.056 (0.044)
d∗z
-0.007 (0.022)
0.021 (0.036)
-0.049 (0.054)
ωt−1
0.761 (0.018)**
0.896 (0.023)**
0.558 (0.048)**
2
ωt−1
0.087 (0.008)**
0.059 (0.006)**
0.213 (0.019)**
V ar(ε)
0.037
0.085
0.072
Cov(εh , εf )
0.016
Revenue Function
k
-0.065 (0.004)**
-0.065 (0.004)**
-0.102 (0.009)**
age 10-19
-0.005 (0.018)
0.013 (0.030)
0.023 (0.037)
age 20-49
-0.099 (0.027)**
-0.129 (0.050)** -0.043 (0.046)
age >50
-0.202 (0.033)**
-0.226 (0.064)** -0.086 (0.060)
Intercept
1.138 (0.319)**
0.760 (0.701)
0.782 (0.241)**
Chemicals
0.136 (0.044)**
-0.038 (0.066)
-0.013 (0.103)
Machinery
0.070 (0.037)
0.005 (0.060)
0.087 (0.086)
Electronics
0.099 (0.041)*
0.088 (0.068)
0.207 (0.094)*
Instruments
0.051 (0.041)
0.165 (0.067)*
0.001 (0.096)
Demand Elasticity
Chemicals
-3.045 (0.055)**
-3.989 (0.206)**
-2.981 (0.116)**
Machinery
-4.220 (0.071)**
-4.287 (0.128)**
-4.207 (0.124)**
Electronics
-4.254 (0.091)**
-3.794 (0.186)**
-4.260 (0.181)**
Instruments
-4.235 (0.074)**
-3.506 (0.135)**
-3.480 (0.097)**
Vehicles
-4.737 (0.135)**
-4.557 (0.312)**
-4.604 (0.255)**
sample size
2,590
2,590
540
The models also include a full set of year dummies.
** significant at the .01 level, * significant at the .05 level
The second and third columns of Table 4 report estimates of the productivity evolution
process for domestic and export market sales for the exporting firms. The coefficients on d, z,
and d ∗ z measure the impact of product and process innovations on revenue productivity. For
domestic sales, both innovations have a significant positive effect on productivity, increasing it
by 2.7 percent for a product innovation and 4.6 percent for a process innovation. Firms that
report both types of innovations have productivity that is 6.6 percent (=0.027 + 0.046 - 0.007)
higher than that of noninnovators on average.

In the export market, product innovation is

particularly important, increasing productivity by 6.1 percent.
23

Process innovations increase

productivity by 1.2 percent and firms with both types of innovations have productivity levels
that are 9.4 percent higher than that of noninnovators. The coefficients on lagged productivity
jointly determine the persistence of the productivity process, ∂ωit+1 /∂ωit . Productivity persistence averages 0.79 in the domestic market and 0.86 in the export market. In both cases,
productivity is highly persistent, implying a long-lived productivity impact of innovations. This
further enhances the gain from investing in R&D.
The relative importance of the domestic versus export market channel to the exporting firm’s
R&D choice is determined by both the productivity persistence and the impact of innovation in
each market. The results in Table 4 indicate that there is both higher productivity persistence
and larger impact of innovation on export market productivity, implying that R&D investment
will have a larger impact on firm profits through the export channel.

The impact of R&D

investment on firm value will increase with the share of the firm’s sales in the export market.
Holding innovation costs constant, this will lead to a greater incentive to invest in R&D by
exporting firms with larger export shares.
The last column of the table reports the productivity coefficients for the domestic firms. The
productivity impact of product innovation for domestic firms is smaller than that of exporting
firms while the productivity effect of process innovation is larger for the domestic firms. For
a firm with both types of innovation, average productivity will be 2.3 percent higher than
a firm with no innovation.
the domestic firms.

However, none of the innovation coefficients are significant for

The productivity process for these firms is persistent with an average

persistence level of ∂ωit+1 /∂ωit = 0.72, which is slightly lower than that of exporters. Overall,
we find strong evidence that innovation has a significant effect on both domestic and export
market productivity for exporting firms but much weaker evidence of any impact for domestic
firms.

This difference contributes to a widening gap between exporting and domestic firm

productivity over time.
The remaining rows in Table 4 report the coefficients of the profit function, equations (4)
and (5). Capital has a negative coefficient implying that firms with larger capital stocks have
lower variable costs and thus higher revenues and profits. The firm age coefficients measure
the deviation from the youngest group of firms, and the negative signs imply that more mature

24

firms have, on average, lower variable production costs, hence higher profits.

The highest

profits will be earned by the oldest firms. The demand elasticities are reported in the bottom
panel of Table 4. Profits are inversely related to the demand elasticity. Whereas the demand
elasticities are fairly similar across the markets and industries, the smaller elasticities for the
chemical industry imply that profits will be higher in this industry for a given level of sales.
In the electronics, instruments, and vehicle industries, the smaller demand elasticity for export
sales, compared to the elasticity for domestic sales, will contribute to a larger impact of export
sales on profits for the exporting firms. This will increase the value of exporting in generating
a larger expected benefit from R&D and increase the probability of investing in R&D. Given
h and ω̂ f
the parameter estimates in Table 4, we construct estimates of revenue productivity ω̂it
it

for sales in each market using equation (17).
The two productivity levels are state variables in the firm’s dynamic decision to invest in
R&D. In turn, as R&D investment alters the future paths of ω h and ω f , it will affect the export
f
h ) + exp(r f )).
intensity of the firm, where export intensity is defined as exp(rit
)/(exp(rit
it

Given

the specification of the log revenue function, equation (4), sales in each market are increasing
in the own-market productivity and the export intensity will therefore be increasing in ω f and
decreasing in ω h . However, since R&D will lead to increases in both ω h and ω f , but at different
rates, the effect of R&D investment on export intensity is ambiguous. Using the productivity
estimates, we can summarize which factor tends to dominate in the data.

Table 5 reports

the mean export intensity for each quartile of the distributions of ω f and ω h for the exporting
firms.19 Moving across each row, the mean export share increases with ω f , and moving down
each column the export share decreases with increases in ω h , as expected. Since R&D generates
an increase in both productivities, firms that invest will tend to move from the upper left to
lower right cells in the table and this results in an increase in the export intensity. The resulting
increase in ω f will tend to outweigh the increase in ω h and result in higher export intensity.
The differences in export intensity with variation in the two productivities are substantial. For
example, for firms in the lowest quartile of ω h , increases in ω f can account for an increase in
export intensity from 0.219 to 0.862.

Similarly, for firms in the highest quartile of ω f , an

19
Each exporting firm is assigned to a cell based on the quartiles in which its productivities fall. The quartiles
are defined separately for each industry.

25

increase in ω h can account for a decrease in export intensity from 0.862 to 0.487.
Table 5: Mean Export Intensity for Exporting Firms
Quartiles of ω f
Quartiles of ω h
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
1st
0.219
0.457
0.615
0.862
2nd
0.108
0.325
0.476
0.707
3rd
0.052
0.233
0.378
0.591
4th
0.026
0.113
0.260
0.487
Before summarizing the dynamic estimation, we estimate the reduced-form policy function
for the discrete R&D choice.

This depends on the state variables ω h and ω f as well as the

variables that define the firm types: industry, capital stock, and age.

Probit estimates for

the discrete R&D variable using a simple linear specification of the explanatory variables are
reported in Table 6. The coefficient estimates reflect a combination of the underlying structural
components: the innovation process, productivity evolution, profit function, and innovation
costs, and cannot be interpreted as structural parameters. For exporting firms, both foreign
market productivity ω f and capital are positively correlated with the firm’s decision to invest in
R&D while, for domestic firms, capital is positively correlated with R&D choice. These effects
are statistically significant. In contrast, domestic market productivity is negatively correlated
with R&D choice for both groups of firms, which is not consistent with the underlying structural
model, but the coefficients are not statistically significant. Using the full structural model, we

26

quantify the true causal effect of both productivities on R&D choice.
Table 6: Probit Estimates of Policy Functions for rdit
Exporting Firms
Domestic Firms
h
ω
-0.126 (0.084)
-0.056 (0.117)
ωf
0.285 (0.060)**
k
0.121 (0.023)**
0.179 (0.035)**
age 10-19
-0.111 (0.094)
-0.322 (0.156)*
age 20-49
-0.295 (0.092)**
-0.148 (0.160)
age >50
-0.044 (0.010)
-0.681 (0.230)**
Intercept
0.587 (0.124)**
0.139 (0.228)
Machinery
0.269 (0.089)**
-0.341 (0.183)
Electronics
0.714 (0.116)**
0.118 (0.194)
Instruments
0.895 (0.114)**
-0.232 (0.204)
Vehicles
0.009 (0.114)
-0.662 (0.240)**
All regressions include a full set of year dummies.
** significant at the 0.01 level, * significant at the 0.05 level
This section has shown that R&D investment increases the probability of innovation and
innovations increase domestic and export market productivity.

The next section reports es-

timates from the dynamic component of the model: the cost of innovation and the expected
benefit of investing in R&D. These allow us to quantify how differences in domestic and foreign productivity affect the payoff to R&D and the probability of R&D investment by the firm,
factors that cannot be inferred from the reduced-form policy function coefficients in Table 6.

5.2

Cost of Innovation and Expected Benefits of R&D

Table 7 reports the final set of parameter estimates: the dynamic costs of innovation. These are
estimated by maximizing the likelihood function in equation (21) with respect to the parameter
vector γ. We allow the distribution of startup and maintenance costs to differ across industry,
with firm export status, and with an interaction term between export status and the log of the
firm’s capital stock k. This last term recognizes that the size differences between domestic and
exporting firms may affect innovation costs. Combinations of these parameters give the mean of
the untruncated distribution of innovation costs for firms with different industry, export status,
firm size, and R&D history.

27

Table 7: Innovation Cost Parameters (standard errors)
Startup Cost
Maintenance Cost
∗∗
Chemicals
13.942 (2.147)
1.987 (0.338)∗∗
∗∗
Machinery
14.138 (2.209)
4.057 (0.287)∗∗
∗∗
Electronics
3.702 (1.650)
1.550 (0.200)∗∗
Instruments
4.976 (1.190)∗∗
1.401 (0.207)∗∗
∗∗
Vehicles
10.172 (0.833)
3.238 (0.205)∗∗
Exporting Firm
8.875 (0.884)∗∗
1.964 (0.196)∗∗
∗∗
Domestic Firm
5.922 (1.315)
0.517 (0.161)∗∗
∗∗
k∗ Export Firm
3.138 (0.274)
0.753 (0.023)∗∗
k∗ Domestic Firm 1.061 (0.384)∗∗
0.338 (0.039)∗∗
** significant at the .01 level, * significant at the .05 level
There are several clear patterns in the cost estimates. The first finding is that maintenance
costs are smaller than startup costs for all industries and both export status groups. This
means that, comparing two firms with the same characteristics and thus the same expected
payoff to R&D, the firm that has previously engaged in R&D will, on average, find it less
expensive to develop an innovation than a firm with no prior R&D experience. The cost
differential is substantial. The ratio of the mean startup cost to maintenance cost varies from
2.4 (electronics) to 7.0 (chemicals) across the industries.

Prior R&D experience induces a

cost saving in the innovation process so that firms with prior experience will be more likely to
continue investing in R&D than non-R&D firms will be to start investing. A second finding
is that startup costs are significantly higher for exporting firms. In the estimated model, the
payoff to conducting R&D is going to be larger for exporting firms because of the larger impact
of R&D on innovation (as seen in Table 3) and the larger impact of innovation on productivity
(as seen in Table 4). Due to a larger payoff to R&D, exporting firms are willing to incur higher
R&D expenditures to get the expected productivity gain resulting from R&D investment. The
final pattern concerns cost variation with firm size. The interaction terms with the firm capital
stock are positive, implying higher average innovation costs (and higher expected benefits of
R&D) for larger firms.20
As part of the estimation algorithm, we solve for the value functions and construct the
20

The estimated model predicts the R&D investment patterns observed in the data well. Overall, it predicts
84.8 percent of the observed R&D choices correctly; 86.22 percent for positive R&D investment and 79.73 for no
investment.

28

h ) for domestic firms and ∆EV X (ω h , ω f ) for exporting
expected payoff to R&D, ∆EV D (ωit
it
it

firms.

Table 8 summarizes the firm’s expected payoffs to R&D at the 25th, 50th, and 75th

h , and ω f . The payoffs are reported for a firm
percentiles of the productivity distributions, ωit
it

between 10 and 19 years old with capital stock at the median level in each industry. The
variations in ∆EV reflect differences that arise solely from variation in firms’ productivity
levels.

Table 8 : ∆EV D (ω h ) and ∆EV X (ω h , ω f ) (millions of euros)
Percentile of the distribution of ω h
25th percentile
50th percentile
75th percentile
Domestic Firms ∆EV D (ω h )
Chemicals
0.723
Machinery
0.588
Electronics
2.047
Instruments
0.283
Vehicles
0.348

0.851
0.852
2.654
0.414
0.443

Exporting Firms ∆EV X (ω h , ω f )a
Chemicals
11.350, 17.746
Machinery
15.500, 19.899
Electronics
9.733, 13.340
Instruments
8.903, 11.213
Vehicles
27.026, 42.365
a The two entries are constructed at the 25th

1.077
1.027
3.409
0.561
0.680

12.139, 18.459
12.855, 19.167
16.546, 20.916
18.007, 22.333
12.203, 15.674
14.591, 17.935
9.673, 11.952
10.580, 12.822
30.299, 45.335
33.421, 48.169
and 75th percentile of the distribution of ω f

The top panel summarizes the benefit for domestic firms.

In the chemical industry, a

firm that only sells its output on the domestic market and has a productivity level of ω h =
0.46 (25th percentile of the productivity distribution) earns an additional expected long-run
profit of 0.723 million euros if it invests in R&D. The expected earning rises with higher
domestic sales productivity and equals 1.077 million euros at ω h = 0.95 (75th percentile of the
distribution).

The expected benefit for domestic firms in the electronics industry is higher

than in the remaining four industries, ranging between 2.047 to 3.409 million euros. Overall,
the expected benefit roughly doubles as we move from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the
productivity distribution for all industries.
The bottom panel of Table 8 summarizes the expected benefit for the exporting firms.
29

Each cell reports two numbers, the expected benefit at the 25th and 75th percentiles of ω f .
For example, an exporting chemical firm with ω h at the 25th percentile and a level of ω f equal
to the 25th percentile of that distribution would earn 11.350 million euros from investing in
R&D. Holding ω h fixed, this would rise to 17.746 million if ω f increased to the 75th percentile.
Three patterns are evident in this table. First, for any level of ω h , the expected payoff to
R&D for exporting firms is substantially higher than that of domestic firms, ∆EV X (ω h , ω f ) >
∆EV D (ω h ). This reflects the higher probability of successful innovations for exporting firms,
their advantages in capitalizing and implementing these innovations, and also any scale advantages of serving a larger market than domestic firms. Furthermore, the productivity impacts of
innovations for exporters persist longer over time, setting them on more favorable productivity
paths, resulting in a higher expected benefit than that of domestic firms.

Second, increases

in export market productivity from the 25th to 75th percentile generate larger improvements
in ∆EV X (ω h , ω f ) than comparable increases in domestic market productivity. This is particularly noticeable in the vehicle industry, where an interquartile increase in ω h increases the
expected benefit by approximately 6.0 million euros, but an interquartile increase in ω f results in an increase of approximately 15 million euro. Third, among the exporting firms, ones
with high foreign productivity will have larger expected payoffs than ones with high domestic
productivity. Together, these patterns indicate that exporting firms and, in particular, those
with high foreign-market productivity will have the highest expected benefits from investing in
R&D.
The results in Table 8 show how the payoff to R&D varies with the key productivity
state variables ω h and ω f . Using the model parameters, we can calculate ∆EV X (ω h , ω f ) and
∆EV D (ω h ) for each data point in the sample. In addition to varying with industry and firm
productivity, these measures also vary with firm capital stock and age. Using the estimates of
∆EV and the distributions of innovation costs, which vary with the firms’ prior R&D and export
status, industry, and capital stock, we calculate the probability of R&D investment, equations
(19) and (20). Table 9 summarizes the distribution of these measures at their 25th, 50th, 75th
percentiles across observations for exporting and domestic firms. In the upper panel, Table 9
reports R&D benefits measures ∆EV and ∆EV /V . The lower panel reports the probability of

30

maintaining and starting R&D activities, P r (rdit = 1|rdit−1 = 1) and P r (rdit = 1|rdit−1 = 0) ,
respectively.
Regarding R&D benefits, three patterns are evident in the data.

First, there is a large

difference in the expected benefits of R&D between exporting and domestic firms within the
same industry.

For example, in the chemical industry the median of ∆EV X (ω h , ω f ) for

the exporting firms is 23.158 million euros while the median value of ∆EV D (ω h ) for domestic
chemical producers is 1.26 million. This pattern occurs for all industries. Second, the withinindustry differences in ∆EV are substantial and much larger than the across-industry differences
at a given percentile. In the case of chemicals, the firm at the 25th percentile of ∆EV X (ω h , ω f )
has an expected benefit of R&D of 14.126 million euros, while the firm at the 75th percentile has
a value of 35.348 million. This within-industry heterogeneity reflects the productivity effects
seen in Table 8, and also the differences in firms’ size (capital stock) and age. Columns (5)-(7)
of the upper panel summarize the distributions of expected benefits as a fraction of firm value
∆EV X /V X and ∆EV D /V D . For most of the domestic firms, the percentage gains are between
1.0 and 2.0 percent of firm value. The electronics industry has slightly larger percentage gains,
reaching 3.1 percent at the 75th percentile.

Not only the absolute expected benefits, but

also the percentage gains are substantially larger for exporting firms than for domestic firms.
Across industries, the 25th percentile varies from 3.5 to 6.4 percent and at the 75th percentile
varies from 5.0 to 13.0 percent. The heterogeneity in expected benefit leads to variation in
firms’ R&D choice, reported in the lower panel of Table 9. First, the higher expected return to
R&D investment for exporting firms compared to domestic firms leads to higher probabilities
of investing in R&D by the exporting firms. This holds for all industries and R&D investment
mode (maintaining or starting R&D). For the median observation in the data, the startup rate
of R&D for exporting firms is above 0.55 and above 0.96 for maintaining R&D, respectively.
The corresponding rates for starting and maintaining are below 0.10 and 0.45 for domestic firms,
with the exception of the electronic industry with higher R&D investment rate, resulting from
higher return to R&D as seen in the upper panel of the table.21 The difference in investment
rate for maintaining and starting R&D results from the innovation cost differences as seen in
21
The electronic industry consistently show higher gain in R&D for domestic and exporting firms. This results
from the combination of industry specific demand elasticity and profit estimates.

31

Table 7. Maintaining R&D is less costly than starting R&D investment. At a given level of
R&D benefits, higher innovation cost leads to lower investment rates.

Table 9: Distribution of R&D Benefits and Probability of R&D (Percentiles)
R&D Benefits
∆EV
∆EV /V
25th
50th
75th
25th 50th
75th
Domestic Firms
Chemicals
0.712
1.259
3.683
0.012 0.014
0.017
Machinery
0.818
1.757
3.753
0.008 0.009
0.011
Electronics
2.775
4.460
9.194
0.025 0.027
0.031
Instruments
0.486
0.851
1.604
0.009 0.011
0.012
Vehicles
0.936
1.620
2.777
0.012 0.014
0.018
Exporting Firms
Chemicals
14.126 23.158 35.348
0.044 0.049
0.058
Machinery
14.049 23.477 38.022
0.035 0.042
0.050
Electronics
11.304 19.729 30.005
0.064 0.084
0.130
Instruments
7.673 12.384 21.888
0.047 0.061
0.089
Vehicles
21.769 48.396 74.141
0.048 0.063
0.107
Probability of R&D
Domestic Firms
Chemicals
Machinery
Electronics
Instruments
Vehicles
Exporting Firms
Chemicals
Machinery
Electronics
Instruments
Vehicles

P r (rdit = 1|rdit−1 = 1)
25th
50th
75th

P r (rdit = 1|rdit−1 = 0)
25th 50th
75th

0.293
0.192
0.860
0.353
0.233

0.406
0.343
0.935
0.448
0.336

0.696
0.551
0.986
0.583
0.495

0.039
0.045
0.297
0.057
0.057

0.063
0.089
0.424
0.086
0.092

0.156
0.167
0.606
0.137
0.150

0.951
0.898
0.974
0.937
0.982

0.987
0.966
0.993
0.971
0.999

0.997
0.993
0.999
0.993
1.000

0.418
0.448
0.655
0.492
0.662

0.551
0.582
0.754
0.578
0.848

0.667
0.724
0.840
0.703
0.918

The clear conclusion that emerges from the estimates of the structural model is that the
expected benefits from investing in R&D are higher for exporters than for domestic firms.
This higher benefit is the result of both a higher chance of innovation success if firms engage
in R&D and a larger possible impact of those innovations on firm productivity and profits.
The cost of an innovation is modestly higher for the exporting firms but, when combined with
the substantially higher expected benefits, results in a greater propensity to invest in R&D.
32

Because productivity in both the domestic and export market sales is highly persistent, the
impact of R&D investment is long-lived and even more so for the export sales productivity.
The higher productivity raises the incentives to invest in R&D in future periods. Because R&D
investment has a larger impact on the productivity process for exporting firms and, particularly
for their export sales, this will contribute to a divergence between the future productivity paths
of exporting and domestic firms. In effect, firms operating in export markets realize greater
returns to R&D than domestic firms leading them to invest more which further increases the
productivity and profit advantage they have relative to domestic firms.

5.3

Counterfactual Analysis for Exporting Firms

An important advantage of the structural model is the ability to simulate how exporting firms
would optimally respond to changes in the economic environment, including the imposition of
a tariff or a subsidy to R&D. Burstein and Melitz (2013) analyze how export patterns and
innovation investments are affected by a reduction in variable trade costs. Akcigit, Ates, and
Impullitti (2018) simulate how import tariffs and R&D subsidies affect long-run productivity
and welfare. Among other things, Lim, Trefler, and Yu (2018) and Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2013)
simulate the effects of foreign market expansion on incentives to innovate.

In this section we

simulate how three different changes in the economic environment impact the expected benefits
and probability of investing in R&D for our high-tech German manufacturing firms.

The

first change simulates how export and import tariffs, which both reduce the profitability of
the export market sales, impact the return to R&D. This provides insights into an important
source of the dynamic gains from trade. The second change simulates how a subsidy to R&D
impacts investment.

The final simulation alters the depreciation rate of past innovations to

measure the importance of the long-lived nature of the productivity gains generated by R&D
investment. As reported above, we find substantial differences in the expected return to R&D
between exporting and domestic firms, and simulated changes in tariffs or R&D subsidies do
little to narrow the disparity in R&D investment between the two groups.
focus our simulations on the exporting firms.

33

As a result, we

5.3.1

The Impact of Tariffs

An export tariff on German products increases their price in foreign markets and reduces
German firm profits from exporting. An import tariff imposed on intermediate inputs imported
to Germany raises the marginal cost of German producers and is passed on to both foreign and
domestic consumers through higher prices, reducing the profits of exporters in both markets.
Both of these restrictions on trade will reduce the expected benefit of investing in R&D and
lead some firms to stop this investment.

How much they impact the benefit of R&D depends

on the firm’s mix of export and domestic sales. As seen in Tables 3 and 4, product innovations
are more common than process innovations among exporting firms and have a larger impact
on export market productivity while process innovations have a larger impact on domestic
productivity.
Table 10 reports the impact of imposing tariffs on the proportional change in the marginal
benefit of R&D and the change in probability of conducting R&D, ∆P r(rd = 1). The first
measure is calculated as the percentage change in ∆EV X moving from the no-tariff to positive
tariff environment. These outcomes are calculated for four different tariff rates, 10, 15, 20, and
25 percent. In each case, the table reports the median change in the variable across all firms
5 years after the introduction of the tariffs.
The top panel simulates the effect of a permanent export tariff on German products imposed
by the importing countries.22 It is equivalent to a reduction in export market size. The second
and third columns report the impact of a permanent τ = 10% export tariff.

The reduction

in firms’ profit in the export market translates into a substantial decrease in the benefit of
investing in R&D in all five industries. The expected payoff to R&D decreases between 14.6
and 27.9 percent for the median observation, with four of the industries above 21.0 percent.
This leads to a reduction in the probability of R&D between 1.0 and 5.0 percentage points.
This pattern is repeated for all industries when firms face higher tariff rates and the reductions
in R&D are substantial. If tariffs rose to 20 percent, the reduction in ∆EV X for the median
firm is between 24.2 and 46.9 percent across industries, and the corresponding reduction in the
22

In our model, the export tariff increases output prices in the destination country by 1 + τ, which is equivalent
to shifting the intercept in the foreign demand curve equation (3) to Φft (1 + τ )ηf . This reduces export profits
by a factor of 1 − (1 + τ )ηf .

34

35
-0.647
-0.566
-0.385
-0.573
-0.611

-0.220
-0.175
-0.060
-0.170
-0.080

Export and Import Tariffs
Chemicals
-0.399
-0.110
Machinery
-0.356
-0.090
Electronics
-0.221
-0.020
Instruments
-0.367
-0.080
Vehicles
-0.398
-0.020
-0.535
-0.472
-0.297
-0.459
-0.488

-0.469
-0.367
-0.242
-0.381
-0.422

%∆EV

X

Table 10: Change in Outcomes Due to Tariffs (Median)
15%
10%
X
X
Industry
%∆EV
∆P r(rd = 1)
%∆EV
∆P r(rd = 1)
Export Tariff
Chemicals
-0.279
-0.050
-0.378
-0.100
Machinery
-0.225
-0.040
-0.301
-0.070
Electronics
-0.146
-0.010
-0.190
-0.020
Instruments
-0.216
-0.030
-0.308
-0.070
Vehicles
-0.272
-0.010
-0.340
-0.020

-0.360
-0.265
-0.150
-0.260
-0.230

-0.160
-0.100
-0.050
-0.110
-0.050

20%
∆P r(rd = 1)

-0.729
-0.637
-0.485
-0.655
-0.728

-0.545
-0.422
-0.292
-0.463
-0.491

%∆EV

X

-0.525
-0.370
-0.280
-0.390
-0.395

-0.230
-0.140
-0.090
-0.170
-0.115

25%
∆P r(rd = 1)

probability of conducting R&D decreases between 5.0 and 16.0 percentage points.
It is important to note that, even though the tariff impacts export market profits, the impact
through the domestic market sales is not zero. The resulting decline in the R&D investment
rate, impacts the growth in domestic productivity ω h and profits as well, further reducing the
payoff to R&D.
The second panel summarizes the effect when both export and import tariffs are imposed,
as would be the case if Germany retaliated with an import tariff when an export tariff is imposed
on its foreign sales. The impact depends on the fraction of inputs that are imported ρ. In
our data, we do not observe this fraction at the firm level so, in this simulation, we calculate
the effect of this tariff increase using the industry-specific fraction of imported inputs which is
ρ = 0.260, 0.301, 0.197, 0.244, and 0.249 for the five industries.23 The impact of export and
import tariffs on firms’ profits are different.

Under the export tariff τ , the firm charges the

price pf = (1 + τ )[η f /(1 + η f )] exp(c) and receives the lower price pf = [η f /(1 + η f )] exp(c)
with a lower quantity sold than without the tariff. Under an import tariff λ, the increase in
production cost is passed on to consumers through higher domestic and export prices. Firms
charge and receive the price pl = [η l /(1 + η l )] exp(c)(1 + λρ) for l = h, f in this case.

The

increase in prices partially offsets the revenue loss from the lower quantity sold which mitigates
the profit loss compared to the export tariff case.24
When both export and import tariffs are imposed at λ = τ = 10 percent, the expected longrun benefit of R&D decreases between 22.1 and 39.9 percent for the median firm across the
five industries, and the probability of investing in R&D falls between 2.0 and 11.0 percentage
points. This loss is magnified as the tariff rates rise to 25 percent. When both tariffs are set
at 25 percent, the probability of investing in R&D is reduced by 28.0 to 52.5 percentage points
for the median exporting firm.
While the impacts of the trade restrictions at the median are substantial, the impact at
23

Statisches Bundesamt (2018), Input-Output Tabelle (Revision 2011) - Inländische Produktion (Herstellungspreise): Deutschland 2008, accessed online 08.10.2018. Calculation of ρ as (inputs from abroad/(inputs
from domestic production + inputs from abroad).
24
Assuming firms import a fraction ρ of their inputs, an import tariff λ increases firm’s production cost and
f
h
lowers its profit in both export and domestic markets by a factor of 1 − (1 + λρ)(η +1) and 1 − (1 + λρ)(η +1) ,
respectively.

36

the firm level depends on the firm’s initial export share. To measure the differential impact,
we divide firms in each industry into quartiles based on their export share. Table 11 reports
the impact of a 20 percent export tariff on the median firm in each quartile. The percentage
reduction in ∆EV X does not vary substantially across firms with different export shares. The
only industry with a differential effect across firms is vehicles.

The firms with the smallest

export shares had a larger percentage reduction in ∆EV X , -56.7 percent, than firms in the
remaining three quartiles. In contrast, the last four columns of the table show that there is a
systematic impact on the probability of investing in R&D depending on the firm’s export share.
Firms with the smallest export shares see a reduction in the probability of doing R&D between
8.0 and 24.0 percentage points. The impact decreases monotonically as the firm’s export share
increases, so that the reduction in the probability of investing in R&D varies from 2.0 to 11.0
percentage points for firms in the quartile with the largest export shares. For the firm’s that
have a smaller share of their sales in the export market, the export tariff reduces the payoff to
R&D sufficiently that it is no longer profitable for them to invest in R&D.

Table 11: Impact of a 20% Export Tariff by Quartile of the Export Share
%∆EV X
∆ Pr(rd = 1)
Quartiles
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
1st
2nd
3rd
Industry
Chemicals
-0.483 -0.459 -0.474 -0.456
-0.240 -0.160 -0.145
Machinery
-0.380 -0.367 -0.361 -0.362
-0.175 -0.110 -0.080
Electronics
-0.242 -0.242 -0.239 -0.249
-0.080 -0.045 -0.040
Instruments -0.385 -0.376 -0.382 -0.380
-0.145 -0.090 -0.100
Vehicles
-0.567 -0.394 -0.405 -0.419
-0.415 -0.050 -0.030

4th
-0.110
-0.040
-0.030
-0.080
-0.020

Overall, the tariff simulations indicate substantial reductions in the expected payoff to
R&D and, as a result, a reduction in the extensive margin of R&D investment. This negatively
impacts the future path of productivity in both the export and domestic markets and reduces
firm value.

Consistent with the mechanisms hypothesized in the endogenous growth and

trade literature, operating in the export market provides benefits to the firm that increase
the incentives to invest in innovation with positive long-run effects. Trade restrictions act to
substantially reduce one of the major sources of the dynamic gains from trade by reducing firm
37

incentives to invest in R&D.
5.3.2

The Impact of R&D Subsidies

Policies designed to subsidize R&D expenditures, either directly or through preferential tax
treatment, are used in many countries.

Using the estimated structural model, we simulate

the effect of R&D subsidies, which are equivalent to reducing the cost of innovation in our
framework, on the incentives of exporting firms to invest.
The top panel in Table 12 reports the impact of reductions in maintenance costs and startup
costs of innovation on the probability of investing and the long-run payoff to R&D. In each
case we reduce the mean of the innovation cost distribution by 20 percent, so that, on average,
firms face lower costs of realizing a product or process innovation.

The second and third

columns report the impact of a reduction in the maintenance cost, which reduces the barrier
for firms to continue their R&D activities. This change generates an increase in the R&D
participation rate of between 1.0 and 2.0 percentage points.

This increase seems small but

the R&D participation rate for exporting firms in our sample is already high, averaging 0.855
across all industries (Table 2). The change in R&D rate reported here captures, in particular,
the participation decision of firms that would have stopped their R&D activity under the initial
higher innovation cost regime.

The third column shows the median value of the percentage

change in firm long-run value from investing in R&D. Across industries, this change varies
between 3.1 (vehicles) and 6.5 (electronics) percent.
Columns (4) and (5) in Table 12 simulate the effect of a 20% subsidy to the startup cost of
innovation for firms in their first year of R&D investment. While this reduction makes it less
costly for firms to begin investing in R&D it also makes it less costly for firms to disrupt their
R&D and restart at another time. Reducing startup costs thus encourages both entry and exit
into R&D activities.

Column (4) shows that there is no net effect on the participation rate

from these two opposing forces. The results on the percentage change in ∆EV are reported
in column (5) and indicate that the long-run payoff to R&D falls as a result of the reduced
innovation cost. The reduction varies between 6.7 and 8.0 percent of the long-run return. This
f
h
happens because the expected value of not doing R&D Et V X (sX
it+1 |ωit , ωit , rdit = 0) in equation

38

(12) rises, reducing the gain from investing in the current period. These countervailing effects
are not present when subsidies are directed at continuous R&D operations. The comparison
of the two innovation cost subsidies emphasizes that subsidies to induce participation can have
subtle effects on the incentive to make ongoing investments.

In particular, the effectiveness

of a subsidy directed at starting R&D will depend on the proportion of firms that are inactive
and can be induced to start versus the proportion that are active and will be induced to stop.

Table 12:

Change in Outcomes Due to R&D Subsidies and Productivity Process
(Median Across Firms )
20% Reduction in
No Persistence
20% Reduction in
Maintenance Cost
Startup Cost
in Productivity
%∆EV X
∆P r(rd = 1)
%∆EV X
∆P r(rd = 1)
%∆EV X ∆P r(rd = 1)
Industry
0.062
0.02
-0.079
0.00
-0.913
-0.83
Chemicals
Machinery
0.061
0.01
-0.073
0.00
-0.893
-0.79
Electronics
0.065
0.01
-0.067
0.00
-0.891
-0.78
Instruments
0.055
0.01
-0.080
0.00
-0.913
-0.84
Vehicles
0.031
0.00
-0.067
0.00
-0.898
-0.71

5.3.3

Change in Productivity Persistence

The final counterfactual focuses on the importance of persistence in the productivity processes
for the firm’s long run profit and probability of R&D investment. By removing all persistence
f
h /∂ω h = 0, we restrict the impact of
in the productivity processes, so that ∂ωt+1
/∂ωtf = ∂ωt+1
t

innovation on productivity to last for only one period and turns the R&D decision into a static
choice. This allows us to measure how much of the incentive to invest in R&D comes from the
long lasting impact of R&D on future productivity. The final two columns in Table 12 report
the results of this restriction.

Immediate depreciation of the productivity gains results in a

substantial reduction in the average long-run return to R&D, amounting to between 89.1 and
91.3 percent of the long-run return for the median firm in each industry. This reduction in the
benefits of innovation leads to a reduction in the R&D participation rate of between 71 and 84
percentage points. It is not just the fact that R&D improves productivity, but also that the
improvement depreciates slowly, that generates the incentives to invest in R&D.

39

6

Conclusion
A large empirical literature in international trade has documented substantial and per-

sistent differences in firm performance between firms that export and those that limit their
business activities to the domestic market. The theoretical literature on growth and trade has
emphasized that the superior performance of international firms may reflect the endogenous
decisions of these firms to invest in R&D that generates innovations and productivity improvements. Firms engaging in international markets may have better opportunities to realize profits
that become available as a result of their endogenous innovative activities and this, in turn,
creates greater incentives for them to invest in R&D. The superior long-run performance of
these firms is the result of greater endogenous investment in innovative activities and is an
important source of dynamic gains from trade.
In this article, we provide empirical evidence on this endogenous investment mechanism
and measure how it differs for two groups of German high-tech manufacturing firms, one that
exports and one that does not. In our empirical model, firm R&D investment generates new
product and process innovations which improve the productivity and future profits of the firm.
The investment and innovation process is allowed to differ between exporting and domestic
firms.

In addition, for exporting firms we allow the impact of innovations on productivity

to differ between their domestic and export market sales.

These factors generate incentives

to invest in R&D that vary with the firm’s export intensity. Using the model estimates, we
construct a measure of the firm’s expected long-run payoff to R&D investment that differs by
firm characteristics and, most importantly, by the firm’s export market participation.
The empirical results show that exporting firms are more likely to introduce product and
process innovations than domestic firms. R&D investment increases the probability of innovation for exporting firms by 65 percent and by 59.5 percent for domestic firms. Even without
R&D investment, exporting firms have an innovation rate that is 9.1 percentage points higher
than their domestic counterparts. The average productivity impact of these innovations and
their persistence is larger for exporting firms leading to a higher expected return to R&D for
exporting firms. The median firm that sells its output only in the domestic market expects an
average long-run payoff from R&D investment between 0.85 million euros in the instruments
40

industry and 4.46 million euros in the electronics industry. When expressed as a percentage of
firm value, the increase in value resulting from R&D for the median firm varies from 0.9 to 2.7
percent across industries. The corresponding expected payoff for a median exporting firm is
much higher, and varies between 12.38 million euros in instruments and 48.40 in vehicles. As
a percentage of firm value, these expected gains vary from 4.2 to 8.4 percent across industries.
This difference in expected payoff to R&D is reflected in the higher R&D investment rate for
exporting firms compared with domestic firms.
Using the model estimates, we simulate the effect of exogenous changes in the economic
environment, including an export tariff and R&D subsidy, on an exporting firm’s expected
return to R&D and R&D choice. An export tariff of 20 percent, which effectively reduces the
size and profitability of the foreign market, lowers the long-run return to R&D investment for
the median firm by more than 24.2 to 46.9 percent across the five industries and reduces R&D
participation by between 5.0 and 16.0 percentage points across industries. This causes a decline
in productivity and slows growth. An R&D subsidy that reduces the cost of innovation by 20
percent for ongoing R&D investment increases the median firm’s long-run return between 3.1
and 6.5 across industries and induces higher R&D participation rates by between 1.0 and 2.0
percentage points. In contrast, a 20 percent reduction in innovation costs for R&D startups
reduces the incentives for firms to continue R&D and encourages both entry and exit in R&D
activities.

This is reflected, on average, in a 6.7 to 8.0 percent reduction in the expected

return to R&D across industries. The effects of entry and exit offset each other resulting in an
R&D participation rate that is unchanged in this case. Finally, we find that over 90 percent
of the return to R&D is due to the slow depreciation of the impact of innovations on future
productivity in both the domestic and export market. It is critical to recognize this dynamic
aspect of the R&D process when assessing the impact of trade restrictions on the incentives to
invest in innovation.
Overall, these findings provide evidence that firms that participate in the export market
have a greater incentive to invest in R&D for several reasons. Their investment is more likely
to generate product and process innovations and these innovations have a larger effect on future
productivity. This difference in R&D investment incentives between exporting and domestic

41

firms reinforces any initial differences in productivity between the two groups and contributes
to a greater divergence in performance between them over time. Among the exporting firms,
R&D investment has a greater impact on the future profits from export sales than domestic
sales.

This provides greater incentives for export intensive firms to invest in R&D. Tariff

restrictions significantly reduce the payoff to R&D investment among exporting firms.

In

summary, our findings are consistent with the ideas underlying models of endogenous growth
and trade that emphasize that participation in international markets can affect the speed and
direction of technological improvements because of the incentives it creates for firms to invest
in R&D.

References
[1] Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Matthieu Lequien, and Marc J. Melitz (2018), “The
Impact of Exports on Innovation: Theory and Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 24600.
[2] Akcigit, Ufuk, Sina T. Ates, and Giammario Impullitti (2018), “Innovation and Trade
Policy in a Globalized World),” NBER Working Paper 24542.
[3] Altomonte, Carlo, Tommas Aquilante, Gabor Bekes, and Gianmarco Ottaviano (2013),
“Internationalization and Innovation of Firms: Evidence and Policy,” Economic Policy,
Vol. 28, No. 76, pp. 663-700.
[4] Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein (2010), “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 118, No. 3, pp. 433-484.
[5] Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, Gary Pisano, and Pian Shu (2017), “Foreign
Competition and Domestic Innovation: Evidence From U.S. Patents.” NBER Working
Paper 22879.
[6] Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Tor Winston (2007), “Export Market Participation,
Investments in R&D and Worker Training, and the Evolution of Firm Productivity,” The
World Economy, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 83-104.

42

[7] Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu (2008), “R&D Investments, Exporting, and the Evolution of Firm Productivity,” American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, Vol. 98, No.2 (May), pp. 451-456.
[8] Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu (2011), “R&D Investment, Exporting
and Productivity Dynamics,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 4 (June), pp.
1312-1344.
[9] Baldwin, John R. and Wulong Gu (2004), “Export Market Participation and Productivity
Performance in Canadian Manufacturing,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 36, pp.
634-657.
[10] Becker, Sascha O. and Peter H. Egger (2013), “Endogenous Product vs Process Innovation
and a Firm’s Propensity to Export,” Empirical Economics, Vol. 44, No. 1, pp. 329-354.
[11] Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1997), “Exporters, Skill Upgrading, and the
Wage Gap,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 3-31.
[12] Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen (2016), “Trade Induced Technical
Change?

The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT, and Productivity,” The

Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 83, No. 1, pp 1347-1393.
[13] Burstein, Ariel and Marc Melitz (2013), “Trade Liberalization and Firm Dynamics,” in
Advances in Economics and Econometrics Tenth World Congress. Applied Economics,
Econometric Society Monographs. Vol 2. Cambridge U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
[14] Bustos, Paula (2010), “Multilateral Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms,” American Economic
Review. Vol 101, No. 1, pp. 304-340.
[15] Cassiman, Bruno and Elena Golvko (2011), “Innovations and Internationalization Through
Exports,” Journal of International Business Studies, Vol 42, No. 1, pp. 56-75.
[16] Coelli, Federica, Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe (2016), “Better, Faster,
Stronger: Global Innovation and Trade Liberalization,” NBER Working Paper 22647.
43

[17] Cohen, Wesley M. (2010), “Fifty Years of Empirical Studies of Innovative Activity and Performance,” in Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Vol 1, B. Hall and N. Rosenberg
(eds), North-Holland, pp. 129-213.
[18] Constantini, James A., and Marc J. Melitz (2008), “The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade Liberalization,” in The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, E.
Helpman, D. Marin, and T. Verdier (eds.), Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[19] Crépon, Bruno, Emmanuel Duguet, and Jacques Mairesse (1998), “Research Innovation
and Productivity: An Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level,” Economics of Innovation
and New Technology, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 115-158.
[20] Damijan, Jože, Črt Kostevc, and Matija Rojec (2017), “Exporting Status and Success in
Innovation: Evidence from CIS Micro Data for EU Countries,” The Journal Of International Trade & Economic Development, Vol. 26, No. 5, pp. 585-611.
[21] Das, Sanghamitra, Mark J. Roberts, and James R. Tybout (2007), “Market Entry Costs,
Producer Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics,” Econometrica, Vol. 75, No. 3, pp. 837-873.
[22] Doraszelski, Ulrich and Jordi Jaumandreu (2013), “R&D and Productivity: Estimating
Endogenous Productivity,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 80, No. 4, pp. 1338-1383.
[23] Griliches, Zvi (1979), “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development
to Productivity Growth,” Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 10, No. 1 (Spring), pp. 92-116.
[24] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1990), “Trade Innovation, and Growth,”
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 86-91.
[25] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1995), “Technology and Trade,” in Handbook
of International Economics,Vol. III, G Grossman and K. Rogoff (eds.), Elsevier Science
B.V., pp. 1279-1337.
[26] Hall, Bronwyn H. (2011), “Innovation and Productivity,” NBER Working Paper No. 17178.

44

[27] Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen (2010), “Measuring the Returns
to R&D,” in Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Vol 1, B. Hall and N. Rosenberg
(eds), North-Holland, pp. 1033-1082.
[28] Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Giuseppe Iarossi, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (2002), “Exports
and Manufacturing Productivity in East Asia: A Comparative Analysis with Firm-Level
Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 8894.
[29] Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Trefler (2010), “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises PlantLevel Productivity...For Some Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 125, No. 3,
1051-1099.
[30] Lim, Kevin, Daniel Trefler, and Miaojie Yu, (2018), “Trade and Innovation:

The Role

of Scale and Competition Effects,” Working Paper, Rottman School of Management,
University of Toronto.
[31] Máñez, Juan A., Maria Rochina-Barrachina, and Juan A. Sanchis-Llopis (2015), “The
Dynamic Linkages Among Exports, R&D, and Productivity,” The World Economy, Vol.
38, No. 4, pp. 583-612.
[32] Melitz, Marc J. (2003), “The Impact of Trade on Aggregate Industry Productivity and
Intra-Industry Reallocations,” Econometrica, Vol. 71, No. 6, pp. 1695-1725.
[33] Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes (1996), “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, Vol. 64, No. 6 (November), pp. 1263-1297.
[34] Peters, Bettina, Mark J. Roberts, Van Anh Vuong and Helmut Fryges (2017), “Estimating
Dynamic R&D Demand. An Analysis of Costs and Long-run Benefits,” Rand Journal of
Economics, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp. 409-437.
[35] Peters, Bettina, Mark J. Roberts, and Van Anh Vuong (2017), “Dynamic R&D Choice
and the Firm’s Financial Strength,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, Vol.
26, No. 1-2, pp. 134-149.

45

[36] Rammer, Christian and Bettina Peters (2013), “Innovation Panel Surveys in Germany,”
in Handbook of Innovation Indicators and Measurement, Fred Gault (ed.), Edward Elgar:
Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA, pp. 135-177.
[37] Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout (1997), “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An
Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs,” American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 4
(September), pp. 545-564.
[38] Santos, Carlos Daniel (2017), “Sunk Costs of R&D, Trade, and Productivity: The Moulds
Industry Case,” Economic Journal, Vol. 127, No. 63, pp. 1626-1664.
[39] Rust, John (1987), “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of
Harold Zurcher,” Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 5 (September), pp. 999-1033.
[40] Shu, Pian and Claudia Steinwender (2018), “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Firm
Productivity and Innovation,” NBER Working Paper 24715.
[41] Syverson, Chad (2011), “What Determines Productivity,” Journal of Economic Literature,
Vol. 49, No. 2, pp. 326-365.
[42] Van Beveren, Ilke and Hylke Vandenbussche (2010), “Product and Process Innovation and
Firms’ Decision to Export,” Journal of Economic Policy Reform, Vol. 13, pp. 3-24.
[43] Van Long, Ngo, Horst Raff, and Frank Stähler (2011), “Innovation and Trade with Heterogenous Firms,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 84, pp. 149-159.
[44] Xu, Rui, and Kaiji Gong (2017), “Does Import Competition Induce R&D Reallocations?
Evidence from the U.S.,” International Monetary Fund Working Papers 17/253.

46

