NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF PHYSICAL AND COGNITIVE DECLINE AT OLDER AGES ON
JOB MISMATCH AND RETIREMENT
Péter Hudomiet
Michael D. Hurd
Susann Rohwedder
Robert J. Willis
Working Paper 25229
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25229

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

Support from the University of Michigan Retirement Research Center Award RRC08098401-09
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Péter Hudomiet, Michael D. Hurd, Susann Rohwedder, and Robert J. Willis. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Physical and Cognitive Decline at Older Ages on Job Mismatch and Retirement
Péter Hudomiet, Michael D. Hurd, Susann Rohwedder, and Robert J. Willis
NBER Working Paper No. 25229
November 2018
JEL No. J26,J81
ABSTRACT
Physical and cognitive abilities of older workers decline with age, which can cause a mismatch
between abilities and job demands, potentially leading to early retirement. We link longitudinal
Health and Retirement Study data to O*NET occupational characteristics to estimate to what
extent changes in workers’ physical and cognitive resources change their work-limiting health
problems, mental health, subjective probabilities of retirement, and labor market status. While we
find that physical and cognitive decline strongly predict all outcomes, only the interaction
between large-muscle resources and job demands is statistically significant, implying a strong
mismatch at older ages in jobs requiring large-muscle strength. The effects of declines in fine
motor skills and cognition are not statistically different across differing occupational job
demands.
Péter Hudomiet
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
Email: hudomiet@rand.org
hudomiet@rand.org

Susann Rohwedder
RAND
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407
susannr@rand.org

Michael D. Hurd
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER
mhurd@rand.org

Robert J. Willis
3254 ISR
University of Michigan
P. O. Box 1248
426 Thompson Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48106
and NBER
rjwillis@isr.umich.edu

Introduction
Poor health is one of the strongest drivers of early retirement (Blundell, Britton, Costa Dias,
and French, 2017; Cahill, Giandrea, and Quinn 2006; Fisher, Chaffee, and Sonnega 2016;
McGarry 2004; Rice et al. 2011; van Rijn et al. 2014) and it reduces the likelihood of continuing
work after separation from career jobs (Topa et al. 2009). Poor health or declining cognitive ability
makes it more burdensome to carry out job tasks, and the magnitude of the added burden depends
on job characteristics. For example, someone with minor back pain may have little difficulty
carrying out the tasks of an office clerk but may be unable to carry heavy objects, a task frequently
performed by construction workers. Conversely, an accountant whose memory starts to deteriorate
may have more trouble performing well on the job compared to a hairdresser with early-stage
memory decline.
When workers’ capabilities become mismatched with the demands of their jobs, there are
several ways to adjust, but changes in their work status are more likely to occur. For example,
workers may initially stay in their current job positions and increase their level of effort to
compensate for their decline in cognitive and physical resources. This greater effort, however,
may lead to dissatisfaction with work, exhaustion, and (mental) health problems. Alternatively,
employers may accommodate the changing capabilities of their aging employees. Workers may
also reduce their work hours to compensate for their increased difficulty working, or switch to
different jobs or tasks better suited to their changing abilities, either in the same or in a lessdemanding occupation. In most scenarios workers will likely leave the labor force earlier than
they would have in the absence of physical or cognitive decline.
Understanding how mismatch between individuals’ resources and job demands affects
labor force participation at older ages is important because early retirement may leave
1

individuals and their families financially vulnerable at older ages. To the extent that better
accommodation of mismatch allows individuals to work longer it will not only improve their
own financial security, but it would also relieve financial pressures on public programs such as
Social Security or Medicare. Even if employers wanted to accommodate work limitations, the
mismatch between the worker’s abilities and the job demands may eventually become too large,
resulting in job separation. Policymakers need to understand how often this happens: such
mismatches and separations may prevent workers from working to the ages they desire or had
planned on.
In this paper, we study how age-related mismatch between job demands and workers’
health and cognitive abilities affects retirement outcomes. We use longitudinal data from the
Health and Retirement Study (HRS) linked to detailed occupational characteristics from the
O*NET project. 2 We considered a large set of outcomes that signaled mismatch, but focus on
five of them in this study: work-limiting health problems, depressive symptoms, the subjective
probability of working full time after age 65, transition probabilities from work to retirement,
and transitions to disability.
When possible, we use panel econometric models to estimate how changes in
individuals’ resources and the interactions between resources and job demands affect changes in
these outcome variables. These empirical models control for individuals’ initial conditions and
hence are more credible than models relying on cross-sectional variation.
We consider mismatch in two physical and two cognitive domains. Regarding physical
domains, we use measures from the HRS of deficits in individuals’ resources or capabilities:

2

The O*NET database (www.onetcenter.org) contains information on hundreds of standardized and occupation-specific
descriptors that capture, among other things, the characteristics and requirements of the jobs, including the intensity of various
activities involved in doing a particular job.

2

whether they have large muscle problems such as having difficulties with stooping, kneeling, or
crouching, or with pushing or pulling large objects; or whether they have fine motor skill
problems such as having difficulties with picking up a dime from a table and dressing. Regarding
cognitive domains, we use a 27-point working and episodic memory score from the HRS, which
is closely linked to fluid intelligence and decision-making abilities (Del Missier et al. 2013).
We pair these resource measures with data on detailed job demands from the O*NET
project. The O*NET, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Labor’s Employment and Training
Administration, is based on a combination of surveys, expert assessments, and tests. The ratings
are available for occupations identified by three-digit codes that can be linked to occupations of
HRS respondents.
We use four O*NET job-demand measures: First, we use measures on dynamic strength,
i.e., the ability to exert muscle force repeatedly or continuously. We paired these with the HRS
large-muscle resource measure. Second, we use measures on finger dexterity, i.e., the ability to
make precisely coordinated movements of the fingers. We pair these with the HRS fine-motor
skill resource measure. Third, we use measures on memorization, i.e., the ability to remember
information. We pair these with the HRS cognition-resource measure. Fourth, we use O*NET
measures on analyzing data or information, also pairing them with the HRS cognition-resource
measure.
We found that, among HRS respondents, large-muscle strength, fine-motor skills, and
cognitive abilities significantly and strongly decline with age. Furthermore, these declines lead to
higher reports of work-limiting health problems, more depressive symptoms, lower subjective
probabilities of working full-time past age 65, and more transitions from full-time work to
retirement and disability.
3

To capture the degree of job mismatch for respondents, we use terms capturing the
interaction between resource decline and job demands. 3 Such terms, for example, show whether
cognitive decline reduces the ability to work in all jobs or only in cognitively demanding ones.
We found only one statistically significant interaction term: that for large muscle problems.
Workers who develop large-muscle limitations are more likely to report changes in most
outcomes when they work in occupations that rely heavily on physical strength than when they
work in occupations that do not rely on physical strength. The interaction effects were large and
statistically significant for work-limiting health problems, mental health, subjective work
expectations, and transitions to disability. In contrast to the large muscle results, the interaction
terms of workers’ resources and job demands for fine motor skills and for cognition were not
statistically significant, suggesting that declines in workers’ fine motor skills or cognition did not
lead to significant differences in their outcomes by occupational job demands.
Our preferred statistical models use panel variation for identification rather than crosssectional variation. But, because our data are observational, we discuss threats to identification,
including omitted factors, selection, and reverse causality, and we estimate alternative
specifications and tests. For example, we estimate models with alternative sets of controls, we
estimate models on different samples, and we estimate placebo regressions on lagged values of
the outcome variables. These results support a causal interpretation, perhaps because withinperson changes in the resources (health) are relatively random events in this age range.

3

The term “mismatch” has been used in the economics literature to describe different issues, such as the
misalignment of the demand and supply of skills in countries or regions (Cappelli 2015); or the difference between
students’ abilities and the qualities of their schools (Dillon and Smith, 2017). We, instead, define it based on
workers’ resources and the demands of their current jobs.

4

It is important to point out, however, that finding a significant causal effect (or absence of
effect) does not necessarily reveal much about the mechanisms linking changes in resources to
labor market outcomes. When an exogenous change in a worker’s health or capabilities occurs
that reduces productivity or increases the disutility of work, the consequences of that change may
lead to responses by the employer or the employee to offset these effects through medical
treatment, equipment, changes in hours, organization of work, task assignments and so on. A
significant causal effect of an exogenous change in resources on retirement outcomes depends on
whether the present value of pecuniary and non-pecuniary costs to the employer and employee of
offsetting adjustments are smaller than the net benefits to both parties of continued employment.
Heterogeneity in task demands and skill supplies across firms and workers due to variation in
firm technology and worker skills and preferences 4 is likely to lead to considerable heterogeneity
in the net costs of mismatch both within and across occupations and, therefore, to considerable
unmeasured variation in the effects of exogenous changes in worker resources on retirement
outcomes. In this paper, we estimate the average causal effect of mismatch for workers in the
equilibrium match. The plausibly large variance in the magnitude of effects implies that there is
considerable room for general equilibrium effects of policy changes that are not captured by our
analysis. However, we believe that our analysis of mismatch helps distinguish types of workers
and occupations for which private or public interventions to overcome mismatch are likely to be
helpful.
Our work builds on several previous strands of research. Several studies have shown the
role of occupational characteristics in explaining job polarization, wage inequality, and career
decisions (Acemoglu and Autor 2011; Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; James 2011; Yamaguchi

4

See Lindenlaub (2017) for outcomes of equilibrium sorting on multiple dimensions in the labor market.

5

2012, 2018), and a smaller number of papers explored the role of occupational characteristics in
the retirement process (Angrisiani, Kapteyn, and Meijer 2015; Bowlus, Mori, and Robinson,
2016; Belbase, Sanzenbacher, and Gillis 2016; Sonnega et al. 2018).
The study of Belbase et al. (2016) is most closely related to ours. It showed that
individuals in occupations that heavily rely on skills that tend to decline with age are more likely
to retire earlier. Nevertheless, our work differs from theirs in several ways. First, we identified
four dimensions of job characteristics for which the HRS elicits respondents’ abilities: two
cognitive and two physical. Second, in addition to analyzing the role of job demands in the
timing of retirement we analyzed the role of respondents’ corresponding abilities at the
individual level and changes therein, which is an important but often neglected heterogeneity
(Bowlus et al., 2016). Third, and maybe most importantly, we analyzed the interaction between
abilities and job demands, whereas Belbase et al. (2016) did not use reports about workers’
abilities. Fourth, we used retirement expectations data, allowing us to observe the immediate
impact of changes in abilities and job mismatch. This has the further advantages of increased
sample size and panel variation for identification.
Other related research in psychology explores the person-environment fit. Wang and
Shultz (2010) suggested that the match between various aspects of the persons (workers) and
their work environment may affect work and retirement outcomes, including well-being and
retirement timing. Liebermann, Wegge, and Muller (2013) used a person-environment
framework in a study of German insurance workers to explore several hypotheses related to
workers’ expectations of remaining in the same job until retirement. McGonagle, et al. (2015)
investigate how the match between job demands, job resources and “perceived work ability”
affects work-related stress and work outcomes. Sonnega et al. (2018) compared objective
6

(O*NET) and subjective (HRS) job-demand measures and how they interacted with HRS
resource measures to predict retirement timing. We use a broader set of variables, and we use
panel econometric models that are less restrictive than cross-sectional models.
In the next section, we describe the HRS and O*NET data we analyze. We then present
separate sections on our methods and results. The final section presents our conclusions and a
discussion of the implications and limitations of our work.
2. Data
The HRS is the primary U.S. data source for studying the retirement process. 5 It has a large
sample—approximately 20,000 responses per wave—of persons at least 50 years of age, and very
detailed panel information on them, including information about work, health, cognitive abilities,
and socioeconomic status. The HRS has interviewed respondents biennially since 1992.
2.1. Measurement of physical and cognitive resources
The HRS has very detailed information about individuals’ health, limitations in the
activities of daily living (ADLs), and cognitive abilities. We use three summary measures, created
by the RAND-HRS (2016), 6 in this project. Table 1 provides an overview.
The first measure is termed “large-muscle problems” and represents difficulties with mildto-moderate physical activities. The measure comprises four items, each corresponding to the
respondent’s mention of any difficulty with:
1. sitting for about two hours

5

The HRS (Health and Retirement Study) is sponsored by the National Institute on Aging (grant number NIA
U01AG009740) and is conducted by the University of Michigan: http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/
6
The RAND HRS Data file is an easy to use longitudinal data set based on the HRS data. It was developed at
RAND with funding from the National Institute on Aging and the Social Security Administration
www.rand.org/labor/aging/dataprod/hrs-data.html.

7

2. getting up from a chair after sitting for long periods
3. stooping, kneeling, or crouching
4. pulling or pushing large objects like a living room chair.
The second measure is termed “fine motor problems” and it aims to capture problems with
the precise coordination of fingers, such as picking up small objects or buttoning a shirt
(Hoogendam et al. 2014). Our measure sums three items from the HRS about reporting difficulties
with:
1. dressing, including putting on shoes and socks
2. eating, including cutting food
3. picking up a dime from a table
The average value of this 0-3 score in our sample is only 0.047 (Table 2). Thus we
anticipate that this measure will not be very discriminatory, but it will distinguish people with
substantial problems (Carmeli, Patish, and Coleman 2003).
Our measure of cognitive ability is the 27-point scale of episodic memory (see Crimmins
et al. 2011), which is strongly related to fluid cognitive abilities (Del Missier et al. 2013). The
measure sums performance on four cognitive tests:
1. Immediate word recall of a list of 10 words (10 points)
2. Delayed word recall of the same list a few minutes later (10 points)
3. Serial subtraction of 7 from 100 five times (5 points)
4. Backward counting from 20 to 10 with two trials (2 points)
The physical measures are consistently available since 1994 for all interviews, including
interviews of proxy respondents for persons unwilling or unable to do the interview. The cognition
8

score is consistently available since 1996 but is not available in proxy interviews because cognitive
abilities can only be directly tested. All three resource measures are recoded so that higher values
represent more resources (better health). For the regression models we also standardized the
measures to have a zero mean and a standard deviation of one in our main analytic sample, which
comprises respondents 50 to 70 years of age who are working full-time.
2.2. Measurement of job demands
The HRS provides information on workers’ occupations by three-digit occupational codes
of the U.S. Census Bureau. The classification changed in 2006 from the 1980 to the 2000 census
classifications, but cross-walks are available between these specifications (Hudomiet 2015; Carr
et al. 2016). The detailed occupations are linked to detailed occupational characteristics from the
O*NET data, similarly to Belbase, Sanzenbacher, and Gillis (2016) and Carr et al. (2016). We
extract four key dimensions of job demands that are closely related to the resource measures. Table
1 provides an overview.
The dynamic strength dimension relates to individuals’ ability to exert muscle force
repeatedly or continuously over time. This involves muscular endurance and resistance to muscle
fatigue. Occupations that score the highest on this measure include fire fighters, masons and
construction workers; occupations that score lowest include management, engineering and
financial ones. We pair the dynamic strength measure with the HRS large-muscle resource
measure.
The finger dexterity dimension describes individuals’ ability to make precisely coordinated
movements of the fingers of one or both hands to grasp, manipulate, or assemble very small
objects. Occupations scoring highest on this measure include dentists, aircraft mechanics, data
entry keyers, and precision textile, apparel, and furnishings machine workers. Occupations scoring
9

lowest include real estate sales, management analysists, human resource clerks and clergy. We
pair this job-demand measure with the HRS fine-motor skill resource measure.
The memorization dimension describes individuals’ ability to remember information such
as words, numbers, pictures, and procedures. Occupations scoring highest on this measure include
clergy, primary school teachers, lawyers, bartenders, and waiters/waitresses. Occupations scoring
lowest include janitors, painters, vehicle washers, and textile sewing machine operators. We pair
this job-demand measure with the HRS cognition-resource measure.
The “analyzing data or information” dimension captures work activities of identifying the
underlying principles, reasons, or facts of information by breaking down information or data into
separate parts. Occupations scoring highest include management analysts and various science jobs;
occupations scoring lowest include mail carriers, vehicle washers, door-to-door sales, and laundry
workers. We also pair this job-demand measure with the HRS cognition-resource measure.
Appendix A.1. discusses details of defining the four job-demand measures based on the
detailed HRS occupation codes. The job-demand measures range from 0 to 1. In our regression
analyses we use standardized measures that have a mean of zero and standard deviation of 1.0
among 50 to 70 years old full-time workers.
2.3. The outcome variables
Our conceptual framework considers how an increasing mismatch between the resources of
workers and the demands of their jobs will influence a number of outcomes. We considered a
large set of outcome variables and chose the following for analysis:

10

•

Self-reports of any impairment or health problem that limits the kind or amount of paid
work respondents can do. We expect that any mismatch between individuals’ resources
and the demands of their jobs would increase the report of such impairments.

•

The number of depressive symptoms individuals have, using the eight-item HRS version
of the Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression (CESD) Scale. We expect that any
mismatch between individuals’ resources and the demands of their jobs would increase
the number of depressive symptoms.

•

Subjective expectations to work full-time after age 65 (or 62). The HRS asks
respondents, Thinking about work in general and not just your present job, what do you
think the chances are that you will be working full-time after you reach age 65 [or 62]?
This measure of expected future work is highly predictive of actual future work at age 65
or 62 (Hurd, 2009). We expect that a mismatch between a worker’s resources and job
demands decreases the subjective probabilities of working full-time in the future and so
will predict earlier retirement.
These outcome variables are available for both workers and non-workers. They are

therefore well-suited for panel econometric modeling. Depressive symptoms and subjective
expectations, however, are not collected in proxy interviews due to their subjective nature.
Missing outcome variables were typically ignored in our analysis, except for subjective
expectations. Beginning in 2006, the HRS asked all respondents their subjective probabilities of
working full-time after age 62 and 65. Prior to 2006, however, non-working individuals were only
asked about the probabilities that they would ever work in the future, resulting in partial responses
to P65: a 0% answer about any work in the future implies a 0% chance of working full-time after
ages 62 or 65. Those, who provided a non-zero answer before 2006, however, were not asked
11

about full-time work after ages 62 and 65. These observations were imputed using a regressionbased imputation model with many predictors including lagged values of these variables. See
Appendix A.2. for details.
We also analyze wave-to-wave transition probabilities from full-time work to either fullretirement or disability. The labor force status variables are based on the RAND-HRS (2016)
definitions. We expected that mismatch between worker resources and job demands would
increase the transition probability from work to retirement or disability status. Because actual
transitions between these states are infrequent, with many workers experiencing just one
transition, panel statistical methods are not well suited for their analysis, so we have to use other,
more restrictive methods.
We also analyze the effect of mismatch between worker resources and job demands on
the probabilities of a worker switching employers between HRS waves, the enjoyment
individuals derive from work, and the likelihood an individual will seek another job while
working.
2.4. Other variables
Other variables we use in our analysis are
•

Age

•

Gender

•

Race (white, black, other)

•

Education (high-school dropout, high school graduate, college dropout, college graduate)

•

Marital status (married or not)

•

Whether one’s spouse works
12

•

Whether individuals have DB or DC pension plans

•

Whether individuals are covered by health insurance either by their own or their spouse’s
employers.

•

Self-employment status

•

Job tenure

•

Total household income

•

Total household wealth, excluding employer-based retirement wealth 7 (such as 401k
balances or defined benefit plan entitlements) and value of secondary residence 8
We use the RAND-HRS dataset for these variables. Total household income and total

household wealth were imputed in case of missing information by the RAND team as explained
by RAND-HRS (2016). In a handful of cases some control variables (such as education) were also
missing. As discussed in Appendix A.2. missing controls were replaced by the modes of the
variables. Missing outcome variables or explanatory variables (other than the subjective
expectations discussed above), however, were not imputed.
2.5. The sample
We restrict our sample in several ways. We use the 1994-2014 waves of the HRS,
excluding the 1992 data because many variables of interest to this study were missing in that
wave. We also limit our analysis sample to person-year observations when individuals were

7

Information about employer sponsored pensions is collected by HRS for all current and previous employers
(although limited to jobs held for 5 years or more for employment prior to the first HRS interview). Measurement
error on pension plan type, changes in survey design across waves and the large number of components involved
makes the derivation of pension wealth measures a major and complicated undertaking, with considerable ambiguity
in the profession how best to accomplish this task.
8
HRS did not ask for the value of any secondary residence in the third wave (1996), so the total wealth measure we
use excludes that.

13

between 50 and 70 years of age. Individuals with missing gender (only two person-year
observations) or occupations (322 person-year observations) are also excluded.
Some variables are not available in the 1994 wave or in proxy interviews (e.g., cognitive
abilities, expectations, CESD), so we exclude these from analyses where necessary.
Our main analyses are carried out on those who work full-time in one wave and are
observed in the succeeding wave, irrespective of labor force status in the next wave. In a few
cases, however, we do not restrict the sample based on current or future labor force statuses.
The HRS data comes with survey weights. Some individuals were initially interviewed
before they were age-eligible in which case they have a sample weight of zero. To maximize
information about initial job matches we report unweighted results. 9 Weighted results are very
similar, probably because our panel econometric models are little affected by weights that (mostly)
correct for stratified sampling.
Table 2 presents descriptive information about our unweighted sample, including 50-70year-old full-time workers (not restricted by future labor force status). Altogether we have about
47,000 person-year observations, but some variables are missing for various reasons discussed
earlier. About half of the sample is female, almost one-fourth is non-white, more than one-fourth
has a college degree, and nearly three-fourths is married. Most individuals in our sample have
only a few, if any, physical limitations, with less than one in ten reporting a health condition that
limits working. On average, they report having one (of eight queried) depressive symptoms.
Appendix A.3. includes a table with weighted statistics that are very similar.

9

The HRS interviews spouses of age-eligible HRS respondents. Some spouses were not themselves age-eligible at
their initial interview and so have an HRS weight of zero.

14

3. Methods
Suppose that as workers enter their early 50’s they are in job equilibrium: their physical
and cognitive capabilities are well matched to the demands of their job. Comparing responses
across individuals about job demands may reveal few mismatches because those workers most
suited to the demands will have sorted into those jobs. For example, strong men will have taken
up jobs that require considerable strength. If they are asked, however, whether the job requires
strength, they may not acknowledge the full extent of those demands. Because of such good
matches, there may be little relationship between anticipated retirement and job demands. Yet a
person of medium strength put into such a job would likely anticipate early retirement. Similarly,
as time passes the quality of the match may deteriorate even for a strong worker because of
decreases in physical health.
Our empirical strategy is based on the observation that because of health shocks or gradual
declines in physical and cognitive resources, jobs that were once a good match to a worker’s
characteristics may become increasingly mismatched.
3.1. Panel models
A strength of our approach is its use of panel data. By using panel-data methods, we can
control for initial conditions, in particular the initial quality of job matches. We illustrate our
empirical strategy with the example of the subjective probability of working past age 65, but
similar methods are used for the other outcomes.
We estimate the following model

∆pi65,t +1 =β 0 + β1rit + β 2 ∆ri ,t +1 + β3dit + β 4 dit × ∆ri ,t +1 + β5 X it + ε it ,

15

(1)

where pit65 is the subjective probability of working full time after age 65 for individual i at wave
t; rit denotes individuals’ resources, dit represents job demands; X it is a set of control variables
(such as changes in marital status, and interview wave indicators), ε it is the error term; and ∆
indicates changes from wave t to wave t+1. The coefficients of interest are the interaction terms (

β 4 ).
We interpret the coefficients in (1) as the causal effect of resources (health) on the
outcomes by job demands. This specification is similar to a first-difference estimator, but the job
demands are fixed at the time t values so that changes in the right hand side variables only reflect
health rather than job changes. The model assumes a zero correlation between the error term in (1)
and changes in the HRS resources, as well as between the error and job demands and the interaction
terms.
The main threat to identification is omitted variable bias: that is, a left-out factor
simultaneously triggers changes in health and the outcomes. For example, a large inheritance may
allow people to quit their jobs and invest more in their health (Schwandt, 2018); or if employers
offer health insurance that may change workers’ health and labor supply. To explore the extent of
omitted variable bias we estimate models with different set of control variables as robustness
checks.
Another threat to identification is reverse causality: retirement itself may affect the physical
and mental health of individuals (Atalay and Barrett, 2014; Blundell, et al. (2017); Insler, 2014;
Mazzonna and Peracchi, 2016; Rohwedder and Willis, 2010). As a robustness check we restrict
the sample to full-time workers at both time t and t+1. These alternative estimates are likely biased
toward zero, because retirement is also a channel though which health shocks affect the outcome
16

variables. For these reasons, we interpret the estimates on this reduced sample as lower bounds of
the true effects.
A third threat to identification is selection into jobs: people in different jobs may have
different trajectories in their health and/or the outcome variables, but these differences may be
independent of their jobs. For example, blue collar workers may be a selected sample with faster
than average declines in health and labor supply. To explore this hypothesis, we estimated placebo
regressions on past values of the outcome variables. This is a form of balancing test à la Pei et al.
(2017). Our identification assumptions predict no effect on past outcomes, while the job selection
hypothesis predicts similar coefficients to the contemporaneous variable model.
3.2. Transition models
When modeling wave-to-wave transition probabilities, we use the same models as (1)
above, but we use transition indicators on the left side of the equation. The identification
assumptions are technically speaking the same as in the panel models. However, these models do
not difference out individual fixed effects in the transition probabilities, and thus, these models
rely on stronger identification assumptions than the panel models. We perform the same robustness
checks on these models as on the panel models when feasible.
4. Results
4.1: Descriptive patterns
The four panels of Figure 1 show age patterns of work-limiting health problems and the
physical and cognitive resource measures for all HRS respondents 50 to 70 years of age. Our
theory predicts an increase in work-limiting health problems with age and a decrease in the three
resource measures.
17

Panel A indeed shows a sharp increase in the fraction reporting a work-limiting health
problem by age. The prevalence of such problems increases from about 20 percent among 50year-olds to more than 30% among 70-year-olds.
Panels B, C, and D show sharp declines in physical and cognitive resources. The
measures are standardized (zero mean and standard deviation of one) among 50-70-year old fulltime workers, but the graph includes everyone in that age range. All resource measures are
negative, on average, which indicates that full-time workers have more resources than the
general population at all ages between 50 and 70. We find a decrease of 0.25 standard deviations
in the large-muscle index among persons 50 to 70 years of age (Panel B), as well as a decline of
0.3 standard deviations in the fine-motor skills index (Panel C), and 0.4 standard deviations in
the cognition score (Panel D).
To get a sense of the quality of the pairings of HRS resources and O*NET job demands
pairs, Appendix A.4. shows correlations between these measures. We found large positive
correlations between cognitive ability and the two cognitive job demands which suggests that the
qualities of these pairs are good, and individuals with high cognitive abilities sort into
cognitively demanding jobs to take advantage of their comparative advantages (Ben-Porath
1967, Roy 1951; Willis and Rosen 1979). We, however, found small negative correlations
between the physical resources and job demands. This may suggest that the quality of these
pairings is less good, in which case we would not expect a strong interaction effect between
these measures in the retirement regressions. It is also possible that too much exposure to the
demands of these jobs depletes individuals’ resources, leading to a negative correlation between
these measures at older ages. For example, exposure to repeated heavy physical activities may
lead to physical health issues.

18

4.2. Main analysis
Tables 3 through 7 show the regression results using our preferred specifications.
Changes in the outcome variables or the transitions are regressed on job demands, changes in
resources, their interactions, changes in age and marital status, and interview wave dummies.
The next section (4.3) discusses alternative specifications. Appendix A.5. shows simple
descriptive tables that do not use any control variables. The patterns are very similar across all
specifications.
Declines in resources strongly and statistically significantly predict all outcome variables.
For example, a one standard deviation decline in the large muscle index increases the chances of
reporting a work limiting health problem by 7.5 percentage point (Table 3); it increases the
number of depressive symptoms by 0.209 (Table 4); it decreases the subjective probability of
working full-time after age 65 by 1.9 percentage points (Table 5); it increases work to retirement
transitions by 2.6 percentage points (Table 6); and work to disability transitions by 1.1
percentage points. The effects of changes in fine motor skills and cognition also have the
expected signs and they are all statistically significant.
The decline in the physical measures tend to have larger effects than declines in
cognition, especially on depressive symptoms and reporting of work-limiting health problems.
For example, Table 3 shows that a one standard deviation decline in the fine motor skill
increases the probability of a work limiting health problem by only 4.4 percentage points (vs. 7.5
for the large muscle index); and the corresponding number for a decline in cognition is 1
percentage point.
The interactions between the large-muscle resource index and dynamic strength job
demands, which capture mismatch in specific dimensions, are statistically significant in all
19

regressions even at the 1% level, except for transitions from full-time work to retirement
(Table 6). The magnitudes of the interactions are also large. In the regressions of subjective
expectations (Table 5), the interaction coefficient (0.82 in the fourth row) is almost half as much
in absolute value as the coefficient on health change (1.921 in the second row). Given that all
coefficients are standardized, this means that changes in the large-muscle index do not predict
retirement expectations in occupations whose demand for dynamic strength are about 2.3
standard deviations below the average level of demand for dynamic strength.
The interaction effects between the large-muscle index and dynamic strength job
demands are almost always strong and statistically significant, affecting work-limiting health
problems, depressive symptoms as measured by CESD, and work-to-disability transitions
(Tables 3 ,4 and 7). This means that developing large-muscle problems increases depressive
symptoms, reported work-limiting health problems, and work-to-disability transitions in all
occupations, but the effects are larger in occupations that demand dynamic strength. Only the
interaction in the regression of the transition from full-time work to retirement is not significant.
The interaction effects between fine-motor skills (resource) and finger dexterity (job
demand) as well as those between cognition and cognitive job demands are close to zero and
almost never statistically significant. The only exception is column 3 in Table 4, in which the
interaction term has an unexpectedly positive sign and is statistically significant at the 5% level.
The model predicts that cognitive decline increases depression relatively more in occupations
that do not demand memorization.
Overall, even though fine-motor skills and cognition strongly predict the five outcomes,
they do not seem to interact with job demands along these dimensions.

20

Appendix B reports results on additional outcome variables. We summarize the results
briefly here. The effects on the subjective probabilities of working past age 62 are similar to the
subjective probabilities of working past age 65. The two physical-decline measures are
statistically significant predictors of disliking work (i.e., of disagreeing or strongly disagreeing
with the statement that “I really enjoy going to work”), but cognitive decline is not. The
interactions of these measures with job demands are not statistically significant in the regression
on the dislike of work. The outcome variable is only available for workers—those not working at
t+1 are not in the analysis sample—and an important part of the sample is therefore missing and
may bias the coefficients toward zero. Decline in the large-muscle and the fine motor indices
make it less likely that an individual will switch employers, but none of the interaction effects
with job demands are statistically significant.
4.3. Robustness checks
Even though we use panel variation for identification, which we believe is more likely to
be valid than cross-section variation, our data are observational and therefore our estimates may
not capture the true causal effects of health on the outcome variables. This section discusses
alternative specifications and tests we performed to learn if there is evidence against our causal
interpretation.
First, Appendix A.5. provides simple descriptive tables showing mean changes in the
outcome variables by job demands and changes in resources. These tables use mean splits in the
explanatory variables and no controls. These specifications show the raw output without imposing
much structure on the data. The tables largely agree with the preferred regression results: changes
in any resources predict the outcome variables, but the effects are largest for large-muscle
resources in large muscle jobs.
21

Second, we estimated models with alternative sets of control variables. Our preferred
specification in Section 4.2. only used changes in a cubic function of age, changes in marital status
and wave indicators. Appendix tables C1-C5 show regressions of the five main outcome variables
using the following additional controls: gender, race, education, change in household income,
change in household wealth, change in spouse labor force status, whether employer sponsored DB
or DC retirement plans, whether self-employed, tenure at the main job, and whether health
insurance through employer or spouse. The main coefficients are indistinguishable from the
preferred ones reported in the previous section. We prefer using fewer controls, because some of
these additional controls are potential outcomes (such as whether the spouse works, or family
income), but it is reassuring that the control variables do not change our coefficients of interest,
perhaps because changes in health are relatively random in this age range.
Third, people in different jobs may have different trajectories in their health and/or the
outcome variables. For example, blue collar workers may face sharper declines in health and the
outcome variables compared to white collar workers. To explore this hypothesis, we estimated
placebo regressions on past values of three outcome variables as shown in Tables C6-C8. This test
was not feasible on the transition models. The main coefficients (changes in resources and
interactions with job demands) are close to zero and almost never statistically significant. One
exception is that apparently changes in fine motor skills are mildly correlated with past changes in
the subjective probabilities of working past age 65. Additionally, one more interaction coefficient
is significant at 5% and another one at 10%.
Fourth, retirement itself may simultaneously predict changes in health and the outcome
variables. To explore, we ran separate regressions on a narrower sample that included only fulltime workers at t and t+1. Appendix Table C9 shows the specification on three main outcomes
22

and the large muscle index. These models cannot be estimated on the transition models; and the
appendix only focuses on the large muscle index with the strongest results. Coefficients in these
regressions are likely biased toward zero because individuals who transition into retirement may
be worse off compared to those who remain in the labor force. Indeed, the coefficients are all closer
to zero compared to the preferred models. Nevertheless, changes in the large muscle index still
strongly predict all three outcomes, and the interaction terms are statistically significant at 5% in
two out of three cases and significant at 10% in the third case.
5. Discussion and conclusion
5.1. Summary
We used longitudinal data from the HRS to find how decline in individuals’ physical and
cognitive resources as well as the mismatch between resources and occupational job demands
affected various retirement-related outcomes. We considered three resource measures: 1) a largemuscle index representing strength and overall physical fitness; 2) fine-motor skills representing
individuals’ ability to perform precise manipulations with their hands (as well as general
physical fitness); and 3) cognitive abilities that mostly focused on the quality of individuals’
working memories.
We paired these three resource measures with four corresponding job-demand measures
derived from the O*NET project. These were dynamic strength (paired with the large-muscle
index), finger dexterity (paired with fine-motor skills), memorization (paired with cognition) and
analyzing data and information (also paired with cognition).
We merged the O*NET characteristics with the detailed 3-digit occupations of HRS
participants and focused on five outcome variables: self-reported work-limiting health problems,

23

the number of depressive symptoms (as measured by the CESD scale), subjective probabilities of
working full-time after age 65, transitions from work to retirement, and to disability. We tested
whether HRS resources and O*NET job demands predicted these outcome variables. We
expected that the decline in resources would lead to more work-limiting problems, more
depressive symptoms, smaller subjective probabilities of working longer, and more transitions
out of work, especially in occupations that rely on specific skills. This latter effect was tested by
the interactions between resources and job demands.
The main novelty of our approach was to use panel econometric models when possible
that identified solely intra-personal rather than inter-personal variation in physical and cognitive
resources. Under reasonable assumptions this variation captures the causal effect of resource
decline on the outcomes. We were able to use panel econometric models because we had
repeated observations in our outcome variables that were collected among both working and
non-working individuals. In standard models of retirement transitions (which we also estimated)
such panel variation is not available to researchers, because (most) individuals retire only once.
Our approach therefore highlights a main advantage of using subjective probabilities such as the
chances of working full-time after age 65: they provide more variation both in the cross-section
(probabilities as opposed to 0-1 indicators available at the individual level) and over time (see
also Hurd 2009; Manski 2004).
We found that physical and cognitive resources all had a strong effect on the five
outcome variables. Decline in the physical measures (large-muscle and fine-motor) tended to
have a stronger effect than declines in cognitive abilities. For example, a decline of one standard
deviation in the large-muscle index decreased the subjective probability of working after age 65

24

by about 1.9 percentage points. The corresponding effect of cognitive ability was about half as
much at one percentage point.
The differences between physical and cognitive resources was even larger for CESD
depression. While a decline of one standard deviation in the large-muscle index increased the
number of depressive symptoms (out of 8) by about 0.21, a decline of one standard deviation in
cognition increased the number of such symptoms by 0.04 (both increases statistically significant
at 1%).
We also found that decline in the large-muscle index had a strong interaction effect with
dynamic strength job demands, implying the importance of mismatch in large muscle problems
for retirement. For example, an increase of one standard deviation from the mean in the
importance of dynamic strength on the job increased the effect of the large-muscle index on the
subjective probability of working past age 65 from 1.9 to 2.7 percentage points. Such an increase
also increased the effect on depressive symptoms from 0.21 to 0.25.
We found weak and statistically insignificant interaction effects between the fine-motor
index (resource) and finger dexterity (job demands), as well as between cognition (resource) and
memorization or analyzing data and information (job demands). There are several possible
explanations for this: It may be that fine motor skills and cognitive abilities are important
determinants of working in all occupations; or workers in cognitive and fine-motor occupations
may have good jobs that protect them from the adverse effects of mismatch (their employers may
accommodate the changing capabilities, or such workers may be able to switch to tasks or jobs
that better align with their reduced skills); or, finally, the pairing of the O*NET measures with
the HRS resource measures was not very good, which may have biased the interaction effect
toward zero.
25

5.2. Implications
Our findings demonstrate the importance for retirement research to consider the
considerable heterogeneity in individuals’ skills and in their jobs’ demands. Different jobs rely
on different skills. As workers age, their physical and cognitive resources decline, for some more
rapidly than for others. By simultaneously considering the heterogeneity in job demands and
resources, we showed that mismatch may be an important obstacle for the employability of some
workers, especially those working in occupations that rely on muscular endurance.
While we found that cognitive decline was associated with some outcomes (depressive
symptoms, retirement expectations, actual retirement), the association was considerably weaker
than with physical decline. We also did not find any interaction between cognitive decline and
job demands.
There are many potential reasons why decline in cognitive abilities is less crucial for
retirement outcomes. Workers in cognitively demanding jobs who experience declines in their
fluid cognitive abilities can rely on their crystallized intelligence (general knowledge and
experience) that is found to be more resistant to aging (Cattell 1987). Such workers also may be
in good jobs with more accommodating employers or have better outside options. Regardless,
cognitive decline appears to be less of a problem for workers at older ages than decline in
physical skills.
We found decline in fine-motor skills was a very strong predictor of retirement outcomes,
but we found little interaction effects with job demands.
We did find very large interaction effects between large-muscle problems and
corresponding job demands (dynamic strength). Employability in physically demanding jobs

26

appears to be very sensitive to an individual’s physical capabilities, or at least much more so than
employability in cognitive jobs is to declines in cognitive skills.
Workers in physically demanding jobs, thus, are more likely to face mismatch with the
demands of their jobs, especially those who experience a decline in their physical capabilities.
These mismatched workers are more likely to leave the labor force, perhaps because they are not
able to effectively work in their occupations and their options for work in other occupations are
limited. This is particularly a concern, because individuals in low socioeconomic status are both
overrepresented in physically demanding jobs, and are less financially prepared for retirement.
The fraction of the labor force in physical jobs has been shrinking in recent decades
(Brownson, Boehmer, and Luke, 2005; Sturm, 2004), and this trend may continue.
Consequently, age related mismatch may become a less important limitation for workers who
would like to continue working. But physical jobs still take up a non-trivial fraction of the
current labor force.
Delaying the decline in the physical health of these workers may increase the chances
that they can work to the ages they desired or had planned on. They may also be better off if their
employers accommodated their changing skills or if they could find alternative work
arrangements that better fit their abilities.
5.3. Limitations
There are several limitations to our study. We used observational data, and we could not
directly test the exogeneity of our explanatory variables. Our robustness checks and placebo
regressions, however, largely support our causal interpretation. Our models identify from
changes in resources (health), which are relatively random events.

27

The job-demand measures were defined by occupations, and so any heterogeneity within
occupations was ignored. We used occupational measures, because they are based on more
objective information than self-reported survey data and because O*NET provided a large
number of measures from which to choose. Future research might consider within-occupation
heterogeneity in job demands.
The two physical-resource measures may be too general and focused on problems for
individuals at older ages than those analyzed. This is particularly true for the fine-motor index
that included problems with eating and dressing. Such issues are rare in the working-age
population and typically manifest long after an individual leaves the labor force. This may
explain why we found no interaction effects between the fine-motor index and the corresponding
job demand (finger dexterity).
An important element of our methods was pairing HRS resource measures with O*NET
job characteristics and to analyze the interactions between these. The success of this method
depends on the quality of the pairing. If the resource and the job-demand measures are
misaligned because, for example, they correspond to somewhat different factors, then we would
expect muted coefficients. This problem may have contributed to the lack of significance
between the fine-motor index and finger dexterity, but we think the quality of the other pairs was
better.
Our preferred sample included those non-workers who had a job in the previous HRS
waves. But before 2006 the HRS did not ask the subjective probability of working after ages
62/65 question of some non-workers. We imputed these cases using a relatively simple singleimputation methodology that flexibly included age, gender, labor force status and past
expectations. Imputation, however, is never perfect. In the future, when more HRS waves
28

become available, researchers might estimate similar models using only post-2006 data that need
no imputation.

29

References
Data
Health and Retirement Study, waves 1992-2012, public use dataset. Produced and distributed by
the University of Michigan with funding from the National Institute on Aging (grant
number NIA U01AG009740). Ann Arbor, MI.
RAND HRS Data, Version P. Produced by the RAND Center for the Study of Aging, with
funding from the National Institute on Aging and the Social Security Administration.
Santa Monica, CA (August 2016).
Research Studies
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. "Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for
employment and earnings." In Handbook of labor economics, 1043-1171. Elsevier.
Angrisani, Marco, Arie Kapteyn, and Erik Meijer. 2015. "Nonmonetary job characteristics and
employment transitions at older ages."
Atalay, K, and Garry F. Barrett. 2014. "The causal effect of retirement on health: New evidence
from Australian pension reform." Economics Letters, 125 (3): 392-395.
Autor, David H, Frank Levy, and Richard J Murnane. 2003. "The skill content of recent
technological change: An empirical exploration." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
118 (4):1279-1333.
Belbase, Anek, Geoffrey T Sanzenbacher, and Christopher M Gillis. 2016. "How do job skills
that decline with age affect white-collar workers?" Issue brief:16-6.
Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. "The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings."
Journal of Political Economy 75 (4, Part 1):352-365.

30

Blundell, Richard, Jack Britton, Monica Costa Dias, and Eric French. 2017. "The impact of
health on labour supply near retirement." IFS Working Papers W17/18, Institute for
Fiscal Studies.
Bowlus, Audra, Hiroaki Mori, and Chris Robinson. 2016. "Ageing and Skill Portfolios: Evidence
from Job Based Skill Measures. " The Journal of the Economics of Ageing, 7: 89-103.
Brownson, Ross C, Tegan K Boehmer, and Douglas A Luke. 2005. "Declining Rates of Physical
Activity in the United States: What are the Contributors? " Annual review of public
health. 26 (1):421-43.
Cahill, Kevin E, Michael D Giandrea, and Joseph F Quinn. 2006. "Retirement patterns from
career employment." The Gerontologist 46 (4):514-523.
Cappelli, Peter H. 2015. "Skill gaps, skill shortages, and skill mismatches: Evidence and
arguments for the United States." ILR Review 68 (2):251-290.
Carmeli, Eli, Hagar Patish, and Raymond Coleman. 2003. "The aging hand." The Journals of
Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 58 (2):M146-M152.
Carr, D. C., Castora-Binkley, M., Kail, B. K., Willis, R. J., & Carstensen L. 2016. Does Job
Complexity Offer Protection Against the Mental Retirement Effect? Working paper.
Cattell, Raymond Bernard. 1987. Intelligence: Its Structure, Growth and Action. Vol. 35:
Elsevier.
Crimmins, Eileen M, Jung Ki Kim, Kenneth M Langa, and David R Weir. 2011. "Assessment of
cognition using surveys and neuropsychological assessment: the Health and Retirement
Study and the Aging, Demographics, and Memory Study." Journals of Gerontology
Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences 66 (suppl_1):i162-i171.

31

Del Missier, Fabio, Timo Mäntylä, Patrik Hansson, Wändi Bruine de Bruin, Andrew M Parker,
and Lars-Göran Nilsson. 2013. "The multifold relationship between memory and decision
making: An individual-differences study." Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 39 (5):1344.
Dillon, Eleanor Wiske, and Jeffrey Andrew Smith. 2017. "Determinants of the match between
student ability and college quality." Journal of Labor Economics 35 (1):45-66.
Fisher, Gwenith G, Dorey S Chaffee, and Amanda Sonnega. 2016. "Retirement timing: A review
and recommendations for future research." Work, Aging and Retirement 2 (2):230-261.
Fisher, GG, Halimah Hassan, Jessica D Faul, Willard L Rodgers, and David R Weir. 2015.
"Health and retirement study imputation of cognitive functioning measures: 1992–2010."
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Hoogendam, Yoo Young, Fedde van der Lijn, Meike W Vernooij, Albert Hofman, Wiro J
Niessen, Aad van der Lugt, M Arfan Ikram, and Jos N van der Geest. 2014. "Older age
relates to worsening of fine motor skills: a population-based study of middle-aged and
elderly persons." Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 6:259.
Hudomiet, Péter. 2015. The role of occupation specific adaptation costs in explaining the
educational gap in unemployment. Working paper.
Hurd, Michael. 2009. "Subjective Probabilities in Household Surveys." Annual Review of
Economics 1:543-562. doi: Doi 10.1146/annurev.economics.050708.142955.
Insler, Michael. 2014. "The Health Consequences of Retirement," Journal of Human Resources
49 (1):195-233.
James, Jonathan. 2011. "Ability matching and occupational choice." Working paper 1125,
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

32

Liebermann, Susanne C, Jürgen Wegge, and Andreas Müller. 2013. "Drivers of the expectation
of remaining in the same job until retirement age: A working life span demands-resources
model." European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 22 (3):347-361.
Lindenlaub, Ilse. 2017. "Sorting Multidimensional Types: Theory and Application." Review of
Economic Studies, 84 (2):718-789.
Manski, Charles. 2004. "Measuring Expectations." Econometrica 72 (5):1329-1376.
Mazzonna, Fabrizio, and Franco Peracchi. 2017. "Unhealthy Retirement?" Journal of Human
Resources, University of Wisconsin Press 52 (1): 128-151.
McGarry, Kathleen. 2004. "Health and retirement: do changes in health affect retirement
expectations?" Journal of Human Resources 39 (3):624-648.
McGonagle, Alyssa K, Gwenith G Fisher, Janet L Barnes-Farrell, and James W Grosch. 2015.
"Individual and work factors related to perceived work ability and labor force outcomes."
Journal of Applied Psychology 100 (2):376.
Rice, Neil E, Iain A Lang, William Henley, and David Melzer. 2010. "Common health predictors
of early retirement: findings from the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing." Age and
Ageing 40 (1):54-61.
van Rijn, Rogier M, Suzan JW Robroek, Sandra Brouwer, and Alex Burdorf. 2014. "Influence of
poor health on exit from paid employment: a systematic review." Occupational and
Environmental Medicine 71 (4):295-301.
Pei, Zhuan, Pischke, Jörn-Steffen, and Schwandt, Hannes. 2017. "Poorly Measured Confounders
are More Useful on the Left Than on the Right," NBER Working Papers 23232, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

33

Rohwedder, S., & Willis, R. J. 2010. "Mental retirement." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24,
119-38.
Roy, Andrew Donald. 1951. "Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings." Oxford Economic
Papers 3 (2):135-146.
Schwandt, Hannes. 2018. "Wealth Shocks and Health Outcomes: Evidence from Stock Market
Fluctuations." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10 (4):349–377.
Sonnega, Amanda, Brooke Helppie-McFall, Peter Hudomiet, Robert J Willis, and Gwenith G
Fisher. 2017. "A comparison of subjective and objective job demands and fit with
personal resources as predictors of retirement timing in a national US sample." Work,
Aging and Retirement 4 (1):37-51.
Sturm, Roland. 2004. "The economics of physical activity: Societal trends and rationales for
interventions. " American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 27 (3):126-135.
Topa, Gabriela, Juan Antonio Moriano, Marco Depolo, Carlos-María Alcover, and J Francisco
Morales. 2009. "Antecedents and consequences of retirement planning and decisionmaking: A meta-analysis and model." Journal of Vocational Behavior 75 (1):38-55.
Wang, Mo, and Kenneth S Shultz. 2010. "Employee retirement: A review and recommendations
for future investigation." Journal of Management 36 (1):172-206.
Willis, Robert J, and Sherwin Rosen. 1979. "Education and self-selection." Journal of political
Economy 87 (5, Part 2):S7-S36.
Willis, Robert J. 1986. "Wage determinants: A survey and reinterpretation of human capital
earnings functions." Handbook of labor economics 1:525-602.
Yamaguchi, Shintaro. 2012. "Tasks and heterogeneous human capital." Journal of Labor
Economics 30 (1):1-53.

34

Yamaguchi, Shintaro. 2016. "Changes in returns to task-specific skills and gender wage gap."
Journal of Human Resources:1214-6813R2.

35

Tables and Figures

Figure 1. Age patterns in whether health limits working and three resource measures, nonparametric regressions, HRS, Age 50-70, 1994-2014, unweighted

Panel A: Whether health limits work

Panel B: Large muscle index

Panel C: Fine motor skills index

Panel D: Cognition

*The three resource measures are standardized to have zero mean and standard deviation of one among 50-70 years old full-time
workers, but the graphs include everyone regardless of labor force status. Higher values indicate better health. The confidence
intervals assume i.i.d. data, and they are likely too narrow due to the positive correlations in the panel.

36

#

Table 1. Definition of the HRS resource measures and the O*NET job demands
Pair
HRS resource
Definition*
#
measures

R1

D1

Large muscle
problems

Having problems with 1) sitting for 2 hours; 2) getting up from a chair; 3)
stooping, kneeling or crouching; 4) pushing or pulling large objects

R2

D2

Fine motor problems

Having problems with the following activities: 1) picking up a dime; 2)
eating; 3) dressing

R3

D3,
D4

Cognition

27-point scale involving immediate word recall (10 words), delayed word
recall (10 words), serial subtraction of 7 from 100 (5 times) and backward
counting from 20 to 10 (2 trials)

#

Pair
#

D1

R1

Dynamic strength

The ability to exert muscle force repeatedly or continuously over time. This
involves muscular endurance and resistance to muscle fatigue.

D2

R2

Finger dexterity

The ability to make precisely coordinated movements of the fingers of one or
both hands to grasp, manipulate, or assemble very small objects.

D3

R3

Memorization

The ability to remember information such as words, numbers, pictures, and
procedures.

D4

R3

Analyzing data or
information

Identifying the underlying principles, reasons, or facts of information by
breaking down information or data into separate parts.

O*NET job
demands

Definition**

* See the RAND-HRS (2016) documentation for details.
** See the O*NET documentation for details at https://www.onetcenter.org/content.html.

37

Table 2. Descriptive statistics of the main variables, HRS, Age 50-70, full-time workers, unweighted
N
mean
sd
min
max
Age
46935
57.9
4.597
50
70
Female
46935
0.477
0.499
0
1
White
46935
0.767
0.423
0
1
Black
46935
0.163
0.369
0
1
Other race
46935
0.070
0.256
0
1
Hispanic
46935
0.106
0.308
0
1
High school dropout
46935
0.177
0.382
0
1
High school graduate
46935
0.285
0.452
0
1
College dropout
46935
0.258
0.438
0
1
College graduate
46935
0.280
0.449
0
1
Married
46935
0.713
0.452
0
1
Spouse works
46935
0.493
0.500
0
1
Household income
46935
90797
147927
0
13570429
Total household wealth
46935 355945 1086466 -4383000 90648200
Has a DB pension
46935
0.326
0.469
0
1
Has a DC pension
46935
0.397
0.489
0
1
Self employed
46935
0.158
0.365
0
1
Tenure at job, in years
46935 13.747
11.494
0
55
Has health insurance from employer
46935
0.680
0.467
0
1
Has health insurance from spouse
46935
0.149
0.356
0
1
HRS interview wave
46935
6.933
3.236
2
12
Dynamic strength, O*NET
46935
0.178
0.126
0.000
0.562
Finger dexterity, O*NET
46935
0.393
0.097
0.177
0.718
Memorization, O*NET
46935
0.339
0.080
0.104
0.580
Analyzing data or information, O*NET
46935
0.523
0.147
0.157
0.877
Large muscle problem index
46927
0.740
1.075
0
4
Fine motor problem index
46935
0.047
0.236
0
3
Cognition
39357 17.020
3.876
0
27
Full-time work → retirement transition
39699
0.104
0.306
0
1
Full-time work → disability transition
39699
0.008
0.087
0
1
Subjective probability working full time after age 62 34674 57.053
36.894
0
100
Subjective probability working full time after age 65 37449 36.661
35.693
0
100
Health limits work
46651
0.078
0.267
0
1
CESD depression score
43876
1.088
1.665
0
8
Moves to a different employer
33158
0.094
0.292
0
1
Does not enjoy going to work
42991
0.121
0.326
0
1

38

Table 3. OLS regressions of the change in whether health limits working as a function of job
demands, resources and their interactions
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.038
[0.002]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.075
[0.003]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.007
[0.001]***

R1 x D1

-0.012
[0.003]***

Fine motor index at t

-0.026
[0.003]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.044
[0.002]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.005
[0.001]***

R2 x D2

0.000
[0.002]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

-0.011

-0.010

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

-0.010

-0.010

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

-0.008
[0.002]***

R3 x D3

-0.003
[0.002]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.008
[0.002]***

R3 x D4

0.001
[0.002]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

-0.019

-0.018

-0.021

-0.021

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.001

[0.000]**

[0.000]**

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.006

0.002

0.006

0.006

[0.010]

[0.010]

[0.011]

[0.011]

Yes
0.052

Yes
0.048

Yes
0.049

Yes
0.048

[0.008]***

[0.009]***

[0.009]***

[0.009]***

0.045
38272

0.026
38279

0.006
31149

0.006
31149

*Sample: HRS, Age 50-70, full-time workers at t, valid interviews at t+1, and non-missing resources and outcome. Job demands
and resources are standardized and higher values indicate higher demands and more resources (better health). Change measures
are all defined from wave t to t+1. Robust standard errors clustered on the household id are in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1% respectively.

39

Table 4. OLS regressions of the change in the CESD depressive symptoms as a function of job
demands, resources and their interactions
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.043
[0.009]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.209
[0.014]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.014
[0.007]**

R1 x D1

-0.040
[0.013]***

Fine motor index at t

-0.031
[0.011]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.110
[0.012]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.012
[0.007]*

R2 x D2

0.004
[0.012]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

-0.004

-0.002

[0.010]

[0.010]

-0.045

-0.043

[0.013]***

[0.013]***

-0.013
[0.008]

R3 x D3

0.023
[0.012]**

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.019
[0.008]**

R3 x D4

0.015
[0.012]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.030

0.036

0.021

0.021

[0.027]

[0.027]

[0.028]

[0.028]

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

-0.482

-0.489

-0.484

-0.484

[0.065]***

[0.065]***

[0.068]***

[0.068]***

Yes
0.024

Yes
0.016

Yes
0.051

Yes
0.051

[0.047]

[0.047]

[0.048]

[0.048]

0.020
35720

0.013
35724

0.009
31623

0.009
31623

*See notes after Table 3 for additional details.

40

Table 5. OLS regressions of the change in the subjective probabilities of working full-time after age
65 as a function of job demands, resources and their interactions
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
1.252
[0.166]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

1.921
[0.243]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

-0.297
[0.152]*

R1 x D1

0.820
[0.237]***

Fine motor index at t

1.105
[0.208]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

1.010
[0.196]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

-0.041
[0.149]

R2 x D2

0.120
[0.182]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

0.676

0.644

[0.221]***

[0.219]***

1.049

1.027

[0.271]***

[0.269]***

0.498
[0.177]***

R3 x D3

-0.221
[0.254]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

0.580
[0.172]***

R3 x D4

-0.246
[0.245]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

1.009

0.944

0.785

0.787

[0.594]*

[0.595]

[0.622]

[0.622]

-0.079

-0.075

-0.080

-0.080

[0.063]

[0.063]

[0.066]

[0.066]

0.004

0.004

0.005

0.005

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

-1.863

-1.762

-1.686

-1.692

[1.166]

[1.170]

[1.251]

[1.252]

Yes
-2.230

Yes
-2.144

Yes
-1.997

Yes
-1.999

[0.994]**

[0.995]**

[1.016]**

[1.016]**

0.008
28176

0.006
28177

0.006
24798

0.006
24798

* Subjective probabilities of working are only collected in non-proxy interviews from people younger than age 65. Prior to 2006,
the HRS did not ask this question from non-workers. The values of expectations for the 50-64-year-old non-proxy non-workers
are imputed with a model described in Appendix A. See notes after Table 3 for additional details.

41

Table 6. OLS regressions of the transitions from full-time work to retirement as a function of job
demands, resources and their interactions
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.028
[0.002]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.026
[0.002]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.010
[0.001]***

R1 x D1

-0.002
[0.002]

Fine motor index at t

-0.020
[0.002]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.018
[0.002]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.011
[0.002]***

R2 x D2

0.000
[0.002]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

-0.015

-0.015

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

-0.009

-0.009

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

-0.004
[0.002]**

R3 x D3

-0.001
[0.002]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.004
[0.002]**

R3 x D4

-0.001
[0.002]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

-0.056

-0.057

-0.054

-0.054

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

0.004

0.004

0.004

0.004

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

-0.001

-0.003

0.001

0.001

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.010]

[0.010]

Yes
0.069

Yes
0.068

Yes
0.067

Yes
0.067

[0.007]***

[0.007]***

[0.007]***

[0.007]***

0.061
38829

0.057
38838

0.051
31645

0.051
31645

* See notes after Table 3 for additional details.

42

Table 7. OLS regressions of the transitions from full-time work to disability as a function of job
demands, resources and their interactions
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.009
[0.001]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.011
[0.001]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.002
[0.000]***

R1 x D1

-0.002
[0.001]**

Fine motor index at t

-0.008
[0.001]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.011
[0.001]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.002
[0.000]***

R2 x D2

0.000
[0.001]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

-0.004

-0.004

[0.001]***

[0.001]***

-0.002

-0.002

[0.001]***

[0.001]***

-0.002
[0.001]***

R3 x D3

0.000
[0.001]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.002
[0.001]***

R3 x D4

-0.001
[0.001]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.001

0.001

0.000

0.000

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.001

0.000

0.001

0.001

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

Yes
0.008

Yes
0.008

Yes
0.009

Yes
0.009

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

0.018
38829

0.022
38838

0.004
31645

0.004
31645

* See notes after Table 3 for additional details.

43

Appendix A: Additional information about the data and the sample

A.1. Measurement of job demands
The O*NET database contains measures for 974 occupations, corresponding to the
occupations in the most recent HRS. However, the occupational coding schemes in the restricted
HRS data have changed over time (Nolte, Turf, and Servais 2014). To ensure comparability across
waves of HRS data, we use a coding scheme that is consistent over time and that aggregates across
small, similar occupation groups. This coding scheme was developed to use in conjunction with
the O*NET data and contains 192 separate occupations/occupational groupings derived from the
original occupational codes. 10
If HRS respondents report working more than one job HRS elicits and codes the occupation
information for all jobs a respondent may hold. The interview also asks respondents to name the
job they consider to be their main occupation, which is the occupation we use here.
For each occupation in the database, O*NET provides information on the level and
importance of each required work activity. Following Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2011), we use
Cobb-Douglas weighted means to combine occupation-level importance and level measures.
Importance weights are 2/3; level weights are 1/3. Given the smaller number of somewhat
aggregated occupations in our HRS data, we average across multiple O*NET occupations that
crosswalk to the HRS occupation categories to create O*NET measures for the HRS occupations.

10

The coding scheme was originally developed by Peter Hudomiet for his dissertation, and it has been used by a
number of researchers since then (e.g. Carr et al., 2016; Sonnega et al. 2018). It can be accessed at
https://sites.google.com/site/phudomiet/Occupation-Crosswalks-MRRC-2015.xlsx.

44

We use CPS detailed occupation frequencies to weight O*NET measures to the level of the 192
detailed occupation categories used in this paper.
The HRS typically only asks about workers’ occupations if they reported a change in their
employment situation (different employer or different tasks at the same employer) or they are
newly recruited sample members. To maximize the available information, workers with missing
occupations were imputed their previously reported occupations. Of the 46,935 person-year
observations in our total sample 20,457 (43.6%) occupations were carried forward from earlier
waves. 20,254 of them (43.2%) reported to have the same employer and job title as in the previous
wave; and 203 of them (0.4%) were missing for other reasons. Our results are virtually identical if
the latter 203 cases are excluded from the sample.
A.2. Imputations
Beginning in 2006, the HRS asked all respondents their subjective probabilities of working
full-time after age 62 and 65. Prior to 2006, however, non-working individuals were only asked
about the probabilities that they would ever work, resulting in partial responses to P65: a 0%
answer implies a 0% chance of working full-time after ages 62 or 65. Those, who provided a nonzero answer before 2006, however, were not followed up with a question about full-time work
after ages 62 and 65.
We seek to include in our sample those who currently do not work but who did work in the
prior wave. Because expectations of such individuals are partially missing before 2006, we
developed a regression-based imputation model estimated over complete data from 2006 to 2014,
reported in Table A1.

45

Table A1. Imputation model used to impute the subjective probabilities of working full-time after
age 62 and 65, HRS, Age 50-61 (column 1) and Age 50-64 (column 2), non-proxy, non-workers in
the current wave, full-time workers in the previous wave, reported a positive chance of working in
the future, 2006-2014
pw62
pw65
Age - 50 (A)
-0.15
-0.952
[0.639]
[0.336]***
Age - 50 squared (A2)
-0.004
0.046
[0.035]
[0.015]***
Age - 50 cube (A3)
2.538
5.644
[3.533]
[2.353]**
Female (F)
1.419
2.197
[2.961]
[2.096]
Retired
ref.
ref.
Unemployed (U)
43.224
29.404
[6.455]***
[5.032]***
Disabled (D)
31.404
16.137
[11.037]***
[8.899]*
OLF other reason (O)
21.322
20.842
[9.459]**
[8.277]**
UxA
-1.725
-0.926
[0.761]**
[0.505]*
DxA
-1.613
-0.428
[1.403]
[1.042]
OxA
0.38
-0.127
[1.071]
[0.844]
UxF
-3.087
-2.757
[4.085]
[3.222]
DxF
-7.553
-10.837
[7.336]
[6.482]*
OxF
-0.31
-10.054
[7.302]
[6.176]
Lagged Pr(works after 62)
0.27
[0.027]***
Lagged Pr(works after 65)
0.298
[0.023]***
Constant
1.349
-3.941
[7.623]
[6.183]
R-squared
0.323
0.256
N
977
1328

46

The model uses data on age, gender, labor force status, prior expectations, and the
probability of any work in the future. We then used the model estimates to predict subjective
probabilities of working full time after age 65 for the relevant missing cases in the 1994 to 2004
waves: those who were not working, but were full-time workers in the prior wave, who did not
have proxy interviews (expectations are only collected in non-proxy interviews), and who provided
a non-zero probability of working in the future.
Some of the resource measures were imputed by the RAND team as explained by RANDHRS (2016). The physical measures only use logical imputations (e.g. not knowing about a
limitation implies no limitation, unless all items from the score are missing, in which case the score
is missing). Missing cognitive resource items were imputed by the HRS (Fisher et al. 2017) using
past and future values of the cognitive items; the 2014 missing values are not yet imputed because
2016 HRS is not yet available.
In a handful of cases some control variables (such as education) are also missing. To
maximize the available sample, missing discrete controls are replaced by the modes of the
variables. Missing household income and wealth were imputed by RAND-HRS (2016). Missing
job tenure was replaced by 10 years (about the median). Missing outcome variables or explanatory
variables (other than the subjective expectations and resources discussed above), however, are not
imputed.
A.3. Weighted descriptive statistics.
In the paper we showed unweighted results, because the weights were zeros for sample
members who entered the survey before age eligibility. Table A2 shows that the weighted
characteristics of the sample are very similar to unweighted ones (Table 2), but the unweighted
sample has more racial and ethnic minorities who are over-sampled by HRS.
47

Table A2. Descriptive statistics about the main variables, HRS, Age 50-70, full-time workers,
weighted by HRS survey weights
N
mean
sd
min
max
Age
43759
57.7
4.290
50
70
Female
43759
0.429
0.495
0
1
White
43759
0.852
0.356
0
1
Black
43759
0.090
0.287
0
1
Other race
43759
0.058
0.234
0
1
Hispanic
43759
0.072
0.258
0
1
High school dropout
43759
0.128
0.334
0
1
High school graduate
43759
0.268
0.443
0
1
College dropout
43759
0.267
0.442
0
1
College graduate
43759
0.337
0.473
0
1
Married
43759
0.707
0.455
0
1
Spouse works
43759
0.505
0.500
0
1
Household income
43759 105043
162553
0
13570429
Total household wealth
43759 428069 1142513 -4383000 90648200
Has a DB pension
43759
0.335
0.472
0
1
Has a DC pension
43759
0.440
0.496
0
1
Self employed
43759
0.164
0.370
0
1
Tenure at job, in years
43759 14.139
11.614
0
55
Has health insurance from employer
43759
0.704
0.457
0
1
Has health insurance from spouse
43759
0.150
0.357
0
1
HRS interview wave
43759
7.764
2.981
2
12
Dynamic strength, O*NET
43759
0.168
0.125
0.000
0.562
Finger dexterity, O*NET
43759
0.389
0.099
0.177
0.718
Memorization, O*NET
43759
0.345
0.078
0.104
0.580
Analyzing data or information, O*NET
43759
0.539
0.146
0.157
0.877
Large muscle problem index
43752
0.709
1.059
0
4
Fine motor problem index
43759
0.046
0.236
0
3
Cognition
36900 17.361
3.684
0
27
Full-time work → retirement transition
37105
0.091
0.288
0
1
Full-time work → disability transition
37105
0.006
0.077
0
1
Subjective probability working full time after age 62 31995 60.217
35.878
0
100
Subjective probability working full time after age 65 34771 40.083
35.880
0
100
Health limits work
43484
0.076
0.265
0
1
CESD depression score
40929
1.041
1.640
0
8
Moves to a different employer
30909
0.094
0.292
0
1
Does not enjoy going to work
40140
0.125
0.331
0
1

48

A.4. Correlations between resources and job demands
Table A3 shows the correlation between the HRS resource measures and their O*NET
job demand pairs among respondents 50 to 55 years old. We focus on the ages when most
individuals have yet to experience decline in these resources. We seek to get a sense of the
quality of the pairings, but this is difficult because of conflicting theories on how these resources
may decline with age.
Table A3. Correlations between the O*NET job demands and the HRS resources measures, HRS,
Age 50-55, full-time workers
N
Correlation
Dynamic strength vs. no large muscle problem index
16052
-0.056
Finger dexterity vs. no fine motor problem index
16055
-0.030
Memorization vs. Cognition
13233
0.279
Analyzing data vs. cognition
13233
0.274
* Higher values indicate higher job demands and more resources (better health).

There are, for example, at least two reasons to expect positive correlations between
resources and job demands. First, human capital theory suggests that individuals tend to sort into
jobs that maximize their lifetime income (Ben-Porath 1967) by pursuing education and
occupations that capitalize on their comparative advantage (Roy 1951; Willis and Rosen 1979).
If physical strength and cognitive resources are positively correlated, those with high levels of
both cognitive and strength resources will tend to sort into high paying “cognitive” occupations
if the variance of worker productivity is greater in relatively cognition-intensive jobs than in
relatively strength-intensive manual jobs (Willis 1986). Second, investment in on-the-job
training and learning-by-doing over their careers in a given occupation (or career ladder) would
reduce any mismatch between their initial resources and the demands of the job. Indeed, to the
extent to which learning new skills depends on cognitive ability, as is likely to be most important
in cognitive jobs, the match between worker resources and job demands is likely to strengthen as
49

job tenure increases. In addition, investments in health capital (Grossman 1972) to maintain
physical and mental health during the career would be important in maintaining match-quality.
At the same time, there is at least one reason to expect negative correlations between
resources and job demands. Specifically, too much exposure to the demands of a job may deplete
individuals’ resources, leading to a negative correlation between their resources and job
demands. For example, exposure to repeated heavy physical activities may lead to physical
health issues. We do not expect this mechanism to play a role in cognition.
Table A3 shows that there are large positive correlations between cognitive ability and
the two cognitive job demands, each with a correlation coefficient of about 0.3. This suggests
that individuals with high cognitive abilities sort into cognitively demanding jobs, or that
individuals occupying cognitively demanding jobs experience slower declines in cognition
whether or not the job is causal for the reduced decline. These mechanisms may operate
simultaneously.
At the same time, we found small negative correlations between the physical resources
and job demands. This may mean that sorting into physical jobs and learning-by-doing are less
important for physical attributes and that, instead, depletion of physical resources does occur in
physically demanding jobs (Fraade-Blanar et al. 2017). It is also possible that workers in
physically demanding jobs have riskier habits (e.g., smoking, heavy drinking) than workers in
less physically demanding jobs, leading to depletion of their resources relevant to such jobs.
Finally, the physical resource and job-demand measures may not pair well, because they
correspond to different attributes of individuals. In such a case, we would not expect a strong
interaction effect between these measures in the retirement regressions.

50

A.5. Descriptive patterns in resources, job demands and the various outcome variables
Tables A4 through A7 show how the change in resources when interacted with job
demands predict the main outcome variables: work-limiting health problems, depressive
symptoms, and expectations to work in the future. Here we seek descriptive evidence from data
without imposing modeling assumptions. The main patterns we are looking for are increased
mismatches between job demands and personal resources as physical and cognitive resources
decline, and for differences in mismatches for workers in jobs with high versus low demand for a
given resource.
Each table focuses on a separate dimension of job demands and workers’ corresponding
resources. Table A4 shows the results for the large muscle index. The cells of the table show the
means of the outcome variables at wave t and t+1. The rows of the table indicate transitions in
the workers’ resource measures as observed across two waves in the HRS data: from high (above
the mean) or low (below the mean) at wave t to high/low at t+1. The columns indicate the waves
(t and t+1) with the left panel showing results for workers in occupations with high demand for
dynamic strength (O*NET index above the mean) and the right panel showing results for
workers in occupations with low demand for dynamic strength (O*NET index below the mean).
We expect larger changes in the outcome variables from wave t to t+1 when individuals’
resources (HRS large muscle index) decline from high to low, especially in jobs that demand
those resources.
Health limitations increase over two-year periods as shown by the line “all” in the first
panel: among those with jobs that have a high demand for dynamic strength, 8.3% had a
limitation in the initial wave and 13.5% had a limitation in the following wave; among those
with jobs that have a low demand, 6.1% had a limitation in the initial wave and 9.2% had a
51

limitation in the following wave It is notable that both the initial level and the rate of increase
are greater when the job has high demand for dynamic strength than when the job has low
demand.
Among individuals who score high on the large muscle index at both waves t and t+1
(workers’ resources observed in HRS: high  high), very few report any work-limiting health
problems. Specifically, only 2.2% of such individuals in occupations demanding a lot of dynamic
strength report work-limiting health problems at t, and only 3.3% report such problems at t+1.
Among workers who score high on the large muscle index in both t and t+1 and who are in
occupations with relatively low demand for dynamic strength, less than 3 percent report any
work-limiting health problems at either t or t+1.
Among individuals for whom the large-muscle index deteriorates from high to low, there
is a sharp increase in reported work-limiting health problems, especially in occupations that
demand dynamic strength. Specifically, the percentage of such individuals reporting worklimiting health increased from 4.5% to 18.5%, while the proportion of such individuals in other
jobs reporting such problems increased from 3.5% to 11.3%.
Among individuals whose large-muscle index improved, there are small decreases in
work-limiting health problems. At the same time, among individuals whose large-muscle index
was low in both waves, the proportion of individuals reporting work-limiting health problems
was high and increased sharply: from 18.5% to 27.3% among individuals in occupations that
demand dynamic strength, and from 15.3% to 22.3% among such individuals in other
occupations.

52

Table A4. Mean health limitations, CESD depressive symptoms and subjective probabilities of
working full-time after age 65 by the dynamic strength O*NET measures and changes in the HRS
large muscle index
Workers'
HIGH job demand for dynamic
LOW job demand for dynamic
Resources (HRS)
strength (O*NET) at t
strength (O*NET) at t
Transition in Large
Muscle Index
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All
Transition in Large
Muscle Index
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All
Transition in Large
Muscle Index
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All

N
7682
2736
2127
5771
18316

Fraction with health
limitations
t
t+1
0.022
0.033
0.045
0.185
0.074
0.064
0.185
0.273
0.083
0.135

N
9737
2621
2138
5460
19956

Fraction with health
limitations
t
t+1
0.016
0.023
0.035
0.113
0.066
0.044
0.153
0.223
0.061
0.092

N
6771
2427
1909
5511
16618

Mean CESD score
t
t+1
0.811
0.823
1.157
1.493
1.285
1.117
1.841
1.962
1.257
1.332

N
9213
2485
2020
5384
19102

Mean CESD score
t
t+1
0.626
0.621
0.920
1.111
1.048
0.829
1.424
1.491
0.934
0.952

N
5168
1814
1411
3968
13000

Mean P(work after 65)
t
t+1
35.4
36.5
33.5
30.1
30.3
32.1
30.6
28.7
32.4
31.9

N
7134
1855
1563
3909
15176

Mean P(work after 65)
t
t+1
38.8
40.2
35.1
35.7
35.6
37.6
35.9
35.8
36.3
37.2

*Sample: HRS, Age 50-70, full-time workers at t and non-missing answers to the three questions at t and t+1. The CESD score is
only collected in non-proxy interviews. Subjective probabilities of working are only collected in non-proxy interviews from
people younger than age 65. Prior to 2006, the HRS did not ask this question from non-workers. The values of expectations for
the 50-61-year-old non-proxy non-workers are imputed with a model described in section 3.3. High and low values of the
O*NET and the HRS measures are defined as being above (=high job demands or high individual resources) or below the mean
(=low job demands or low individual resources) in the sample of 50-70-year-old full-time workers.

These patterns are as our theory predicts: declining resources increase the chances that
individuals report work-limiting health problems, especially in occupations where dynamic
strength is needed.

53

We see the same general patterns in the CESD depression scores. For example, among
individuals who develop large-muscle problems and work in occupations that demand dynamic
strength, the average number of reported depressive symptoms increased from 1.157 to 1.493.
The increase is somewhat smaller, from 0.920 to 1.111, among such individuals who do not
work in occupations that demand dynamic strength.
There are also similar patterns for subjective probabilities of working past age 65.
Individuals who develop large-muscle problems (large muscle index from high to low) report a
decline in the subjective probabilities of working past age 65 if they work in occupations that
demand such skills. That is in contrast to those with the same change in the large muscle index
who work in occupations that do not require dynamic strength. For them the average subjective
probability of working past age 65 remained about the same.
Table A5 shows changes among workers by their reports of fine-motor skills and the
demand for such skills on their jobs. Levels and changes in fine motor skills all strongly predict
whether workers will report developing health limitations on work, more depressive symptoms,
or expectation of working past age 65, although the interaction with relevant job demands is less
strong than it is with the large muscle index.
Among individuals who develop fine-motor skill problems and work in occupations that
demand finger dexterity, the propensity to report work-limiting health problems increases from
19.4% to 48.8%, or by 29.4 percentage points. Yet such workers who do not work in jobs
requiring finger dexterity report a similarly sharp increase in work-limiting health problems,
from 19.1% to 42.4%, or a change of 23.3 percentage points.

54

Table A5. Mean health limitations, CESD depressive symptoms and subjective probabilities of
working full-time after age 65 by the finger dexterity O*NET measures and changes in the HRS
fine motor skill index
Workers'
HIGH job demand for finger
LOW job demand for finger
Resources (HRS)
dexterity (O*NET) at t
dexterity (O*NET) at t
Transition in Fine
Motor Index
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All
Transition in Fine
Motor Index
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All
Transition in Fine
Motor Index
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All

N
15945
783
442
392
17562

Fraction with health
limitations
t
t+1
0.062
0.098
0.194
0.488
0.285
0.290
0.360
0.497
0.080
0.129

N
14383
712
406
386
15887

Mean CESD score
t
t+1
1.083
1.139
2.021
2.605
2.283
1.990
2.772
2.847
1.197
1.268

N
10896
506
287
267
12573

Mean P(work after 65)
t
t+1
33.9
34.2
32.4
26.7
29.9
30.2
30.2
24.5
33.0
32.9

N
19347
655
424
291
20717

Fraction with health
limitations
t
t+1
0.051
0.078
0.191
0.424
0.250
0.241
0.364
0.495
0.064
0.098

N
18496
633
413
295
19837

Mean CESD score
t
t+1
0.920
0.929
1.912
2.436
1.954
1.826
2.285
2.356
0.994
1.017

N
13941
437
285
205
15604

Mean P(work after 65)
t
t+1
36.8
37.6
32.8
28.5
34.8
33.3
31.3
29.0
35.8
36.2

*Sample: HRS, Age 50-70, full-time workers at t and non-missing answers to the three questions at t and t+1. The CESD score is
only collected in non-proxy interviews. Subjective probabilities of working are only collected in non-proxy interviews from
people younger than age 65. Prior to 2006, the HRS did not ask this question from non-workers. The values of expectations for
the 50-61-year-old non-proxy non-workers are imputed with a model described in section 3.3. High and low values of the
O*NET and the HRS measures are defined as being above (=high job demands or high individual resources) or below the mean
(=low job demands or low individual resources) in the sample of 50-70-year-old full-time workers.

55

Table A6. Mean health limitations, CESD depressive symptoms and subjective probabilities of
working full-time after age 65 by the memorization O*NET measures and changes in the HRS
cognition score
Workers'
HIGH job demand for
LOW job demand for
Resources (HRS)
memorization (O*NET) at t
memorization (O*NET) at t
Transition in
Cognition
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All
Transition in
Cognition
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All
Transition in
Cognition
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All

N
7002
2883
2747
4764
17396

Fraction with health
limitations
t
t+1
0.053
0.079
0.064
0.108
0.071
0.091
0.082
0.115
0.066
0.096

N
7084
2928
2788
4843
17643

Mean CESD score
t
t+1
0.810
0.850
0.935
0.960
0.915
0.895
1.170
1.202
0.946
0.972

N
5569
2201
2168
3556
14043

Mean P(work after 65)
t
t+1
38.5
40.0
38.6
39.2
37.7
39.3
37.3
37.1
37.3
38.2

N
3148
2141
1955
6509
13753

Fraction with health
limitations
t
t+1
0.076
0.107
0.077
0.127
0.080
0.116
0.078
0.144
0.078
0.129

N
3196
2172
1985
6627
13980

Mean CESD score
t
t+1
1.013
1.063
1.202
1.245
1.178
1.190
1.519
1.590
1.306
1.359

N
2467
1623
1524
4650
10755

Mean P(work after 65)
t
t+1
38.4
38.2
36.4
34.7
34.7
35.3
31.4
30.5
33.8
33.1

*Sample: HRS, Age 50-70, full-time workers at t and non-missing answers to the three questions at t and t+1. The CESD score is
only collected in non-proxy interviews. Subjective probabilities of working are only collected in non-proxy interviews from
people younger than age 65. Prior to 2006, the HRS did not ask this question from non-workers. The values of expectations for
the 50-61-year-old non-proxy non-workers are imputed with a model described in section 3.3. High and low values of the
O*NET and the HRS measures are defined as being above (=high job demands or high individual resources) or below the mean
(=low job demands or low individual resources) in the sample of 50-70-year-old full-time workers.

56

Table A7. Mean health limitations, CESD depressive symptoms and subjective probabilities of
working full-time after age 65 by the analyzing data or information O*NET measures and changes
in the HRS cognition score
Workers'
HIGH job demand for analyzing
LOW job demand for analyzing
Resources (HRS)
data or information (O*NET) at t
data or information (O*NET) at t
Transition in
Cognition
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All
Transition in
Cognition
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All
Transition in
Cognition
High → high
High → low
Low → high
Low → low
All

N
6430
2515
2360
3763
15068

Fraction with health
limitations
t
t+1
0.049
0.073
0.062
0.106
0.069
0.094
0.073
0.107
0.060
0.090

N
6502
2555
2394
3827
15278

Mean CESD score
t
t+1
0.799
0.822
0.931
0.951
0.911
0.877
1.131
1.170
0.922
0.939

N
5123
1953
1881
2854
12300

Mean P(work after 65)
t
t+1
37.9
39.6
38.1
38.2
37.1
38.3
36.7
36.5
36.8
37.6

N
3720
2509
2342
7510
16081

Fraction with health
limitations
t
t+1
0.080
0.115
0.077
0.126
0.080
0.109
0.083
0.144
0.081
0.130

N
3778
2545
2379
7643
16345

Mean CESD score
t
t+1
1.001
1.079
1.167
1.212
1.138
1.160
1.492
1.554
1.276
1.334

N
2913
1871
1811
5352
12498

Mean P(work after 65)
t
t+1
39.4
39.2
37.2
36.4
35.8
37.0
32.5
31.7
34.8
34.4

*Sample: HRS, Age 50-70, full-time workers at t and non-missing answers to the three questions at t and t+1. The CESD score is
only collected in non-proxy interviews. Subjective probabilities of working are only collected in non-proxy interviews from
people younger than age 65. Prior to 2006, the HRS did not ask this question from non-workers. The values of expectations for
the 50-61-year-old non-proxy non-workers are imputed with a model described in section 3.3. High and low values of the
O*NET and the HRS measures are defined as being above (=high job demands or high individual resources) or below the mean
(=low job demands or low individual resources) in the sample of 50-70-year-old full-time workers.

Table A6 shows our analysis for mismatches between cognitive resources and
memorization demands on the job, and Table A7 shows the same analysis for mismatches
between cognitive resources and analytical demands of a job. The patterns are more similar to
the fine-motor skill results in Table A5 than to the large-muscle results in Table A4. Cognitive

57

decline predicts the outcome variables relatively strongly (though less strongly than fine-motor
skills do), but there are only weak interactions with job demands.
For example, among individuals who develop cognitive problems and work in
occupations that demand memorization, the propensity to report work-limiting health problems
increases from 6.4% at t to 10.8% at t+1. Among such workers in occupations that do not
demand memorization, work-limiting health problems increase even more, from 7.7% to 12.7%.
References
Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. "The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings."
Journal of Political Economy 75 (4, Part 1):352-365.
Firpo, Sergio, Nicole Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 2011. "Occupational tasks and changes in
the wage structure."
Fraade-Blanar, Laura A, Jeanne M Sears, Kwun Chuen G Chan, Hilaire J Thompson, Paul K
Crane, and Beth E Ebel. 2017. "Relating Older Workers’ Injuries to the Mismatch
Between Physical Ability and Job Demands." Journal of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine 59 (2):212-221.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. "On the concept of health capital and the demand for health." Journal
of Political Economy 80 (2):223-255.
Nolte, Michael A., MA Servais, and M Turf. 2013. "Occupation and industry coding in
HRS/AHEAD." Health and Retirement Study Documentation Report, DR-021.
Roy, Andrew Donald. 1951. "Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings." Oxford Economic
Papers 3 (2):135-146.
Willis, Robert J, and Sherwin Rosen. 1979. "Education and self-selection." Journal of political
Economy 87 (5, Part 2):S7-S36.
58

Appendix B: Additional outcome variables
Table B1. OLS regressions of the change in the subjective probabilities of working full-time after
age 62 as a function of job demands, resources and their interactions
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
1.516
[0.211]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

2.014
[0.294]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

-0.642
[0.181]***

R1 x D1

0.655
[0.287]**

Fine motor index at t

1.451
[0.252]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

1.351
[0.242]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

-0.367
[0.181]**

R2 x D2

0.269
[0.228]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

1.088

1.089

[0.264]***

[0.264]***

1.371

1.374

[0.324]***

[0.323]***

0.384
[0.214]*

R3 x D3

-0.009
[0.287]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

0.385
[0.205]*

R3 x D4

0.177
[0.284]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.664

0.591

0.429

0.427

[0.717]

[0.719]

[0.747]

[0.747]

-0.142

-0.139

-0.091

-0.090

[0.094]

[0.094]

[0.098]

[0.098]

0.012

0.012

0.009

0.009

[0.005]**

[0.005]**

[0.005]

[0.005]

-2.184

-2.051

-1.545

-1.539

[1.248]*

[1.259]

[1.335]

[1.336]

Yes
-1.350

Yes
-1.231

Yes
-1.270

Yes
-1.278

[1.073]

[1.075]

[1.097]

[1.098]

0.008
24226

0.007
24227

0.006
21064

0.006
21064

59

Table B2. OLS regressions of the transitions from full-time work to a different employer as a
function of job demands, resources and their interactions
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
0.007
[0.002]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

0.004
[0.002]**

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.005
[0.002]**

R1 x D1

0.001
[0.002]

Fine motor index at t

0.002
[0.002]

Change in fine motor index, R2

0.002
[0.001]

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.000
[0.002]

R2 x D2

0.000
[0.001]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

0.003

0.002

[0.003]

[0.003]

0.002

0.001

[0.002]

[0.002]

-0.005
[0.002]**

R3 x D3

-0.001
[0.002]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.003
[0.002]

R3 x D4

0.001
[0.002]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.026

0.026

0.029

0.029

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

-0.017

-0.017

-0.024

-0.024

[0.010]*

[0.010]*

[0.011]**

[0.011]**

Yes
0.054

Yes
0.054

Yes
0.050

Yes
0.050

[0.007]***

[0.007]***

[0.008]***

[0.008]***

0.006
32563

0.005
32570

0.006
26760

0.006
26760

*Those who lose their jobs or become self-employed are coded as zeros (they did not switch employers).

60

Table B3. OLS regressions of the change in disliking to work as a function of job demands,
resources and their interactions
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.001
[0.002]

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.007
[0.003]**

Dynamic strength at t, D1

-0.002
[0.002]

R1 x D1

0.002
[0.003]

Fine motor index at t

-0.004
[0.002]*

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.007
[0.002]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

-0.002
[0.001]

R2 x D2

0.000
[0.002]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

0.003

0.002

[0.002]

[0.002]

0.003

0.003

[0.003]

[0.003]

-0.001
[0.002]

R3 x D3

0.000
[0.002]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

0.002
[0.002]

R3 x D4

0.001
[0.003]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.011

0.011

0.010

0.010

[0.006]*

[0.006]*

[0.006]*

[0.006]*

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.005

0.005

0.011

0.011

[0.012]

[0.012]

[0.012]

[0.012]

Yes
-0.007

Yes
-0.008

Yes
-0.008

Yes
-0.008

[0.010]

[0.010]

[0.010]

[0.010]

0.001
29818

0.001
29823

0.001
26863

0.001
26863

*Disliking to work is defined as disagreeing or strongly disagreeing with the statement that “I really enjoy going to work.”

61

Appendix C: Robustness checks
Table C1. OLS regressions of the change in whether health limits working as a function of job
demands, resources and their interactions, using many control variables
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.038
[0.002]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.075
[0.003]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.005
[0.002]***

R1 x D1

-0.012
[0.003]***

Fine motor index at t

-0.025
[0.003]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.043
[0.002]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.002
[0.002]*

R2 x D2

0.000
[0.002]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

-0.007

-0.007

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

-0.009

-0.009

[0.003]***

[0.002]***

-0.005
[0.002]***

R3 x D3

-0.003
[0.002]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.005
[0.002]***

R3 x D4

0.001
[0.002]

Female
White
Black
Other race
Hispanic
Less than high school
High school
Some college

-0.003

0.005

0.009

0.008

[0.003]

[0.003]*

[0.003]***

[0.003]**

ref.
0.002

ref.
0.003

ref.
0.003

ref.
0.003

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.005]

[0.005]

0.001

0.004

0.001

0.001

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.007]

[0.007]

-0.001

-0.003

0.001

0.001

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.006]

[0.006]

0.016

0.020

0.022

0.022

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

[0.006]***

[0.006]***

ref.
0.005

ref.
0.001

ref.
0.003

ref.
0.003

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

62

College graduate
Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Change in spouse works
Change in log household income
Change in positive household income
Change in log household wealth
Change in household wealth positive
Has a DB pension
Has a DC pension
Self-employed
Tenure at job, in years
Tenure missing
Has health insurance from employer
Has health insurance from spouse
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.002

-0.009

-0.009

-0.009

[0.003]

[0.003]***

[0.004]**

[0.004]**

-0.019

-0.018

-0.022

-0.022

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.001

[0.000]*

[0.000]**

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.014

0.011

0.015

0.015

[0.010]

[0.010]

[0.011]

[0.011]

0.001

0.002

0.002

0.002

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.005]

-0.019

-0.019

-0.021

-0.021

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

-0.010

-0.007

-0.010

-0.010

[0.020]

[0.021]

[0.023]

[0.023]

-0.001

-0.001

0.000

0.000

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

0.001

-0.003

-0.003

-0.003

[0.022]

[0.023]

[0.025]

[0.025]

0.002

0.002

0.003

0.003

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

0.001

-0.001

0.001

0.002

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.004]

-0.005

-0.008

-0.003

-0.003

[0.005]

[0.005]*

[0.005]

[0.005]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]*

[0.000]*

[0.000]**

[0.000]**

0.013

0.008

-0.008

-0.010

[0.018]

[0.019]

[0.022]

[0.022]

0.003

0.003

0.005

0.005

[0.004]

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.005]

0.010

0.008

0.012

0.012

[0.005]*

[0.005]

[0.005]**

[0.005]**

Yes
0.047

Yes
0.045

Yes
0.041

Yes
0.041

[0.010]***

[0.010]***

[0.010]***

[0.010]***

0.047
38272

0.029
38279

0.010
31149

0.010
31149

63

Table C2. OLS regressions of the change in the CESD depressive symptoms as a function of job
demands, resources and their interactions, using many control variables
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.044
[0.009]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.208
[0.014]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.018
[0.008]**

R1 x D1

-0.040
[0.013]***

Fine motor index at t

-0.029
[0.011]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.108
[0.012]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.011
[0.007]

R2 x D2

0.004
[0.012]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

-0.001

0.000

[0.011]

[0.011]

-0.043

-0.042

[0.013]***

[0.013]***

-0.006
[0.009]

R3 x D3

0.023
[0.012]**

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.013
[0.009]

R3 x D4

0.015
[0.012]

Female
White
Black
Other race
Hispanic
Less than high school
High school
Some college
College graduate

-0.011

-0.006

0.002

0.001

[0.013]

[0.013]

[0.014]

[0.014]

ref.
-0.027

ref.
-0.019

ref.
-0.023

ref.
-0.025

[0.019]

[0.019]

[0.022]

[0.022]

0.015

0.025

0.012

0.012

[0.035]

[0.035]

[0.038]

[0.038]

-0.036

-0.037

-0.014

-0.015

[0.031]

[0.032]

[0.033]

[0.033]

-0.006

0.006

0.040

0.038

[0.023]

[0.023]

[0.025]

[0.025]

ref.
-0.001

ref.
-0.009

ref.
0.003

ref.
0.005

[0.017]

[0.017]

[0.018]

[0.019]

0.012

-0.007

-0.005

0.000

[0.017]

[0.017]

[0.020]

[0.019]

64

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Change in spouse works
Change in log household income
Change in positive household income
Change in log household wealth
Change in household wealth positive

0.029

0.034

0.018

0.018

[0.027]

[0.027]

[0.028]

[0.028]

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

-0.445

-0.450

-0.449

-0.449

[0.065]***

[0.066]***

[0.069]***

[0.069]***

-0.037

-0.035

-0.032

-0.032

[0.028]

[0.028]

[0.030]

[0.030]

-0.046

-0.047

-0.051

-0.051

[0.016]***

[0.016]***

[0.017]***

[0.017]***

0.230

0.247

0.255

0.257

[0.125]*

[0.128]*

[0.141]*

[0.141]*

-0.013

-0.013

-0.006

-0.006

[0.007]*

[0.007]*

[0.007]

[0.007]

0.152

0.145

0.005

0.006

[0.133]

[0.133]

[0.140]

[0.140]

-0.018

-0.019

-0.014

-0.014

[0.018]

[0.018]

[0.019]

[0.019]

Has a DC pension

0.016

0.010

0.013

0.014

[0.018]

[0.018]

[0.019]

[0.019]

Self-employed

-0.005

-0.007

-0.013

-0.012

[0.022]

[0.022]

[0.024]

[0.024]

Has a DB pension

Tenure at job, in years
Tenure missing
Has health insurance from employer
Has health insurance from spouse
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

-0.001

-0.001

-0.002

-0.002

[0.001]**

[0.001]**

[0.001]**

[0.001]**

-0.200

-0.211

-0.200

-0.200

[0.093]**

[0.095]**

[0.100]**

[0.100]**

-0.019

-0.023

-0.037

-0.035

[0.024]

[0.024]

[0.025]

[0.025]

0.015

0.009

-0.006

-0.005

[0.025]

[0.025]

[0.026]

[0.026]

Yes
0.066

Yes
0.066

Yes
0.099

Yes
0.096

[0.053]

[0.053]

[0.055]*

[0.055]*

0.021
35720

0.014
35724

0.011
31623

0.011
31623

65

Table C3. OLS regressions of the change in the subjective probabilities of working full-time after
age 65 as a function of job demands, resources and their interactions, using many control variables
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
1.267
[0.171]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

1.908
[0.245]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.037
[0.178]

R1 x D1

0.802
[0.237]***

Fine motor index at t

1.032
[0.207]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

0.966
[0.196]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.173
[0.163]

R2 x D2

0.112
[0.181]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

0.508

0.492

[0.242]**

[0.241]**

0.979

0.964

[0.277]***

[0.276]***

0.302
[0.201]

R3 x D3

-0.215
[0.254]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

0.414
[0.196]**

R3 x D4

-0.227
[0.246]

Female

0.793

0.525

0.265

0.321

[0.301]***

[0.289]*

[0.315]

[0.312]

White
Black

ref.
0.005

ref.
0.019

ref.
0.567

ref.
0.612

[0.424]

[0.424]

[0.473]

[0.475]

Other race

-1.024

-1.111

-0.893

-0.893

[0.716]

[0.717]

[0.743]

[0.743]

Hispanic
Less than high school
High school
Some college
College graduate

0.952

1.047

1.265

1.292

[0.630]

[0.628]*

[0.675]*

[0.675]*

-1.273

-1.421

-1.831

-1.804

[0.498]**

[0.493]***

[0.555]***

[0.553]***

ref.
-0.366

ref.
-0.260

ref.
-0.672

ref.
-0.708

[0.384]

[0.382]

[0.419]

[0.423]*

0.157

0.552

-0.071

-0.150

[0.389]

[0.383]

[0.445]

[0.439]

66

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Change in spouse works
Change in log household income
Change in positive household income
Change in log household wealth
Change in household wealth positive

0.915

0.874

0.788

0.782

[0.595]

[0.596]

[0.624]

[0.624]

-0.069

-0.067

-0.079

-0.079

[0.063]

[0.063]

[0.067]

[0.067]

0.004

0.004

0.005

0.005

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

-1.875

-1.780

-1.736

-1.736

[1.188]

[1.192]

[1.276]

[1.276]

-0.048

-0.087

-0.225

-0.221

[0.588]

[0.587]

[0.631]

[0.631]

0.357

0.371

0.578

0.580

[0.310]

[0.310]

[0.330]*

[0.331]*

2.510

2.491

3.472

3.452

[2.570]

[2.583]

[2.740]

[2.743]

-0.091

-0.093

-0.057

-0.058

[0.136]

[0.136]

[0.143]

[0.143]

1.216

1.287

0.418

0.423

[2.591]

[2.596]

[2.741]

[2.742]

-0.158

-0.147

-0.268

-0.271

[0.394]

[0.395]

[0.423]

[0.423]

Has a DC pension

0.542

0.597

0.517

0.465

[0.369]

[0.369]

[0.396]

[0.398]

Self-employed

-1.302

-1.213

-0.943

-0.961

[0.566]**

[0.567]**

[0.598]

[0.598]

Has a DB pension

Tenure at job, in years
Tenure missing
Has health insurance from employer
Has health insurance from spouse
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.035

0.034

0.045

0.045

[0.014]**

[0.014]**

[0.015]***

[0.015]***

-1.019

-1.270

-1.224

-1.162

[2.890]

[2.862]

[3.058]

[3.067]

0.499

0.520

0.578

0.527

[0.523]

[0.525]

[0.551]

[0.551]

1.935

2.021

2.036

2.016

[0.529]***

[0.529]***

[0.557]***

[0.557]***

Yes
-3.489

Yes
-3.476

Yes
-3.174

Yes
-3.110

[1.148]***

[1.146]***

[1.180]***

[1.181]***

0.009
28176

0.007
28177

0.008
24798

0.008
24798

67

Table C4. OLS regressions of the transitions from full-time work to retirement as a function of job
demands, resources and their interactions, using many control variables
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.025
[0.002]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.024
[0.002]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.008
[0.002]***

R1 x D1

-0.003
[0.002]

Fine motor index at t

-0.018
[0.002]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.017
[0.002]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.007
[0.002]***

R2 x D2

0.000
[0.002]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3

-0.012

-0.012

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

-0.007

-0.007

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

Memorization at t, D3

-0.003

R3 x D3

-0.001

[0.002]
[0.002]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.003
[0.002]*

R3 x D4

-0.001
[0.002]

Female
White
Black
Other race
Hispanic

0.000

0.004

0.005

0.004

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

ref.
0.004

ref.
0.005

ref.
0.002

ref.
0.001

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.005]

[0.005]

0.000

0.001

-0.003

-0.003

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.007]

[0.007]

-0.017

-0.018

-0.017

-0.018

[0.005]***

[0.006]***

[0.006]***

[0.006]***

Less than high school
High school
Some college
College graduate

0.007

0.010

0.005

0.005

[0.005]

[0.005]**

[0.006]

[0.006]

ref.
-0.002

ref.
-0.004

ref.
-0.004

ref.
-0.004

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

-0.020

-0.026

-0.027

-0.026

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

68

Change in age

-0.054

-0.055

-0.053

-0.053

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

Change in age - 50 squared

0.003

0.003

0.003

0.003

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.033

0.032

0.037

0.037

[0.009]***

[0.009]***

[0.010]***

[0.010]***

Change in spouse works

-0.035

-0.035

-0.035

-0.036

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

[0.006]***

[0.006]***

Change in log household income

-0.057

-0.057

-0.059

-0.059

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

Change in positive household income

0.104

0.104

0.100

0.100

[0.017]***

[0.017]***

[0.019]***

[0.019]***

Change in log household wealth

0.002

0.002

0.002

0.002

[0.001]**

[0.001]**

[0.001]**

[0.001]**

Change in household wealth positive

-0.035

-0.035

-0.034

-0.034

[0.015]**

[0.015]**

[0.016]**

[0.016]**

Has a DB pension

0.050

0.050

0.051

0.051

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

-0.008

-0.009

-0.009

-0.008

[0.003]**

[0.003]***

[0.004]**

[0.004]**

-0.045

-0.046

-0.043

-0.043

[0.004]***

[0.004]***

[0.005]***

[0.005]***

Has a DC pension
Self-employed
Tenure at job, in years

0.002

0.002

0.001

0.001

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

Tenure missing
Has health insurance from employer
Has health insurance from spouse

0.030

0.028

0.018

0.017

[0.018]*

[0.019]

[0.022]

[0.022]

0.000

-0.001

0.000

0.001

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.005]

[0.005]

0.012

0.011

0.012

0.012

[0.005]***

[0.005]**

[0.005]**

[0.005]**

Yes
0.048

Yes
0.048

Yes
0.049

Yes
0.049

[0.008]***

[0.008]***

[0.009]***

[0.009]***

0.099
38829

0.096
38838

0.092
31645

0.092
31645

Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

69

Table C5. OLS regressions of the transitions from full-time work to disability as a function of job
demands, resources and their interactions, using many control variables
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.009
[0.001]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.011
[0.001]***

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.001
[0.000]*

R1 x D1

-0.002
[0.001]**

Fine motor index at t

-0.008
[0.001]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.010
[0.001]***

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.001
[0.000]*

R2 x D2

0.000
[0.001]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

-0.003

-0.003

[0.001]***

[0.001]***

-0.002

-0.002

[0.001]***

[0.001]***

-0.001
[0.001]*

R3 x D3

0.000
[0.001]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.001
[0.001]**

R3 x D4

-0.001
[0.001]

Female
White
Black
Other race
Hispanic
Less than high school
High school
Some college
College graduate

-0.002

0.000

0.003

0.002

[0.001]**

[0.001]

[0.001]***

[0.001]**

ref.
0.006

ref.
0.006

ref.
0.004

ref.
0.004

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

[0.002]**

[0.002]**

-0.001

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

0.003

0.002

0.001

0.000

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

0.005

0.005

0.004

0.004

[0.002]***

[0.002]***

[0.002]**

[0.002]**

ref.
0.002

ref.
0.001

ref.
0.001

ref.
0.001

[0.001]*

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

0.002

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.001]*

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

70

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Change in spouse works
Change in log household income
Change in positive household income
Change in log household wealth
Change in household wealth positive
Has a DB pension

0.001

0.001

-0.001

-0.001

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]*

[0.000]*

0.003

0.002

0.004

0.004

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

-0.005

-0.005

-0.004

-0.004

[0.001]***

[0.001]***

[0.001]***

[0.001]***

-0.005

-0.005

-0.002

-0.002

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.009]

[0.009]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.006

0.006

0.004

0.004

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.008]

-0.002

-0.002

-0.001

-0.001

[0.001]*

[0.001]*

[0.001]

[0.001]

Has a DC pension

-0.001

-0.001

0.000

0.000

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

Self-employed

-0.004

-0.004

-0.003

-0.003

[0.001]***

[0.001]***

[0.001]**

[0.001]**

Tenure at job, in years
Tenure missing
Has health insurance from employer
Has health insurance from spouse
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

[0.000]***

0.001

-0.001

0.004

0.004

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.008]

[0.008]

-0.003

-0.003

-0.004

-0.004

[0.001]**

[0.001]**

[0.001]***

[0.001]***

-0.003

-0.003

-0.003

-0.003

[0.001]**

[0.001]**

[0.002]**

[0.002]*

Yes
0.011

Yes
0.010

Yes
0.012

Yes
0.012

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

0.023
38829

0.027
38838

0.008
31645

0.008
31645

71

Table C6. OLS regressions of lagged work limiting health problems as a function of job demands,
resources and their interactions, balancing tests
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.018
[0.002]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

0.001
[0.002]

Dynamic strength at t, D1

0.000
[0.001]

R1 x D1

0.002
[0.002]

Fine motor index at t

-0.016
[0.003]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.003
[0.002]

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.000
[0.001]

R2 x D2

0.000
[0.002]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

0.001

0.001

[0.002]

[0.002]

0.003

0.002

[0.002]

[0.002]

0.000
[0.002]

R3 x D3

0.000
[0.002]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

0.001
[0.002]

R3 x D4

-0.004
[0.002]**

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.008

0.007

0.005

0.005

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.006]

[0.006]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

-0.004

-0.005

-0.003

-0.003

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.010]

[0.010]

Yes
-0.016

Yes
-0.015

Yes
-0.011

Yes
-0.011

[0.010]

[0.010]

[0.011]

[0.011]

0.006
31775

0.005
31781

0.003
25208

0.003
25208

72

Table C7. OLS regressions of lagged CESD depressive symptoms as a function of job demands,
resources and their interactions, balancing tests
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
-0.057
[0.011]***

Change in large muscle index, R1

0.024
[0.015]

Dynamic strength at t, D1

-0.012
[0.009]

R1 x D1

0.006
[0.015]

Fine motor index at t

-0.002
[0.013]

Change in fine motor index, R2

-0.013
[0.008]

Finger dexterity at t, D2

0.009
[0.012]

R2 x D2

0.000
0.000

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

0.020

0.020

[0.014]

[0.014]

0.008

0.005

[0.009]

[0.009]

-0.007
[0.013]

R3 x D3

0.000
0.000

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

-0.007
[0.013]

R3 x D4

-0.027
[0.063]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.025

0.023

0.024

0.024

[0.034]

[0.034]

[0.034]

[0.034]

-0.004

-0.004

-0.003

-0.003

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

-0.087

-0.091

-0.082

-0.081

[0.075]

[0.075]

[0.076]

[0.076]

Yes
-0.029

Yes
-0.024

Yes
-0.027

Yes
-0.027

[0.062]

[0.062]

[0.063]

[0.063]

0.007
25617

0.006
25622

0.005
25178

0.005
25178

73

Table C8. OLS regressions of lagged subjective probabilities of working after age 65 as a function
of job demands, resources and their interactions, balancing tests
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Large muscle index at t
0.454
[0.182]**

Change in large muscle index, R1

-0.090

Dynamic strength at t, D1

-0.301

[0.256]
[0.166]*

R1 x D1

-0.491
[0.252]*

Fine motor index at t

0.716
[0.227]***

Change in fine motor index, R2

0.416
[0.207]**

Finger dexterity at t, D2

-0.263

R2 x D2

-0.104

[0.163]
[0.186]

Cognition at t
Change in cognition, R3
Memorization at t, D3

0.386

0.402

[0.235]

[0.235]*

-0.258

-0.246

[0.303]

[0.302]

0.115
[0.202]

R3 x D3

0.125
[0.280]

Analyzing data or information at t, D4

0.063
[0.194]

R3 x D4

-0.079
[0.273]

Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

0.241

0.265

0.428

0.428

[0.666]

[0.666]

[0.723]

[0.723]

-0.285

-0.283

-0.327

-0.327

[0.062]***

[0.062]***

[0.067]***

[0.067]***

0.015

0.015

0.017

0.017

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

[0.003]***

-2.528

-2.508

-2.290

-2.291

[1.179]**

[1.180]**

[1.270]*

[1.270]*

Yes
1.282

Yes
1.268

Yes
1.228

Yes
1.237

[1.331]

[1.332]

[1.378]

[1.379]

0.010
24675

0.010
24677

0.009
20643

0.009
20643

74

Table C9. OLS regressions of work limiting health problems, CESD depressive symptoms,
subjective probabilities of working after age 65, and transitions from full-time work to disability as
a function of job demands, resources and their interactions, restricted to full-time workers at t+1

Large muscle index at t
Change in large muscle index, R1
Dynamic strength at t, D1
R1 x D1
Change in age
Change in age - 50 squared
Change in age - 50 cube
Change in married
Wave dummies
Constant
R-squared
N

health limitation

CESD

PW65

-0.009
[0.002]***
-0.041
[0.003]***
0.002
[0.001]
-0.005
[0.003]*
-0.014
[0.005]***
0.000
[0.000]
0.000
[0.000]
-0.004
[0.010]
Yes
0.028
[0.009]***
0.017
28950

-0.006
[0.010]
-0.171
[0.016]***
0.001
[0.008]
-0.037
[0.016]**
0.026
[0.029]
-0.001
[0.002]
0.000
[0.000]
-0.497
[0.077]***
Yes
-0.010
[0.051]
0.017
26903

0.441
[0.194]**
1.020
[0.293]***
-0.159
[0.169]
0.746
[0.290]**
0.698
[0.662]
-0.205
[0.070]***
0.016
[0.003]***
-2.116
[1.361]
Yes
-0.555
[1.114]
0.009
22043

75

