NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGES AND THE VALUE OF NONEMPLOYMENT
Simon Jäger
Benjamin Schoefer
Samuel G. Young
Josef Zweimüller
Working Paper 25230
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25230
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018, Revised September 2019
We thank Karl Aspelund, Nikhil Basavappa, Carolin Baum, Niklas Flamang, René Livas, Peter
McCrory, Damian Osterwalder, Johanna Posch, and Nina Roussille for excellent research
assistance. We thank four anonymous reviewers, and Pierre Cahuc, Steve Davis, Cynthia
Doniger, Robert Hall, Jonathon Hazell, Patrick Kline, Alan Manning, Giuseppe Moscarini,
Andreas Mueller and Iván Werning, and audiences at Boston University, MIT, Penn State, SOLE
2019, Stanford, Stockholm IIES, UC Berkeley, UCLA, U Mannheim, Universidad Carlos III
Madrid, University of British Columbia, University College London, All California Labor
Economics Conference, Eastern Economic Association, IAB Perspectives on (Un-) Employment,
IZA Evaluation of Labor Market Policies Conference, IZA/CREST/OECD Conference on Labor
Market Policy, LMU Munich, University of Regensburg, NBER Economic Fluctuations and
Growth, NBER Summer Institute Macro Perspectives, West Coast Matching Workshop, and
Stanford SITE. Jäger and Schoefer acknowledge financial support from the Sloan Foundation and
the Boston Retirement Research Center. The latter grant requires the following disclaimer: “The
research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security
Administration (SSA) funded as part of the Retirement Research Consortium. The opinions and
conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the opinions or policy
of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes
any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy,
completeness, or usefulness of the contents of this report. Reference herein to any specific
commercial product, process or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise
does not necessarily constitute or imply endorsement, recommendation or favoring by the United
States Government or any agency thereof.”
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Simon Jäger, Benjamin Schoefer, Samuel G. Young, and Josef Zweimüller. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Wages and the Value of Nonemployment
Simon Jäger, Benjamin Schoefer, Samuel G. Young, and Josef Zweimüller
NBER Working Paper No. 25230
November 2018, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D43,D83,E0,E2,E24,H0,H22,H55,J0,J2,J3,J30,J31,J41,J42,J5,J6,J64,J65,M5,M52
ABSTRACT
Nonemployment is often posited as a worker’s outside option in wage setting models such as
bargaining and wage posting. The value of nonemployment is therefore a key determinant of
wages. We measure the wage effect of changes in the value of nonemployment among initially
employed workers. Our quasi-experimental variation in the value of nonemployment arises from
four large reforms of unemployment insurance (UI) benefit levels in Austria. We document that
wages are insensitive to UI benefit changes: point estimates imply a wage response of less than
$0.01 per $1.00 UI benefit increase, and we can reject sensitivities larger than $0.03. The
insensitivity holds even among workers with low wages and high predicted unemployment
duration, and among job switchers and recently unemployed workers. The insensitivity of wages
to the nonemployment value presents a puzzle to the widely used Nash bargaining model, which
predicts a sensitivity of $0.24–$0.48. Our evidence supports wage-setting models that insulate
wages from the value of nonemployment.
Simon Jäger
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sjaeger@mit.edu
Benjamin Schoefer
Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
schoefer@berkeley.edu

Samuel G. Young
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
sgyoung@mit.edu
Josef Zweimüller
Department of Economics
University of Zurich
Schoenberggasse 1
8001, Zurich
Switzerland
josef.zweimueller@econ.uzh.ch

1

Introduction

A prominent view in macroeconomics and labor economics is that workers’ nonemployment
outside options are a key determinant of wages. Most prominently, matching models of the
aggregate labor market feature wage bargaining with nonemployment as the worker’s outside
option (Pissarides, 2000; Shimer, 2010; Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2017). This view helps explain
aggregate wage dynamics such as the Phillips and wage curves: high unemployment weakens
workers’ threat point in bargaining, and thereby lowers wages (Beaudry and DiNardo, 1991;
Blanchflower and Oswald, 1994; Ravenna and Walsh, 2008; Christiano et al., 2016). It also shapes
policy debates, such as whether countercyclical unemployment insurance generosity may depress
hiring during recessions by pushing up wage demands (Krusell et al., 2010; Hagedorn et al.,
2013; Chodorow-Reich et al., 2018). The sensitivity of wages to the nonemployment value also
determines the capacity of macroeconomic models to generate realistic labor demand fluctuations
(Shimer, 2005; Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008; Hall and Milgrom, 2008; Chodorow-Reich and
Karabarbounis, 2016; Hall, 2017). In wage posting models, the nonemployment value also
determines reservation wages of the unemployed, forming the cornerstone of firms’ wage policies
and the equilibrium wage distribution (Burdett and Mortensen, 1998; Manning, 2011). Similarly,
firms pay wage premia above worker’s nonemployment outside option in efficiency wage models
(Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984; Akerlof and Yellen, 1986; Katz, 1986). Yet, there exists no direct
empirical estimate of the sensitivity of wages to the value of nonemployment.
We estimate the dollar-for-dollar sensitivity of wages to the nonemployment value arising
from changes in unemployment insurance benefit (UIB) levels, which we analyze in a quasiexperimental research design studying four large UIB reforms in Austria in 1976, 1985, 1989,
and 2001.1 The reforms raised UIBs differentially for workers based on their previous salaries by
as much as 28% in 1985, for example. Our difference-in-differences design compares wage growth
between workers eligible for increased UIBs (treatment group) and their unaffected peers (control
group). We use administrative data on workers and firms going back to 1972. The Austrian UI
context is particularly suitable: (i) most separators receive UI due to broad eligibility and high
take-up, (ii) quitters are UI-eligible,2 (iii) there is no experience rating, (iv) and post-UI welfare
benefits move nearly one-to-one with the reforms’ UIB shifts.
We document that wages are insensitive to increases in UI benefit levels. We first visually
analyze each reform nonparametrically. We sort workers into bins by their reference wages that
determine UIBs, and then plot wages before and after each reform. These raw data do not
reveal any wage responses among treated workers. Second, our difference-in-differences regression
reveals point estimates for the dollar-for-dollar wage sensitivity below $0.01 to a $1.00 increase
1

Only the 1989 reform has been studied, with a focus on unemployment spell duration (Lalive et al., 2006).
Quitters have full benefit duration after a brief 28-day wait period. Wait periods are considerably longer in
other OECD countries, such as three months in Germany, while U.S. quitters are, de jure, permanently ineligible.
2

1

in UIBs after one and two years. Our confidence intervals rule out sensitivities above $0.03 in
our preferred specification with rich controls.
These estimates are an order of magnitude smaller than predicted by the widely used Nash
bargaining model with nonemployment as the outside option. Here, wages are the weighted
average of the job’s inside value (e.g., productivity) – of which the worker receives a share equal to
the worker bargaining power parameter –, and the worker’s outside option – of which the worker
receives one minus her bargaining power. UIBs boost workers’ outside option by increasing the
payoff during nonemployment but importantly also through an endogenous feedback effect on
reemployment wages. We calibrate worker bargaining power to 0.1, consistent with the micro
evidence from firm-level rent sharing (i.e. inside value shifts from productivity changes). The
basic Nash model then predicts that wages will increase by $0.48 whenever UIBs increase by
$1.00. This prediction is robust to model refinements, such as equilibrium or micro responses.
Additionally, incorporating institutional features, such as incomplete take-up or finite duration
of benefits, results in predicted sensitivities of $0.24. In fact, the Nash benchmark could only
rationalize the insensitivity we document with full worker bargaining power, an assumption
inconsistent with the small rent sharing elasticities in the data.
We also test a central cross-sectional prediction of the model: the pass-through of UI into
outside options and wages is mediated by a worker’s post-separation nonemployment duration.
Yet, when we split up workers by their predicted post-separation time on UI (and other proxies
for unemployment risk), both the bottom and top groups exhibit the zero wage effect. Relatedly,
we find little evidence of larger sensitivity among workers with plausibly lower bargaining power
(e.g., blue-collar or female workers) for whom wages should be more sensitive to outside options.
We rule out various confounders that could explain the wage insensitivity. First, standard
wage stickiness is unlikely to explain the insensitivity, which extends to new hires (even those
hired out of unemployment) whose wages are likely flexibly reset (and allocative for hiring in
standard matching models, e.g., Pissarides, 2009). We also find no wage incidence after two
years, or in firms exhibiting more flexible or volatile wage policies. Lastly, since the reforms
should entail wage increases, standard downward wage rigidity should not bind.
Second, the insensitivity extends even to workers with frequent interaction with, and hence
awareness of, the UI system (see Lemieux and MacLeod, 2000). Supplementary survey evidence
indicates that Austrian employees know their own UIB levels. We additionally document wage
insensitivity to age-specific – and thus simple and salient – reforms raising UIB duration.
Third, we investigate whether our findings could be explained by bargaining occurring with
a firm’s entire workforce rather than with individual workers (as in union bargaining models
and as documented in Saez et al., 2019). We rerun the regressions with a firm-level average of
the worker-level benefit changes. These wage sensitivities remain small and insignificant. While
collective bargaining is prevalent in Austria, the institutional environment leaves substantial room

2

for between-firm wage variation. Firms regularly deviate upward from the resulting industry-wide
wage floors (mean wages exceed the floors by more than 30%, Leoni and Pollan, 2011), and
between-firm wage dispersion is large (Borovičková and Shimer, 2017)).
Fourth, robustness checks reveal that the reforms did not affect separations or sickness spells,
suggesting that wage effects were not masked by composition or efficiency-wage effects.
To our knowledge, our paper is the first to quantitatively assess the wage effects of UI-induced
outside option shifts against calibrated wage setting models. We complement studies of UI effects
on search behavior and reemployment wages of unemployed workers (Feldstein and Poterba,
1984; Katz and Meyer, 1990; Krueger and Mueller, 2016; Schmieder et al., 2016; Le Barbanchon
et al., 2017; Nekoei and Weber, 2017). Our focus on employed workers isolates the bargaining
channel, whereas the unemployed are subject to multiple, perhaps offsetting, non-bargaining
wage effects, such as skill depreciation (Dinerstein et al., 2019), job composition (McCall, 1970;
Nekoei and Weber, 2017), or stigma (Kroft et al., 2013, 2016). Second, much of the literature
focuses on benefit duration reforms, hence harder to price and map back into our model, and
affecting only long spells.
Our evidence supports models that insulate wage setting from the nonemployment outside
option. This set includes models with on-the-job search and job ladders, where competing job
offers can serve as outside options in bargaining (e.g., Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002; Cahuc et al.,
2006; Altonji et al., 2013; Bagger et al., 2014). Interestingly, we do not find larger wage effects
for recently unemployed workers, for whom nonemployment remains the outside option in these
models. Another promising bargaining model is alternating offer (or credible) bargaining (Hall
and Milgrom, 2008), in which the threat point is to extend bargaining rather than to terminate
negotiations – thereby limiting the role of outside options in general. Wage posting models may
be another promising route to explore, although they too can deliver large sensitivities.
Our findings also raise the question whether the short-run comovement between aggregate
wages and labor market conditions, such as the Phillips curve and the wage curve (Beaudry
and DiNardo, 1991; Blanchflower and Oswald, 1994; Winter-Ebmer, 1996; Blanchard and Katz,
1999), may arise from mechanisms other than fluctuations in workers’ nonemployment outside
option, such as compositional effects (Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2013; Gertler et al., 2016) or
wage pressure from job-to-job transitions (Moscarini and Postel-Vinay, 2017).
The type of wage insensitivity we document is also a crucial theoretical ingredient for the
capacity of matching models to produce realistic labor demand fluctuations (Shimer, 2005),
where Nash bargained wages move procyclically with the nonemployment value and thereby
provide stabilization (Shimer, 2004; Hall and Milgrom, 2008; Hall, 2017; Chodorow-Reich and
Karabarbounis, 2016). Relatedly, our findings for limited short-run wage pressure from UI speak
against large labor demand effects (Krusell et al., 2010; Hagedorn et al., 2013), and rationalize
evidence for small employment effects from UI duration extensions in Chodorow-Reich et al.

3

(2018) and positive employment spillovers on ineligible control workers in Lalive et al. (2015).
Section 2 derives wage-UIB sensitivity in our Nash benchmark, and discusses alternative
models. Section 3 describes institutions, reforms, and data. Section 4 presents our empirical
design and results. Section 5 studies subsamples and group bargaining. Section 6 concludes.

2

Conceptual Framework

We draw on wage bargaining to conceptualize and benchmark the wage effects of UI shifts through
the outside option channel. Our point of departure, the canonical and widely used Nash bargain,
predicts a wage-benefit sensitivity of 0.24–0.48: when UI benefits – or any components of the
nonemployment payoff – go up by $1.00, wages should increase by $0.24 to $0.48 – dramatically
higher than our empirical estimate of a wage-benefit sensitivity below $0.03 in Section 4. We
then discuss alternative wage setting models that insulate wages from the nonemployment value.

2.1

Nash Bargaining

We derive the sensitivity in our baseline model with risk-neutral agents, fixed job finding and
separation rates, and UIBs as the only nonemployment payoff (with complete take-up and infinite
potential duration). Going from an aggregate steady state, we study a surprise and permanent
shift in UI benefits. In Section 2.2, we show how this baseline sensitivity extends to richer
environments, such as other nonemployment payoffs (including without UI, as with incomplete
take-up or finite duration), micro responses (e.g., search effort), and market-level adjustments.
2.1.1

Basic Model: Wages, the Nonemployment Value, and UI Benefits

The Nash-Bargained Wage Nash bargaining results in a wage that is the average of the
inside value of a job, here productivity p, and the worker’s outside option Ω, weighted by worker
bargaining power φ (equivalently, w is outside option Ω plus share φ of surplus p − Ω):3
w = φ · p + (1 − φ) · Ω.

(1)

Hence, the sensitivity of the wage to the outside option is 1 − φ (and φ with respect to the inside
option, e.g., productivity). This implies, for example, that if workers’ bargaining power is zero,
φ
1−φ
The firm and the worker choose wage w = arg maxw̃ E(w̃) − N
J(w̃) − V
(with employment value
E, nonemployment value N , firm’s job value J and vacancy value V ). Firm’s job value J = p − w + δ[V − J(w)]
draws on productivity p. Jobs end exogenously with probability δ, pushing the (infinitely lived) worker into
nonemployment and destroying
the firm’s position
(leaving
no vacancy value
h
i
h
i V ). Going from (1 − φ)(E(w) − N ) =
w+δ(N −E(w))
p−w+δ(V −J(w))
φ(J(w) − V ) ⇔ (1 − φ)
−N = φ
− V and eliminating continuation terms
ρ
ρ
(1 − φ)δ(E(w) − N ) = φδ(J − V ) due to bargaining next period, one obtains w = φp + (1 − φ)ρN − φρV . We
ignore dV /db, either relying on canonical free entry V = 0, or on a control group netting out dV (Section 2.2).
We assume dp/db = 0, but argue against room for quantitatively important dp effects in Appendix Section H.
3

4

they are paid exactly their outside option, with which wages then move one-to-one.
The Nonemployment Outside Option The canonical specification of the worker’s outside
option is a job separation, potentially into temporary nonemployment (e.g., in matching models
Pissarides, 2000; Shimer, 2005; Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis, 2016; Ljungqvist and
Sargent, 2017). Nonemployment carries value N . Its flow value ρN (in continuous time, with
discount rate ρ) consists of (instantaneous) payoff b (UI benefits) and, at job finding rate f , the
potential “capital gain” into reemployment E(w0 ) with its payoff wage w0 :
Ω ≡ ρN = b + f · (E(w0 ) − N ) = ρ

b + f · E(w0 )
.
ρ+f

(2)

Reemployment flow value ρE(w0 ) = w0 + δ(N − E(w0 )), in turn, incorporates returning into N
at separation rate δ. The nonemployment flow value ρN then consists of the amortized expected
present value of the instantaneous payoffs from nonemployment, b, and reemployment, w0 :
ρN =

ρ+δ
ρ+f +δ
|

{z

≡τ

b+

f
ρ+f +δ
|

}

Nonemployment Time
Post-Separation

{z

≡1−τ

w0 .

(3)

}

Reemployment Time
Post-Separation

ρ+δ
Payoffs b and w0 are weighted by τ ≡ ρ+f
, capturing discounting and the expected time the
+δ
worker will spend in nonemployment conditional on separating. A high discount rate ρ → ∞
(e.g., due to myopia or liquidity constraints), a low job finding rate f = 0, or a high subsequent
separation rate δ → ∞ will put full weight on b such that τ = 1 and ρN = b (the initial state
after bargaining breaks down). A high job finding rate f → ∞ implies ρN = w0 .

The Wage-Benefit Sensitivity Our variation in the outside option is brought about by
variation in workers’ payoff while nonemployed, specifically shifts in UI benefit levels. With
Ω = ρN and plugging in the expression for ρN derived in (3), the Nash wage becomes:
Ω
}|

z

{

w = φ · p + (1 − φ) · (τ b + (1 − τ )w0 ) .

(4)

The wage sensitivity to b works through outside option Ω and is therefore mediated by 1 − φ:
dΩ/db
z

}|

!{

dw
dw0
= (1 − φ) · τ + (1 − τ )
.
db
db

5

(5)

The first term, τ , is the mechanical effect of b on N through the instantaneous payoff while
nonemployed. Second, the feedback effect, (1 − τ )dw0 /db, captures that reemployment wages in
future jobs (thus weighted by post-separation time in reemployment 1 − τ ) also respond to b.
0
Nash bargaining in the next job implies dw
= dw
. This allows us to solve for the wage-benefit
db
db
sensitivity in terms of φ and τ as the fixed point in Equation (5):
dw
(1 − φ) · τ
=
.
db
1 − (1 − φ) · (1 − τ )

(6)

1−dw/db
Conversely, a given sensitivity dw/db and τ imply a bargaining power φ = 1+dw/db·(τ
−1 −1) . For
intuition, Figure 1a plots a contour map of the predicted wage-benefit sensitivity as a function of
worker bargaining power φ for various levels of τ . The lower τ , the lower the weight the outside
option puts on UI benefit b, thereby insulating wages from b. By contrast, for τ = 1, such that
= 1 − φ. Figure 1b plots the sensitivity as a function of τ , for various levels
ρN = b, we have dw
db
φ. The higher τ , the more weight b receives. For φ = 1, the wage is insulated from the outside
= 1 for any τ > 0.
option for any τ ; for φ = 0, the wage equals the outside option, and so dw
db

2.1.2

Calibrating the Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

We now calibrate the sensitivity in Equation (6) as a benchmark for the empirical estimates.
Calibrating φ We calibrate worker bargaining power to match the empirical dollar-for-dollar
pass-through of firm-specific shifts in labor productivity p (proxied for by profits and productivity
shifts) into wages, φ = dw
. Our source is the large body of rent sharing estimates (reviewed
dp
in, e.g., Manning, 2011; Card et al., 2018), as well as our own calculation based on Austrian
data. Figure 2 plots the implied φ values in a meta study. Among these studies, we focus on
worker-level specifications to net out composition effects. We calculate an average of 0.104, hence
setting φ = 0.1.4 As a reference, we also list macro calibrations, which typically treat φ as a free
parameter or set it to meet the Hosios condition of constrained efficiency in matching models.
The figure also foreshadows, assuming the Nash benchmark, the large, close to one, φ values
implied by our estimated empirical wage insensitivity to the outside option. This striking
inconsistency with the rent sharing estimates suggests a rejection of the baseline model.
Calibrating τ To calibrate τ , we exploit the fact that the discount rate ρ is small compared
δ
to empirical worker flow rates f and δ, such that τ / δ+f
(where ρ ≈ 0 implies a lower bound
4

This benchmark is robust to excluding studies that use short-term fluctuations in productivity, which may
have muted effects on wages due wage stickiness or insurance (see, e.g., Guiso et al., 2005). Several studies report
estimates of the effects of more persistent shifts in productivity on wages (Guiso et al. (2005), Cardoso and
Portela (2009), and Card et al. (2018)); averaging over these studies, we find an inverse-variance weighted mean
of 0.103. We also do not include studies that report profit-sharing elasticities, as those do not directly identify
worker bargaining power, as we discuss in Appendix F.

6

for dw
). τ then corresponds to an individual’s expected fraction of post-separation time spent
db
on UI, mirroring the familiar steady-state expression for aggregate unemployment.
We can directly measure this τ concept for actual separators. We start with our full regression
sample and keep all individuals who, in the next year, separate into nonemployment for at least
one day. Importantly, we do not impose that a separator ever take up UI. For each separator,
we calculate her realized post-separation share of time spent on unemployment insurance (UI)
or unemployment assistance (UA) (Notstandshilfe, which is indexed nearly one-to-one to an
individual’s UI benefit level and inherits our policy variation db, as detailed in Footnote 21). We
refer to “UI” in this paper typically as encompassing both programs.
We then assign each worker in our regression sample (whether she separates or not) her
idiosyncratic predicted τ̂i . We construct these predicted values because we may not see a
separation for many of these workers, because the composition of these workers may differ
from the separators, and because in Section 4.4 we will exploit heterogeneity in τ̂i . Specifically,
to construct τ̂i , we plug a worker’s pre-separation attributes (industry/occupation, tenure,
experience, age, region, gender, separation year, and previous UI history) into the corresponding
regression model estimated off the actual separators’ realized τi ’s (details in Appendix C).5
Table 1 reports the results for our regression sample, along with predicted values for non-UI
states. The average of τ̂i across the entire regression sample yields an average expected time spent
on UI, E[τ̂i ], of 10.4% for our preferred specification in the first column (1).6 The columns show
robustness to restrictions on the separator sample underlying the prediction. Each odd column
considers employment restrictions of some (at least one day of) work within four post-separation
years, thereby dropping emigrants or other permanent labor force exits. The column pairs also
loop over “time restrictions”: in our preferred specification, we stop including separators’ labor
market states at the earliest of 16 years, reaching age 70, or death (the longest horizons we
can apply given the 2001 reform and the regression sample age restriction (54)), as well as
either of retirement or disability, if “absorbing” (no subsequent employment or UI/UA spells in
the next 16 years). The other columns additionally show robustness to stopping counting only
at absorbing retirement in columns (3)-(4), or neither at disability nor retirement in columns
(5)-(6).
Benchmark Wage-Benefit Sensitivity In Table 1, we also report the implied wage-benefit
sensitivities. For φ = 0.1, suggested by the micro studies on rent sharing, and an average
5

The R2 of the model is 9%, and the unexplained variation captures a combination of unobservables, model
misspecification, and likely also ex-post stochastic earnings realizations unrelated to the quality of the model.
6
Appendix Table A.5 Panel A reports the realized τ values among the actual separators, whose somewhat
higher average τ , 11.6%, reflects composition differences from our full sample. Panel B reports for the full sample
the naturally smaller unconditionally-realized (rather than predicted-in-case-of-separation) average τ of 3.9-4.1%,
reflecting that our full worker sample is stably employed unless taking up the separation outside option.

7

τ = 10% as described above, the predicted wage–benefit sensitivity is:
dw
db

= (1 − 0.1) ·
(τ =0.104,φ=0.1)

0.104
≈ 0.48.
1 − (1 − 0.1) (1 − 0.104)

(7)

That is, the calibrated Nash model predicts a $0.48 wage response to a $1.00 increase in
UIBs. Even if calibrating φ = 0.2, the upper end of the rent sharing estimates, the model
predicts a 0.29 sensitivity. Even for φ = 0.5, the middle of the macro targets inconsistent with
microempirical evidence, we would find a sizable sensitivity of 0.09. The table also reports the
sensitivity respecting Jensen’s inequality (as dw/db is nonlinear in τ ), which is similarly sized
E[dw/db(τ̂i)] = 0.46, so our exposition reports dw/db(E[τ̂i]). Finally, in Section 4.4, we also
study subsamples with τ ranging from 0.02 to 0.2 yielding predicted dw
from 0.15 to above 0.60.
db

2.2

Robustness

The baseline model holds fixed all terms except for wages and UIBs, and hardwires UI and
nonemployment. We now show that the baseline sensitivity extends exactly to richer nonemployment payoffs, general micro responses (e.g., search effort), and market-level adjustments. Second,
a large sensitivity prevails with nonemployment without UI receipt (as with limited take-up).
2.2.1

Richer Payoffs, Micro Reoptimization, and Market Adjustment

Richer Payoff While Nonemployed The level-on-level sensitivity is invariant to the (hardto-measure) share of b in a more general nonemployment payoff z(b), as z 0 (b) = 1 since b
simply enters the budget constraint. For example, z(b) may include leisure value or employment
disutility −v (MRS), search effort costs c(e), unemployment stigma γ (all normalized into money
units by budget multiplier λ), and other nonwork-contingent income y:
z(bi , ...) = bi +

−vi − ci (ei ) − γi
+ yi + ...
λi

(8)

Micro Choices and Market Adjustment We now also include vector c of choice variables
(search effort,...), of which we permit micro-reoptimization in response to the reform, as well as
vector x of exogenous variables (e.g. market-level labor demand) taken as given by the household,
yet which we now permit to adjust. Now, values N and E are:
n

o

ρN (b, c, x) = max z(b, c, x) + f (c, x) · [E(w0 , b, c, x) − N (b, c, x)]
c

ρE(w, b, c, x) = max w + δ(c, x) · [N (b, c, x) − E(w, b, c, x)] .


c

8

(9)
(10)

We group the total derivative of N in Equation (9) with respect to b, into four effects:

dN
=
db

=τ
∂N
∂b
|{z}

z}|{

Mechanical
Effect

Net Out with
=z1}|−{ τ
= 0 By Envelope Theorem
Control Group
}|
{
z
z
}|
{
∂N dw0
∗
∗
∇
N
(b,
c
,
x)
·
∇
c
+
+
+
∇
N
·
∇
x
,
c
b
x
b
0
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
| ∂w {z db}
Feedback from
Wage Response

Micro Re-Optimization

(11)

Market Adjustment

where ∇a f (a, b) denotes the gradient of f () over the subset of arguments given by vector a.
The first two terms are exactly the mechanical and feedback effects from the basic model.
Envelope Theorem: the Irrelevance of Micro Reoptimization The third term, capturing reoptimization of the agent’s choices c in response to the shift in b, can be ignored by appeal
to the envelope theorem, as in the neighborhood around the original optimum ∇c N (b, c∗ , x)= 0,
where ∇c N (b, c∗ , x)∇b c∗ = 0.7 This result permits us to disregard rich responses in choice
variables, and should carry over to unmodeled extensions with job search effort, reservation
wages, liquidity effects, take-up and program substitution, or skill loss.
Netting out Market-Level Effects with a Control Group The fourth term accounts
for shifts in factors x that the individual agent takes as given, e.g., shifts in job finding rate
f due to labor demand or labor force participation shifts, or crowd-out of substitute transfer
programs entering z. We net out such effects with a control group. Consider treatment and
control groups T and C in the same market m(T ) = m(C), for whom dbT > 0 and dbC = 0. For
a given individual i in market m(i) and group g(i), we split up xi = (µm(i) , ιi ) into market-level
variables µm , and worker/type-specific factors ιi perhaps differing between T and C.
Control group C is exposed to dbT only through market-level effects and own-wage spillovers.
Our difference-in-differences strategy nets out market-level effects:
∂N
dN g
∂N dw0 g
=
+
+ ∇ι N · ∇b ιg + ∇µ N · ∇b µm
T
dbT
∂b
∂w0 db
 


dN T
dN C
∂N
∂N  dw0 T
dw0 C  
⇒
+ ∇ι N · ∇b ιT − ∇ι N · ∇b ιC .
−
=
+
·
−
|
{z
}
dbT
dbT
∂b
∂w0
dbT
dbT

(12)
(13)

Assume =0

We cannot evaluate the overall effect of potential b-sensitive ι, and thus must ignore them going
forward. Examples are b-dependent transfers (e.g., z(b) = b + x(b)), statistical discrimination in
hiring by mere treatment status, social stigma, or credit-worthiness changing with benefit level.
7

Moreover, this benchmark underestimates the effect of non-small b increases (the direction of our reforms)
on N (as permitting reoptimization weakly increases N ), implying a conservative lower bound for dw
db .

9

Difference-in-Differences Sensitivity Rearranging Equation (13) yields a difference-indifferences version of the wage-benefit sensitivity – which we will empirically estimate – that
exactly mirrors the simple model in Equation (6), which held fixed non-wage variables:8


#

(1 − φ)τ
dwT
dwC
dw0T
dw0C 
τ + (1 − τ )
=
.
−
=
(1
−
φ)
−
T
T
T
T
db
db
db
db
1 − (1 − φ)(1 − τ )
"

(14)

Imperfect Labor Market Overlap We will assess consequences of potential imperfect labor
market overlap between the groups in four ways.9 First, our empirical analysis in Section 4
starts by plotting raw data of wage growth for a continuum of worker groups sorted by income,
permitting visual inspection of treatment and control observations around the cutoff. Second, in
our regression framework, we add year- and group-specific fixed effects, and in one specification
even firm-by-year fixed effects capturing difference-in-differences between treated and control
colleagues in the same firm. Third, while our reforms are income-specific, in Appendix J
we provide an additional difference-in-differences design that exploits sharp segmentation of
treatment and control groups by date of birth, plausibly close substitutes in the same markets.
Fourth, in Appendix Section E.1, we show that even if markets were perfectly segmented, the
market-level wage-benefit sensitivity is similarly sized in calibrated equilibrium (DMP) models
with Nash bargaining – with similar mathematical structure as the micro sensitivity.10
2.2.2

Nonemployment Without UI

Our benchmark Nash bargaining model assumes infinite UI benefit duration and universal,
immediate take-up, such that b adds into z(b) for all individuals. In Austria, however, benefit
duration is finite (see Section 3), while take-up is high but not universal (due to the waiting
period for quitters and endogenous take-up decisions). In Appendix D, we derive the wagebenefit sensitivity in a three-state model that additionally features non-UI nonemployment (the
nonemployed start out with or without UI receipt, then transition back and forth) – capturing
concisely a variety of such otherwise hard-to-jointly-model-and-quantify detailed mechanisms.
8

Here, we use ∂(ρN )/∂b = τ and ∂(ρN )/∂w0 = 1 − τ from Equation (3), dw/db = (1 − φ) · d(ρN )/db from
Equation (5), and dw0g /dbT = dwg /dbT , implied by Nash bargaining in subsequent jobs.
9
We also have evaluated the implicit assumption that the predicted wage effect remains within the firm’s
post-reform reservation wage, i.e. has sufficiently large initial firm surplus. Away from the most basic DMP
setting, we have found that incorporating firing or hiring costs and specific human capital suffices to accommodate
the predicted wage effects.
10
The DMP equilibrium expression for the wage-benefit sensitivity we derive in Appendix Section E.1 is:
(1−φ)u
dwDMP
≈ η 1−(1−φ)(1−u)−(1−η)u
≈ 0.32, where u ≈ 0.07 now denotes the market-level unemployment rate (again
db
here approximating ρ = 0) and η ≈ 0.72 (e.g., Shimer, 2005) is a DMP matching function parameter. Note
that the u here need not coincide with the τ (or the τ U we provide in the extended model with nonemployment
without UI receipt), as the rate here is cross-sectional rather than tracking a worker after a separation (and,
respectively, as some of that non-UI nonemployment state is spent out of the labor force while the model at hand
only considers those workers actively searching). For u = 0.05 or η = 0.5, the sensitivity would be 0.25.

10

The expected nonemployment value with this second nonemployment state mirrors the twostate baseline model, with ρN = τ U z U (b) + τ O z O + (1 − τ U − τ O )w0 , where τ U is the share of time
U
on UI, and dzdb(b) = 1. Now however, not all non-UI time 1 − τ U is spent in reemployment (where
> 0), but fraction τ O of post-separation time occurs in a
the payoff (wage) is UI-sensitive: 1 > dw
db
O
state with a UI-insensitive nonemployment payoff dzdb = 0. Hence, this extension clarifies that, for
0
0
a given τ U , such features attenuate the feedback effect dw
in dw
= τ U ·1+τ O ·0+(1−τ U −τ O )· dw
.
db
db
db
This feature is thus a potentially powerful force, as the feedback accounts for 0.39/0.48=81.25%
of the two-state sensitivity of 0.48 ≈ (1 − 0.1) · (0.1 + 0.9 · 0.48) ≈ 0.09 + 0.39.
This formulation yields an intuitive variant of the familiar two-state sensitivity:
dw
(1 − φ)τ U
=
.
db
1 − (1 − φ)(1 − (τ U + τ O ))

(15)

To assess the attenuation of the feedback effect through non-UI nonemployment, Table 1 presents
estimates for τ O (i.e. we additionally measure nonemployment states without UI-sensitive
payoffs, and predict this value from actual separators onto our regression sample, also detailed in
Appendix Section C). Most time post-separation is spent reemployed, and only fraction τ O = 0.21
is spent in non-UI nonemployment, such that the fraction of time reemployed τ E = 1 − τ U − τ O
is not much far from our baseline (two-state) assumption τ E = 1 − τ U . Of course, our measure
of τ U remains the same. The three-state model therefore preserves a high (though attenuated)
wage-benefit sensitivity of 0.24. Since in both benchmarks we still exclude other factors that
would push up the sensitivity (e.g., discounting, the fact that Austrian UIBs are not taxed,...),
going forward we refer to 0.24-0.48 as the range of predicted wage-benefit sensitivities, and use
the sensitivity from the simpler two-state model when including theoretical benchmarks for
predicted wage growth in the empirical figures.
2.2.3

Further Robustness and Extensions

Appendix Section E.1 contains additional robustness checks, including specific models of finite
benefit duration, limited take-up, wage stickiness, liquidity constraints/myopia, treatment and
control groups in segmented markets with DMP equilibrium effects, and on the job search and
endogenous separations, individual households with risk aversion, and multi-worker firms.

2.3

Alternative Wage Setting Models

We briefly discuss wage sensitivities to nonemployment values in alternative wage setting models.
Sequential Auctions In sequential auction models with on-the-job search and employer
competition, wages are often still set by Nash bargaining (Cahuc et al., 2006). Unemployed
workers initially use nonemployment as their outside option. Yet, while on the job, workers
11

receive outside job offers that may dominate and replace the nonemployment outside option, such
that dΩi /dNi = 0, leaving wages insulated from shifts in N and b.11 Yet, for workers without
such offers, unemployment remains the outside option, and their wages should still exhibit the
large sensitivity to benefit increases from standard Nash.12
Credible Bargaining Hall and Milgrom (2008) analyze wage setting by alternating offer
bargaining in which threat points are to extend bargaining – rather than separating as in the
Nash model, which we formally study in Appendix Section E.3. Outside options only become
relevant in exogenous break-downs of bargaining – limiting their influence.13 Moreover, the wage
can simultaneously exhibit outside-option insensitivity and empirically small productivity effects.
Wage Posting Survey evidence from US workers (Hall and Krueger, 2012) and German
employers (Brenzel et al., 2014) suggests about equal relevance for bargaining and wage posting.
Models of the latter (e.g., Albrecht and Axell, 1984; Burdett and Mortensen, 1998) can exhibit
large wage-benefit sensitivities as well, albeit through very different mechanisms, and are more
difficult to characterize and calibrate (in particular along a transition). Here, firms post jobs
with predetermined wages. Workers accept jobs that dominate their outside option defined
by reservation wages: staying put at the current wage if employed, and nonemployment if
unemployed. Due to random search, firms set wages taking into account the entire distribution
of outside options. The nonemployment reservation wage R given by the nonemployment value
E(w = R) = N , thus forms the cornerstone – the lower bound w – of firms’ equilibrium wage
policy distribution.14 Thus, b-induced shifts in R trigger one-for-one responses at the low end
of the wage distribution. But they also entail ripple effects through the entire equilibrium
wage policy distribution. These effects and hence the implied wage sensitivities can be small
in the knife-edge case of perfect homogeneity (Burdett and Mortensen, 1998). Yet, away from
perfect homogeneity, as with heterogeneity in firm productivity, not only do the least productive
11

Mortensen and Nagypal (2007), Fujita and Ramey (2012), Mercan and Schoefer (forthcoming) feature
on-the-job search with the nonemployment outside option. Beaudry et al. (2012), Caldwell and Danieli (2018),
Caldwell and Harmon (2018), and Conlon et al. (2018) find evidence consistent with job offers raising wages.
12
These workers’ wage is pinned down by: E(w) = (1 − φ) · N (bi ) + φ · (E(w) + J(xf , w)), where xf is the matchor firm-specific productivity. An employed worker having received outside offer xf 0 dominating N yet dominated
by the current job (E(w) + J(xf , w) − U (b) > W (w) + J(xf 0 , w) − U (b) > U (b)) renegotiates the current wage
with that external job offer as the outside option: E(w) = (1 − φ) · [E(w) − E(wf 0 )] + φ · (E(w) + J(xf , w)).
13
Consider the firm’s optimal strategy: to offer the worker her reservation wage w, given by indifference between
accepting and rejecting with her optimal counteroffer – equal to the firm’s reservation wage w (with discount
w+βδN
w+βδN
factor β, exogenous break-down probability s, and firm’s cost of delay γ): 1−β(1−δ) = z + (1 − s)β 1−β(1−δ)
+ sβN .
(1−β(1−δ))z+(1−s)β [(1−β(1−δ))γ+p(1−β(1−s))]
The firm’s offer w =
+ β(s−δ)×(1−β)N
is insensitive to N if s = δ.
2
2
1−β 2 (1−s)2
R w1−β (1−s)
14
The McCall (1970) reservation wage is R = b + (λU − λE ) R (w − R)f (w)dw , and so dR
db = [1 + (λU −
Rw
Rw
df (w)
−1
λE ) R f (w)dw − (λU − λE ) R (w − R) dR dw] , where λE ((λU ) is the job offer arrival rate for the employed
(unemployed) workers. A useful benchmark is λE = λU , for which dR/db = 1, mechanically shifting the
nonemployment payoff. Away from λE = λU , R responses also affect the opportunity cost of continuing search by
accepting a job, as well as through equilibrium adjustments in F (w), feeding back into the opportunity cost.

12

firms (who pay R) adjust wages, but cascading effects can raise even the highest wages nearly
one-to-one.15 Relatedly, we expect similar rippling effects (across submarkets) with directed
search (Wright et al., 2017).
Some wage posting models also preclude firms from differentiating wages between treated
and control workers (as in, e.g., Bontemps et al., 1999; Vuuren et al., 2000; Saez et al., 2019),
motivating our additional design relating firm-level average wages to average treatment.

3

Institutional Context, Reforms, and Data

We review Austrian wage setting institutions, the UI system, our four reforms, and the data.
Wage Setting in Austria About 95% of Austrian workers are covered by a central bargaining
agreement (CBA) negotiated between unions and employer associations, typically at the industryby-occupation level. Besides working hours and conditions, CBAs also regulate wage floors
(Bönisch, 2008)– such that in practice, additional negotiations at the establishment level as well
as bilaterally regularly lead to substantially higher wages.16 Even in the early 1980s, actually
paid average wages exceeded CBA wage floors by 34% (Leoni and Pollan, 2011), suggesting
substantial scope for negotiations at the firm or worker level. At a macroeconomic level, the
flexible wage setting institutions are mirrored in high levels of aggregate real and nominal wage
flexibility (Hofer et al., 2001; Dickens et al., 2007), although our reforms entail benefit and
hence potential wage increases. We also document direct evidence consistent with firm-specific
rent-sharing and thus wage deviations in Austria even when controlling for industry-by-year and
firm effects.17 Accordingly, Austria has large wage dispersion between firms, even within the
same industry (Borovičková and Shimer, 2017). As robustness checks, we additionally study
15

In the model of homogeneity, wage policies are an equilibrium of mixed (iso-expected-profit) strategies (with
q

2
p̃−w
δ
δ
E
no mass points), characterized by w = R, w = [1− δ+λ
]p̃+( δ+λ
)2 R, and F (w) = ( δ+λ
λE )(1−
p̃−R ). While
E
E
dw
the bottom wage exhibits the one-to-one effect, the top wage sensitivity is dR
= ( λEδ+δ )2 , i.e. the unemployment
rate, squared, for λE = λU . In the model with heterogeneity, firms differ in productivity p ∈ [p, p]. Type p’s
R p +δ(1−Γ(p))
δ
wage policy w(p) is (see Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2006): w(p) = p − R λλEE +δ(1−Γ(x))
dx ⇒ dw(p)
dR = 1 − λE +δ Γ(p),
where Γ(p) = F (w(p)) is the (offer-weighted) CDF, which depends on recruitment costs and is not generally
characterized in closed form. The lower bound of the integral (Γ(p) = F (w(p)) = 0) makes clear that the least
productive active firm pays R and earns zero profit. To see the ripple effects, consider the top wage (Γ(p) = 1),
which responds the least. Ballparking to λE = λU , implies that λEδ+δ = λUδ+δ is the unemployment rate. Then,
the lowest wage-UIB sensitivity (in the top) is one minus the unemployment rate. In the full model, Γ(p) adjusts
due to worker reallocation and p-specific recruitment responses. So unless λE = λU , feedback effects between
Γ(p) and R emerge, amplifying or attenuating the effects.
16
For example, comparative industrial relations work concludes that “in practice local works councils often
negotiate supplementary wage increase” (OECD, 1994, p. 176).
17
We use firm panel data from Bureau van Dijk from 2004 to 2016 and regress wages per employee on
value-added per employee, controlling for firm and industry-by-year effects, estimating a level-on-level coefficient
of 0.046 (SE 0.009). See Figure 2 for a comparison to coefficients from other settings.

13

wage responses to firm- or industry-by-occupation level treatment definitions, and we zoom in
on firms with particularly flexible wage policies or in industries with high growth rates.
Unemployment Insurance in Austria The Austrian UI system assigns benefit levels to
granular reference wages. Appendix L plots these schedules by year, from 1976 to 2003, detailed
in Section 4.1. The replacement rate was 41% at the beginning of our sample period, and
benefits start at a minimum level and are capped. By 2001, the net replacement rate, (1−τbii )wi ,
had increased to 55%. Before 2001, the benefit schedule was based on gross income. UIBs are
neither taxed nor means-tested, but UI recipients are required to search for jobs suitable to their
qualifications.18
Until 1989, benefit duration was only experience-dependent, with 12 (20, 30) weeks for
workers with 12 (52, 156) weeks of UI contributions in the last two (two, five) years. From 1989
on, workers with sufficient experience aged 40-49 (above 50) were eligible for 39 (52) weeks.19
The Austrian UI system is particularly suitable for our study. First, workers that unilaterally
quit are eligible for UI, ensuring that our UI variation shifts workers’ outside options.20 Second,
as a consequence of broad eligibility, relatively long PBD, and mandatory registration with
the UI agency (for continuity of health insurance coverage), most workers who separate will
take up UI. Appendix Table A.1 reports take-up rates after separations into nonemployment.
63.3% (66.2%) of nonemployment spells longer than 14 (28) days lead to take-up of UI. Third,
workers ineligible or exhausting UI can apply for means-tested unemployment assistance (UA or
Notstandshilfe), which track a given worker’s reform-induced UIB shifts nearly one-to-one.21 So
we will often denote by “UI” as encompassing both programs. Fourth, there is no experience
rating. UI is financed by a payroll tax split between the worker and firm.
Four Large Reforms to the UI Benefit Schedule Figure 3 plots the four reforms we study
as a function of nominal earnings (Panels (a)-(d)), and of contemporaneous earnings percentile
(Panel (e)). These four particularly large increases in benefit levels differentially affected different
segments of the earnings distribution. To cleanly test for pre-trends or anticipation effects, we
exclude reforms in 1978 and 1982 and several small maximum-level inflation adjustments as the
affected earnings regions had recently been exposed to other benefit reforms. In each panel of
18

Income-independent UIB add-ons (e.g., in 2018 EUR 29.50 per dependent) are orthogonal to our variation.
A program in place from 1988 to 1993 raised duration to 209 weeks for workers 50 or older, with 708 weeks
employment in the last 25 years, residing in certain regions (Winter-Ebmer, 1998; Lalive and Zweimüller, 2004).
20
By contrast, US quitters are de-jure ineligible for UI. Compared to most European countries, Austrian UI
features a very short wait period to claim UI benefits after a quit (four weeks). By contrast, the wait period is,
e.g., 12 weeks in Germany, 45 days in Sweden, and 90 days in Hungary and Finland. Quitters in many other
European countries such as the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain are fully ineligible for UI benefits. See Venn
(2012) for an overview.
21
Precisely, UABi = min{0.92UIBi , max{0, 0.95UIBi − Spousal Earningsi + Dependent Allowancesi }}. Due
to the spousal earnings means test, not all workers are eligible for UA. For 1990, Lalive et al. (2006) report
median UA at 70% of median UIB. Card et al. (2007) gauge average 2004 UA at 38% of UI for a typical job loser.
19

14

Figure 3, we plot the new schedule and the pre-reform schedule. Benefits and earnings are in
nominal Austrian shillings (ATS). We convert EUR into ATS starting 1999 at rate 1 to 13.76.
The timing and policy process is summarized in Appendix G.5. Three reforms were parts of
legislation passed in parliament; the 1985 reform followed a decree from the Ministry of Social
Affairs. The 2001 reform simplified the benefit schedule by switching from a gross to a net
earnings base.
Data Our primary dataset is the Austrian Social Security Database (ASSD) (Zweimüller et al.,
2009). The underlying spell data provide day-specific labor force status, and average earnings
per days worked by employer and calendar year (“wages”, detailed in Appendix Section G.1),
but no hours information. It covers all private (and non-tenured public) sector employees from
1972 onward, and for most of our period excludes the self-employed and farmers. Earnings are
censored at annual social security contribution caps (see Zweimüller et al., 2009).22 Across the
sample years of a given reform, we harmonize the cap at the lowest censored percentile. The
ASSD includes covariates such as gender, age, citizen status, and a white/blue collar indicator,
and establishment (“firm”) location and industry. We also draw on UI registry data (AMS) to
validate our prediction of actual benefits based on lagged earnings (Appendix Section G.4).

4

Estimating the Wage Effects of Four UIB Reforms

We estimate σ, a dollar-for-dollar sensitivity of wages to the nonemployment value, by comparing
reform-induced variation in UI benefits dbi,t with wage changes dwi,t = wi,t − wi,t−1 :
dwi,t = σ · dbi,t .

(16)

We first plot raw data of wage against benefit changes by workers, and then implement a
difference-in-differences regression analysis. We estimate a wage effect of $0.00 to a $1.00 benefit
increase, with confidence intervals ruling out effects above $0.03 even after two years. This
insensitivity extends to new hires, and workers with high predicted time on UI.

4.1

Variable Construction and Samples

Wage Responses Our main outcome of interest is the change in average daily wages from
one year to the next, dwi,t where dwi,t = wi,t − wi,t−1 , whose construction we detail in Appendix
Section G.1. We will further normalize dwi,t by lagged wages wi,t−1 , so that we study percent
wage growth (but will similarly normalize benefit changes db, so that we will estimate the
22

The statutory caps reported there are for 12 months of earnings. Our earnings data also capture two bonus
payments entering the UIB calculation (see Appendix G.2 for a details). We have confirmed that our reforms did
not affect the probability of censored t + 1 earnings, so censoring is unlikely to mask positive wage effects.

15

level-on-level sensitivity rather than an elasticity). For any job spell (lasting at most one calendar
year), we divide total earnings by spell length (days). To account for job switching, we assign
jobs by calendar month. Within a month, we prioritize the job with the longest spell in that
year. Lastly, we calculate annual averages of these monthly values (excluding months without
earnings) to obtain our year-t wage measure.
Reform-Induced UI Benefit Level Changes Our variation in the nonemployment option
arises from reform-induced shifts in UI benefit levels. Formally, a worker i with UI-relevant
attributes xi,t receives benefits bt (xi,t ) in year-t benefit schedule bt (.). Our variation is the
difference between this benefit level and the worker’s counterfactual benefit absent the reform,
i.e. under t − 1 schedule bt−1 (xi,t ). In practice, UI benefit levels are a function of pre-separation
reference wages, so that assignment variable xi,t = w̃i,t equals reference wage w̃i,t applicable in
year t. We ignore additional factors such as the number of dependents, which largely entail lump
sums orthogonal to our benefit variation. Our reform-induced variation in benefits is:
dbi,t (w̃i,t ) = bt (w̃i,t ) − bt−1 (w̃i,t ).

(17)

Hence, dbi,t captures benefit variation solely due to shifts in the benefit schedule. The variation
is zero if the UI schedule remains unchanged between t − 1 and t. Such years will form our
placebo years. Reform years feature schedule changes for some workers i ∈ T , our treatment
group. dbi,t is zero for workers forming our control group C.23 Importantly, UI reference wages
are lagged wages - hence predetermined and unaffected by the reforms.
Reference Wages w̃i,t We now describe our construction of reference wages and implied UIBs
(with additional details in Appendix Section G.3). The earnings concept determining UIBs
underwent slight changes over the decades spanned by our four reforms (administrative details
in Appendix Section G.2). For the 2001 reform, the reference wage determining UIBs in year t
t≥1996
is the wage from the previous calendar year t − 1, a rule in place since 1996: w̃i,t
= wi,t−1 .24
Hence, we directly assign the benefit variation dbi,t = bt (wt−1 ) − bt−1 (wt−1 ) by a worker’s lagged
wage wi,t−1 . Before 1996, UIBs were calculated based on the wage in the last full month before
23

See Appendix Section I.1 for details on the sample construction. We construct the treatment group by
selecting earnings percentiles that experienced a sizeable increase in their replacement rates due to the reform.
We construct the control group by picking the same number of earnings percentiles adjacent to the treated
earnings range. The nominal earnings ranges for the treatment (T) and control (C) regions for the four reforms
in the baseline year are presented in Figure 3. For the 1976 and 1989 reforms, we exclude the lowest treated
percentile because earnings growth is quite volatile for these individuals. For the 1985 reform, we exclude data
three percentiles below the social security earnings cap (above which earnings are censored, so we could not
accurately measure wage effects for these individuals). Our findings remained quantitatively unchanged with
lower values for this upper limit. For the 1985 reform, we also include 11 earnings percentiles (the 50th through
60th) between the treatment and control regions that had been slightly treated in prior years but also check
robustness of our findings to excluding them.
24
More precisely, UIBs for claims beginning before (after) June 30 of year t depend on t − 2 (t − 1) income.

16

unemployment (before 1988) or a moving average of wages during employment in the last six
months (1988 to 1996). Because of wage growth, because we measure annual but not monthly
wages, and because wages are potentially affected by the reform, we predict year-t nominal wage
levels based on year-t − 1 wages, ŵi,t = ḡt,t−1 · wi,t−1 , by inflating lagged earnings with average
nominal wage growth in our sample, ḡt,t−1 , between t − 1 and t (whereby our strategy builds on
simulated instruments as in Cutler and Gruber, 1996; Gruber and Saez, 2002; Kopczuk, 2005;
Kleven and Schultz, 2014; Weber, 2014). In Appendix G.4, we validate that this procedure
almost perfectly predicts wages and implied benefit levels across most of the earnings distribution.
There, we also show graphically and in a regression (based on a job loser subsample using the
information on actually paid benefits from the AMS data) that actual received UIBs tightly
track our predicted levels, finding coefficients very close to one.
Sample Restrictions and Summary Statistics We restrict the sample to workers aged
25-54 employed in each of the 12 months of the base year (reform and placebo).25 For each
reform, we include treatment earnings regions and adjacent, equally sized control earnings regions.
Table 2 provides summary statistics for the treatment and control workers, by reform. This table
is not a balance check. Instead, our design relies on a conditional parallel trends assumption
discussed in Section 4.3. We also construct pre-reform placebo cross sections occupying the
reform-year earnings percentiles.

4.2

Non-Parametric Graphical Analysis

We start with a non-parametric analysis of each reform to illustrate how our variation identifies
wage-benefit sensitivities, which we normalize, going forward, by the worker’s lagged wage wi,t−1 :
dbi,t
dwi,t
=σ·
.
wi,t−1
wi,t−1

(18)

We plot raw data on wage growth of workers sorted by UI reference wages and hence UIB
changes.
2001: Large Benefit Increase for Lower Earners Figure 4(a) shows the results for the
2001 reform, which we describe in particular detail. The x-axis indicates gross earnings in 2000,
the pre-reform base year. These reference wages determine 2001 benefits.26 Here, we collapse
25

Individuals with fewer than 52 weeks of experience in the past two years would be eligible for at most 12
weeks of UI benefits. We found similar results with a laxer restriction of employment in December of the base
year. The heterogeneity analysis by recent unemployment relaxes this restriction.
26
The benefit schedule b2001 (.) is a function of net earnings while b2000 (.) is a function of gross earnings, as with
all schedules through 2000. We use an income tax calculator to translate gross earnings (which our administrative
data provide) into net earnings to compute b2001 (.). For visual consistency, we plot the 2001 reform in terms of
gross earnings. We thank David Card and Andrea Weber for sharing the tax calculator.

17

the data into earnings percentiles.
The solid green line indicates the reform-induced benefit change for individuals at a given
level of base year wages. The 2001 reform affected UI benefits for workers with base-year earnings
below ATS 20,500 (32nd percentile of the earnings distribution).
The red lines with solid and hollow circles plot wage effects by base-year earnings at the oneand two-year horizon. For each percentile, we calculate the difference between wage growth from
2000 to 2001, when the reform was in place, and pre-reform wage growth from 1999 to 2000.
(Analogously, two-year effects difference 2000-2 and 1998-2000 wage growth.) We normalize the
wage effects to zero for the lowest percentile not receiving a benefit increase in 2001. There is no
excess wage growth for workers treated with higher benefits, neither right below nor away from
the threshold, neither at the one- nor the two-year horizon.
To provide a visual benchmark, we also plot the wage growth predicted by our calibrated
bargaining framework in Section 2, as the dashed orange line. That is, we multiply benefit
change with the calibrated wage-benefit sensitivity of 0.48. Our analysis of the 2001 reform thus
clearly rejects this benchmark.
Our analysis rests on the identification assumption that the average wage growth among
groups treated by a benefit reform compared to the control group, whose benefits remained
unchanged, would have followed parallel trends absent the reform. We shed light on this
assumption in two ways. First, the flat wage effects across the control percentiles provide support
for the identification assumption. A second test, reported in Appendix Figure A.1, lags both
the reform period and the pre-period by two years, and checks whether the earnings percentiles
affected by the 2001 reform experienced higher or lower excess wage growth in periods before
2000. Such different trends could then have masked a non-zero treatment effect during the 2001
reform. Appendix Figure A.1 shows no such effects for a placebo reform in 1999 (thus comparing
1999-2000 to 1998-9 wage growth) for the one-year earnings changes. At the two-year horizon,
there is even some evidence of a positive pre-trend. While such a pre-trend would actually
bias our results upward, it motivates our regression-based difference-in-differences analysis in
Section 4.3, where we add time-varying industry/occupation and firm-by-year fixed effects as well
as parametric earnings controls to net out such potential confounders. There, we also formally
test for, and do not find, pre-trends across all of the reforms.
1989: Increase in Benefits for Low Earners Figure 4(b) presents the analysis of the 1989
reform, which increased benefits for workers with base-year earnings below ATS 12,600 by up to
eight percentage points. The graph suggests moderate, positive average wage effects which even
at the two-year horizon remain much smaller than the benchmark prediction.27
27

For 1989 as for the other two reforms before 1995, we additionally confirm that the reform affected actual
benefit levels by base-year earnings. In Appendix Figure A.2, the assignment variable—based on inflated lagged
earnings—is again plotted with the green line and the actual benefit level with the red line, for the one-year and

18

1985: Increase in Benefit Maximum Figure 4(c) plots the effects of the 1985 reform, which
raised the maximum benefit level by 29% (ca. 7,600 ATS to 9,800 ATS) for higher earners. We
find no evidence for wage increases among these workers.
1976: Increase for Low Earners The 1976 reform, analyzed in Figure 4(d), raised benefits
for workers with earnings below 4,100 ATS. If anything, their wages differentially decrease.
The Average Sensitivity of Wages to UI Benefits Figure 5 is a scatter plot of excess
wage growth against UIB change by earnings percentile across all four reforms (colors/symbols
differentiate the reforms). Estimating the wage-benefit sensitivity in a linear regression reveals
point estimates of σ̂ = −0.005 (SE 0.008) at the one-year horizon and of σ̂ = 0.028 (SE 0.018)
at the two-year horizon. At both horizons, the confidence interval of the slope includes zero and
clearly excludes the predicted benchmarks slopes of 0.24 to 0.48 (depicted).

4.3

Difference-in-Differences Design

We next investigate the regression analogue of the non-parametric analysis, to formally test for
pre-trends (e.g., due to anticipation effects) and to include a rich set of controls. The estimated
wage-benefit sensitivities range from negative 3 to positive 0.7 cents on the dollar after one and
two years. The confidence intervals for our preferred specifications reject sensitivities above 3
cents on the dollar.
4.3.1

Econometric Framework

Our difference-in-differences design regresses wage changes, dwi,r,t = wi,r,t − wi,r,t−1 , on reforminduced – actual and placebo – benefit changes, dbi,r,t , both normalized by lagged wages:
−1
X
dwi,r,t
dbi,r,t (w̃i,r,t )
dbi,r,t (w̃i,r,t )
=σ0 · 1(t=r) ×
+
σe · 1(t=r+e) ×
wi,r,t−1
wi,r,t−1
wi,r,t−1
e=−L

!

!

(19)

0
+ τr,Pt−1 + θr,t−1 + γr,t ln wi,r,t−1 + Xi,r,t−1
φr,t−1 + i,r,t .

The coefficient of interest is σ0 , capturing the effect of the reform-induced benefit changes on
wages. r denotes specific reforms (as we let control variables vary between reforms). We control
for earnings percentile fixed effects, τr,Pt−1 , and year effects, θr,t−1 , as well as additional control
variables, in particular time-varying controls for lagged earnings, ln wi,r,t−1 .28 As we include
two-year horizons. Realized benefit changes closely track our reform-induced variation at the one-year horizon,
validating our earnings inflation prediction and the benefit imputation. Another reform shifted the schedule in
1990, broadly for the control and treatment groups, explaining the shifted line for that year. Our two-year results
are robust to excluding 1989. Moreover, in our regression specifications, we will only build on one-year benefit
variation as a treatment variable even when we measure longer-term wage outcomes.
28
We also include an eligibility control for the regional PDB extension described in Footnote 19.

19

earnings percentile fixed effects, we set σ−1 to zero. In addition to the one-year horizon, we also
conduct the analysis using two-year wage outcomes (then normalizing σ−2 to zero and omit σ−1 ).
The remaining variation in dbi,r,t that identifies the wage-benefit sensitivity σ0 compares wage
growth across earnings percentiles with and without reform-induced benefit changes in a year,
and within a percentile over time, comparing actual to placebo reforms. We again normalize
changes in wages and benefits by i’s lagged wage.
Percentile fixed effects τr,Pt−1 absorb permanent wage growth differentials across percentiles,
e.g., due to mean reversion. They are reform-specific, i.e. common between reform and placebo
years for a given reform, but separate between reforms. Calendar year effects, θr,t−1 , absorb
aggregate wage growth shifts. Year-specific parametric earnings controls, ln(wi,r,t−1 ), account
for time-varying shocks to different parts of the earnings distribution. We then incrementally
add covariates Xi,r,t−1 with year-specific coefficients to absorb other time-varying shocks. First,
we add demographics (sex, cubic polynomials of experience, tenure, and age). The second set
contains industry-by-occupation-by-year fixed effects γo(i,t−1),k(f (i,t−1)),t−1 (four-digit industry by
white/blue collar occupation). Third, in our most fine-grained specification, firm-by-year effects
ψf (i,t−1),t−1 isolate variation between workers in the same firm.
The core identification assumption of our difference-in-differences design requires conditional
parallel trends: conditional on the controls, in particular percentile and year effects and timevarying parametric earnings controls, the average wage growth among groups treated by a benefit
reform compared to those whose benefits remained unchanged would have followed parallel trends
absent the reform. A potential violation of our identification assumption would occur if treated
groups experienced an additional wage growth shock contemporaneous with the reform.29 We
test the parallel trends assumption in the pre-period by assigning placebo reforms: in pre-reform
years, e < 0, we assign the average db/w of workers in a given earnings percentile in the actual
reform year to workers in that percentile in e < 0. A violation of the parallel trends assumption
in the pre-period would occur if the placebo reforms were associated with excess wage growth as
captured by σe 6= 0 for e < 0 (as we include percentile fixed effects).
We estimate specification (19) using the procedure in Correia (2017) and stack data for all
reforms r ∈ {1976, 1985, 1989, 2001}. We restrict the earnings ranges for each reform to the
“treatment” and “control” percentile groups of Section 4.2. For each reform, we add L = 3
pre-period years (the maximal amount to still study the 1976 reform, since our data start in
1972).30 We report standard errors based on two-way clustering at the individual and the earnings
percentile level (the level of our treatment variation). In Appendix Figure A.6, we confirm that
other clustering levels (firm, percentile, individual, and reform-specific percentiles) lead to similar
29

Since we include time-varying parametric controls for lagged earnings, ln wi,r,t−1 , these types of shocks to
different parts of the earnings distribution would have to be quite sharply delineated.
30
We have also assessed robustness to longer pre-periods (L = 5) while dropping that earliest reform in
unreported results.

20

confidence intervals. We winsorize wage growth at the 1st/99th percentile; Appendix Figure A.7
confirms robustness to no winsorization as well as at the 5th/95th percentiles.
4.3.2

Visual Regression Results

To provide a bridge between Figure 5 and our difference-in-differences specification (19), we plot
wage growth against reform-induced benefit changes in binned scatter plots and incrementally
add year effects, earnings percentile effects, and year-specific earnings controls in Figure 6. The
figure plots the slope, i.e. coefficient σ0 in Equation (19), of a binned scatter plot of residualized
earnings changes and benefit changes in the treatment year.31 The panels also plot, in orange,
the predicted relationship from our calibrated Nash bargaining model. Panel A only includes
year fixed effects as controls. Panel B adds earnings percentile fixed effects and Panel C adds a
year-specific log-earnings control.
Across all three specifications, we find no evidence of positive effects of benefits on earnings.
To assess our identifying assumptions, we present similar binned scatter plots in the e = −3 and
e = −2 placebo years in Appendix Figure A.5. For e = −2, we find no evidence for placebo effects
across specifications. For e = −3, we find some pre-trends or significant placebo estimates unless
we include log earnings controls as is customary in the simulated instruments literature. The
visual analysis also allows us to assess the validity of the conditional parallel trends assumption.
At shorter horizons, the parallel trends assumption holds without additional controls. At longer
horizons, it holds conditional on time-varying parametric controls for lagged earnings.
4.3.3

Full Regression Results

Mirroring the non-parametric analysis, the difference-in-differences analysis reveals that wages
are insensitive to benefit changes. The point estimate for the wage-benefit sensitivity is σ̂ = 0.00
(SE 0.013) after one year and σ̂ = −0.027 (SE 0.026) after two years in our preferred specifications
with firm-by-year fixed effects. Confidence intervals thus let us rule out wage increases above
$0.03 for a $1.00 increase in UIBs both at the one- and two-year horizon.
One-Year Effects Panel A in Table 3 presents one-year wage effects, i.e. estimates of σe . The
regressor of interest is σ0 , capturing the wage growth associated with reform-induced benefit
changes. Column (1) includes the same controls as in Figure 6(c), and the subsequent columns
progressively add further controls. We have normalized σ−1 to zero and assess pre-trends with
σ−3 and σ−2 . Across all six specifications, we cannot reject that both pre-period estimates are
jointly equal to zero, which supports our identification assumption.
31

We residualize the independent and dependent variables in the entire sample of reform and placebo years, so
that the best fit lines match the coefficients in Table 3.

21

Across columns, effects are quantitatively similar, centered at zero. Column (1), without
control variables, estimates σ̂0 = −0.004 (SE 0.016), ruling out effects above 0.03. Column (2)
finds a similar estimate when adding Mincerian controls. Our estimates are even smaller at
-0.014 and -0.019 in columns (3) and (4), with industry-occupation-year fixed effects and then
all controls jointly, while standard errors remain unchanged.
Two-Year Effects Panel B in Table 3 reports the analogous longer-run effects of the reforms,
at the two-year horizon. Column (4), with all controls, estimates σ̂ = −0.022 (SE 0.03). Similar
estimates emerge with fewer controls in columns (1)–(3), ranging between -0.027 and 0.007. The
pre-period effects of placebo reforms remain statistically insignificant.
Intrafirm Variation Next we assess whether changes in the nonemployment outside option
between workers within the same firm lead to wage changes, by including firm-by-year fixed
effects in columns (5) and (6). At the one-year horizon (Panel A in Table 3), the within-firm
variation also leads to zero effects, even more precisely estimated than those in columns (1)-(4).
Similarly, at the two-year horizon (Panel B in Table 3), the effects remain small and insignificant.
Parametric Earnings Controls Consistent with the simulated instruments literature (Kopczuk,
2005; Kleven and Schultz, 2014), our main specifications include time-varying controls for (log)
earnings. (As Figure 6 and Appendix Figure A.5 show, the parallel trends assumption holds
in the pre-period without conditioning on parametric earnings controls. At longer horizons, it
holds conditional on such controls.) We present variants of our main specification (column (4)
in Table 3) with alternative earnings controls in Appendix Figure A.8, namely log, linear, and
linear percentiles, which all yield very similar estimates around zero.
Validation Exercise To assess the extent to which reform-induced benefit changes, assigned
based on lagged earnings, shift benefits implied by realized earnings, we estimate a variant
t−1 (wi,t )
of 19 with reform-induced benefit changes implied by realized earnings bt (wi,tw)−b
as the
i,r,t−1
(w̃i,r,t )
dependent variable. The contemporaneous coefficient on dbi,r,t
could be close to zero if,
wi,r,t−1
hypothetically, an individual’s earnings were independently redrawn each year, because then
wage earnings in t = r − 1 would not predict earnings and thus benefits in t = r. We report
results and write out the formal regression model in Appendix Table A.2. The analysis reveals
a 0.807 (SE 0.013) coefficient at the one-year horizon and of 0.529 (SE 0.021) at the two-year
horizon, confirming that the reforms affected benefits in the treatment percentiles.32 The effects
32

Excluding the 2001 reform from this validation exercise (because the reform occurred at a time when benefits
were determined based on lagged years’ wages) yields quantitatively very similar results with a 0.762 (SE 0.013)
coefficient at the one-year horizon and of 0.500 (SE 0.025) at the two-year horizon. We also report instrumental
variable estimates in Appendix Table A.3, formally interpreting the validation exercise as a first stage relationship.
The IV specification leaves our conclusions quantitatively unchanged as standard errors increase only slightly.

22

are also stable when we add in more detailed controls, even firm-by-year effects. Moreover,
pre-period coefficients now test whether the same earners have systematically seen benefits
change due to schedule changes or wage growth. In line with our selection of reforms, these
placebo effects are an order of magnitude smaller than the reform effects (t = r).33
Transitory vs. Permanent Treatment Treatment status may be imperfectly persistent
due to idiosyncratic wage changes. To evaluate this dynamic, we estimate “donut hole” treatment
effects, whereby we drop individuals situated within varying bandwidths on both sides of the
treatment/control earnings cutoff, hence particularly prone to switching status in future years.
Coefficient estimates, reported in Appendix Figure A.9, indicate no evidence of increasing
treatment effects, even when dropping 25% of our sample, suggesting that transitory treatment
is unlikely to mask an underlying larger effect. This finding also suggests that potential limited
capacity of firms to differentiate wages by treatment status around the cutoffs (as in wage posting
models) may not drive the absence of wage effects. Finally, a subsample analysis in Section 5
will not find larger treatment effects for very stable earners, e.g., with a low predicted separation
rate.
Accounting for Non-Taxation of UIBs Austrian UIBs are not taxed. Our gross-wagebased estimates should imply even smaller sensitivities, which we confirm in Appendix Table A.6
(graphical analysis in Appendix Figure A.18). There, we replicate our main results from Table
3 but rescale the untaxed UIB shifts into gross UIB shifts (imputing an individual’s average
net-of-tax rate following a tax calculator detailed in Appendix K). As the tax imputations are
tentative, our main results use raw net (untaxed) UIBs, hence likely overestimating sensitivities.
Separation Effects To rule out selective attrition, we also report treatment effects on separations and sickness in Appendix H. Across specifications and outcomes, the benefit increases were
associated with quantitatively negligible and largely statistically insignificant effects.34

4.4

Wage Sensitivity by Post-Separation Time in Unemployment τ

As illustrated in Figure 1b, the baseline model’s sensitivity of N to b – and thus that of w to b –
increases in post-separation time on UI, τ , the weight on instantaneous payoff b.
Reporting results in Figure 7, we now estimate wage effects across worker subsamples sorted
into quantiles by their idiosyncratic predicted post-separation time on UI, τ̂i , which is the weight
the wage bargain puts on UIB b in the wage equation (6). The quantiles, sorted within each
33

Their very high precision renders the pre-reform one-year coefficients statistically significantly different from
zero. For the two-year validation, we cannot reject that the pre-period coefficients are jointly equal to zero.
34
By contrast, Jäger et al. (2018) document separation effects among workers from a reform that dramatically
raised potential benefit duration for older workers in Austria, perhaps used as a bridge into early retirement.

23

reform, start from deciles; to obtain additional dispersion, we further split the top and bottom
decile into two ventiles each, and then further split up the resulting very top/bottom ventiles into
two. We thereby study a total of 14 quantiles. On the x-axis, we plot the group-specific mean
predicted τ̂i . The y-axis reports two wage-benefit sensitivities. First, the yellow line (squares)
plots the quantile-specific model-predicted wage-benefit sensitivity based on Equation (6) and
φ = 0.1, inputting the quantile’s mean τ̂i . (A negative correlation between τi and φi would
steepen the gradient.) Second, the blue line (circles) traces out the empirical sensitivities, as
heterogeneous treatment effects from our main regression model (19) interacting reform-induced
UIB shifts with indicators for a worker’s τ̂i quantile.
Figure 7 reveals substantial variation in τ̂i – ranging from around 0.02 to nearly 0.20 –,
and thus in the model-predicted wage-benefit sensitivity – from around 0.15 to above 0.60. By
contrast, the empirical gradient of wage effects is flat at zero, just as much among workers
likely to experience long periods of UI – for whom the UIB increases should mechanically raise
nonemployment values by more – as among workers whose separations rarely entail UI receipt.

4.5

New Hires’ Wage Sensitivity

Perhaps wage stickiness among incumbent workers slows down wage adjustments even after
two years. We therefore estimate the treatment effects separately for job stayers and various
mover types, whose wages are more likely to reset flexibly. By studying wages of new hires, this
analysis also tests whether employer competition models (Cahuc et al., 2006) or contractual
models with insurance (Beaudry and DiNardo, 1991; Bertrand, 2004) may play a role in the
insensitivity of average (i.e. largely incumbent workers’) wages.
Panel A of Table 4 displays the one- and two-year treatment effects for job stayers, and
recalled workers and job switchers. We classify switchers by their first type of transition from
the original job in the base year. We use our daily spell data to consider only post-separation
wages rather than average annual earnings.35 We interact an indicator for each transition type
with the σe coefficients, the parametric year-specific earnings controls and the baseline earnings
percentile fixed effects. Across the three transition types, the effects are small and insignificant.
Despite the smaller subsamples, the confidence intervals exclude the 0.24-0.48 benchmark. Even
recalled workers – who return to the same firm after unemployment – do not appear to bargain
a higher wage when outside options improve.
We have also divided movers into “EE” movers, who directly move from one employer to
another, and “EUE” movers, who first undergo an unemployment spell with UI receipt (“EUE”).36
Of particular theoretical interest are EUE movers. First, these workers receive UI benefits, and
35

Recalled workers’ one-year earnings are hence pre- and post-separation calendar year averages.
To distinguish between EE, EUE, and ENE movers, we augment our monthly employment spell data with
daily spell data and define EUE (ENE) movers as employer-to-employer transitions with at least one day of
unemployment (nonemployment) between employment spells.
36

24

then rebargain with their next employer with UI on hand. Second, the wage responses of these
new hires from unemployment are allocative for aggregate employment in standard matching
models.37 Third, these workers should exhibit the standard, large sensitivity of wages to UI
shifts even in richer models with employer competition and external job offers as in Cahuc et al.
(2006), because these workers’ best outside option is still nonemployment.
Even the results for EUE movers, presented in Panel B of Table 4, do not reveal positive
effects. In fact, the point estimates are negative, but turn insignificant with controls specific to
transition type, and none of the upper confidence intervals includes the predicted value.38
Estimates for EE movers are in Table 4 Panel C. Confidence intervals again widen. Interestingly, this sample exhibits some positive effects at the one-year horizon, which however move to
zero once we interact controls by transition type, and fully return to zero with firm-by-year effects.
At the two-year horizon, estimates are very close to zero no matter the control specification,
perhaps suggesting that initial (one-year) post-transition earnings may have been noisier.
There are a few caveats to consider. First, worker transitions may be affected by the reforms,
and since we condition on an endogenous outcome, selection may show up as wage effects. Second,
for EUE movers, there are non-bargaining channels affecting re-employment wages, such as
reservation wages, skill depreciation, or employers’ statistical discrimination by nonemployment
duration. These potential confounds among EUE movers had in part motivated our strategy of
primarily studying on-the-job wage changes of incumbent workers in the first place.

5

The Missing Link Between Wages and Benefits

We now dissect the wage-benefit insensitivity along the following three-element chain:
dwi
=
dbi

dwi
dΩi
| {z }

Sensitivity of wages
to outside options

×

dΩi
dNi
| {z }

Sensitivity of outside option
to nonemployment value

×

dNi
dbi

(20)

| {z }

Sensitivity of nonemp. value
to UIB shifts

To assess the relative importance of these three factors for the insensitivity result, we conduct
a battery of heterogeneity analyses. In particular, for each dimension of heterogeneity, we
run our main specification (mirroring column (4) in Table 3) and include interactions between
37

Pissarides (2009) summarizes this paradigm. Richer models, as when firms face financial constraints, give
allocative consequences to incumbents’ wages too (e.g., under financial constraints as in Schoefer, 2015).
38
In unreported results, we have investigated robustness to alternative earnings controls (based on the check
of our main results in Appendix Figure A.8). Here, some point estimates for EUE movers were closer to zero.
Moreover, EUE and EE estimates were stable around zero when we drop very low (perhaps noisy) earners. We
have also tested for duration effects (consistently finding positive but insignificant effects), and conducted a
calibration exercise to assess whether the duration channel can explain the negative wage effect using estimates
of the elasticity of nonemployment duration to UIBs (Lalive et al., 2006; Card et al., 2015; Nekoei and Weber,
2017), and the semi-elasticity of wages to nonemployment duration (Schmieder et al., 2016). The calibration can
rationalize the point estimates of the EUE wage effects when drawing from the very high end of these targets.

25

heterogeneity group indicators with the treatment variable (and placebo treatments in pre-reform
years). Table 5 presents a summary of these estimates. Appendix Section I.2 describes the
variable construction. Except for the categorical variables, the top (bottom) estimates indicate
lowest (highest) values of the heterogeneity variable. We find very little variation across groups.
Additionally, we report below that wages remain insensitive to alternative treatment definitions
(potential duration rather than benefit levels; firm- and industry-level average of the instrument).

5.1

The Nonemployment Value and UI Benefits dN /db

A first reason why wages are insensitive to UI benefits may be that the nonemployment value
does not move with the UI reform as predicted by our model.
Unemployment Risk We provide additional proxies for unemployment risk or for experience
with the UI system, studying heterogeneity by unemployment (separation) risk, the local
unemployment rate, and a direct prediction of time on UI unconditionally of a separation. These
unemployment risk proxies are not consistently associated with larger one-year point estimates,
and hover around zero.
Experience with, and Salience and Knowledge about UI Limited knowledge or salience
of UIB levels could diminish wage responses (as, e.g., in the context of complex tax incentives in
Abeler and Jäger, 2015). Several pieces of evidence speak against this explanation. First, wages
remain insensitive even after two years and in response to large (and plausibly more salient)
shifts. Second, even recent UI recipients (and EUE switchers in Section 4.5) – plausibly more
aware of the UIB schedule (Lemieux and MacLeod, 2000) – do not exhibit higher sensitivity,
which we test by splitting up the sample by a worker’s actual UI history (months since last
UI receipt or nonemployment spell). We find some suggestive evidence of larger effects for
recently reemployed workers at the two-year horizon, which however remain insignificant. Third,
compared to other sources of idiosyncratic variation in the nonemployment value, UIBs largely
depend on recent earnings, information available to both parties. Fourth, we additionally analyze
a 2006 Eurobarometer survey asking Austrian workers about beliefs about their hypothetical UI
replacement rates. The histograms in Appendix Figure A.10, of beliefs and actual rates (from the
AMS/ASSD, binned into the survey intervals), line up well. The average worker’s rate is 64.03%
(SE 0.72) in the survey, close to the 65.29% among actual recipients.39 Moreover, we found in
unreported results that workers with more children correctly predict higher benefits. Fifth, we
have found positive albeit noisily estimated effects of the reforms on UI take-up (Appendix Table
39
The replacement rate can deviate from 55% due to lump sum benefits for dependents, and the earnings base
for benefits post-1996 are lagged annual earnings rather than current as in the survey.

26

A.4). Lastly, Jäger et al. (2018) document that employed workers separated in response to, and
hence were aware of, UI PBD extensions in Austria.
Variation in UI Generosity From an Age-Specific PBD Reform Appendix J additionally reports the effects of reforms to the potential benefit duration (PBD) of UIBs (rather than
their level) on incumbents’ wages, exploiting a 1989 reform for workers aged 40 and above. We
do not find wage effects of this dimension of UI generosity either, even two years after the reform.
This design complements our previous designs as the treatment assignment was age- rather than
past-income-based, the reform was permanent (rather than potentially eroded by inflation or
subsequent benefit shifts), and perhaps more salient and simple (age-based). The age dimension
divides workers who are almost certainly in the same market and close production substitutes.

5.2

Outside Options and the Nonemployment Value dΩ/dN

A second reason why wages are insensitive to UI benefits may be that the nonemployment value
(while shifting with b) may not shift the relevant outside option in wage bargaining.
External Job Offers and Job Mobility We sort workers by several measures of recent
nonemployment, including months since UI receipt and months since last nonemployment spell.
These measures proxy for the likelihood of not yet having received potential outside offers.
Outside job offers may insulate wages from changes in the nonemployment value by ratcheting up
wages as in models of employer competition and on the job search (Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002;
Cahuc et al., 2006). At the one-year horizon, we do not find that recently nonemployed workers
exhibit larger wage-benefit sensitivities (Table 5). We find some, but statistically insignificant
and quantitatively small, evidence for this prediction at the two-year horizon.
Group-Level Bargaining Rather than atomistic bargaining between one individual worker
and one firm, real-world wage setting may occur with groups of workers (or employers). Here,
the average worker’s outside option may matter, as in union bargaining models, similarly for
wage posting models in which firms are constrained to offer a single wage. First, we construct
the average of the worker-level reform-induced benefit variation at the establishment level, as
firms play an important role in Austrian wage setting (e.g., through plant-level works councils
in Austria, see Section 3). Second, we do likewise at the industry-by-occupation level, at
which collective bargaining agreements between employer associations and unions are typically
concluded in Austria, typically distinguishing white and blue collar workers (e.g., white-collar
workers in the insurance industry). Most CBAs cover all of Austria; some are state-specific
(see Knell and Stiglbauer, 2012). Our industry proxy is 3-digit NACE. We plot histograms
of benefit variation averaged at the group level in Appendix Figure A.11. We then adapt
27

our worker-level regression specification (19) with the group-level treatment. We include the
main controls from specification (19) and additionally include two sets of group-level control
variables: reform-specific percentile fixed effects for (i) the average treatment at the group level
in a given year and (ii) the reform-sample specific share of workers in the group cell with a
positive treatment.40 We also report firm-level specifications with industry-by-occupation-by-year
effects, and industry-by-year (3-digit, our CBA proxy) and occupation-by-year effects in the
industry-by-occupation-level specifications.
Table 6 reports small firm-level point estimates ranging from 0.013 to 0.036 (0.024 to 0.035) at
the one-year (two-year) horizon. The confidence intervals include the worker-level point estimates
and zero. Table 6 also reveals pre-trend violations for the specification without industry-byoccupation-by-year effects. This suggests that firms with different shares of reform-affected
workers were on different trends, perhaps because of industry-level shifts that were correlated
with treatment intensity. When we include industry-by-occupation effects (specifications 3
and 4), comparing workers in the same industry and occupation but working at firms with
different benefit shifts, we find that pre-trends are flat and point estimates for the pass-through
remain between 0.033 and 0.036 with confidence intervals ruling out effects larger than 0.11.
Quantitatively, the evidence is hard to square with a firm-level variant of the Nash benchmark.
Table 7 reports results for the industry-by-occupation level. Point estimates are less stable
across specifications and have substantially wider confidence intervals. In specifications with
the most fine-grained controls, i.e. industry-by-year and occupation-by-year effects in columns
(5) and (6), we find negative point estimates between -0.03 and -0.05 (-0.06 and -0.14) at the
one-year (two-year) horizon, with confidence intervals including higher pass-through above 0.1.
Specifications with fewer controls suggest larger effects, yet violate our identification assumption
due to statistically significant placebo estimates in the pre-period, thus suggesting that the
inclusion of control variables is important to account for, e.g., occupation-by-year-specific shocks.
An additional caveat is that administrative industry proxies may only imperfectly overlap with
actual CBA units and miss all regional differentiations.41
40

Formally, letting g(i,t − 1) denote worker i’s t − 1 firm or industry-by-occupation group, average treatment in
P
dbj,r,t (w̃j,r,t )
1
worker i’s group g is db
= Ng(i,t−1)
, where Ng(i,t−1) denotes the worker count
j∈g(i,t−1)
w
wj,r,t−1
g(i,r,t−1)

in group g in period t − 1, dbj,r,t again denotes worker j’s reform-induced benefit change. Before averaging
dwi,r,t
within group-by-year cells, we winsorize db/w at the 1st and 99th percentiles. We then estimate: wi,r,t−1
=




 


P−1
σ0 · 1(t=r) × db
+ e=−L σe · 1(t=r+e) × db
+ τr,Pt−1 + θr,t−1 + γr,t−1 ln wi,r,t−1 +
w
w
g(i,r,t−1)

g(i,r,t−1)

0
Xi,r,t−1
φr,t−1 + i,r,t . The main control variables are percentile fixed effects τr,Pt−1 , calendar year effects, θr,t−1 ,
year-specific parametric earnings controls, as well as a control for being eligible for extended benefits under the
REBP. In the firm- (industry-) level specifications, these fixed effects are at the percentile (ventile, given the
small group count) level.
41
The typical Austrian CBA mandates a wage floor (“Kollektivvertragslohn”), plus a percent raise for any job
with above-floor prevailing wages (“Istlöhne”). In additional case studies of digitized CBAs (from the KVSystem Kollektivverträge Online data from the Trade Union Federation, with best coverage around the 2001 reform), wage
floors did not appear to differentially shift for treated vs. untreated wage groups (instead continued to prescribe

28

Lastly, in Table 5, we also include an heterogeneity analysis for worker-level wage effects by
the firm’s share of employees recently nonemployed, whose reservation wages may shift most
with UI, and do not find larger wage responses in those firms.

5.3

Wages and Outside Options dw/dΩ

A final reason why wages are insensitive to UI benefits may be that while UI benefits shift the
nonemployment value, real-world wage setting is insensitive to outside options more generally.
Worker Bargaining Power Workers with lower bargaining power should exhibit larger
sensitivity to outside options. We start by splitting workers by age, as well as occupation class
(blue vs. white collar). The results show no clear effect heterogeneity. Since female workers’
wages appear less sensitive to productivity shifts (Black and Strahan, 2001; Card et al., 2016),
perhaps due to lower bargaining power, we then consider sex, finding somewhat larger effects
among women at the one-year horizon (although the pattern reverses at the two-year horizon).
Firm Wage Premia We calculate firm fixed effects following the AKM methodology in
(Abowd et al., 1999) and estimate the wage-benefit sensitivity in firms with high or low firm
effects. In both groups, estimates are close to zero at the one-year horizon. At the two-year
horizon, the sensitivity is around 0.1 in low-AKM firms, which is consistent with the idea that
worker-sided renegotiation is more likely in firms with low wages (as in MacLeod and Malcomson,
1993). Yet, the estimated sensitivity remains below the calibrated benchmark.
Wage Adjustment Frictions and Infrequent Renegotiation Perhaps wage stickiness or
downward wage rigidity in continuing jobs masks wage pass-through in the short run. Alternatively, rebargaining of a given wage may only occur if it otherwise were to leave the bargaining
set, i.e. fall short of (exceed) the worker’s (firm’s) reservation wage (as in e.g., MacLeod and
Malcomson, 1993). Several pieces of evidence speak against this explanation. First, we found no
wage effects even after two years, when stickiness should bind for a smaller fraction of jobs.42
Second, most of our reforms should induce upward wage pressure, making downward wage
rigidity less binding. Third, our visual inspection did not suggest wage effects even for larger
treatment, where menu costs could be overcome. Fourth, we have not found positive wage effects
in settings less constrained by wage rigidity, e.g., in new jobs or in growing industries. Fifth, we
also have not found wage increases in job types perhaps reflecting lower worker surplus.
homogeneous wage increases). An attempt to systematically study CBA wage floors and wage growth (building
on the Statistics Austria-based “CBA wage floor index” (Tariflohnindex) in Knell and Stiglbauer (2012)), was
not feasible due to a small number of observations.
42
More than half of wage contracts appear to reset each year (Barattieri et al., 2014; Sigurdsson and Sigurdardottir, 2016), and incumbents’ wages are still half as sensitive to aggregate shocks as new hires’ wages (Pissarides,
2009). Dickens et al. (2007) find lower downward wage rigidity in Austria than in Germany or the U.S.

29

Moreover, we find a zero effect in subsamples of firms with flexible wage policies. We
stratify firms by the standard deviation of within-firm wage growth, perhaps indicating wage
differentiation facilitating wage pass-through. We also consider a proxy for a firm’s distance from
the CBA-level wage floor, approximated as the firm-level standard deviation of the residuals
from a regression of log wages on industry-occupation-tenure-experience-year fixed effects.
The Prevalence of Wage Bargaining Perhaps wage bargaining may not determine realworld wage setting in any pocket of the Austrian labor market. However, a vast body of empirical
work points to patterns consistent with wage bargaining, such as rent sharing. Moreover, survey
evidence on the actual presence of bilateral bargaining suggests that both workers and employers
report the presence of bargaining in a substantial part of the labor market (Hall and Krueger,
2012; Brenzel et al., 2014). Here, we do not find wage effects in subsamples that carry the
correlates of prevalence of wage bargaining according to those surveys, such as tighter labor
markets (lower unemployment), workers with higher education (our proxy: white rather than
blue collar), in smaller firms, or among men. This suggests that even in pockets of the labor
market where we expect bargaining to occur, nonemployment value shifts do not entail wage
effects.

6

Conclusion

We have studied the effects of changes in the value of nonemployment on wages brought about
by reforms to unemployment insurance (UI) benefit levels in Austria, a setting where UI enters
the nonemployment scenario for most workers. Wages appeared fully insulated from these
UI-induced shifts in the value of nonemployment, even after two years and in all pockets of the
labor market. This limited wage pressure may carry over to other UI-like policies that boost
workers’ nonemployment value, at least in the short run and if group-specific.
This empirical wage insensitivity is inconsistent with the large theoretical sensitivity of the
commonly used Nash bargaining model specified with nonemployment as workers’ outside option.
To reconcile our findings with that model, workers would need to hold nearly full bargaining
power. Yet, this unitary bargaining power is in turn rejected by the large body of rent sharing
estimates implying low worker bargaining power of around 0.1.
Our findings instead support wage setting protocols that insulate wages from nonemployment
values. The kind of wage insensitivity we document also helps models of the aggregate labor
market generate realistic labor demand fluctuations. Our findings also raise the possibility that
the empirical comovement between wages and labor market conditions, such as the Phillips
and wage curves, may be driven by mechanisms other than the procyclicality of workers’
nonemployment value.
30

References
Abeler, J. and S. Jäger (2015). Complex Tax Incentives. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (3),
1–28.
Abowd, J. A. and T. Lemieux (1993). The Effects of Product Market Competition on Collective Bargaining
Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (4),
983–1014.
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999). High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms.
Econometrica 67 (2), 251–333.
Acemoglu, D. and W. B. Hawkins (2014). Search with Multi-worker Firms. Theoretical Economics 9 (3),
583–628.
Akerlof, G. A. and J. L. Yellen (1986). Efficiency Wage Models of the Labor Market. Cambridge University
Press.
Albrecht, J. W. and B. Axell (1984). An Equilibrium Model of Search Unemployment. Journal of Political
Economy 92 (5), 824–840.
Altonji, J. G., A. A. Smith, and I. Vidangos (2013). Modeling Earnings Dynamics. Econometrica 81 (4),
1395–1454.
Andolfatto, D. (1996). Business Cycles and Labor Market Search. The American Economic Review,
112–132.
Arai, M. (2003). Wages, Profits, and Capital Intensity: Evidence from Matched Worker-firm Data. Journal
of Labor Economics 21 (3), 593–618.
Arai, M. and F. Heyman (2009). Microdata Evidence on Rent-sharing. Applied Economics 41 (23),
2965–2976.
Bagger, J., B. J. Christensen, and D. T. Mortensen (2014). Wage and Labor Productivity Dispersion: The
Roles of Total Factor Productivity, Labor Quality, Capital Intensity, and Rent Sharing. Working Paper,
Royal Holloway.
Bagger, J., F. Fontaine, F. Postel-Vinay, and J.-M. Robin (2014). Tenure, Experience, Human Capital, and
Wages: A Tractable Equilibrium Search Model of Wage Dynamics. American Economic Review 104 (6),
1551–96.
Barattieri, A., S. Basu, and P. Gottschalk (2014). Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Wages.
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (1), 70–101.
Barth, E., A. Bryson, J. C. Davis, and R. Freeman (2016). It’s Where You Work: Increases in the
Dispersion of Earnings across Establishments and Individuals in the United States. Journal of Labor
Economics 34 (S2), S67–S97.
Beaudry, P. and J. DiNardo (1991). The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages over the
Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data. Journal of Political Economy (4), 665–688.
Beaudry, P., D. A. Green, and B. Sand (2012). Does Industrial Composition Matter for Wages? A Test of
Search and Bargaining Theory. Econometrica 80 (3), 1063–1104.

31

Bertrand, M. (2004). From the Invisible Handshake to the Invisible Hand? How Import Competition
Changes the Employment Relationship. Journal of Labor Economics 22 (4), 723–765.
Black, S. E. and P. E. Strahan (2001). The Division of Spoils: Rent-sharing and Discrimination in a
Regulated Industry. American Economic Review 91 (4), 814–831.
Blanchard, O. and L. F. Katz (1999). Wage Dynamics: Reconciling Theory and Evidence. American
Economic Review 89 (2), 69–74.
Blanchflower, D. G. and A. J. Oswald (1994). The Wage Curve. MIT press.
Blanchflower, D. G., A. J. Oswald, and P. Sanfey (1996). Wages, Profits, and Rent-sharing. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111 (1), 227–251.
Bönisch, M. (2008). Kollektivvertragliche Abdeckung in Österreich. Statistische Nachrichten 3 (2008),
207–211.
Bontemps, C., J.-M. Robin, and G. J. Van den Berg (1999). An Empirical Equilibrium Job Search Model
with Search on the Job and Heterogeneous Workers and Firms. International Economic Review 40 (4),
1039–1074.
Borovičková, K. and R. Shimer (2017). High Wage Workers Work for High Wage Firms. NBER Working
Paper No. 24074 .
Brenzel, H., H. Gartner, and C. Schnabel (2014). Wage Bargaining or Wage Posting? Evidence from the
Employers’ Side. Labour Economics 29, 41–48.
Burdett, K. and D. T. Mortensen (1998). Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and Unemployment. International Economic Review 39 (2), 257–273.
Cahuc, P., F. Marque, and E. Wasmer (2008). A Theory of Wages and Labor Demand with Intra-firm
Bargaining and Matching Frictions. International Economic Review 49 (3), 943–972.
Cahuc, P., F. Postel-Vinay, and J.-M. Robin (2006). Wage Bargaining with On-the-job Search: Theory and
Evidence. Econometrica 74 (2), 323–364.
Caldwell, S. and O. Danieli (2018). Outside Options in the Labor Market. Working Paper.
Caldwell, S. and N. Harmon (2018). Outside Options, Wages, and Bargaining: Evidence from Coworker
Networks. Working Paper.
Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline (2018). Firms and Labor Market Inequality: Evidence
and Some Theory. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1), S13–S70.
Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, and P. Kline (2016). Bargaining, Sorting, and the Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying
the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (2),
633–686.
Card, D., R. Chetty, and A. Weber (2007). Cash-on-hand and Competing Models of Intertemporal Behavior:
New Evidence from the Labor Market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4), 1511–1560.
Card, D., F. Devicienti, and A. Maida (2013). Rent-sharing, Holdup, and Wages: Evidence from Matched
Panel Data. Review of Economic Studies 81 (1), 84–111.
Card, D., D. S. Lee, Z. Pei, and A. Weber (2015). Inference on Causal Effects in a Generalized Regression
Kink Design. Econometrica 83 (6), 2453–2483.

32

Cardoso, A. R. and M. Portela (2009). Micro Foundations for Wage Flexibility: Wage Insurance at the
Firm Level. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111 (1), 29–50.
Carlsson, M., J. Messina, and O. N. Skans (2016). Wage Adjustment and Productivity Shocks. The
Economic Journal 126 (595), 1739–1773.
Chodorow-Reich, G., J. Coglianese, and L. Karabarbounis (2018). The Limited Macroeconomic Effects of
Unemployment Benefit Extensions. Working Paper.
Chodorow-Reich, G. and L. Karabarbounis (2016). The Cyclicality of the Opportunity Cost of Employment.
Journal of Political Economy 124 (6), 1563–1618.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2016). Unemployment and Business Cycles.
Econometrica 84 (4), 1523–1569.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2017). On DSGE models. Unpublished paper,
Northwestern University.
Christofides, L. N. and A. J. Oswald (1992). Real Wage Determination and Rent-sharing in Collective
Bargaining Agreements. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (3), 985–1002.
Conlon, J. J., L. Pilossoph, M. Wiswall, and B. Zafar (2018). Labor Market Search With Imperfect
Information and Learning. NBER Working Paper No. 24988 .
Correia, S. (2017). Linear Models with High-Dimensional Fixed Effects: An Efficient and Feasible Estimator.
Working Paper.
Cutler, D. M. and J. Gruber (1996). Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance? The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111 (2), 391–430.
Dickens, W. T., L. Goette, E. L. Groshen, S. Holden, J. Messina, M. E. Schweitzer, J. Turunen, and M. E.
Ward (2007). How Wages Change: Micro Evidence from the International Wage Flexibility Project.
Journal of Economic Perspectives (2), 195–214.
Dinerstein, M., R. Megalokonomou, and C. Yannelis (2019, July). Human Capital Depreciation. Working
Paper.
Du Caju, P., F. Rycx, and I. Tojerow (2011). Inter-Industry Wage Differentials: How Much Does Rent
Sharing Matter? The Manchester School 79 (4), 691–717.
Estevão, M. and S. Tevlin (2003). Do Firms Share Their Success with Workers? The Response of Wages to
Product Market Conditions. Economica 70 (280), 597–617.
Fakhfakh, F. and F. FitzRoy (2004). Basic Wages and Firm Characteristics: Rent Sharing in French
Manufacturing. Labour 18 (4), 615–631.
Feldstein, M. and J. Poterba (1984). Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages. Journal of Public
Economics 23 (1-2), 141–167.
Fujita, S. and G. Ramey (2012). Exogenous Versus Endogenous Separation. American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 4 (4), 68–93.
Garin, A. and F. Silvério (2018). How Does Firm Performance Affect Wages? Evidence from Idiosyncratic
Export Shocks. Working Paper.

33

Gertler, M., C. Huckfeldt, and A. Trigari (2016). Unemployment Fluctuations, Match Quality, and the
Wage Cyclicality of New Hires. NBER Working Paper No. 22341 .
Gertler, M. and A. Trigari (2009). Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining.
Journal of Political Economy 117 (1), 38–86.
Gruber, J. and E. Saez (2002). The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and Implications. Journal of
Public Economics 84 (1), 1–32.
Guiso, L., L. Pistaferri, and F. Schivardi (2005). Insurance within the Firm. Journal of Political Economy 113 (5), 1054–1087.
Gürtzgen, N. (2009). Rent-sharing and Collective Bargaining Coverage: Evidence from Linked Employer–
Employee Data. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111 (2), 323–349.
Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2013). Unemployment Benefits and Unemployment
in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects. NBER Working Paper No. 19499 .
Hagedorn, M. and I. Manovskii (2008). The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies
Revisited. American Economic Review 98 (4), 1692–1706.
Hagedorn, M. and I. Manovskii (2013). Job Selection and Wages Over the Business Cycle. American
Economic Review 103 (2), 771–803.
Hall, R. E. (2017). High Discounts and High Unemployment. American Economic Review 107 (2), 305–30.
Hall, R. E. and A. B. Krueger (2012). Evidence on the Incidence of Wage Posting, Wage Bargaining, and
On-the-Job Search. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (4), 56–67.
Hall, R. E. and P. R. Milgrom (2008, August). The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage
Bargain. American Economic Review 98 (4), 1653–1674.
Hansen, G. D. (1985). Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics 16 (3),
309–327.
Hildreth, A. K. (1998). Rent-sharing and Wages: Product Demand or Technology driven Premia? Economics
of Innovation and New Technology 5 (2-4), 199–226.
Hildreth, A. K. and A. J. Oswald (1997). Rent-sharing and Wages: Evidence from Company and
Establishment Panels. Journal of Labor Economics 15 (2), 318–337.
Hofer, H., K. Pichelmann, and A.-U. Schuh (2001). Price and Quantity Adjustments in the Austrian Labour
Market. Applied Economics 33 (5), 581–592.
Jäger, S. and J. Heining (2019). How Substitutable are Workers? Evidence from Worker Deaths. Working
Paper.
Jäger, S., B. Schoefer, and J. Zweimüller (2018). Marginal Jobs and Job Surplus: Evidence from Separations
and Unemployment Insurance. Working Paper.
Katz, L. F. (1986). Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1,
235–276.
Katz, L. F. and B. D. Meyer (1990). The Impact of the Potential Duration of Unemployment Benefits on
the Duration of Unemployment. Journal of Public Economics 41 (1), 45–72.

34

Kleven, H. J. and E. A. Schultz (2014). Estimating Taxable Income Responses Using Danish Tax Reforms.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (4), 271–301.
Kline, P., N. Petkova, H. Williams, and O. Zidar (2019). Who Profits from Patents? Rent-Sharing at
Innovative Firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3), 1343–1404.
Knell, M. and A. Stiglbauer (2012). Reference Norms, Staggered Wages, and Wage Leadership: Theoretical
Implications and Empirical Evidence. International Economic Review 53 (2), 569–592.
Kopczuk, W. (2005). Tax Bases, Tax Rates and the Elasticity of Reported Income. Journal of Public
Economics 89 (11-12), 2093–2119.
Kroft, K., F. Lange, and M. Notowidigdo (2013). Duration Dependence and Labor Market Conditions:
Evidence from a Field Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (3), 1123–1167.
Kroft, K., F. Lange, M. J. Notowidigdo, and L. F. Katz (2016). Long-term Unemployment and the Great
Recession: The Role of Composition, Duration Dependence, and Nonparticipation. Journal of Labor
Economics 34 (S1), S7–S54.
Krueger, A. B. and A. I. Mueller (2016). A Contribution to the Empirics of Reservation Wages. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (1), 142–79.
Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, and A. Sahin (2010). Labour-market Matching with Precautionary Savings and
Aggregate Fluctuations. The Review of Economic Studies 77 (4), 1477–1507.
Lalive, R., C. Landais, and J. Zweimuller (2015, December). Market Externalities of Large Unemployment
Insurance Extension Programs. American Economic Review 105 (12), 3564–3596.
Lalive, R., J. Van Ours, and J. Zweimuller (2006). How Changes in Financial Incentives Affect the Duration
of Unemployment. The Review of Economic Studies 73 (4), 1009–1038.
Lalive, R. and J. Zweimüller (2004). Benefit Entitlement and Unemployment Duration: The Role of Policy
Endogeneity. Journal of Public Economics 88 (12), 2587–2616.
Le Barbanchon, T., R. Rathelot, and A. Roulet (2017). Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages:
Evidence from Administrative Data. Journal of Public Economics.
Lemieux, T. and W. B. MacLeod (2000). Supply Side Hysteresis: The Case of the Canadian Unemployment
Insurance System. Journal of Public Economics 78 (1-2), 139–170.
Leoni, T. and W. Pollan (2011). Lohnentwicklung und Lohnunterschiede in der Industrie seit 2000. WIFO
Monatsberichte, WIFO October.
Ljungqvist, L. and T. J. Sargent (2017). The Fundamental Surplus. American Economic Review 107 (9),
2630–65.
MacLeod, W. B. and J. M. Malcomson (1993). Investments, Holdup, and the Form of Market Contracts.
The American Economic Review, 811–837.
Manning, A. (2011). Imperfect Competition in the Labor Market. In Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 4, pp. 973–1041. Elsevier.
Margolis, D. N. and K. G. Salvanes (2001). Do Firms Really Share Rents with Their Workers? IZA
Discussion Paper Series no. 330 .
Martins, P. S. (2009). Rent Sharing before and after the Wage Bill. Applied Economics 41 (17), 2133–2151.

35

McCall, J. J. (1970). Economics of Information and Job Search. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
113–126.
Mercan, Y. and B. Schoefer (forthcoming). New Jobs and Old Jobs: Quits, Replacement Hiring, and
Vacancy Chains. American Economic Review: Insights.
Merz, M. (1995). Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle. Journal of Monetary
Economics (2), 269–300.
Mortensen, D. T. and E. Nagypal (2007). More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluctuations. Review of
Economic Dynamics 10 (3), 327–347.
Moscarini, G. and F. Postel-Vinay (2017). The Job Ladder: Inflation vs. Reallocation. Working Paper.
Nekoei, A. and A. Weber (2017, February). Does Extending Unemployment Benefits Improve Job Quality?
American Economic Review 107 (2), 527–561.
OECD (1994). Collective Bargaining: Levels and Coverage. In OECD Employment Outlook, Chapter 5.
OECD.
Pissarides, C. A. (2000). Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. MIT press.
Pissarides, C. A. (2009). The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the Answer? Econometrica 77 (5), 1339–1369.
Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2002). Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and Employer
Heterogeneity. Econometrica 70 (6), 2295–2350.
Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2006). Microeconometric Search-Matching Models and Matched EmployerEmployee Data. In Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Ninth World
Congress, Volume 2.
Ravenna, F. and C. E. Walsh (2008). Vacancies, Unemployment, and the Phillips Curve. European Economic
Review 52 (8), 1494–1521.
Rogerson, R. (1988). Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium. Journal of Monetary Economics 21 (1),
3–16.
Saez, E., B. Schoefer, and D. Seim (2019). Payroll Taxes, Firm Behavior, and Rent Sharing: Evidence from
a Young Workers’ Tax Cut in Sweden. American Economic Review 109 (5), 1717–63.
Schmieder, J. F., T. von Wachter, and S. Bender (2016). The Effect of Unemployment Benefits and
Nonemployment Durations on Wages. American Economic Review 106 (3), 739–77.
Schoefer, B. (2015). The Financial Channel of Wage Rigidity. Working Paper.
Shapiro, C. and J. E. Stiglitz (1984). Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device. The
American Economic Review 74 (3), 433–444.
Shimer, R. (2004). The Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models. Journal of the European Economic
Association 2 (2-3), 469–479.
Shimer, R. (2005). The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies. American Economic
Review 95 (1), 25–49.
Shimer, R. (2010). Labor Markets and Business Cycles. Princeton University Press Princeton, NJ.

36

Sigurdsson, J. and R. Sigurdardottir (2016). Time-Dependent or State-Dependent Wage-Setting? Evidence
from Periods of Macroeconomic Instability. Journal of Monetary Economics 78, 50–66.
Stole, L. A. and J. Zwiebel (1996). Intra-firm Bargaining Under Non-Binding Contracts. The Review of
Economic Studies 63 (3), 375–410.
Van Reenen, J. (1996). The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a Panel of UK
Companies. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (1), 195–226.
Venn, D. (2012). Eligibility Criteria for Unemployment Benefits. OECD Social, Employment and Migration
Working Papers, No. 131..
Vuuren, A. v., G. J. Van Den Berg, and G. Ridder (2000). Measuring the Equilibrium Effects of Unemployment Benefits Dispersion. Journal of Applied Econometrics 15 (6), 547–574.
Weber, C. E. (2014). Toward Obtaining a Consistent Estimate of the Elasticity of Taxable Income Using
Difference-in-differences. Journal of Public Economics 117, 90–103.
Winter-Ebmer, R. (1996). Wage Curve, Unemployment Duration and Compensating Differentials. Labour
Economics 3 (4), 425–434.
Winter-Ebmer, R. (1998). Potential Unemployment Benefit Duration and Spell Length: Lessons from a
Quasi-Experiment in Austria. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 60 (1), 33–45.
Wright, R., P. Kircher, B. Julien, and V. Guerrieri (2017). Directed Search: A Guided Tour. NBER
Working Paper No. 23884 .
Zweimüller, J., R. Winter-Ebmer, R. Lalive, A. Kuhn, J.-P. Wuellrich, O. Ruf, and S. Buchi (2009).
Austrian Social Security Database. Austrian Center for Labor Economics and the Analysis of the Welfare
State Working Paper No. 0903.

37

Tables

38

Table 1: Predicted Fraction of Post-Separation Time on UI (τ ) and Wage-Benefit Sensitivity (dw/db)
Time Restriction:

Ret’nt or Disability

Reemployment Restriction:

4-Year
(1)

None
(2)

Retirement

No Restriction

4-Year None 4-Year
(3)
(4)
(5)

None
(6)

Panel A: Fraction of Post-Separation Time (τ ) (Predicted Values)
UI-Affected Nonemployment - τ̂ U
Unemployment Insurance - τ̂ U :U I
Unemployment Assistance - τ̂ U :U A
Employment - τ̂ E
Other Nonemployment - τ̂ O

0.104
0.083
0.021
0.684
0.212

0.105
0.083
0.022
0.588
0.307

0.096
0.076
0.020
0.648
0.255

0.095
0.074
0.022
0.564
0.341

0.094
0.073
0.020
0.633
0.274

0.092
0.070
0.022
0.555
0.353

Panel B: Predicted Wage Benefit Sensitivity (dw/db)
Baseline: Two-State dw/db Prediction
E[dw/db(τ̂i )]
dw/db(E[τ̂i ])

0.462
0.484

0.462
0.486

0.442
0.464

0.437
0.461

0.434
0.458

0.426
0.453

Robustness: Three-State dw/db Prediction
E[dw/db(τ̂i )]
dw/db(E[τ̂i ])

0.251
0.244

0.217
0.201

0.224
0.208

0.195
0.174

0.217
0.196

0.190
0.165

Note: The first five rows present estimates of the predicted amount of time a worker would spend on unemployment
insurance τ̂ U :U I , on unemployment assistance τ̂ U :U A , which we also pool into a single UI-affected state τ̂ U (the sum
of τ̂ U :U I and τ̂ U :U A , where unemployment assistance is included because it is indexed nearly one-for-one with UI,
and we refer to “UI” in the text as encompassing both), employed τ̂ E , and in other nonemployment τ̂ O . The τ
values for our preferred specification, column (1), are calculated as follows. Starting with our baseline regression
sample, we keep individuals who separate from employment into nonemployment for at least one day in the next
year and return to employment at least once within the next four years. For these actual separators, we calculate
post-separation share of time spent in each of the above labor market states. We stop including labor market states
in this share at the earliest of 16 years, reaching age 70, death, or absorbing retirement or disability (defined as
entering retirement or disability and without any subsequent employment or UI/UA spells). Using the separators
sample, we estimate a regression model predicting the time spent in each state based on individuals’ pre-separation
characteristics comprising of industry by white/blue collar fixed effects, tenure, experience, age, region, year and
previous UI history. We then use this model to predict the specific τ s for the entire regression sample (including
non-separators). The reported τ estimates are the average predictions across the entire regression sample. The dw/db
predictions plug in the predicted τ values into the two- and three-state model wage-benefit sensitivity expressions
(see Section 2.1 and Appendix Section D respectively). The E[dw/db(τ̂i )] estimates report the average sensitivity
first plugging in the individual-level τ̂i sensitivities into the wage-benefit expressions and then taking the average
across individuals (thus respecting Jensen’s Inequality). The dw/db(E[τ̂i ]) estimates plug in the average τ̂i values
from rows (1) to (6) into the wage-benefit sensitivity expressions. Columns (3) and (4) also stop counting at absorbing
retirement but not disability, and columns (5) and (6) stop counting labor market states only at the earliest of 16
years or age 70. The reemployment-restriction columns (1), (3) and (5) requires that individuals in the separator
sample return to re-employment (at any job) sometime in the next four years (for at least one day). Appendix Table
A.5 reports the realized τ values for the separator samples and the analysis sample unconditionally on a separation.

39

Table 2: Summary Statistics
1985 Reform
1989 Reform
2001 Reform
Pooled Reform
1976 Reform
Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment
Proportion Women
.891
.896
.511
.23
.64
.876
.466
.82
.54
.62
(0.312) (0.305)
(0.500)
(0.421)
(0.480)
(0.329)
(0.499)
(0.384)
(0.498)
(0.486)
Age
40.3
40.6
38.9
39.6
38.5
39.7
38.7
39.6
38.8
39.7
(8.282) (8.208)
(8.406)
(7.996)
(8.358)
(7.932)
(8.021)
(7.651)
(8.240)
(7.879)
White Collar
.382
.289
.384
.546
.386
.412
.464
.521
.42
.49
(0.486) (0.453)
(0.486)
(0.498)
(0.487)
(0.492)
(0.499)
(0.500)
(0.493)
(0.500)
Experience in last 25 Years 10.3
9.8
15.9
18.4
15.1
13.3
15.5
13.4
15.2
15
(6.375) (6.055)
(5.968)
(6.118)
(5.821)
(5.798)
(6.258)
(5.994)
(6.230)
(6.616)
Tenure
2.83
2.83
7.22
8.67
7.34
6.32
7.74
6.26
7.2
6.9
(1.122) (1.113)
(4.115)
(4.213)
(5.069)
(4.729)
(6.546)
(5.602)
(5.476)
(4.998)
Avg. Monthly Earnings
4269
2655
13455
20696
13900
8529
24268
15683
17456
15253
(347.579) (688.626) (1237.210) (2103.023) (1144.354) (2120.226) (2074.368) (3059.542) (6409.774) (6060.462)
61149
268708
338999
188362
180839
370786
328345
887078
909332
Observations in Base Year 59222
40

Note: This table includes summary statistics for the control and treatment regions for the four reforms that make up the pooled sample on which we
run our analysis: 1976, 1985, 1989, and 2001. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses beneath the means. All values are calculated from individuals employed all 12 months in the base year for the reform, which is defined as the year prior to the reform, e.g., 1975 for the 1976 reform. The
pooled sample appends the four reform samples together. The actual number of observations in the base year will be slightly larger than the sum of the
treatment and control groups for the 1985 reform sample and thus the pooled sample because the control region is shifted slightly down the income table to account for repeated treatment in a small section of the income distribution during the placebo period for that reform. Importantly, this table is
not a balance check between “treatment” and “control” regions, which naturally must differ in a given cross section. Instead, our difference-in-differences
design (with varying treatment intensity within the treatment group) relies on a conditional parallel trends assumption which we discuss in Section 4.3.

Table 3: Estimated Wage Effects: Difference-in-Differences Regression Design
Panel A: 1-Year Earnings Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Placebo: 3 Yr Lag

(5)

(6)

0.016
(.017)
-0.001
(.014)

-0.002
(.016)
-0.014
(.015)

0.016
(.018)
-0.007
(.015)

0.014
(.016)
-0.009
(.015)

0.022
(.013)
0.018
(.014)

0.028
(.014)
0.014
(.014)

Treatment Year

-0.004
(.016)

-0.001
(.017)

-0.019
(.015)

-0.014
(.016)

0.002
(.013)

-0.0004
(.013)

Pre-p F-test p-val

0.532

0.581

0.413

0.381

0.245

0.119

.048
7139

.067
7139
X

.076
7138

.094
7138
X
X

.257
6299
X

.281
6298
X
X
X

(5)

(6)

Placebo: 2 Yr Lag

2

R
N (1000s)
Mincerian Ctrls
4-Digit Ind.-Occ. FEs
Firm-Year FEs

X

Panel B: 2-Year Earnings Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Placebo: 3 Yr Lag

-0.007
(.021)

-0.025
(.021)

-0.001
(.025)

-0.001
(.024)

-0.003
(.022)

0.007
(.022)

Treatment Year

-0.007
(.031)

0.007
(.031)

-0.027
(.032)

-0.022
(.03)

-0.022
(.026)

-0.027
(.026)

Pre-p F-test p-val

0.752

0.241

0.966

0.962

0.878

0.742

.103
5039

.125
5039
X

.14
5038

.16
5038
X
X

.305
4434

.332
4433
X
X
X

2

R
N (1000s)
Mincerian Ctrls
4-Digit Ind.-Occ. FEs
Firm-Year FEs

X

X

Note: These results pool four reforms to the replacement rate schedule in Austria, and are based on specification
(19). Standard errors based on two-way clustering at the individual and earnings percentile level are in parentheses.
The null hypothesis of the F-test is that the coefficients of interest are jointly all equal to 0 in the pre-period.
The Mincerian controls include time-varying polynomials of experience, tenure, and age; time-varying gender
indicators, and a control for being REBP eligible. The industry-occupation controls are time-varying fixed effects
for each four-digit industry interacted with an indicator for a blue vs. white-collar occupation. All specifications
also include reform-specific earnings percentile fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year-specific log earnings
controls.

41

Table 4: Wage Effects by Individual Labor Market Status Transition Types
Panel A: Effects by Transition Type
Full Sample
Job Stayers Recalled Workers
Job Movers
Time Horizon

1-Year 2-Year 1-Year 2-Year 1-Year

1-Year

2-Year

Est. Wage Effect

-0.014 -0.022 -0.026 -0.027 0.061
0.007
0.054
(0.016) (0.030) (0.013) (0.021) (0.139) (0.137) (0.096)

-0.035
(0.090)

Base-Year Transition Rate
Mincer + Ind.-Occ. FEs

X

X

0.828
X

0.705
X

0.040
X

2-Year

0.057
X

0.069
X

0.110
X

Panel B: Employment-Unemployment-Employment Movers
1-Year Earnings Effects
2-Year Earnings Effects
(1)
Est. Wage Effect

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.372 -0.215 -0.337 -0.249 -0.126 -0.104 -0.064
(0.146) (0.140) (0.161) (0.228) (0.147) (0.154) (0.194)

Base-Year Transition Rate 0.022
Transition-Specific Controls
Mincer + Ind.-Occ. FEs
X
Firm FEs

0.022
X
X

0.022
X
X

0.022
X
X
X

0.035
X

0.035
X
X

0.035
X
X

(8)
-0.115
(0.237)
0.035
X
X
X

Panel C: Direct Job-to-Job Movers
1-Year Earnings Effects
2-Year Earnings Effects
(1)
Est. Wage Effect

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.267 0.187 0.271 0.002 0.108
0.009
0.021
(0.102) (0.097) (0.099) (0.103) (0.106) (0.113) (0.107)

Base-Year Transition Rate 0.047
Transition-Specific Controls
Mincer + Ind.-Occ. FEs
X
Firm FEs

0.047
X
X

0.047
X
X

0.047
X
X
X

0.075
X

0.075
X
X

0.075
X
X

(8)
-0.134
(0.147)
0.075
X
X
X

Note: The results show σ0 coefficients from estimating Equation (19) but interacting an indicator for each
transition type with the σ0 and σe coefficients. We also vary the parametric earnings controls by transition type.
The specifications indicating Transition-Specific Controls interact all controls with the transition types. The
estimates are from specification (4) in Table 3. Stayers refers to incumbent workers who remain employed at the
same firm the entire next year or for two years in the specifications with a two-year outcome. Recalled refers to
individuals who leave their current employer for another employer or nonemployment and then return to their
original employer within the next year or two (depending on the specification horizon). Job Movers refers to
individuals who move to another employer in the following year or two years, with or without and intermediate
unemployment spell. EUE Movers refers to the subset of job movers who receive unemployment insurance before
moving to their next employer. JtoJ Movers refers to the subset of job movers who have no intervening months
of nonemployment before starting work at another employer.

42

Table 5: Heterogeneity of Nonemployment Effects on Wages: One- and Two-Year Effects
1-Year Effects
1 Quintile

5

st

th

2-Year Effects
Quintile

1 Quintile
st

5th Quintile

Unemployment Risk
Predicted Months UE

-0.061

(0.026)

-0.001

(0.031)

-0.062

(0.053)

0.050

(0.046)

Predicted Separation Rate

-0.024

(0.026)

-0.009

(0.032)

-0.045

(0.047)

0.070

(0.043)

Local Unemployment Rate

0.014

(0.025)

0.000

(0.028)

0.006

(0.037)

-0.023

(0.043)

Months since UI Receipt

-0.036

(0.040)

-0.034

(0.053)

0.088

(0.053)

-0.195

(0.095)

Months since Non-Emp.

-0.064

(0.051)

-0.026

(0.047)

0.041

(0.053)

-0.054

(0.073)

Industry Growth Rate

-0.018

(0.038)

-0.026

(0.028)

-0.025

(0.035)

-0.053

(0.039)

Wage Premium (AKM FE)

-0.014

(0.032)

-0.029

(0.035)

0.091

(0.043)

0.013

(0.037)

SD of Earnings Growth

-0.004

(0.020)

-0.027

(0.042)

0.059

(0.026)

-0.009

(0.048)

Wage Distance from CBA Floor

-0.007

(0.026)

-0.032

(0.034)

-0.012

(0.033)

-0.023

(0.053)

Share Non-Emp Last 2 Yrs

-0.015

(0.030)

0.012

(0.033)

0.055

(0.029)

-0.035

(0.038)

Tenure

0.013

(0.036)

-0.033

(0.023)

0.078

(0.054)

0.007

(0.031)

Age

0.006

(0.030)

-0.045

(0.022)

-0.068

(0.055)

-0.065

(0.037)

Male/Female

-0.031

(0.026)

0.007

(0.018)

0.037

(0.034)

-0.055

(0.044)

Blue/White Collar

-0.020

(0.020)

-0.008

(0.025)

-0.014

(0.030)

-0.030

(0.054)

Firm Characteristics

Worker Characteristics

Note: The table shows σ0 coefficients from estimating Equation (19) but interacting an indicator for each different
heterogeneity group category with the σ0 and σe coefficients in Equation (19). Standard errors are reported
in parentheses. We also vary the parametric earnings controls by heterogeneity type, allowing for differential
earnings growth patterns by heterogeneity type. The estimates are from specification (4) in Table 3 that include
Mincerian and industry/occupation controls but not the firm-by-year fixed effects. See Section 5 and Appendix I.2
for more details about the construction of each heterogeneity group. For the cuts by months since most recent UI
receipt/nonemployment, to pick up workers recently hired, we relax the sample restriction requiring 12 months of
employment in the base year.

43

Table 6: Wage Effects: Difference-in-Differences Regression with Firm-Level Variation
1-Year Earnings Effects

2-Year Earnings Effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.090
(.026)
-0.056
(.023)

-0.081
(.025)
-0.059
(.023)

-0.021
(.027)
-0.010
(.026)

-0.004
(.027)
-0.008
(.026)

-0.094
(.033)

-0.079
(.033)

-0.005
(.037)

0.022
(.036)

Treatment Year

0.016
(.027)

0.013
(.027)

0.034
(.027)

0.036
(.027)

0.030
(.043)

0.024
(.043)

0.035
(.042)

0.033
(.042)

Pre-p F-test p-val

0.002

0.004

0.734

0.953

0.005

0.016

0.888

0.548

R2
N (1000s)
Mincerian Ctrls
4-Digit Ind.-Occ. FEs

.055
7139

.074
7139
X

.079
7138

.097
7138
X
X

.111
5038

.133
5038
X

.142
5038

.163
5038
X
X

Placebo: 3 Yr Lag
Placebo: 2 Yr Lag

X

X

Note: These results pool four reforms to the replacement rate schedule in Austria, and are based on specification
(19) with the variation in benefits aggregated at the firm-level, detailed in Footnote 40. See Section 5.2 for more
details about the construction of the firm-level instrument, and Footnote 40 for the regression specification.
Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way clustered at the firm and individual level. The null hypothesis of
the F-test is that the coefficients of interest are all jointly equal to 0 in the pre-period. The Mincerian controls
include time-varying polynomials of experience, tenure, and age; time-varying gender indicators, and a control
for being REBP eligible. The industry-occupation controls are time-varying fixed effects for each four-digit
industry interacted with an indicator for a blue vs. white-collar occupation. All specifications also include the
baseline controls in Table 3, reform-specific firm-treatment intensity percentile fixed effects and firm share treated
percentile fixed effects.

44

Table 7: Wage Effects: Difference-in-Differences Regression with Industry-Occupation Level
Variation
Earnings Effects
(1)

(2)

0.139
(0.094)
0.059
(0.068)

0.100
(0.094)
0.037
(0.068)

0.530
(0.064)
0.307
(0.045)

Treatment Year

0.304
(0.073)

0.326
(0.075)

Pre-p F-test p-val

0.313

0.528

R2
N (1000s)

0.070
7138

0.087
7138

0.054
(0.074)

0.006
(0.073)

0.452
(0.073)

Treatment Year

0.160
(0.096)

0.225
(0.090)

Pre-p F-test p-val

0.463

R2
N (1000s)
Mincerian Ctrls
3-Digit Ind. FEs
Occ. FEs

0.133
5041

Placebo: 3 Yr Lag
Placebo: 2 Yr Lag

Placebo: 3 Yr Lag
Placebo: 2 Yr Lag

(3)
(4)
Panel A: 1-Year Horizon

(5)

(6)

-0.005
(0.105)
-0.043
(0.073)

0.053
(0.098)
0.009
(0.072)

0.015
(0.099)
-0.015
(0.072)

0.219
(0.083)

0.273
(0.085)

-0.052
(0.086)

-0.029
(0.084)

0.000

0.724

0.846

0.920

0.082
7138

0.098
7138

-0.100
(0.074)

-0.025
(0.110)

-0.048
(0.104)

0.007
(0.097)

0.187
(0.092)

-0.140
(0.128)

-0.059
(0.121)

0.931

0.000

0.178

0.819

0.640

0.156
5041
X

0.145
5041

0.137
5041

0.146
5041

X

X
X

0.168
5041
X
X
X

0.081
0.072
7138
7138
Panel B: 2-Year Horizon

X

Note: These results pool four reforms to the replacement rate schedule in Austria, and are based on specification
(19) with the variation in benefits aggregated at the industry-occupation level. See Section 5.2 for more details
about the construction of the industry-occupation-level instrument, and Footnote 40 for the regression specification.
Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way clustered at the industry-occupation and individual level. The
null hypothesis of the F-test is that the coefficients of interest are all jointly equal to 0 in the pre-period.
The Mincerian controls include time-varying polynomials of experience, tenure, and age; time-varying gender
indicators, and a control for being REBP eligible. The industry controls are time-varying fixed effects for each
three-digit industry, and the occupation controls are time-varying indicators for a blue vs. white-collar occupation.
All specifications also include the baseline controls in Table 3, reform-specific industry-treatment intensity ventile
fixed effects and industry share treated ventile fixed effects.

45

Figures

46

Figure 1: Nash Bargaining: Relationship between Wage-Benefit Sensitivity
(a)

dw
db

and Bargaining Power φ and Time in Nonemployment τ

and φ, by τ

(b)

1

dw
db

and τ , by φ

1
=3%
=5%
= 10 %
= 20 %
= 100 %

0.8

Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

47

Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

dw
db

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.8

0.6

0.4
= 0.02
= 0.1
= 0.2
= 0.5

0.2

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Worker Bargaining Power

0.8

1

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Time in Nonemployment

Note: The figure plots the relationship between wage-benefit sensitivity dw
db , and worker bargaining power φ, and time in nonemployment τ , as predicted
by Equation (6). We vary τ , the post-separation time spent in nonemployment, (τ ∈ {3%, 5%, 10%, 20%, 100%}), and worker bargaining power φ
(φ ∈ {0.02, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5}). Our calibration (τ = 0.1 and φ = 0.1) predicts a sensitivity of 0.48, depicted in the thin line departing from φ = 0.1, crossing the
solid line (τ = 10%) and ending at the 0.48 sensitivity (left panel), and depicted in the thin line departing from τ = 0.1, crossing the solid line (φ = 0.1) in
the right panel.

Macro
Industry-Level Firm-Level
Calibrations Specifications Specifications

Worker-Level
Specifications

Bargaining with
Nonemployment OO
(Worker Variation)

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Rent-Sharing Estimates and
Implied Worker Bargaining Power φ

Figure 2: Overview of Estimates and Calibrations of Worker Bargaining Power

0

Avg.: 0.104

48

s g ) )
e y ) t ) ) ) ) t n ) ) ) )
ia 3) 6) 7) 8) 4)
2) 6) its ed
5) 8) 7) 7) 9) 9)
on on on on
nc wa 03 nen 04 09 09 09 nen tio 09 14 14 14 Firmyer Mf 19 18
str 99 99 99 99 01
99 99 of d
00 00 01 01 00 00
riz riz riz riz
Fra Nori (20rma (20 (20s (20 (20rma ifica (20 (20s (20s (20en Sta14), r (20 (20
(1 y (1 : pr e-ad
(2 ii (2l. (2 t (2 i (2 s (2
Aux (1n (1 d (1h (1 n (2
Hor Hor Hor Ho
,
r
y
a
o
e
d
n
n
c
)
,
)
g
r
,
r
w
a
i
l
l
u
e k a d
t
e o o in e e e a id n n w ) 0 a r
e
e 3 l
1 ) r
ea ea ea ea
rin ieu ne a re ma
im vs et an iga rid
wa nf 00 va
00 01 A5), p itzRojer art rtzg9), pM spaym Ma Ska Ska Bet 014 n (2d Zid ilve
ha em Ree OswHild ree
e-Y e-Y o-Y o-Y
Sh anoich Trab d Trissa
Os , Sa (2 ):
F
M ue 0 K H nd nd nd ), (2 se n
(2 (20
S
F
00 nd nd T
t-S d L an nd
M Re d an P
On, On , Tw , Tw
es es
G (20 ), A nd ti a a a a a 014 ine ten s a and
nd ald vlin2003
d
2
n
,
n
a
a
n
(
a
d
V
e
n
n
a
r
s
s
n
ls Es
l E
i
w Te (
n w a le
a
R a
s
a 8 i a n n n 2 Kl or m n
lva va
rd akf cx
is
eth
tro F tro r F
de Os d in
tel 01 ra ie si si ( , M llia ri
y: wd
n a ro m rt
Sa Sal
av
ivaakhf , Ry
or e (2 A evic Mes Mes linedososen , Wi Ga
on Year Con Yea
ldr
ofi er, o an Tevl
or odo bau Ge
ud Abo
i
d
t
h
P
D
t
d
C
d
s
K
c
n
H
u
w
,
F aj
d n
a n
ri lo a d
S
ge Ch hen
, D n, n, , ar en a
rS
er m- er m
C
an Kli
rth
Ch chf stevo an
lis is a
rd so so so , C ist kov
ri,
Ha
Ou
inc Fir inc Fir
Eic
Ba
er
so nd
go ol
Ca arls arlsardoard Chr Pet
lan Eeva
: Mudy: y: Mudy:
ar arg
n,
C C C C r, e,
do g a
taf
B
y
r
a
s
t
M
i
i
d
d
,
e
t
M
Ca inin
Es
tu St tu St
rd
,P
gg Klin
ris
Ca
r S Our ur S Our
iso
Ba
Ch
He
u
,
O
O
Gu
so
do
ar
C
,
rd
Ca

Note: The figure shows an overview of calibrations as well as implied estimates of worker bargaining power. For the calibrations, we plot the values used in
the respective papers. For the estimates, we build on the meta-study in Card et al. (2018) and use level-on-level specifications from the papers included in
the overview if those are reported. In addition, we report recent estimates from Kline et al. (2019) (Table 8, Panel A, column 12, avg. non-inventor stayer
earnings), Garin and Silvério (2018), an estimate from Card et al. (2018) relating value-added and AKM firm effects (Table 4, Panel A, row 3), and our own
estimate for Austria. For the study of rent-sharing in Austria, we use firm panel data from Bureau van Dijk from 2004 to 2016 and regress wage costs per
employee on value-added per employee, controlling for firm and industry-by-year effects in a level-on-level specification. Some of the estimates surveyed in
Card et al. (2018) are cast as elasticities and are thus upper bounds for the implied worker bargaining power when rent-sharing elasticities are calculated (see
Appendix Section F). Among the worker-level specifications, we calculate an inverse variance weighted mean of the estimates among those studies that either
report level-on-level specifications or rent-sharing elasticities (we omit studies with profit-sharing elasticities since these do not provide bounds for bargaining
power). For our study, we plot the implied worker bargaining power under the assumption that nonemployment is the outside option based on the results in
Table 3. Specifically, we plot the implied φ based on the estimates in columns (2) and (6) of both panels in Table 3 and report φ = 1 if the point estimate
would imply even higher values.

Figure 3: Unemployment Benefit Schedules and Reforms
(a) 1976 Reform
T

60

(b) 1985 Reform
60

C

Benefits (b/w)

40

40

30

30

20

20
0

5000
10000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1975

15000

0

10000

20000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

1976

1984

(c) 1989 Reform

30000

40000

1985

(d) 2001 Reform

60

60
T

C

T

50

Benefits (b/w)

Benefits (b/w)

T

50

50

Benefits (b/w)

C

40

30

C

50

40

30
0

5000

10000
15000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1988

20000

25000

0

1989

10000

20000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
2000

30000

40000

2001

Benefit Change (db/w)

(e) Reform Benefit Changes by Earnings Percentiles
20
15
10
5
0
0

20

40
60
Earnings Percentile
1976

UI Reform Year
1985
1989

80

100

2001

Note: Figures (a)-(d) plot the unemployment benefit schedule before and after each of the four reforms we analyze.
The x-axis shows the income relevant for calculating benefits while the y-axis plots the benefits, calculated as the
unemployment benefits divided by income. The T and C labels delineate the treatment and control earnings ranges
included in the analysis. See footnote 23 and Appendix Section 4.1 for more details about how the treatment and
control regions for each reform were selected. The nominal earnings ranges for the treatment (T) and control (C)
regions for the four reforms are 1976: T: 2080 to 4100 ATS, C: 4100 to 5300 ATS; 1985: T: 18850 to 26900 ATS,
C: 12000 to 16700 ATS; 1989: T: 5300 to 12600 ATS, C: 12600 to 16600 ATS; and 2001: T: 9950 to 20500 ATS,
C: 20500 to 27800 ATS. Figure (e) plots the reform induced benefit change for each reform in earnings percentile
space.

49

Figure 4: Nonparametric Benefit Changes and Wage Effects
(a) 2001 Reform

(b) 1989 Reform
8

4

Change (Pct Pts)

Change (Pct Pts)

6
2

0

4

2

0
-2
10000

15000

20000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

Benefit Change (db/w)
One-Year Effects (dw/w)

25000

30000

6000

Predicted Wage Effects
Two-Year Effects (dw/w)

8000

10000
12000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

Benefit Change (db/w)
One-Year Effects (dw/w)

50

(c) 1985 Reform

14000

16000

Predicted Wage Effects
Two-Year Effects (dw/w)

(d) 1976 Reform

10

20

Change (Pct Pts)

Change (Pct Pts)

8
6
4

10

0

2
0
10000

-10
15000

20000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

Benefit Change (db/w)
One-Year Effects (dw/w)

25000

30000

Predicted Wage Effects
Two-Year Effects (dw/w)

2000

3000
4000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
Benefit Change (db/w)
One-Year Effects (dw/w)

5000

Predicted Wage Effects
Two-Year Effects (dw/w)

Note: The figure plots reform-induced replacement rate changes and wage effects for all four reform. Observations are binned by their base year (year before the reform
was enacted) earnings percentile on the x-axis. The dashed orange line indicates the wage growth that the reform would induce in the calibrated bargaining model
with a wage-benefit sensitivity of 0.48. The red circles indicate the wage effects that the reform induced at the one- and two-year horizon. Section 4.2 provides more
information.

Figure 5: Scatter Plots of Wage Growth and Unemployment Benefit Changes
(a) One-Year Horizon

Wage Growth (dw/w)

8
6
4
2
0
-2
0

5
10
15
Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)
1976

1985

1989

2001

20

Predicted

Estimated Wage Sensitivity σ: -.005 (SE: .008)
Predicted Semi-Elasticity: .484

(b) Two-Year Horizon

Wage Growth (dw/w)

10

5

0

-5

-10
0

5
10
15
Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)
1976

1985

1989

2001

20

Predicted

Estimated Wage Sensitivity σ: .028 (SE: .0181)
Predicted Semi-Elasticity: .484

Note: The figures show scatter plots of wage growth (y-axis) and reform-induced replacement rate changes (x-axis),
db/w, pooling the four reforms outlined in Figures 4(a) through 4(d). Each dot corresponds to a percentile
observation from one of the 4(a) through 4(d). The upper panel shows wage effects after one year and the lower
panel effects after two years. The orange cross marks indicate the predicted wage growth that the reforms would
have induced in the calibrated bargaining model with a wage-benefit sensitivity of 0.48. The remaining symbols
indicate actual data points for wage growth and benefit changes. The estimated wage sensitivities σ̂ are calculated
as the slope of wage growth with respect to changes in the benefit level.

51

Figure 6: Pooled Earnings and Benefit Change Bin Scatter Plots - Treatment Year
(b) Adding Earnings Percentile Fixed Effects

2

Residual: Earnings Change (dw/w)

Residual: Earnings Change (dw/w)

(a) Year Fixed Effects

1

0

-1
-2

0
2
Residual: Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)
Actual

2

1

0

-1

4

-2

0
2
Residual: Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)

Predicted

Actual

Slope: -0.018 (0.008)

4

Predicted

Slope: -0.025 (0.009)

Residual: Earnings Change (dw/w)

(c) Adding Year-Specific Log Earnings Controls

1

.5

0

-.5

-1
-2

-1
0
1
Residual: Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)
Actual

2

Predicted

Slope: -0.004 (0.016), See Table 3, column (1), Row 3

Note: The three panels show the best-fit lines and binned scatter plots from estimating Equation 19 with a
limited set of controls for the pooled sample of all four reforms. The best-fit line slope and standard errors are
the coefficient and standard error on σ0 in Equation 19. The binned scatter plot is estimated on earnings changes
and reform induced benefit changes both residualized by the other included controls. Panel (a) only includes
year fixed effects as controls. Panel (b) adds earnings percentile fixed effects. Panel (c) adds year-specific log
earnings controls. The yellow predicted line plot the predicted earnings change for each benefit change based on
the calibrated Nash bargining model.

52

.4
.2
0
-.2

Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

.6

Figure 7: Heterogeneity of Wage-Benefit Sensitivity by Predicted Post-Separation Time on UI τ :
Model Prediction vs. Empirical Estimates

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

Predicted Fraction of Post-Separation Time on UI (τ)
Empirical Estimate

Predicted

Note: The graph presents wage-benefit sensitivities for workers sorted by their predicted fraction of time on
UI conditional on a separation, i.e. the τ̂i statistic described in Section 2.1.2, further detailed Appendix C,
and summarized in Table 1. Specifically, the analysis sorts the regression sample (of each reform year) into 14
quantiles: the sorting starts with deciles, and then for additional dispersion, further splits up the top and bottom
decline into two equally sized groups (ventiles), and then further splits up the resulting very top/bottom ventiles
into two. The x-axis denotes the quantile-specific mean τ̂i values. The graph then reports two wage-benefit
sensitivities. First, the yellow line (squares) plots the series of model-predicted wage-benefit sensitivity following
Equation (6) and based on a Nash bargaining model with worker bargaining power φ = 0.1, inputting each
group’s mean τ̂i . The blue line (hollow circles) presents the group-specific empirical heterogeneous treatment
effects, estimated in a version of our main regression model (19) but interacting the treatment (reform-induced
benefit changes) with a series of indicators for a worker’s quantile membership regarding her τ value.

53

Online Appendix of:
Wages and the Value of Nonemployment
Simon Jäger, Benjamin Schoefer, Samuel Young and Josef
Zweimüller

A

Additional Tables
Table A.1: Take-Up of Unemployment Insurance among Nonemployment Spells
Prop. of NE Spells

No. Spells

All Spells
2 Years or Shorter
2 Days or Longer
14 Days or Longer
28 Days or Longer
Between 28 Days and 2 Years
Men
Women
Blue Collar
White Collar
Excluding Ages 50-54
Employed At Least 2 Years

0.491
0.508
0.532
0.633
0.662
0.724
0.491
0.491
0.518
0.551
0.488
0.502

2984601
2640962
2754233
2240664
2012286
1668647
1523085
1461516
1538079
1011599
2814545
2011459

Spells between 28 Days and 2 Years
Male
Male Under 50
Female
Female Under 50
Blue Collar
White Collar
Excluding Ages 50-54
Employed At Least 2 Years

0.756
0.755
0.692
0.692
0.788
0.761
0.723
0.732

825336
772648
843311
793565
832004
614514
1566213
1143459

Note: This table plots the share of workers who take up unemployment insurance after the end of an employment
spell. The sample is restricted to prime-age workers (25-54) whose employment spell prior to nonemployment
lasted at least one year and who were not recalled by their previous employer. We also drop workers who
immediately transition from employment into other types of spells, e.g., maternity leave or disability. The sample
period ranges from 1972 to 2000. To illustrate, the table indicates that 63.8% of nonemployment spells of 14
days or longer led to take-up of unemployment insurance.

54

Table A.2: Validation Exercise: Difference-in-Differences Regression Design
1-Year Implied Benefit Change

2-Year Implied Benefit Change

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.152
(.029)
0.097
(.01)

0.148
(.028)
0.095
(.01)

0.153
(.028)
0.105
(.009)

-0.005
(.025)

-0.009
(.024)

-0.022
(.026)

Treatment Year

0.808
(.015)

0.800
(.015)

0.807
(.013)

0.526
(.024)

0.515
(.023)

0.529
(.021)

Pre-p F-test p-val

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.825

0.702

0.399

R2
N (1000s)
Mincerian Ctrls
4-Digit Ind.-Occ. FEs
Firm-Year FEs

0.798
7202

0.807
7198
X
X

0.853
6354
X
X
X

0.629
5179

0.654
5176
X
X

0.773
4563
X
X
X

Placebo: 3 Yr Lag
Placebo: 2 Yr Lag

Note: To assess the extent to which reform-induced benefit changes, assigned based on lagged earnings, shift
benefits implied by realized earnings, we estimate a variant of (19) with benefit changes implied by actual earnings
realizations as the dependent variable:
0
X
bt (wi,t ) − bt−1 (wi,t )
dbi,r,t (w̃i,r,t )
V
V
V
0
=
δeV (1(t−r=e) ×
) + τr,P
+ θr,t−1
+ γr,t
ln wi,r,t−1 + Xi,r,t−1
φVr,t + Vi,r,t .
t−1
wi,r,t−1
wi,r,t−1
e=−L

(A1)
The dependent variable is the normalized change in benefits calculated based on realized earnings while the
regressors are the predicted shifts in benefits based on lagged earnings. For the 2001 reform, the relevant realized
V
V
earnings concept in fact corresponds to lagged earnings. We normalize σ−1
(and σ−2
) to zero in the specification
with the one-year (two-year) implied benefit change as outcome variable. Standard errors based on two-way
clustering at the individual and earnings percentile level are in parentheses. The null hypothesis of the F-test is
that the coefficients of interest are all equal to 0 in the pre-period. The Mincerian controls include time-varying
polynomials of experience, tenure, and age; time-varying gender indicators, and a control for being REBP eligible.
The industry-occupation controls are time-varying fixed effects for each four-digit industry interacted with an
indicator for a blue vs. white-collar occupation.

55

Table A.3: Instrumental Variable Analysis
Earnings Effects
(1)

(2)

-0.0051
(0.019)

-0.0012
(0.021)

-0.024
(0.018)

F statistic

3250.5

3165.2

3208.5

N (1000s)

7139

7139

-0.011
(0.053)

0.012
(0.053)

-0.048
(0.057)

F statistic

437.5

429.7

N (1000s)
Mincerian Ctrls
4-Digit Ind.-Occ. FEs
Firm-Year FEs

5021

5021
X

Treatment Effect

Treatment Effect

(3)
(4)
Panel A: 1-Year Horizon

(5)

(6)

-0.018
(0.019)

0.0027
(0.016)

-0.00048
(0.017)

3142.1

3705.2

3748.4

6299

6298

-0.038
(0.054)

-0.036
(0.046)

-0.046
(0.046)

452.0

442.3

507.5

505.0

5020

5020
X
X

4417

4416
X
X
X

7138
7138
Panel B: 2-Year Horizon

X

X

Note: We implement an instrumental variable strategy akin to the simulated instruments literature (see, e.g.,
Gruber and Saez, 2002; Kopczuk, 2005; Kleven and Schultz, 2014). In the instrumental variables interpretation,
b (w )−bt−1 (wi,t )
specification (A1) serves as first stage and (19) is the reduced form relationship, t i,twi,r,t−1
the endogenous
db

(w

)

i,r,t−1
the excluded instrument. We estimate the model with 2SLS and use two-way clustering
variable, and i,r,t
wi,r,t−1
by individual and by earnings percentile. The Mincerian controls include time-varying polynomials of experience,
tenure, and age; time-varying gender indicators, and a control for being REBP eligible. The industry-occupation
controls are time-varying fixed effects for each four-digit industry interacted with an indicator for a blue vs.
white-collar occupation. All specifications also include reform-specific earnings percentile fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and year-specific log earnings controls.

56

B

Additional Figures

Description of Appendix Figures A.1-A.4 Appendix Figures A.1-A.4 present additional
non-parametric results for the 2001, 1989, 1985, and 1976 replacement rate reforms. The left
column in each set of figures contains results for one-year earnings changes and the right column
contains results for two-year earnings changes.
Panels (a) and (b) plot the average wage growth for the treatment year (navy scatter points)
and the pre-period year (olive scatter points) over the earnings distribution. Their difference
(orange scatter points) is the same earnings growth difference that is plotted in Figures 4(a)- 4(d).
The navy and olive scatter point allow us to better assess the (lack of) pre-trends in earnings
growth by comparing the earnings growth gradient in the treatment and control time periods.
The difference (red scatter points) between average wage growth in the treatment and the
pre-period year is normalized to be zero at the dashed vertical line.
Panels (c) and (d) plot the average of our predicted replacement rate change (the green
line) and the average of the actual replacement rate change (the red line) over the earnings
distribution. The predicted replacement rate change is calculated using the predicted earnings
in the replacement rate reform year. See Section 4.1 for more details about this prediction
process. The actual replacement rate change is the average of the replacement rate changes each
individual actually experiences. In 1989, the two-year change (1988 to 1990) also captures a
follow-up reform in 1990. Our interpretation of two-year wage effects in 1989 therefore largely
captures delayed responses to the 1989 reform. Our two-year results are robust to excluding
1989. For 2001, since UI benefits are determined by lagged earnings, the predicted and actual
replacement rate changes are identical for one-year outcomes.
Panels (e) and (f) further assess the parallel trends assumption underlying our identification
strategy. Here, we estimate the effects of placebo reforms at the same earnings percentile ranges,
but we lag both the reform period and the pre-period by by two years. This placebo exercise
thus assesses whether the earnings percentiles affected by the reform experienced higher or lower
wage growth compared to other earnings percentiles in periods before the reform was enacted.
The results presented in these panels are the same as in Panels (a) and (b) except all years are
lagged by one or two to estimate the effect the placebo effects. For 1976, we cannot run the
two-year placebo check because it would require calculating earnings growth from 1971-’73 and
our data start in 1972. In the main regression analysis, we still report two-year earnings effect
estimates including the 1976 reform because this only requires data starting in 1972.

57

Figure A.1: Additional Results: 2001 Reform
(a) Wage Growth: 2000-2001 vs. 1999-2000; 1 Yr

(b) Wage Growth: 2000-2 vs. 1998-2000; 2 Yr

15

Wage Growth (dw/w)

Wage Growth (dw/w)

20

10

5

10

5

0

0
10000

15

15000
20000
25000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

30000

10000

Wage Growth '99-'00
Wage Growth '00-'01
Difference

4

3

3
Change (Pct Pts)

Change (Pct Pts)

(d) Realized vs. Predicted Benefit Change; 2 Yr

4

2
1

2
1

0

0

-1

-1
15000
20000
25000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Replacement Rate Change

30000

Wage Growth '98-'00
Wage Growth '00-'02
Difference

(c) Realized vs. Predicted Benefit Change; 1 Yr

10000

15000
20000
25000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

30000

10000

Realized RR Change

15000
20000
25000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Replacement Rate Change

(e) Placebo 2000: 1998-9 vs. 1999-2000; 1Yr

30000

Realized RR Change

(f) Placebo 1999: 1996-8 vs. 1998-2000; 2 Yr

15

Wage Growth (dw/w)

Wage Growth (dw/w)

20

10

5

0
10000

15

10

5

0
15000
20000
25000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

30000

Wage Growth '98-'99
Wage Growth '99-'00
Difference

10000

15000
20000
25000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

30000

Wage Growth '96-'98
Wage Growth '98-'00
Difference

Note: The figure plots additional results related to the analysis in Figure 4(a). We provide a description at the
beginning of this Appendix Section (B).

58

Figure A.2: Additional Results: 1989 Reform
(a) Wage Growth: 1987-8 vs. 1988-9; 1 Yr

(b) Wage Growth: 1986-8 vs. 1988-90; 2 Yr
50

Wage Growth (dw/w)

Wage Growth (dw/w)

20

15

10

5

40
30
20
10
0

0
5000

10000
15000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

20000

5000

Wage Growth '87-'88
Wage Growth '88-'89
Difference

10000
15000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

20000

Wage Growth '86-'88
Wage Growth '88-'90
Difference

(c) Realized vs. Predicted Benefit Change; 1 Yr

(d) Realized vs. Predicted Benefit Change; 2 Yr

8
8

Change (Pct Pts)

Change (Pct Pts)

6

4

2

4

2

0

0
5000

10000
15000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Replacement Rate Change

20000

5000

Realized RR Change

10000
15000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Replacement Rate Change

(e) Placebo 1988: 1986-7 vs. 1987-8; 1Yr

20000

Realized RR Change

(f) Placebo 1987: 1984-6 vs. 1986-8; 2Yr

20

40
Wage Growth (dw/w)

Wage Growth (dw/w)

6

15

10

5

0

30

20

10

0
5000

10000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

15000

5000

Wage Growth '86-'87
Wage Growth '87-'88
Difference

10000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

15000

Wage Growth '84-'86
Wage Growth '86-'88
Difference

Note: The figure plots additional results related to the analysis in Figure 4(b). We provide a description at the
beginning of this Appendix Section (B).

59

Figure A.3: Additional Results: 1985 Reform
(a) Wage Growth: 1983-4 vs. 1984-5; 1 Yr

(b) Wage Growth: 1982-4 vs. 1984-6; 2 Yr
15

Wage Growth (dw/w)

Wage Growth (dw/w)

8

6

4

2

0

10

5

0

10000

15000
20000
25000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

30000

10000

Wage Growth '83-'84
Wage Growth '84-'85
Difference

10

8

8
Change (Pct Pts)

Change (Pct Pts)

(d) Realized vs. Predicted Benefit Change; 2 Yr

10

6

4

2

4

0
15000
20000
25000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Replacement Rate Change

30000

10000

Realized RR Change

15000
20000
25000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Replacement Rate Change

(e) Placebo 1984: 1982-3 vs. 1983-4; 1Yr

30000

Realized RR Change

(f) Placebo 1983: 1980-2 vs. 1982-4; 2Yr

8

20

6

15

Wage Growth (dw/w)

Wage Growth (dw/w)

6

2

0

4

2

10

5

0

0
10000

30000

Wage Growth '82-'84
Wage Growth '84-'86
Difference

(c) Realized vs. Predicted Benefit Change; 1 Yr

10000

15000
20000
25000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

15000
20000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

25000

Wage Growth '82-'83
Wage Growth '83-'84
Difference

10000

15000
20000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

25000

Wage Growth '80-'82
Wage Growth '82-'84
Difference

Note: The figure plots additional results related to the analysis in Figure 4(c). We provide a description at the
beginning of this Appendix Section (B).

60

Figure A.4: Additional Results: 1976 Reform
(b) Wage Growth: 1973-5 vs. 1975-7; 2 Yr

40

80

30

60

Wage Growth (dw/w)

Wage Growth (dw/w)

(a) Wage Growth: 1974-5 vs. 1975-6; 1 Yr

20

10

20

0

0
2000

40

3000
4000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

5000

2000

3000
4000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

Wage Growth '74-'75
Wage Growth '75-'76
Difference

Wage Growth '73-'75
Wage Growth '75-'77
Difference

(d) Realized vs. Predicted Benefit Change; 2 Yr

20

20

15

15
Change (Pct Pts)

Change (Pct Pts)

(c) Realized vs. Predicted Benefit Change; 1 Yr

10

5

10

5

0
2000

5000

0
3000
4000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Replacement Rate Change

5000

2000

Realized RR Change

3000
4000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Replacement Rate Change

5000

Realized RR Change

(e) Placebo 1975: 1973-4 vs. 1974-5; 1Yr

Wage Growth (dw/w)

40

30

20

10

0
2000

3000
4000
Nominal Earnings in Base Year

5000

Wage Growth '73-'74
Wage Growth '74-'75
Difference

Note: The figure plots additional results related to the analysis in Figure 4(d). We provide a description at the
beginning of this Appendix Section (B).

61

Figure A.5: Pooled Earnings and Benefit Change Bin Scatter Plots - Placebo Years
Year Fixed Effects
(b) Year e = −3 Placebo Treatment Effects

2

Residual: Earnings Change (dw/w)

Residual: Earnings Change (dw/w)

(a) Year e = −2 Placebo Treatment Effects

1

0

-1

-2
-2

0
2
Residual: Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)
Actual

2

1

0

-1

-2

4

-2

0
2
Residual: Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)

Predicted

Slope: -0.026 (0.009)

Actual

4

Predicted

Slope: -0.114 (0.013)

Adding Earnings Percentile Fixed Effects
(d) Year e = −3 Placebo Treatment Effects

2

Residual: Earnings Change (dw/w)

Residual: Earnings Change (dw/w)

(c) Year e = −2 Placebo Treatment Effects

1

0

-1
-2

0
2
Residual: Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)
Actual

2

1

0

-1

4

-2

0
2
Residual: Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)

Predicted

Slope: -0.018 (0.010)

Actual

4

Predicted

Slope: -0.099 (0.014)

Adding Year-Specific Log Earnings Controls
(f) Year e = −3 Placebo Treatment Effects

1

Residual: Earnings Change (dw/w)

Residual: Earnings Change (dw/w)

(e) Year e = −2 Placebo Treatment Effects

.5

0

-.5

-1
-2

-1
0
1
Residual: Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)
Actual

2

Predicted

Slope: -0.001 (0.014), See Table 3, column (1), Row 2

1

.5

0

-.5

-1
-2

-1
0
1
Residual: Unemployment Benefit Change (db/w)
Actual

Predicted

Slope: 0.016 (0.017), See Table 3, column (1), Row 1

Note: The six panels show the best-fit lines and binned scatter plots from estimating Equation 19 with a limited
set of controls for the pooled sample of all four reforms. The best-fit line slope and standard errors are the
coefficient and standard error on σ−2 and σ−3 in Equation 19. The binned scatter plot is estimated on earnings
changes and reform induced benefit changes both residualized by the other included controls.

62

2

Figure A.6: Robustness Check: Different Levels of Clustering

Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

.05

0

-.05
-3

-2

Year

Eighths of a Percentile
Individual-Percentile
Reform-Percentile
Reform-Percentile-Individual

-1

0

Percentile
Firm-Percentile
Reform-Percentile-Firm

Note: The figure plots estimated δ0 coefficients and associated confidence intervals based on the differencein-differences specification in (19). It estimates specification (4) reported in Table 3 but changes the level
of clustering used to calculate the standard errors. We calculate clustering based on: (1) the eighths of a
percentile level, (2) percentile level, (3) two-way clustering at the individual and percentile level, (4) two-way
clustering at the firm and percentile level, (5) clustering at reform-specific percentile, (6) two-way clustering at
the reform-specific percentile and firm level, and (7) two-way clustering at the reform-specific percentile and
individual level. Reform-specific percentiles are calculated as percentiles separately for each reform sample.

Figure A.7: Robustness Check: Outcome Variable Winsorization

Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

.06
.04
.02
0
-.02
-.04
-3
No Winsoring

-2
-1
Year Rel. to Treatment
Winsor at 1st Pct

0
Winsor at 5th Pct

Note: The figure plots estimated δ0 coefficients and associated confidence intervals based on the difference-indifferences specification in (19). It estimates specification (4) reported in Table 3 but the level of winsorization
we use for the outcome variables varies across specifications.

63

Figure A.8: Robustness Check: Different Parametric Earnings Controls

Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

.1

.05

0

-.05
-3
Log Earnings

-2
-1
Year Rel. to Treatment
Linear Earnings

0

Earnings Percentile

Note: The figure plots estimated δ0 coefficients and associated confidence intervals based on the difference-indifferences specification in (19). It estimates specification (4) reported in Table 3 but changes the year-specific
parametric earnings controls used. The red estimates controls for log earnings, the yellow estimates controls for
earnings linearly, and the green estimates control linearly for earnings percentiles.

Figure A.9: Robustness of Wage-Benefit Sensitivity Estimate to Dropping Observations near
Treatment/Control Cutoff (“Donut Hole” Specification)
Dropping Fixed Percentile Ranges

Dropping Fixed Nominal Ranges
.05

0

Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

.1

-.1

0

-.05

-.2

-.3

-.1
1%

5%

10 %
15 %
20 %
Percentage of Earnings Range Dropped

25 %

1%

5%

10 %
15 %
Percentage of Percentiles Dropped

20 %

25 %

Note: These figures show σ0 estimates from estimating Equation (19) but restricting the sample to not include
treated and control individuals close to the treatment cutoff. The estimates are from specification (4) in Table 3.
The left panel presents estimates where starting from the treatment/control cutoff earnings value, we drop a
fixed percent of the nominal earnings ranges in the treatment and control groups. The right panel presents
estimates where starting from the treatment/control cutoff earnings value, we drop a fixed percent of the earnings
percentiles in the treatment and control groups.

64

Figure A.10: Beliefs About UI Benefit Levels Among Employed Workers

Share of Total

.6

.4

.2

Actual UIB Observed in AMS Data

-9
0%
>
91
%

71

70
%

51
-

50
%

31
-

30
%
<

91
%
>

90
%

71
-

70
%

51
-

50
%

31
-

<

30
%

0

Beliefs (Eurobarometer)

Mean observed UIB % = 65.29%
Mean belief about UIB % = 64.03%

Note: The figure shows worker beliefs about unemployment benefits based on representative Eurobarometer
2006 data for Austria and compares it to data on actually paid out benefits among unemployed workers in 2006
based on AMS data. The Eurobarometer 2006 wave asked 568 employed respondents the following question:
“Suppose you are laid off, what is your belief about the percentage of your current income that would be replaced
through unemployment insurance and the Austrian social security system in the first six months?” The answer
categories are 91 to 100%, 71 to 90%, 51 to 70%, 31 to 50%, less than 30%, and a category for those who do
not know. 90.1% of respondents provide a quantitative answer. The figure presents the distribution of actual
benefits as a percent of net earnings and individuals’ beliefs about their benefits. We bin the actual benefit ratios
into the same interval bins that were presented in the Eurobarometer survey. To extract the mean response, we
use an interval regression and find a mean of 64.03% (SE 0.72). We also report the actual replacement rate of
unemployed workers in 2006 based on AMS data and find a mean of 65.29%.

65

Table A.4: 1(Mth UI > 0| Mth NE > 0) ×100

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: UI Takeup, 1 Year Ahead (100 * Indicator)
Placebo: 3 Yr Lag
Placebo: 2 Yr Lag
Treatment Year
Pre-p F-test p-val
R2
N (1000s)
Placebo: 3 Yr Lag
Placebo: 2 Yr Lag
Treatment Year
Pre-p F-test p-val

-0.090 -0.055 -0.119 -0.113 0.018
0.030
(0.110) (0.114) (0.109) (0.111) (0.129) (0.133)
-0.200 -0.108 -0.143 -0.104 -0.129 -0.086
(0.114) (0.111) (0.101) (0.097) (0.114) (0.115)
0.042 0.127 0.094 0.128 0.207 0.241
(0.115) (0.109) (0.110) (0.106) (0.122) (0.123)
0.203

0.614

0.360

0.518

0.469

0.665

0.031
0.071
0.124
0.148
0.418
0.437
910
910
908
908
609
608
Panel B: UI Takeup, 2 Year Ahead (100 * Indicator)
-0.031 -0.026 -0.054 -0.060 0.066
0.044
(0.078) (0.084) (0.082) (0.085) (0.097) (0.096)

0.145 0.124 0.163 0.138 0.221 0.198
(0.081) (0.083) (0.081) (0.081) (0.085) (0.086)
0.696

0.753

0.511

0.485

0.501

0.646

R2
0.032
N (1000s)
1127
Mincerian Ctrls
4-Digit Ind.-Occ. FEs
Firm-Year FEs

0.074
1127
X

0.124
1126

0.147
1126
X
X

0.386
820

0.404
819
X
X
X

X

X

Note. We evaluate the effect of four reforms to the Austrian unemployment insurance benefit schedule on the
take-up of UI. In particular, we begin with the months on UI in year t + 1 or t + 2 (as a share of total months),
which appears in Appendix Figure A.14, and indicate if there are nonzero months on UI and nonzero months
nonemployed. This indicator is missing if the individual has no months nonemployed in year t + 1 or t + 2,
in order to isolate take up. The outcome complements the analysis fo the effect on months on UI observed in
Appendix Figure A.14 (separation effects). This indicator is multiplied by 100 for legibility. Errors are two-way
clustered at the individual- and percentile-level.

66

Figure A.11: Distribution of Benefit Changes at the Firm and Industry-by-Occupation Level
(a) Firm Level
.4

Density

.3

.2

.1

0

0
5
10
15
Average Reform-Induced Benefit Change at Firm Level

20

(b) Industry-by-Occupation Level

.4

Density

.3

.2

.1

0

-5
0
5
10
15
Average Reform-Induced Benefit Change at Industry-Occupation Level

Note: The figure plots the distribution of the average reform-induced benefit change aggregated at the firm and
industry-by-occupation level.

67

C

Measuring Fraction of Time on UI, and Calibrating
the Wage-Benefit Sensitivity

Here we describe the measurement of the share of time spent in the various labor market states
and the implied wage-benefit sensitivity.
Separator Sample We measure subsequent time spent in different labor market states conditional on an employment to nonemployment separation. We start with our regression sample of
workers, described in Section 4.1. Although the sample of workers is the same as for our main
analysis, for the τ calculations we use data with labor market states recorded at the daily rather
than monthly level. This allows for more precise measurement of the time spent in each labor
market state.
We then define separators in each year t as individuals who separate from employment into
nonemployment for at least one day in the next year t + 1. Importantly, we do not impose that
the separator ever take up UI during nonemployment. In our baseline specification, we do not
require the separators ever return to employment. In alternate, more realistic, specifications, we
require that the separators have at least one subsequent employment spell in the next four years.
This restriction drops emigrants or other permanent labor force exits.
Labor Market States For these separators, we count the fraction of time spent in the
following three exhaustive labor market states:
τ E : Employment - includes dependent employment (i.e. wage and salary work), minor
employment, self-employment, civil servants/military/civil service, maternity/parental
leave associated with a firm, and sick leave associated with a firm.
τ U : UI-Affected Nonemployment For measuring τ U , “UI” encompasses both UA and UI.
τ U :U I : Unemployment Insurance
τ U :U A : Unemployment Assistance - Notstandshilfe, which is indexed nearly one-to-one
to individual-level unemployment insurance and hence affected by the reform-induced
UIB changes we study.
τ O : Other Nonemployment - includes any other recorded ASSD spell statuses43 and other
missing labor market states not recorded in the ASSD.44
For overlapping spells in the ASSD, we prioritize spells based on the following ordering U I 
U A  Employment  Non-UI Employment. For example, if on one day an individual has a UI
and an employment spell, the day would be counted towards UI.
43

Retirement and disability cover almost half of all reported non-UI nonemployment. Around a quarter is
potentially spuriously reported social security payments without employer information. Another important
category is registered job search (yet without UI receipt) – which in the literature is often counted as unemployment
due to its search connotation, yet which we here carefully count as non-UI nonemployment.
44
For example, if individuals emigrate from Austria their labor market states are not recorded in the ASSD.

68

Time Horizons After Separation To calibrate τ , we exploit the fact that the discount rate
ρ is negligible compared to the job finding and separation rates (f and δ). τ E , τ U , and τ O thus
correspond to the share of time separators spend in each respective labor market state. Since our
model has infinitely lived agents, we approximate these measures by counting for a “long time.”
In our baseline specification, we stop counting labor market states (in both the numerator
and denominator of the “share of time” calculation) at the earliest of 16 years post-separation
or an individual’s death. We stop at 16 years because it is the longest horizon we can study
for all of our reforms (the latest of which is in 2001 and our data end in 2018). This variant is
most conservative with respect to the wage-benefit sensitivity because it assumes that events
such as retirement occur unexpectedly and hence essentially generate a state that is non-UI
nonemployment but is still accounted for in the “denominator” of the fraction. We then add
more realistic variants where we “stop the clock” earlier when an individual reaches
1. Absorbing Retirement: earliest of 16 years post-separation, death, or absorbing retirement. Absorbing retirement is entering retirement and never subsequently becoming
employed or taking up UI.
2. Absorbing Retirement or Disability earliest of 16 years post-separation, death, absorbing retirement, or absorbing disability (defined analogously to absorbing retirement).45
Actual Share of Time Spent in Labor Market States Panel A of Appendix Table A.5
presents the average fraction of post-separation time in different labor market states for the
restricted sample of separators. Columns (1) and (2) stop counting after either absorbing
retirement or absorbing disability. Columns (3) and (4) stop counting after absorbing retirement.
Columns (5) and (6) simply stop counting at 16 years or death. The even columns include no
reemployment restrictions and the odd columns add the reemployed in four year restriction.
Adding more conservative restrictions reduces the share of time spent in other nonemployment,
τ O , but keeps the relevant share of time affected by UI, τ U , relatively constant.
Panel B of Appendix Table A.5 presents the average fraction of time spent in different labor
market states for the entire regression sample, not conditioning on a separation.46 There are
three reasons why the share of time spent on UI and UA are lower for this sample than the
separator sample. First, the separation induces a nonemployment spell, whereas most of our full
sample will not initially separate. Since Panel A conditions on a separation and we can only
measure outcomes for a finite amount of time, the separator sample will by design have a higher
share of time spent nonemployed. Second, the separation from employment may raise individuals’
future separation rates (or lower job finding rates). Third, there may be compositional differences
between individuals more or less likely to separate. We account for this below by adjusting the
predicted τ estimates based on observables.
Predicting the Wage-Benefit Sensitivity We then assign each worker in our regression
sample (whether she separates or not) a predicted τ̂i . Since many of these workers will not
separate, we construct these predicted values in order to account for compositional differences
45

Over 90 % of retirement and disability spells are “absorbing.”
Here there is no need to impose a 4-year reemployment restriction because all individuals in the sample are
initially employed, so the only worker we would drop with the restriction is one that separates into permanent
nonemployment on January 2nd for the next 4 years.
46

69

between the regression sample and the separator sample in our τ calibrations. Our prediction
model is an OLS regression of the separators’ actual fraction of time spent in each state on the
following predictors xi :
• 4-digit-industry by occupation (blue/white collar) FE
• Fixed effects for tenure categories in 3-year steps up to 15 years (cutoffs 2, 5, 8, 11, 14)
• Fixed effects for experience categories in 5-year steps up to 25 years (cutoffs: 5, 10, 15, 20)
• Fixed effects for age categories in 5-year steps (cutoffs 29, 34, 39, 44, 49)
• Region of establishment FE (3-digit NUTS)
• Gender FE
• 6 categories of months since UI: 1 for the censored value, then year-specific quintiles
• Reform-Year FE
For our preferred specification, column (1) in Table 1 and in Appendix Table A.5, the
R for this prediction exercise is 0.09. We then use the model coefficients on the xs to predict
individual-level τ U , τ E , and τ O for each individual in our regression sample.
2

Average Predicted Share of Time Spent in Labor Market States The first five rows
in Table 1 present the average predicted τ̂i values across the entire regression sample. The six
columns present the same specifications as in Appendix Table A.5. Compared to the average τi
values just for the sample of actual separators in Appendix Table A.5, the average predicted
τ̂i values across the entire sample in Table 1 are slightly larger for UI affected nonemployment
and other nonemployment and correspondingly smaller for employment. These differences
are consistent with the actual separators having characteristics associated with higher future
separation rates. Yet, across the two groups, the τ averages are qualitatively quite similar.
Calibrating the Wage-Benefit Sensitivity Besides reporting the underlying τ values by
state, we also report the implied wage-benefit sensitivities. We report the sensitivities from
our baseline two-state model (described in Section 2.1) and the extended three-state model
(described in Appendix Section D). In both versions, we assume φ = 0.1.
We construct the sensitivities in two different ways:
1. Individual-level τ̂i values, E[dw/db(τ̂i )]: Here we plug in the individual-level τ̂i values
into the the two- and three-state wage-benefit sensitivity expressions and take averages
over these individual-level wage benefit sensitivities. Since the wage-benefit sensitivity is a
non-linear function of τ̂i , this respects Jensen’s Inequality. Additionally, for the three-state
model where the wage-benefit sensitivity depends on τ̂iU and τ̂iO , this method takes into
account the individual-level correlation between the two different predicted values.
2. Average τ̂i values, E[dw/db(E[τ̂i ])]: Here we take the average E[τ̂i ] values presented in
Table 1 . and plug them directly into the two- and three-state wage benefit sensitivities.
70

The two- and three-state calibrated wage-benefit sensitivities constructed in both ways
described above are presented in the bottom four rows of Table 1. Across the different specifications, the two-state model predicts a pass-through of 0.45 to 0.49. Additionally, in our
preferred specification, column (1), the difference between the individual- and average-level τ̂i
constructions is around 0.02 percentage points. The three-state model predicts a qualitatively
lower pass-through of between 0.17 to 0.24.

71

Table A.5: Actual Fraction of Post-Separation Time on UI (τ )
Time Restriction:

Ret’nt or Disability

Reemployment Restriction:

4-Year
(1)

None
(2)

Retirement

No Restriction

4-Year None 4-Year
(3)
(4)
(5)

None
(6)

0.110
0.082
0.028
0.681
0.209

0.109
0.081
0.028
0.672
0.220

0.104
0.077
0.027
0.600
0.296

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

0.039
0.030
0.009
0.758
0.203

Panel A: Separators
UI-Affected Nonemployment - τ U
Unemployment Insurance - τ U :U I
Unemployment Assistance - τ U :U A
Employment - τ E
Other Nonemployment - τ O

0.116
0.087
0.028
0.703
0.181

0.115
0.087
0.027
0.627
0.258

0.107
0.080
0.027
0.608
0.286

Panel B: Full Sample (Not Conditioning on Separation)
UI-Affected Nonemployment - τ U
Unemployment Insurance - τ U :U I
Unemployment Assistance - τ U :U A
Employment - τ E
Other Nonemployment - τ O

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

0.041
0.032
0.009
0.826
0.133

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

0.040
0.031
0.009
0.791
0.169

Note: The five rows in Panel A and B present estimates of the fraction of time that individuals in our sample
spend on unemployment insurance τ̂ U :U I , on unemployment assistance τ̂ U :U A , which we pool into a single UI
affected state τ̂ U (the sum of τ̂ U :U I and τ̂ U :U A , where unemployment assistance is included because it is indexed
nearly one-for-one with UI, and we refer to “UI” in the text as encompassing both), employed τ̂ E , and in other
nonemployment τ̂ O . The estimates here differ Table 1 because they are the actual fraction of time spent in each
state rather than the predicted fraction of time for separators (Panel A), and for the full sample (unconditionally
on a separation, Panel B). Panel A shows the fraction of time for actual separators and Panel B shows the
fraction of time for the entire analysis sample. For the entire sample, we start counting future states in January
of each year and do not need to add any reemployment restriction. The τ values for our preferred specification,
column (1), are calculated as follows. We stop including labor market states in this share at the earliest of 16
years, reaching age 70, death, or absorbing retirement or disability (defined as entering retirement or disability
and without any subsequent employment or UI/UA spells within the 16 year horizon). Columns (3) and (4) also
stop counting at absorbing retirement but not disability, and columns (5) and (6) stop counting labor market
states only at the earliest of 16 years or age 70. The reemployment-restriction columns (1), (3) and (5) require
that individuals in the separator sample return to re-employment (at any job) sometime in the next four years
(for at least one day).

72

D

Accounting For Nonemployment Without UI Receipt:
Three-State Model

Our model in the main text in Section 2 considers a two-state model of employment and UIyielding nonemployment. We now consider a general case by which workers’ nonemployment spell
can consist of nonemployment with UI and without UI receipt. The setup can be interpreted to
capture a series of specific institutional features such as limited take-up, finite potential benefit
duration, or wait periods. We consider a series of such more specific cases in Appendix Section
E.1.
The value of nonemployment continues to be denoted by value N . While nonemployed, the
worker loops through states UI (value U and instaneneous payoff z U (b)), and other nonemployment
(value O with instantaneous payoff z O ). Transitions from state s to s0 are described by Markov
0
process xs→s . We set xO→E = xU →E = f and xE→N = δ. When separating, due to a exogenous
separation shock δ or due to the worker taking up the nonemployment outside option in bargaining,
fraction υ workers start in UI, whereas fraction 1 − υ start in non-UI nonemployment.47
The associated value functions are defined as follows:
ρE = w + δ(N − E)
N = υU + (1 − υ)O

(A2)
(A3)

ρU = z U (b) + f (E − U ) + xU →O (O − U )

(A4)

ρO = z + f (E − O) + x

(A5)

O

O→U

(U − O)

The flow value of nonemployment can then be reformulated as a weighted average of the
instantaneous payoffs in each state, analogously to our baseline two-state expression (3) yet
augmented with the third state of non-UI nonemployment:
ρN = τ U z U (b) + τ O z O + τ E w0

(A6)

where τ E = 1 − τ U − τ O . Concretely in terms of transition rates and the discount factor, the τ s
weights are:
τE =

f
δ+f +ρ
|

{z

=1−τ N

(A7)

}

δ+ρ
(1 − ν)xO→U
ν(xO→U + f + ρ)
τ =
· O→U
+
δ+f +ρ x
+ xU →O + f + ρ xO→U + xU →O + f + ρ
"

#

(A8)

U

|

τO =

{z

τN

} |
"

{z
α

δ+ρ
(1 − ν)(xU →O + f + ρ)
xU →O ν
· O→U
+
δ+f +ρ x
+ xU →O + f + ρ xO→U + xU →O + f + ρ
|

{z

τN

} |

{z

1−α

}
#

(A9)
}

which we can separate into a series intuitive weights.
δ+ρ
(i) τ E = δ+ff +ρ is the (discount-rate-adjusted) time spent in employment. (ii) τ N = δ+f
=
+ρ
E
1 − τ is the (discount-rate-adjusted) time spent in nonemployment. Within the nonemployment
47

This consideration eliminates the need to consider separate wages for eligible and ineligible workers.

73

state, (iia) workers spend fraction α of nonemployment time receiving UI, and (iib) share 1 − α
of time nonemployment not receiving z U (b) but instead z O . There are various ways by which
workers end up in a given nonemployment state. They either enter the state initially (and then
stay, or move out but then back in). Or, they enter the state from the other nonemployment
state (and then leave, but may re-enter).
The Nash wage bargain follows the same structure as in the two-state model, yet augmented
with the third state in the outside option:
w = φp + (1 − φ)ρN

(A10)



= φp + (1 − φ) · τ U z U (b) + τ O z O + τ E w0
As in the full model in Section 2.2, we assume that
sensitivity is:

dz U (b)
db

dw0
db

=

dw
=
db

dw
,
db

(A11)

= 1 which implies that the wage-benefit

dw
dw0
dz O
= (1 − φ) τ U + τ O
+ τE
db
db
db
which, if again using



!

(A12)

solves into:


O

(1 − φ) τ U + τ O dzdb



1 − (1 − φ)τ E

(A13)

Maximal attenuation vis-à-vis the two-state model arises if payoff z O is insensitive to b, i.e.
O
dz O
= 0 (assuming away the curious case of dzdb < 0):
db
dw
(1 − φ)τ U
(1 − φ)τ U
=
=
db
1 − (1 − φ)τ E
1 − (1 − φ)(1 − (τ U + τ O ))

(A14)

Here, the higher τ O , the less weight nonemployment value N puts on b-sensitive payoffs z U (b) or
w0 , thereby attenuating either the mechanical effect or the feedback effect in the wage-benefit
sensitivity, or both. In our baseline two-state model in Section 2.1, we permitted only two
states – nonemployment with UI receipt and employment, and therefore 1 − τ U = τ E , effectively
assuming that τ O = 0. We calibrated τ U to the empirical share of post-separation time spent on
UI – a number that carries over to the extended three-state model (i.e. τ U = τ ). In the extended
three-state model, the implied time in reemployment τ E = 1 − τ U − τ O therefore is the τ s that
is attenuated by measuring and including τ O .
Comparison to Baseline Two-State Model Our baseline two-state model assumed that
υ = 1 and xU →O = 0. This implies that τ O = 0, α = 1, τ N = τ U , and τ E = 1 − τ U .
Extensions Alternative setups are conceivable. A interesting setup we side-step above is
one by which outside options are differentiated by eligibility status, which in turn may evolve
while employed. Another setup would have workers be permanently, or expectedly, eligible or
ineligible, with this status known to the bargaining parties. We cannot credibly differentiate
these alternatives in the data.

74

Calibrating the Wage-Benefit Expression in the Presence of Non-UI Nonemployment Table 1 presents estimates of the wage-benefit passthrough in expression A14 calibrated
based on our estimates of τ U and τ O . In our preferred specification, column (1), the estimated
wage-benefit sensitivity from the three-state model is 0.24, compared to 0.46–0.48 in the two-state
variant. See Appendix Section C for more details about the three-state model calibration.

75

E
E.1

Additional Theoretical Material
Additional Model Variants

Next, we show that the key prediction from the benchmark model carries over to a wide variety
of richer models considered in the literature. In Section 2.3 we additionally discuss alternative
models that insulate wages from the nonemployment value, and which may therefore rationalize
the zero effect of b on w that we document in the empirical Section 4.
I. Equilibrium Adjustment: DMP Model Together, our difference-in-differences design
and theoretical framework aim to isolate the micro effects of an idiosyncratic shift in the outside
option on wages, holding constant (or netting out with a control group) market-level adjustment.
Yet, we cannot definitely empirically rule out the concern that experimental groups populate
segmented – rather than roughly the same – labor markets. Our treatment effect would then
capture “macro” effects. Next, we derive this macro wage-benefit sensitivity explicitly with
equilibrium adjustment in the context of a calibrated DMP model. We show that the magnitude
and structure of the micro and macro sensitivities are strikingly similar quantitatively and
structurally. We conclude that market-level spillovers cannot explain small zero wage-benefit
sensitivities.
The canonical DMP Nash wage replaces the continuation term of the worker with an
equilibrium value related to labor market tightness θ = v/u, the ratio of vacancies v to
unemployment u):48
=(1−φ)ρN

w

DMP

z

}|

{

= φp + (1 − φ)b + φθk

(A15)

With a market-wide increase in benefits, the capital gain continuation term of ρN is pinned
down by firm’s free entry, such that the wage comovement is described by:
dwDMP = (1 − φ)db + φkdθ

(A16)

0

(θ)
k
Next we solve the free entry condition q(θ)
= J = p−w
for kdθ = −dw0 · η1 fρ+δ
to move into the
ρ+δ
wage equation (noting that θ is only affected by b through w and denoting by η the elasticity of
the matching function respect to unemployment):

"

dw
⇔

DMP

= (1 − φ)db + φ −dw

dwDMP
1−φ
=
(θ)
db
1 + φ η1 fρ+δ
≈

1−φ
1 + φ · η1 · (u−1 − 1)

48

0 DMP

1 f (θ)
·
ηρ+δ

#

(A17)
(A18)
(A19)

In DMP models, the reemployment capital-gains term in the worker’s outside option ρN = b+f [E(w0DMP )−N ]
is replaced with the firm’s value of a filled job (recognizing the Nash sharing rule such that (1 − φ)f [E(w0 ) − N ] =
φf [J(w0 ) − V ]). Free entry has firms post vacancies until the value of vacancies is pushed to zero V = 0 ⇔ kq = J,
implying that φf [J(w0 ) − V ] = φkf /q = φkθ, due to the standard constant-returns matching function, by which
f (θ)/q(θ) = θ, such that φkθ now captures the worker’s capital gain from reemployement (1 − φ)f (E(w0 ) − N ).

76

f
≈ fδ ≈ 1−u
where step 2 uses dw = dw0 , and step 3 uses ρ+δ
= u−1 − 1, where u denotes the
u
market-level unemployment rate (since ρ is small compared to worker flow rates). Strikingly, this
expression mirrors our structural micro sensitivity except for two differences. First, the φ factor
in the denominator is divided by η < 1, attenuating the sensitivity slightly. Second, the relevant
unemployment rate u refers to the market-level average rather than the worker’s idiosyncratic time
= 1−φ.
in nonemployment post-separation τ . In both limits, we have dw/db τ =1 = dwDMP /db
u=1
For φ = 0.1 (micro estimates from rent sharing), u ≈ 7% and η = 0.72 (e.g., Shimer, 2005), we
obtained a calibrated benchmark for the wage-benefit sensitivity of 1+0.11−0.1
≈ 0.32. Note
1
· 0.93
0.72 0.07

that the u here need not coincide with the τ (or the τ U we provide in the extended model with
nonemployment without UI receipt), as the rate here is cross-sectional rather than tracking
a worker after a separation (and, respectively, as some of that non-UI nonemployment state
is spent out of the labor force while the model at hand only considers those workers actively
searching).49 Moreover, higher unemployment u increases the macro sensitivity almost exactly
as a higher τ increases the micro sensitivity, which generalizes the implications of whether the
sensitivity differs in the local unemployment rate, a prediction we test in Section 5.1. Therefore,
our quantitative and structural benchmark for the wage-benefit sensitivity carries over to a macro
context with equilibrium adjustment and perfectly segmented labor markets for the treatment
group and the control group.
II. Stole and Zwiebel (1996) Bargaining with Multi-Worker Firms Extensions to
multi-worker contexts highlight the complications that the splitting of the inside option entails
with multi-worker firms and diminishing returns (see Jäger and Heining, 2019, for empirical
evidence). We build on the derivation of the Nash wage with firm level production function
Y = nα in Acemoglu and Hawkins (2014) augmented with our worker-specific outside option
Ωi :50
wMultiWorker =

αφ
· xf · nα−1
+ (1 − φ)Ωi
f
1 − φ + αφ

(A20)

That is, multi-worker firm bargaining preserves the sensitivity of wages to outside options Ω.51
III. Representative vs. Individual Households Implementations of matching-frictional
labor markets are largely either in terms of individual households with linear utility or with
large households that send off households into employment with full insurance in the spirit of
indivisible labor (Rogerson, 1988; Hansen, 1985), for example Merz (1995), Andolfatto (1996),
or Shimer (2010). In Appendix Section E.2.1 we extend this setting to an individual household
with nonlinear utility. Our individual household bridges these setups with the assumption of
perfect capital markets (and negligibly long unemployment spells).
49

With η = 0.5 instead of 0.72, the sensitivity is 0.25. With τ = 0.05 instead of 0.07, we have 0.25.
Cahuc et al. (2008) also derive a dynamic search model with Stole and Zwiebel (1996) bargaining and
heterogeneous worker groups i that may differ in their outside options bi and derive the wage for group i as
R 1 1−α
wi (n) = (1 − α)ρNi + 0 a α Fi (na) da.
51
These models also imply that rent sharing estimates from firm-specific TFP shifts xf transferred to predict
wage sensitivity to b would require an additional scaling up if α < 1.
50

77

IV. Endogenous Separations The Nash wage is the same in models with endogenous
separations among existing jobs due to idiosyncratic productivity shocks, where p is replaced
with pit . Inframarginal surviving matches, i.e. those that we track in the data, exhibit the same
pass-through of Ωi into wages.52
V. On-the-Job Search On its own, on-the-job search with a job ladder (e.g., due to heterogeneous firms or match-specific quality) need not change the wage bargaining process as long as
the worker is required to give notice to the firm before engaging in bargaining with the next
employer. Nonemployment then remains the outside option in wage bargaining. This tractable
route is taken by for example Mortensen and Nagypal (2007) and Fujita and Ramey (2012).
We discuss alternative models with competing job offers as outside options in Section 2.3. In
this class of models however, new hires from nonemployment still use nonemployment as their
outside option in their initial bargain, where wages thus follow our baseline model.
VI. Finite Potential Benefit Duration While a common approach is to model benefits as
having infinite potential duration, its duration is finite in Austria, as we describe in Section
3. Yet, in the Austrian setting, infinite benefit duration is a particularly good approximation
for initially incumbent workers because only around 20% of unemployment spells end up in
benefit exhaustion (Card et al., 2007). Moreover, after UI exhaustion, eligible Austrian workers
collect a follow-up UI substitute s(b) < b (Notstandshilfe, i.e. unemployment assistance (UA)).
Importantly, s(b) is explicitly indexed to a worker’s pre-exhaustion UIB levels and – while in
many cases lower – its level shifts almost one-to-one with changes in b. This feature leaves
post-UI benefits sensitive to our reforms even for UI exhausters.53
Here, we extend the model to a two-tier system of finite-duration UIBs b, after which
fraction α of still-jobless workers move into post-UI substitute s(b) < b. Denote by ζ the
fraction of the unemployment spell a separator spends on UA (vs. UI). We treat ζ as the
probability that a given separator moves into s (UA) or b (UB) post-separation. An initially
employed worker’s expected
outside option is therefore
Ω = ρE[N ] = (1 − ζ) · ρNb + ζ · ρNs =


ζ τs αs + (1 − τs )ws + (1 − ζ) τb b + (1 − τb )wb . With permanent types and wages ws < wb ,
Nash still implies identical sensitivities dws /ds = dwb /db. Moreover, due to fs = fb , we have
that once in a type, τs = τb .
In consequence, the wage sensitivity to benefits for the finite benefit duration is:
dwfinite
=
db

(1 − φ)τ
− (1 − φ)(1 − τ )

1
1−ζ (1−α ds
db )

(A21)

Using the fact that only 20% of workers exhaust their benefits and the fraction of the unem52

In these models, bi will also shift the reservation quality at which matches are formed and destroyed. Jäger
et al. (2018) study a large extension of potential duration of UI for older workers and document substantial
separation responses of that policy, which perhaps served as a bridge into early retirement in particular for
workers in declining industries. In this paper, we do not detect significant separation effects to increases in benefit
leves, perhaps because we study younger workers.
53
UA benefits are capped at 92% of the worker’s UI benefits. Importantly, for uncapped workers, UA benefits
shift 0.95 to one with the worker’s UIB level. The precise formulate is UABi = min{0.92bi , max{0, 0.95bi −
Spousal Earningsi + Dependent Allowancesi }}. Due to the spousal earnings means test, not all workers are
eligible for UA. For 1990, Lalive et al. (2006) report that median UA was about 70 % of the median UIB. Based
on data from 2004, Card et al. (2007) gauge the average UA at 38 % of UIB for the typical job loser.

78

ployment spell a separator spends on UA (vs. UI), we calibrate ζ = 0.8·0+0.2·1/f
= 0.2, where
1/f
1/f denotes both expected duration remaining in nonemployment after benefit exhaustion as
well as the average time at separation. A fraction α ≈ 0.6 of those workers move on to the
post-UI substitute unemployment assistance. We calculate the fraction α as the share of workers
who take up post-UI benefits within a 60 day window of exhausting their UI benefits; for this
analysis, the sample is restricted to workers who do not take up employment in the same time
window. Among those who receive them, the post-UI benefits are almost one-to-one indexed to
the household’s previous, actually received UI benefit level, and thus move in lock-step with
benefit changes.54


As a result, the term [1 − ζ 1 − α ds
] = 0.91 provides negligible attenuation of the wagedb
benefit sensitivity: the wage benefit-sensitivity remains at 0.32. This is an underestimate if the
workers exhausting UI have a lower job finding rate and thus a larger τ , which for that subset of
workers would greatly amplify the sensitivity: setting τ = 0.15 rather than 0.104 will restore
dw/db = 0.4 for those workers.
In other words, since an initially employed Austrian worker has a low probability of benefit
exhaustion and, moreover, post-UI benefits are indexed to UI benefits our design is robust to
finite benefit duration. Perhaps this fact also explains why we also do not find wage effects from
potential benefit duration extensions in Section 5.1 and Appendix J. We have also not found
evidence that workers with particularly high potential benefit durations exhibit different wage
sensitivity to the unemployment benefit level.
VII. UI Wait Periods for Unilateral Quitters Austria has broad UI eligibility that
encompasses even quitters. There is however a 28-day wait period, after which UI recipients
enjoy full potential benefit duration (i.e. for 28 more calendar days than their peers receiving UI
immediately). We evaluate this consideration in two steps. First, we define a probability 1 − υ
that a bargaining progress breakdown leaves the worker eligible for UI whereas at probability υ
leaves the worker ineligible (for any social insurance program). Ineligible workers wait 28 days
until they receive UI, implying that z ineligigble = z eligigible − b for initial period of nonemployment.
In discrete time, N in = z in + f m βE in + (1 − f m )βN el , such that:

E[N ] = (1 − υ)N el + υNh in

(A22)

= (1 − υ)N + υ z + (1 − f )βN + f βE
el



in

m

= N el 1 − υ 1 − (1 − f m )β




el

h

m

in

i

+ υ z in + f m βE in

i

(A23)
(A24)

The effect of b on the expected outside option is bounded from below by an attenuation factor
times our previously derived sensitivity of N to b, due to dE in /db ≥ 0 and dz in /db ≥ 0:

dE[N ]
dN el 
≥
1 − υ + υ(1 − f m )β
{z
}
db
db |

(A25)

≈1−υf m

54

The law stipulates that post-UI benefits move with a slope of 0.92 along with previous UI benefits. There are
additional additive components, e.g., benefits for dependents and reductions for other income, and the post-UI
benefit level is capped at 0.95 times previous UI benefits. For the calibration, we pick the middle point between
0.95 and 0.92 and assume ds/db ≈ 0.935.

79

where β = 0.9965 ≈ 1 at monthly frequencies. Therefore, the wage-benefit sensitivity is at least:
dwLimited Elig.
1 − υfm
≥ (1 − φ) ·
db
1 + φ (τ −1 − 1)

(A26)

Calibrating the bracketed attenuation factor with f = 0.12 (incorporating a monthly β = 0.9965
will not change the result) implies that the attenuation is by 0.88 even if all separations were to go
into nonemployment with initial ineligibility (i.e. ν = 1). That is, since so many nonemployment
spells go beyond one month, this institutional feature has limited effects on the predicted
wage-benefit sensitivity.55 This benchmark thereby also evaluates also delayed take-up for any
reason even among the immediately eligible. In reality, most separations into nonemployment in
Austria entail UI eligibility such that ν is closer to zero than to one, greatly limiting attenuation.
VIII. Wage Stickiness Rather than Period-by-Period Bargaining Real-world wage
renegotiations may occur infrequently on the job, e.g. arrive at rate γ. Then, the measured wage
response to a (permanent) shift in db is increasing in time-since-reform dt, and on average:

E

"

dwsticky,dt
1−φ
= (1 − e−γdt ) ·
+ e−γdt · 0
−1
db
1 + φ (τ − 1)
#

(A27)

Empirically, we approach this aspect from three angles. First, we start with observing average
wage earnings in the first full calendar year after the reform takes effect.56 We then additionally
investigate earnings in the calendar year in the subsequent year, allowing two years for wage
pass-through, whereas existing evidence on wage stickiness suggests half of wages to get reset
within one year.57 Second, we consider wage effects in new jobs, for workers switching jobs with
or without unemployment spells in between, where we follow the standard assumption that new
jobs get to set wages initially in a flexible way. Third, we sort jobs (firms) by the usual degree of
wage volatility, essentially by an empirical proxy for γ, and investigate heterogenous wage effects.
IX. Taxation Our bargaining setup so far sidesteps the tax system, but the results would
carry over to a model in which both the firm and the worker face a (linear) income tax, and
bargain over net surpluses by means of setting a gross wage. Taking into account taxation
however would increase the effect of our UIB variation on wages. In Austria, benefits are not
taxed, whereas wages and profits are. If the employer’s and the worker’s income taxes are
approximately taxed by the same τ , then changes in net benefits b enter the worker’s outside
b
option relatively as 1−τ
. For τ ≈ 0.3, accounting for the tax system would therefore amplify the
1
predicted sensitivity of wages to b by 1−0.3
≈ 1.43 for any given φ. Analogously, a given wage
response will, structurally interpreted in a model of Nash bargaining with nonemployment as
the outside option, would for example imply 1.43 as large a worker bargaining power parameter.
In an empirical robustness check in Appendix Table A.6 (graphical analysis in Appendix Figure
A.18), we further report specifications in which we scale up benefits (and benefit changes) to
55

This attenuation is further slightly reduced with finite PBD because the one-month delay does not reduce
subsequent PDB, such that at probability (1 − f m )PBD Months , the worker “buys back” the first month (valued as
b − αs, i.e. the premium over UI substitute s adjusted for eligibility probability α.
56
An exception is the 1989 reform, which takes effect mid-year.
57
See, e.g., Barattieri et al. (2014) for the United States, and Sigurdsson and Sigurdardottir (2016) for Iceland.
Finally, the evidence on inside-option rent sharing documents same-year wage effects for incumbent workers.

80

correspond to (hypothetical) gross benefit changes so that all calculations occur in terms of gross
units. The results of the robustness check lead to the same conclusion as our main results and
also reveal an insensitivity of wages to (gross) benefit changes.
X. Bounded Rationality: Myopia Our framework assumes that all workers and firms are
rational in particular about their expectations about the nonemployment state. However, myopic
agents may discount the future by more than the social planner would on their behalf. In
our model, this consideration would most simply be nested with a larger ρ. Since the initial
> 0, implying that the agents put more weight on b,
post-separation state is unemployment, ∂τ
∂ρ
amplifying the effect on the wage-benefit sensitivity.
XI. Bounded rationality: bounded rationality and k-level thinking Other deviations
from the fully rational benchmark may however attenuate the effect. The wage sensitivity
consists of the direct effect as well as expectations about wage responses in subsequent jobs. The
latter feedback effect is a strong ingredient into the theoretical sensitivity of wages to benefits and
hard-wired into the model. A promising theory to attenuate the effect will therefore attenuate
the feedback effect of re-employment wages into the wage bargain at hand. Perhaps k = 1-level
thinking may provide such a rationalization: agents act while ignoring equilibrium effects because
they only consider one iteration of the equilibrium adjustment, but not the reemployment wage
adjustment. The resulting wage-benefit sensitivity would then be limited to the direct effect:
dw(k = 1)
= (1 − φ)τ
db

(A28)

Calibrating the (k = 1) sensitivity to τ = 0.1 and φ = 0.1 would return a smaller sensitivity
of 0.09 on average. Larger effects would emerge with k > 1. However, the sensitivity is still
increasing in τ , linearly so now. In Section 4.4, we test whether workers with larger τ (predicted
time on UI post-separation) have larger pass-through, and do not find evidence for a slope, in
contrast to the prediction from even (k = 1)-level thinking.

E.2
E.2.1

Additional Wage Setting Models
Bilateral Nash Bargaining Between an Individual Household with a Potentially Multi-Worker Firm

The model presented here forms the basis for the additional model variants presented in Section
E.1. Here we generalize the structural wage equation by a variety of dimensions, starting with a
bilateral bargaining between a worker and a multi-worker firm, long-term jobs and non-linear
utility.
Hiring Costs and Ex-Post Job Surplus Employment relationships carry strictly positive
joint job surplus because of hiring costs, c0 (H) > 0, c(0) = 0, which are sunk before bargaining.
In consequence, both the worker and the firm would strictly prefer to form the match (for an
efficiently set wage) than part ways.
Household Labor is indivisible and hours are normalized to one. In a given period s, the
household is either employed or unemployed (es ∈ {0, 1}). There is no direct labor supply
81

channel; workers accept job opportunities when they emerge. When employed, the worker earns
wage ws . The employed household incurs labor disutility γ. When unemployed, the worker
collects unemployment insurance benefits b. With probability f , the worker finds a job and
moves into employment (and wage bargaining) next period. With probability 1 − δ, employed
job seekers lose their jobs and become unemployed. Households can borrow and save at interest
rate r, fulfilling a lifetime budget constraint.58 Households own firms and collect capital income
in form of dividends dt .
V (et ) = max Et
H

ct

s.t.

∞
X
s=t

β s−t u(cs ) − γ · I(es = 1)

∞
∞
X
X
I(es = 1) · ws + I(es = 0) · b + ds + a
s
Et (1 +cr)
≤
E
t
t
s−t
(1 + r)s−t
s=t
s=t
Et[es+1|es = 1] = 1 − δ ∀s
Et[es+1|es = 0] = f ∀s

(A29)
(A30)
(A31)
(A32)

The household’s problem can be cast in dynamic programming in familiar form associated with
search and matching models:
f
Ut = max
u(ct |et = 0) + (1 − f )β Et Ut+1 + f β Et W
t+1
c
t

Wt = max u(ct |et = 1) − γ + (1 − δ)β Et Wt+1 + δβ Et Ut+1
ct

(A33)
(A34)

where Ut denotes the value function of a worker that is currently unemployed (et = 0) and Wt for
f
the employed worker (et = 1). W
t+1 denotes a potential subsequent job. The household’s benefit
from employment, at a given wage w, is pinned down by the difference in income, net of the
disutility of labor, plus the shift in the continuation value (where we here simplify the setting to
a lifecycle budget constraint that features a λ unaffected by the stochasticity of separations and
reemployment; a similar setting would emerge with complete markets or through a representative
household):
f
Wt (w) − Ut = λ(w − b) − γ + (1 − δ) · β Et (Wt+1 − Ut+1 ) − f · β Et (W
t+1 − Ut+1 )

(A35)

Firm The multi-worker firm, facing a competitive product and capital market, employs Nt
workers in long-term jobs and rents capital Kt at rate Rt . Capital rentals are made given wages
after bargaining.59 Production follows constant returns with all labor being of the same type and
thus perfect substitutes, which together with rented capital implies linear production in labor,
avoiding multi-worker bargaining complications. Each period, a fraction 1 − δ workers separate
into unemployment exogenously, whereas the firm hires Ht workers at cost c(Ht ). Employment
follows a law of motion as a constraint in the firm’s problem. The firm maximizes the present
58

Due to the absence of moral hazard in job search and due to the law of large numbers on the part of the
unmodelled lenders, the expected lifetime earnings do not complicate the borrowing potential of households.
Since average unemployment spells are short in nature (on the order of 45% at the monthly rate in the US), we
abstract from shifts in lifetime earnings in shifting lifetime wealth and therefore the multiplier on the budget
constraint. Therefore, we assume that the budget constraint multiplier is approximately independent of the
employment status, λ(e = 0) ≈ λ(e = 1).
59
Rental of capital inputs and this timing conventions precludes the complication of potential investment
holdup associated with bargaining.

82

value of payouts to the households (stockholders):
VtF (Nt ) = λEt max

∞
X

Ht ,Kt

β s−t [F (Kt , Nt ) − wt Nt − Rt Kt − c(Ht )]

(A36)

s=t

s.t.

Nt+1 = (1 − δ)Nt + Ht

(A37)

The firm’s problem can be cast in dynamic programming in familiar form associated with search
and matching models; where the firm’s state variable is the employment level:
n

o

F
VtF (Nt ) = max λ[F (Kt , Nt ) − wt Nt − Rt Kt − c(Ht )] + βVt+1
(Nt+1 )
Ht ,Kt

s.t.

Nt+1 = (1 − δ)Nt + Ht

(A38)
(A39)

The firm’s input demand (capital rentals and hiring) is described by the following first-order
conditions and the envelope condition for µt , the shadow value on the law of motion for
employment, pinned down by the envelope condition:
FK (Nt , Kt ) = Rt
c0 (Ht ) = β Et

(A40)
∂Vt+1 (Nt+1 )
∂Nt+1

(A41)

∂V F (Nt+1 )
∂VtF (Nt )
= λ[fÑ (Kt , Nt ) − wt ] + (1 − δ)β Et t+1
∂Nt
∂Nt+1

(A42)

⇒ c0 (Ht ) = β Et fÑ (Kt+1 , Nt+1 ) − wt+1 + (1 − δ)c0 (Ht+1 )

i

h

(A43)

These conditions describe input demand given the wages firms expect to pay at the bargaining
stage. Firm’s value of employing an incremental individual worker (hired last period and
becoming productive, and thus bargaining, in period t) is:
0

F
(Nt+1 )
∆VtF (Nt , w) = λ[fÑ (Kt , Nt ) − w] + (1 − δ)βVt+1

(A44)

Nash Wage Bargaining Nash bargaining solves the following joint maximization problem,
by which the worker and the firm pick a Nash wage wN that maximizes the geometric sum of
net-of-wage surplus of the match to the worker W (w) − U and of the firm ∆Vt (Nt−1 , w), weighted
by exponents φ and 1 − φ:
wN = arg max W (w) − U

φ

w

1−φ



× ∆V F (Nt , w)

⇒ W (wN ) = U + φ (∆V F (Nt , w) + W (wN ) − U )
|

{z

Job surplus

(A45)
(A46)

}

That is, the employed worker receives her outside option U plus share φ of the job surplus:
the sum of the parties’ inside options net of their outside options. Worker bargaining power
parameter φ guides the share of the surplus that the employed worker receives, on top of her
outside option. Next, we solve for the Nash wage wN that implements this surplus split.
The model recognizes the long-term nature of jobs.60 Wages then not only reflect current
conditions but also expectations about future inside and outside values, through the continuation
60

We consider period-by-period bargaining in the main part of the this exposition.

83

values. An important implication of Nash bargaining to apply also in subsequent period, renders
the Nash wage identical to the myopic thought experiment except for a continuation term:61
wN = φfÑ (Kt , Nt ) + (1 − φ)(1 − β)

U
λ

(A47)

The condition mirrors the continuous-time conditions in the main text, where 1 − β ≈ ρ and
U/λ corresponds to N .

E.3

Alternative Bargaining Model: A Simple Version of Credible
Bargaining (Hall and Milgrom, 2008)

We describe a simple version of the credible bargaining protocol proposed by Hall and Milgrom
(2008) that relies on alternating offers. The model remains empirically untested but has been
favored for its macroeconomic upside: it generates endogenous rigidity to shocks and therefore
amplifies employment fluctuations (see, e.g., Christiano et al., 2016; Hall, 2017). Specifically,
“the credible bargaining equilibrium is less sensitive to conditions in the outside market” (Hall,
2017, p. 310).
The firm and the worker make alternating wage offers. In between bargaining rounds, the
firm incurs a delay cost γ. Importantly, in our discussion here we allow the worker’s flow
utility z to differ from the flow unemployment benefits b, unlike in the existing treatments
in macroeconomic applications of this bargaining protocol. After all, for an employed worker
z may capture leisure, disutility from bargaining, the old, still-prevailing wage, and so forth.
Moreover z may accordingly differ between an unemployed negotiator entering a new job, and
an already-employed job seeker potentially seeking to renegotiate.
In between rebargaining rounds, the match may dissolve. The probability of this bargainingstage separation is s, which may be different from the probability of standard exogenous job
destruction during production, δ. N will therefore enter the problem either through s or δ, with
importantly opposite effects on the worker’s reservation wage, as we show below.
Inside Values Preserving unemployment value N for the worker and a zero for the firm’s
vacancy value due to free entry, we define the inside value of the worker W (w) and the firm J(w)
(where we have set vacancy value V = 0 due to free entry):
w + βδN
1 − β(1 − δ)
p−w
J(w) =
1 − β(1 − δ)

E(w) =

(A48)
(A49)

Strategies for Wage Offers The optimal strategies are described by reservation wages. The
worker’s reservation wage is w, and the firm’s reservation wage is w > w, which we have yet to
F
The derivation recognizes that φβ Et (Wt+1 − Ut+1 ) = (1 − φ)β Et Vt+1
(Nt ) by Nash bargaining in t + 1 in
the job at hand. In consequence, the (1 − δ)-weighted continuation terms cancel out:
h
i
h
i
F 0
ft+1 − Ut+1 ) = φ λ[f − wN ] + (1 − δ)β Et Vt+1
(1 − φ) λ(wN − b) − γ + (1 − δ) · β Et (Wt+1 − Ut+1 ) + f · β Et (W
(Nt )
Ñ
0

61

84

derive. When it is the worker’s (firm’s) turn to make an offer, she (it) will offer w (w), leaving
the firm (worker) indifferent between rejecting and rebargaining.
Worker’s Strategy: Offer Firm’s Reservation Wage The firm’s indifference condition
defines the worker’s strategy, to offer the firm its reservation wage w:
p−w
p−w
= −γ + β(1 − s)
1 − β(1 − δ)
1 − β(1 − δ)
p − w = −(1 − β(1 − δ))γ + β(1 − s))(p − w)
w = (1 − β(1 − δ))γ + β(1 − s))w − p(1 − β(1 − s))

(A50)
(A51)
(A52)

Firm’s Strategy: Offer Worker’s Reservation Wage Analogously, the firm offers the
worker her reservation wage. The definition of the reservation wage is such that the worker is
rendered indifferent between w and waiting a period to make her own offer to the firm – which
in turn will optimally equal the firm’s reservation wage w:
w + βδN
w + βδN
= z + (1 − s)β
+ sβN
1 − β(1 − δ)
1 − β(1 − δ)

(A53)

For s = 1, i.e. rejection by the worker results in unemployment, the reservation wage is equal to
z, the payoff while bargaining, plus an “amortized” (hence: flow) value of unemployment U :
⇔ w = (1 − β(1 − δ))z + β(1 − β(1 − δ))N

(A54)

The worker’s reservation wage is maximally sensitive to N if a rejected offer indeed results in
unemployment, i.e. for s = 1. In fact, if the time period is short, the reservation wage is the
payoff of not accepting the offer (and thus forgoing z this period), and the excess of that going
forward compared to unemployment.
More generally, we can rearrange the terms to isolate the present value of wages promised by
the firm to leave the worker indifferent:
Rel. unemp. risk: bargaining vs. producing

Follow-up offer

w
=
1 − β(1 − δ)

payoff while barg.

z}|{

z

z

}|

{

w
+(1 − s) β
+β
1 − β(1 − δ)

z

}|

{

1−β
N
(s − δ)
1 − β(1 − δ)

⇔ w = (1 − β(1 − δ))z + (1 − s)βw + β(s − δ)(1 − β)N

(A55)
(A56)

Given N , we can solve for worker and firm reservation wages. The worker’s reservation wage
(and the optimal wage the firm would offer the worker) is:
(1 − β(1 − δ))z + (1 − s)β (1 − β(1 − δ))γ + p(1 − β(1 − s))
β(s − δ)
w=
+
× (1 − β)N
2
2
1 − β (1 − s)
1 − β 2 (1 − s)2
(A57)




The wage insensitivity to the nonemployment value (1 − β)N (ρN in our continuous time setting)

85

is:
dw
β(s − δ)
=
d(1 − β)N
1 − β 2 (1 − s)2

(A58)

Therefore, for s = δ, the wage is insensitive to the nonemployment value. And still, the model
can still accommodate small rent sharing coefficients:
(1 − s)β(1 − β(1 − s))
dw
=
dp
1 − β 2 (1 − s)2

(A59)

For s = δ ≈ 0, this becomes very close to zero:
dw
dp

≈β
s=δ≈0

1−β
1 + β2

(A60)

Therefore, the protocol can accommodate wages that are, in the same calibration, insensitive to
outside options including the nonemployment value, and have small wage responses to inside
option shifts such as rent sharing (e.g., for small s).
The Role of s vs. δ in Mediating the Effect of N on Worker Reservation Wages
As in the standard Nash model, N denotes both the outside option of the worker in case of
bargaining breakdown during the bargaining process (weighted by s) as well as the value of an
exogenous job destruction (arriving with probability δ). The net effect of U on the worker’s
reservation wage w depends on the relative size of s and δ in the alternating offer bargaining
protocol.
A useful benchmark is s = δ. Here, the worker is exposed to N with the same probability –
whether she decides to reject the firm’s offer to get a chance to make her counteroffer (where
with probability s bargaining breaks down and she becomes unemployed), or whether she accepts
the current offer – when therefore production begins a period earlier (which exposes her job
destruction probability δ, and thus she puts a δ weight on N one period earlier). In this knife-edge
case, the worker’s reservation wage w turns completely insensitive to N – and thus b, and is only
driven by the while-bargaining flow utility z (which need not contain b) and the (present value
of the) wage gain resulting from getting the chance to make the (in subgame perfect equilibrium
expected to be accepted) counteroffer, w.
Calibrating AOB to δ = s could in principle generate wage insensitivity to N (and thus b,
assuming that z =
6 b for an incumbent worker). However, for cases where δ is small relative to
s, AOB may feature high sensitivity of w to shifts in N and thus b. For bilateral negotiations,
perhaps s ≈ 1 with δ < 5% may not be a poor approximation of the real world, for example.
Whether s ≈ δ is empirically realistic as such is difficult to assess because independently
calibrating s directly to empirical evidence is not straightforward.62 For example, Hall (2017)
calibrates s = 0.013 and δ = 0.0345, which here would lead worker reservation wages to fall
when N were to increase ceteris paribus. Conversely, Hall and Milgrom (2008) sets δ = 0.0014
and s = 0.0055 at the daily frequency, which in our version of the AOB model leads increases in
N to increase wages (reservation wages of the worker) ceteris paribus.
62

For example, in a situation with multiple applicants, s from the perspective of the worker should capture also
the risk of losing out to the next applicant, with higher probability s than the incumbent worker would worry
about being displaced by a colleague or get high with a job destruction shock δ. This would suggest that s >> δ.

86

The Role of z vs. b While we intentionally define z (the flow utility of the worker while
bargaining, perhaps not containing b for, e.g., an incumbent worker) separately from b (the
nonemployment payoff, contained in N ), the original authors and the follow-up literature (see,
e.g., Hall and Milgrom, 2008; Christiano et al., 2016; Hall, 2017) set both to be the same, and
thus explicitly include unemployment benefits in z = b. But these authors are interested in new
hires and their wage responses; our setting also studied incumbent workers, whose z is unlikely to
contain b but rather reflect a default, previous wage. Somewhat in tension to the model however,
we do not find evidence for new hires’ out of unemployment to exhibit large wage sensitivity.

87

F

Interpreting Firm- and Industry-Level Rent Sharing
Estimates in a Bargaining Setting

A larger body of evidence examines the effect of idiosyncratic inside values of jobs on wages:
rent sharing of firm- and industry-specific productivity and profit shifts, which is consistent with
rent sharing. Card et al. (2018) review that literature. A leading interpretation is that shifts in
surplus arise from TFP shifters. A structural interpretation of a shift in the inside value of the
employment relationship in Nash bargaining is:
wN = φ × p + (1 − φ) × Ω
⇒ dwN = φ ×

dp

(A61)
(A62)

|{z}

Rent sharing variation

Below, we proceed under the assumption that p shifts are well-measured. If so, the rent-sharing
result can be readily interpreted in a bargaining framework.
Elasticity Specifications A common empirical estimate comes in an elasticity of wages with
respect to value added per worker, measured at the firm or industry level:63
ξ=

dw/w
dp/p

(A63)

Structurally interpreted in the Nash bargaining setup, this elasticity turns out to capture a
product of two distinct terms: the ratio of the marginal product over the wage, times bargaining
power φ:
p
dwN /wN
=φ× N
dp/p
w

(A64)

Rent sharing elasticities ξ therefore provide upper bounds for φ:
φ=

w
·ξ ≤ξ
p

(A65)

Of course, if the ratio of w to p, the marginal product of the worker, were known, φ can be
immediately backed out. However, the very motivation of models of imperfectly competitive
labor markets, which give rise to bargaining, rent sharing and wage posting, is that these two
values can diverge dramatically and in heterogeneous ways.
This bound is tight if φ ≈ 1 or if b ≈ p since then, by Nash, w ≈ p. However, this bound
is less useful in case the elasticity is small. In that case, φ is implied to be small, and w may
deviate from M P L greatly unless b is close to p. In the data, x is indeed estimated to be small,
implying a small bargaining power parameter and also permitting a small wage–MPL ratio
absent high b. In this case, information on the level of b is required again to make progress.
Formally, one can plug in the Nash expression for w to obtain a correspondence between φ and
63

Some studies consider profit elasticities rather than value added shifts; rescaling into value added elasticities
that rely on strong assumptions about homogeneity and the comovement of variable and fixed factors with
productivity shifts.

88

p, b and the measured wage–productivity elasticity ξ as follows:
φ=

bξ
=
p(1 − ξ) + bξ

1
p
b

·

1−ξ
ξ

+1

(A66)

We caution that it may therefore be impossible to translate the elasticity estimates into bargaining
power parameters without strong quantitative assumptions about the bargaining structure, chiefly
because the observable variables, w and perhaps p, do not uniquely map into b and φ.
An interesting example is Card et al. (2016), who among many verification tests also estimate
the heterogeneity in ξ for women and men. The elasticity for women is below the elasticity for
men. However, even with measured productivity shifts being homogeneous, two distinct factors
may cause the elasticity differences within a bargaining framework. First, either men and women
wield differential bargaining power φg where g ∈ {w, m}. Second, φw = φm yet pf /wf < pm /wm
or pf /bf < pm /bm . That is, the latter scenario could arise if the opportunity cost of working
of women bf > bm , as would also be in line with their larger labor supply elasticities, higher
unemployment, and lower participation overall.
The information needed to translate a given value added rent sharing elasticity into the point
estimate for φ therefore requires strong assumptions or empirical knowledge about b. Measuring
the level of the worker’s flow valuation of nonemployment b (and thus surplus b = M P L − b) is
difficult even for an average household (see, e.g., Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis, 2016).
z includes unemployment benefits but also any utility differences between the employed and
unemployed state, or other income. M PzL−z is similarly elusive and related to the fundamental
L
surplus in Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017), which is MMPPL−z
).
Identifying φ off level shifts in p rather than percentage shifts eliminates the complications
arising from elasticities.

89

G
G.1

Additional Institutional Information and Validation
Exercises
Average Daily Earnings Construction

We construct our average daily earnings measure as follows:
1. For each individual-firm-year observation (even across multiple spells like recall), we
calculate the total earnings the individual received from that firm during the year divided
by the total number of days worked at that firm. These earnings include supplementary
payments such as 13th or 14th month wage payments and extra vacation payments.
2. For each month where the individual is employed by at least one firm, we assign the
individual the “daily earnings” from the firm at which the individual is employed for the
longest during that year and employed at that month.
3. We calculate the average daily earnings as the average of these monthly earnings measures
across all months the individual is employed by at least one firm.

G.2

Earnings Base for Unemployment Benefit Determination Throughout our Sample Period

From 1977 until 1987, the earnings base for calculating unemployment benefits are generally
the earnings in the last full month of employment before the beginning of an unemployment
spell (§ 21 (1) Arbeitslosenversicherungsgesetz 1977). Importantly, Austrian wage contracts are
structured to pay out 14 instead of 12 monthly salaries, with the two additional ones typically
paid out at the beginning of the summer and at the end of the year, respectively. These additional
payments are proportionally factored into and added to the earnings in the last four weeks
before the beginning of an unemployment spell to calculate unemployment benefits (§ 21 (2)
Arbeitslosenversicherungsgesetz 1977). To illustrate, someone with constant monthly earnings
of ATS 10,000 would be paid an annual salary of ATS 140,000. Unemployment benefits would
be calculated based on monthly earnings of ATS 11,667 based on the monthly earnings of ATS
10,000 plus 1/12 of the two additional bonus payments (ATS 10,000 * 2 / 12 = ATS 1,667).
A reform in 1987 changed the calculation period from the last month before unemployment
to the last six months before unemployment, while still factoring in the 13th and 14th monthly
salary proportionally.
A 1996 reform then changed the calculation more substantially by using last year’s earnings
for unemployment spells beginning after June 30 of a given year and the earnings in the second
to last year for spells beginning before June 30. The 1996 reform left the treatment of the 13th
and 14th salaries unchanged.
An additional important feature of the Austrian unemployment insurance system is that times
of nonemployment (Beschäftigungslosigkeit) are exempt from the calculation of average earnings
(Art. 2 §21 Arbeitslosenversicherungsgesetz). As a consequence, average earnings for calculation
of UI benefits of those who experienced a nonemployment spell in the relevant calculation time
period are based on a division of total earnings by the actual days of employment in the relevant

90

time window (multiplied by 30 to arrive at a monthly number) rather than the total calendar
time of the time window.64
Sources The laws are contained in the respectively updated versions of § 21 of the Unemployment Insurance Act (Arbeitslosenversicherungsgesetz, ASVG).

G.3

Calculation of Predicted Benefits

The crucial ingredient for our strategy to use shifts in the benefit schedule is the correct measurement of the income concept used by the UI system to assign employed workers the benefit
they would receive conditional on a separation leading to nonemployment.
This step requires a review of the relevant earnings concept for UIB determination. Two
of our four reforms we study occurred before 1987, when the earnings in the last month of
full employment were the earnings concept. In 1989, the earnings concept referred the average
earnings in the last six months. In our identification strategy for these reforms, we assign an
employed worker her predicted contemporaneous earnings to assign her a benefit level.
To calculate predicted benefits, we rely on a purpose-built calculator of unemployment benefits in
Austria. Through 2000, UI benefits were calculated using a table (Lohnklassentabelle) based on
the earnings concepts outlined in Section G.2. The benefit table and the formula that replaced
it in 2001 can be found in § 21, Section 3, of the Unemployment Insurance Act and reports the
earnings concepts at the daily (later monthly) level.
We collect all changes to the benefit table from 1972 through 2000 and the 2001 benefit formula
by investigating all legal changes to the Unemployment Insurance Act as referenced in the Legal
Information Database (Rechtsinformationssystem, RIS). The RIS is the Austrian government’s
online archive of the Austrian Federal Law Gazette (Bundesgesetzblatt), where all legislation
passed by the Austrian Parliament and decrees by cabinet ministries are published.65 The UI
benefit schedule for each year as a function of monthly gross earnings can be found in Appendix L.
Prior to 1994, the earnings base was a measure of earnings right before unemployment (see
Section G.2 for details). For these years (i.e. the 1976, 1985, and 1989 reform samples), we
undertake the following steps to calculate the predicted benefit change:
1. Begin with the daily gross earnings concept described in Section G.1.
2. Within each sample (across the whole ASSD, not just the percentile ranges used in our
regressions), calculate the average annual growth rate from the year into the next year.
64

This is in contrast to the US setting where spells of unemployment potentially lower earnings and thus
subsequent unemployment benefits. In Massachusetts, for example, UI benefits are calculated based on the
average weekly earnings in the two out of the last four quarters with the highest earnings. The earnings
in those two quarters get divided by 26 to arrive at a weekly average regardless of actual time in employment. Holding wages while employed constant, nonemployment periods can thus lower average earnings and thus UI benefits–unlike in the Austrian setting. Source: https://www.mass.gov/info-details/
how-your-unemployment-benefits-are-determined.
65
The RIS page with all references to the Unemployment Insurance Act in the Federal Law Gazette can be
found here: https://www.ris.bka.gv.at/GeltendeFassung.wxe?Abfrage=Bundesnormen&Gesetzesnummer=
10008407.

91

3. Multiply the daily earnings in the year by the average earnings growth rate. Call this the
inflated earnings.
4. Calculate the UI benefits corresponding to the inflated earnings value using the benefit
calculator. This is b.
From 1994 onward, the earnings base was based on lagged earnings (see Section G.2 for details).
From 1994 through 2000, we undertake the following steps to calculate the predicted benefit
change:
1. Begin with the daily gross earnings concept described in Section G.1 but from the previous
year.
2. Calculate the UI benefit corresponding to the lagged earnings value using the benefit
calculator in each year. This is b.
For 2001, the earnings base is based on lagged net earnings:
1. Begin with the daily gross earnings concept described in Section G.1 but from the previous
year.
2. Calculate the daily net earnings using the tax calculator described in Section K.
3. Calculate the UI benefit corresponding to the lagged net earnings value using the benefit
calculator for 2001. This is b.
Before 1994, we also calculate realized benefits changes for our validation exercise:
1. Begin with the daily gross earnings concept described in Section G.1.
2. Calculate the UI benefits corresponding to the daiy gross earnings value using the benefit
calculator. That is, we do not inflate by average annual earnings growth into the next year.
This is b.
Note that “realized” and predicted benefits correspond exactly after 1994, i.e. for the 2001
reform.

G.4

Validation of Benefit Calculation

We assess the quality of our prediction of benefits based on the ASSD (see previous Section
G.3) by comparing predicted unemployment insurance benefits for actual separators to actually
received UIBs. To this end, we merge the unemployment benefit data (AMS) with the ASSD
(social security based data), which contains our earnings measure. All measures are nominal and
not inflation-adjusted.
Appendix Figure A.12 plots the relationship between actual and predicted UI benefit levels
for all Austrian separators drawing UI benefits. The relationship traces out a slope that is on
average 0.974.66 We therefore conclude that our approach accurately assigns employed workers
by their ASSD-based earnings into the UI benefit levels.
66

The R2 is 0.69. We would not expect R2 = 1 even if we accurately predicted income for each individual since
UIBs also include supplemental benefits based on the number of dependents (e.g., EUR 29.50 per month in 2018).
These are not dependent on income and thus orthogonal to our variation.

92

In addition, we also validate that our earnings prediction works well across the earnings
distribution with coefficients on predicted and actual benefits close to 1 throughout (Appendix
Figure A.13).
Figure A.12: Actual Benefit Receipts vs. Predicted Receipts from Measured Pre-Separation
Average Earnings Among Sample of Separators

Actual Benefit Level

14000

12000

10000

8000

6000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Predicted Benefit Level (Based on Lagged Earnings)
2

Note: β=0.974 (se 0.006), R =0.69.

Note: The figure draws on earnings data from the ASSD and benefit data from the AMS. The x-axis shows
predicted benefit levels based on earnings data from the ASSD. The y-axis shows actually paid-out benefits based
on data from the AMS. The figure is a binned scatter plot based on individual-level observations.

93

Figure A.13: Quality of Wage Prediction Procedure
1.2

1.2

1

1
Slope, R

2

.8

.8

.6

.6
.4

.4

Standard Deviation

1.4

.2
.2

0
0

20

40
60
Earnings Percentile

Slope

2

R

80

Standard Deviation

Slope
for Total Sample: 0.935
2
R for Total Sample: 0.848
S.D. of Total Sample: 0.284

Note: The Figure reports several statistics by earnings percentile for the income prediction procedure. In
particular, the figure reports the slope of actual to predicted wages, as well as the standard deviation of the
residual and the R2 .

G.5

Timeline for Reforms to Unemployment Benefits

We report on the procedural timelines for each of the four reforms to the Austrian unemployment
insurance system.
2001 Reform. The Budget Act of 2001 (Budgetbegleitgesetz 2001 ) was introduced in the
Austrian Parliament on October 17, 2000, and passed on November 23 (Item 142 in the 2000
Federal Law Register). It went into effect on January 1, 2001 and included reforms to other laws
apart from Unemployment Insurance Law of 1977. On November 17, the Budget Committee
produced its report and requested adoption of the legislative proposal. It was discussed by
parliament on November 23. Martin Bartenstein, the labor minister, argued during this session
that the change to a 55% net income replacement rate was intended a means of improving
transparency in the determination of unemployment benefits. The law was approved with 93
votes in favor and 70 votes against, and published in the official gazette on December 29. Changes
to unemployment benefits went into effect January 1, 2001.
1989 Reform. The Amendment of the Unemployment Insurance Act 1977 and the General
Social Insurance Act (AIVG-Novelle 1989 ) was introduced in Parliament on June 7, 1989, and
passed 20 days later (Item 364 in the 1989 Federal Law Register). It went into effect on August
1. The AIVG-Novelle 1989 was approved unanimously with no modifications to the original
draft, barring a proposed amendment from the Social Affairs Committee produced amending the
salary contribution to the UI system. The unemployment benefit schedule in the final version
was identical to the one in the original proposal.
1985 Reform. On October 16, 1984, the Austrian Ministry of Social Affairs published a
94

decree (Verordnung) extending the unemployment benefit schedule which went into effect on
January 1, 1985 (Item 416 in the 1984 Federal Law Register). The decree cited a requirement in
the Unemployment Insurance Act67 that the Ministry extend the cap on the benefit schedule
when the Parliament increases the maximum contribution from salaries to the UI system
(Höchstbeitragsgrundlage). These increases are meant to adjust for nominal wage changes, and
the requirement existed throughout the period of study in this paper. The 1985 adjustment was
much larger than previous adjustments, however, because a year earlier, the Parliament had
switched the maximum contribution to the UI system from that used for the national health
insurance system to that used for the old-age pension system.68
1976 Reform. The Austrian government first introduced a bill increasing unemployment
benefits (AlVG-Novelle 1976 ) at a session of Parliament on March 17, 1976, which was approved
in a subsequent session on May 6 (Item 289 of the 1976 Federal Law Register). It went into
effect on July 1, with the benefit increases exactly as proposed in the government’s original bill.
An amendment from a member of an opposition party increasing benefits for a slightly higher
range of gross earnings was considered in a committee meeting but rejected during the May 6
parliamentary session.

67

See § 21, section 4, of the Unemployment Insurance Act (Arbeitslosenversicherungsgesetz, AlVG). Specifically,
the law as of 1984 stipulates a deadline for these unemployment insurance cap extensions—i.e. within a year that
the increased contribution cap takes effect—the size of the additional earnings brackets, and the benefit level at
each bracket.
68
See § 61, section 1, of the Unemployment Insurance Act for the definition of the maximum salary contribution
to the UI system and § 45, section 1, of the Social Security Act (Allgemeines Sozialversicherungsgesetz, ASVG)
for the maximum contributions to the health insurance and old-age pension systems. The change in the maximum
contribution originated as a bill proposed by a MP from the right-wing Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ) that
was in a governing coalition with the Social Democrats (SPÖ). The bill was introduced in Parliament on October
21, 1983; passed in a subsequent session on November 29; and went into effect on January 1, 1984. Aside from
tying the cap to a different maximum contribution, the law was also the first to stipulate a specific deadline of a
year for the Ministry of Social Affairs to issue an appropriate cap extension.

95

H

Alternative Outcomes

In this section, we briefly discuss effects of the reforms on alternative outcomes: separations,
unemployment duration, and sickness. Across specifications and outcomes, we find that the
benefit increases were associated with quantitatively negligible effects on these outcomes that
are statistically indistinguishable from zero in most specifications.
Separation and Unemployment Effects The improvement in the nonemployment outside
option may lead marginal workers to select into nonemployment that would have otherwise
experienced higher wage growth (e.g. because they are young or have low tenure, and therefore
high wage growth).69 We therefore report treatment effects on separations and unemployment in
Appendix Figure A.14 for one- and two-year horizons. The benefit change treatment is expressed
in percentage points (i.e. 1ppt db/w is 1), the outcome variables are range from 0 to 1. We do
not find a statistically or economically significant effect of the improved nonemployment option.
70
Appendix Figure A.14 also reports treatment effects for the probability of experiencing an
employment to unemployment to employment (EUE) spell and the fraction of months spend
on UI over the next one and two years. At the two-year level we see suggestive evidence that
treatment increased the probability of an EUE spell and the fraction of months spend on
UI, consistent with the prior literature on the effects of UI generosity on unemployment spell
durations (see Lalive et al., 2006; Card et al., 2015, for evidence from Austria).
Efficiency Wage Effects: Sickness Incidence Efficiency wage mechanisms may mask
bargaining-related wage effects by lowering productivity, if workers are more likely to reduce
effort. Yet, we have not found retention effects in the previous robustness checks. We additionally
study the treatment effect on registered sickness spells in our administrative data in Appendix
Figure A.14. Sickness spells do not respond to the improved outside option.71
69

See Jäger et al. (2018) for evidence for older workers separating into nonemployment in response to a large
increase in the potential benefit duration, along with characterization of the incremental separators.
70
Consider the one-year mover estimate of around 0.0001. For a 10 percentage point increase in an individual’s
replacement rate, we can rule out an increase her mover probability by more than 0.1 percentage points. Compared
to the baseline annual one-year mover rate of around 9 %, this would be an economically small increase in
the mover rate. The upper end of the one-year mover confidence interval also implies that for a 10 percentage
point increase in an individual’s replacement rate, we can rule out an increase her mover rate by more than 0.5
percentage points.
71
However, the productivity decrease would have had to be tremendous in order to account for the net wage
effect of zero. If worker bargaining power were 0.1, then the 8ppt increase in the change in benefits (normalized
by the wage) would have had to imply a 0.48×8ppt
= 38.4ppt decline in the productivity/wage ratio to offset the
0.1
bargaining channel and leave wages unchanged on net. Since we expect that w/p ≈ 1 we would need a similar
order of magnitude percent decline in productivity to offset the bargaining effect.

96

N
Mo C
Al in +on
l C tro
on I-O ls
tr FE
ol
s

Figure A.14: Employment and Separation Effects: Difference-in-Differences Regression Design

Alternative Outcomes

.001

.0005

0

-.0005

-.001
One-Year Outcomes
Mover

Recalled

ENE

Two-Year Outcomes
EUE

Mth NE

Mth UI

Mth Sick

Note: The figure plots σ0 coefficients from estimating equation 19 but replacing the dw
w outcome with alternative
outcomes. All of the alternative outcomes range from 0-1 (either transition probabilities or shares) and the
dependent variable is the percentage point change in dw
w (ranging from around 0 to 20). Mover, Recalled, ENE
and EUE refer to indicators for going through different employment transition types in the next one or two years.
Specifically, mover refers to individuals who are observed at a new employer and do not return to their original
employer within the next one or two years. Recalled refers to individuals who leave their current employer for
another employer or nonemployment and then return to their original employer within the next year or two
(depending on the specification). ENE refers to employer to different employer transitions with an intermediate
nonemployment spell (excluding paternity leave). EUE refers to employer to different employer transitions with
an intermediate unemployment spell (measured by any UI receipt). Mth NE, Mth UI, and Mth Sick are the share
of months in the next one or two years spent in different labor market states (they range from 0-1). Mth NE
refers to the share of months nonemployed. Mth UI refers to the share of months on UI receipt. Mth Sick refers
to the share of months on sick leave. The industry-occupation controls are time-varying fixed effects for each
four-digit industry interacted with an indicator for a blue vs. white-collar occupation. Firm FE indicates that
time-varying firm-fixed effects were included. The base rates for the outcome variables averaged across all the
pre-reform years are: Movers: 0.086, Recall: 0.035, ENE: 0.053, EUE: 0.032, Mth NE: 0.044, Mth UI: 0.017,
and Mth Sick: 0.006.

97

I

Construction of Regression Sample and Variables

I.1

Construction of Sample

Begin with all individuals with non-missing earnings. To isolate the part of the income distribution
we include for each reform sample, we use the idea of treatment and control groups. The
distinctions play no further role in our main empirical analysis, however.
I.1.1

Treatment

The treatment region is defined as the percentile earnings range in the base year where the
predicted benefit change is large and positive.
• Identify the average predicted UIB change for each percentile. See Section G.3.
• For the 1985 reform, the lower bound of treatment is the percentile at which the average
predicted benefit change is more than 0.5% of earnings. The upper bound of treatment is
3 percentiles below the reform-specific adjusted ASSD cap.
• For the 1976 reform, the lower bound of treatment is one percentile above the first percentile
(the ASSD minimum). We drop the first percentile because earnings growth is very volatile
here. The upper bound is the highest percentile under the 12th percentile72 that experiences
a predicted benefit change greater than 1% of earnings.
• For the 1989 reform, the lower bound of treatment is the lowest percentile at which the
predicted benefit change is greater than 2% of earnings. This is because at the lowest end
of the income distribution, there was not a very large change. We then drop an additional
percentile because the earnings growth was very volatile. The upper bound is the highest
percentile at which the predicted RR change was greater than 0.5% of earnings.
• For the 2001 reform, the lower bound of treatment is the percentile at which 10,000 ATS
falls in 2000. The upper bound is the percentile at which 20,000 ATS falls in 2000.
I.1.2

Control

The control region is chosen as the percentile range in the base year closest to the treatment
earnings range but received no change/a very small change in predicted benefits.
• Calculate the range of the treatment region, i.e. the number of percentiles included in the
treatment region.
• For the 1985 reform, take the difference between the averaged predicted UIB change in the
base year r − 1 and three years before, r − 4, for each percentile. Call this “excess db/w.”
This is an effort to make sure there is a region in the reform sample that has not been
treated recently in the base year. It is 11 percentiles in 1984. Find the highest percentile
for which this difference is 0. This is the upper bound of the control region. Then subtract
the treatment region range from the upper bound of control to get the lower bound of
72

It must be the highest under the 12th percentile because there is also a cap extension at the top of the
income distribution, and choosing the 12th percentile avoids the cap comfortably.

98

control. In our main specification, we also include the ”intermediate region” between the
treatment and control region in our estimation sample for transparency; and we also check
that our results are quantitatively robust to excluding this region.
• For the 1976 and 1989 reforms, the lower bound of the control region is an eighth of a
percentile above the upper bound of the treatment region. Then add the treatment range
to the lower bound of control to upper bound of control.
• For the 2001 reform, the lower bound of control is the upper bound of treatment. Then
add the treatment range to the lower bound of control to get the upper bound of control.
I.1.3

Percentile Ranges of Reform Samples

While we describe sample restrictions and our empirical framework in percentiles, we operationalize the benefit aggregation (for placebo assignment) as well as the sample construction
using eighths of percentiles, to create fine-grained benefit levels. This is especially useful in the
small reform samples. We report the cutoffs at the level of eighths of percentile in parentheses:
• 1976 Reform
– Treatment: 1st (1.625) to 6th percentile (6.875)
– Control: 7th (7.00) to 12th percentile (12.25)
• 1985 Reform
– Treatment: 61st (61.125) to 87th percentile (86.75)
– Control: 24th (24.25) to 49th percentile (49.875)
– Skipped, due to repeated treatment: 50th (50.00) to 61st percentile (61.00)
• 1989 Reform
– Treatment: 2nd (2.5) to 19th percentile (19.75)
– Control: 20th (19.75) to 37th percentile (37.00)
• 2001 Reform
– Treatment: 8th (7.875) to 32nd percentile (32.25)
– Control: 33rd (32.375) to 57th percentile (56.625)

I.2

Construction of Variables for Heterogeneity Analysis

This section describes the construction of the variables we use for the analysis of treatment effect
heterogeneity. Below, we describe how we divide the heterogeneity groups into quintiles (unless
otherwise stated), which we calculate separately for each reform. Throughout, we draw on the
sample of all workers, regardless of whether they are employed all year, unless stated otherwise.
Prime-age below refers to the ages 25 to 54. The variable status refers to workers’ employment
status in the ASSD status.
1. Firm size.
99

• Begin with the universe of prime-age workers.
• Count the total number of workers at the firm who are employed for the whole year.
• Separate into four groups (not quintiles): firms less than 10 people, between 11 and
100 people, between 101 and 1,000 people, and larger than 1,000 people.
2. The share of the worker’s firm that was nonemployed in the last two years.
• Begin with the universe of prime-age workers.
• Count the number of workers at the firm whose current employment spell is less than
24 months and who was unemployed in the month before their current employment
spell (status = 1).
• Count the total number of workers at the firm.
• Divide the former by the latter.
• We separate the sample into quintiles by worker.
3. Tenure
• Begin with the sample of workers that is included in our analysis.
• Split the tenure variable by quintile.
4. Four measures of the time since nonemployment.
(a) Months since nonemployment (i.e. status 6= 3) Note that if employment spells
are separated by only a single month of illness, then the month of illness and the two
spells are counted as a single employment spell.
(b) Months since last UIB receipt (i.e. status = 1). Note that the employment
spell length keeps counting if the worker becomes sick, goes on disability, or takes a
parental leave.
(c) Months since the last change in labor market status, skipping recalls from
illness/leave. This is the same as (a), but if a worker becomes nonemployed (i.e.
status 6= 1, 3) and then returns to the same employer (i.e. the next status change is
a change back into employment with the same firm), then the worker remains in the
same employment spell throughout. Here, the spell count only resets when a worker
receives UIB or when a worker becomes ill, goes on parental leave, etc. and does not
return to the same firm when they are next employed.
(d) Months since the last UIB receipt, skipping recalls after unemployment.
This is the same as 2), but if a worker becomes unemployed or nonemployed (i.e.
status 6= 3) but then returns to the same employer (i.e. the next status change is a
change back into employment with the same firm), then the worker remains in the
same employment spell throughout. Here, the spell count only resets when a worker
receives UIB and does not return to the same firm when they are next employed.
• We then implement the following procedures:
– Begin with sample of prime-age workers.
– Count the number of months for each of the four designations for each worker.
100

– Split into quintiles.
– Time: year t
5. Local unemployment rates.
• Begin with the universe of workers aged between 25 and 54 in a given year.
• A: Count the number of workers who are unemployed (status= 1) by area of residence
using the gkz variable. The relevant information is only available starting in 1987, so
we use their 1987 location for pre-1987 years.
• B: Count all the workers in the area of residence who are unemployed, sick, employed,
self-employed, on parental leave, and in minor employment.
• Divide A by B.
• Here, we separate the sample into quartiles, not quintiles, because the sample bunches
(in areas with large populations).
6. Industry growth rates.
• Begin with the universe of prime-age workers in a given year. Measure the leave-out
mean industry growth rate. That is, for worker i in firm j and industry k, the growth
between t and t0 = t + 1 is
4Sijk =

P

j 0 ∈J−j

1(Industryj 0 = k) · (Employmentj 0 t0 − Employmentj 0 t )
P
j 0 ∈J−j 1(Industryj 0 = k) · Employmentj 0 t

• Count the number of workers in the firm (benr), not necessarily employed the whole
year.
• Count the number of workers in the industry (nace08), not necessarily employed the
whole year.
• Subtract, for each firm, its population from the number of workers in the industry.
• Find the same number for the next year t + 1 (i.e. two years pre-reform), but only for
workers employed at the same firm between year t and year t + 1.
• Calculate the percent difference between the leave-out employment in the industry
between year t + 1 and year t.
7. AKM firm effects
• For each year in the reform sample t (i.e. the four years pre-reform), take the universe
of prime-age workers from year t − 10 to t. Before 1982, take 1972 as the earliest year.
Do not use 1972 or 1973.
• Regress log-earnings on year fixed effects, a third-order polynomial in age, and an
exhaustive set of worker and firm fixed effects (Abowd et al., 1999). We use the
procedure in (Correia, 2017) for estimation.
• Save the firm fixed effects for year t and assign to workers in the regression sample.
• Divide the sample into quintiles based on the firm effects.
101

8. Age
• Sample identical to the one we use for analysis.
9. Four measures of within-firm wage dispersion.
(a) The standard deviation of year-on-year earnings growth within the firm.
• Focus on a sample of workers who stay with their firm from one year to the next.
• Drop workers at the ASSD cap and with missing earnings.
• Calculate the individual earnings growth relative to last year. Winsorize to the
5th and 95th percentiles.
• Calculate the standard deviation of the earnings growth by firm-year among
workers who were in the same firm across the two years.
(b) The difference between the 75th and 25th percentile of within-firm earnings growth.
• Take the earnings growth variable and sample above.
• For each firm-year, calculate the percentile for each worker’s earnings growth.
• Take the difference between the average earnings growth for an individual in the
74th-76th percentile to that for an individual in the 24th-26th percentile.
(c) The residualized standard deviation of log-earnings. We base this measure
on the residuals from a regression of log-earnings on tenure-experience-occupationindustry-year fixed effects, with standard deviations calculated at the firm-year level.
Tenure n(i, t) is made up of 5 three-year categories and a category for those with
more than 15 years of tenure. Experience e(i, t) is made up of 5 five-year categories
and a category for those with more than 25 years experience. Occupation refers
to white- vs. blue-collar, for which there are often separate collective bargaining
agreements. Calculate the log-earnings for each worker, and winsorize to the 5th and
95th percentile. Regress log-earnings on industry-occupation-tenure-experience-year
fixed effects. Calculate residuals from this regression, and take the standard deviation
of the residual by firm-year. Split the sample into quintiles.
(d) The mean squared residuals of log-earnings.
• Calculate the average by firm-year of the square of the residuals from the previous
regression.
10. Occupation.
• Motivation. Survey data suggest that workers with more education/skills are likelier
to bargain. Thus white-collar workers might bargain more and thus be more sensitive
to the outside option.
• Place blue-collar workers in occupation group 1 (whitecoll = 0) and white-collar
workers in occupation group 2 (whitecoll = 1).
11. Three additional measures of industry-occupation unemployment risk.
(a) Separation rate. This is the probability of being unemployed in the next period in
a given industry-occupation, given that one is employed in the current period.
102

• Sample the universe of prime-age workers.
• Create an indicator for whether the individual is unemployed (status= 1) in the
next year.
• Regress this indicator on industry-occupation fixed effects for that year, and
save these fixed effects. I also run a specification with categories for tenure and
experience and a linear control for age and keep the predicted values.
Regression: Let Yi be an indicator for being unemployed in the year t + 1.
Individual i has occupation o (blue or white collar) in industry k. Then, for all
workers in year t,
Yi = β0 + φk(i),o(i) + i
(b) Expected months of unemployment. This is the average number of months of
unemployment in the next period, conditional on being employed in the current
period.
• Sample the universe of prime-age workers.
• Calculate how many months the worker is unemployed in the following year.
• Regress the number of months on industry-occupation fixed effects for that year,
and save these fixed effects.
Regression: Let t be the year three years before the reform. Individual i
has occupation o (blue or white collar) in industry k. Then, for all workers in
year t,
Yi = β0 + φk(i),o(i) + i
(c) Probability of being unemployed for more than 6 months. It is another
measure of the “severity” of unemployment spells in the industry-occupation.
• Begin with the sample of prime-age workers.
• Create an indicator for whether the individual is unemployed for more than 6
months in the following year.
• Regress the indicator on industry-occupation fixed effects for that year, and save
these fixed effects.
Regression: Let Yi be an indicator for being unemployed for more than six
months in the year t + 1. Individual i has occupation o (blue or white collar) in
industry k. Then, for all workers in year t,
Yi = β0 + φk(i),o(i) + i

103

J

Alternative Variation in UI Generosity: Measuring
Wage Effects from An Age-Specific Reform of Potential Benefit Duration

In this section, we analyze the effect of changes in potential benefit duration (PBD) of UIBs,
rather than UIB levels, on incumbent wages. We do so by exploiting a reform in 1989 that
changes PBD for workers aged 40 and above. Appendix Figure A.15 shows how the PBD
schedule changed for individuals age 30-49. Before 1989, the PBD was only experience and not
age-dependent.73 In 1989, these eligibility rules were changed so that individuals age 40-49 with
at least five years of experience in the past 10 years were eligible for 39 weeks while individuals
below age 40 were still only eligible for 30 weeks. For the analysis below, we focus on the PBD
reform for individuals age 40-49 and compare their earnings growth to individuals age 30-39.74
We apply the same sample restrictions as in our main result for the full sample but drop all
individuals present in particular Austrian regions where workers aged 50 and above were eligible
for even larger PBD reform since 1988.75
The two panels in Appendix Figure A.16 plot the average earnings percent changes (one and
two years) by age groups in the treated and control years. The left-panel plots the average wage
growth from 1987-1988 (the control year) and from 1988-1989 (the treatment year) as well as
their difference. If the PBD extension for older workers passed through to their wages, we would
expect an increase in wage growth for older workers. The right panel plots the same for two-year
wage growth. Neither figure shows an increase in wage growth for treated individuals.
In Appendix Figure A.17, we report results from estimating a specification similar to Equation
(19) but replacing the replacement rate reform indicators with an indicator for being ages 39-42
and adding age-specific fixed effects. We also include the same controls included in specification
(4) in Table 3. The figures show no significant treatment effects when the reform was enacted as
well as a lack of pre-trends, validating our identifying assumptions. In conclusion, we do not find
wage effects of PBD on incumbent wages either, thereby mirroring the insensitivity we document
for UI level shifts.

73

Individuals with less than 12 weeks of UI contributions in the last two years were eligible for 12 weeks,
individuals with 52 weeks in the last two years were eligible for 20 weeks, and individuals with 156 weeks (3
years) and the last five years were eligible for 30 weeks.
74
These rules applied to workers with at least 6 years of experience in the past 10 years, which is our sample
restriction for this part of the analysis. See Nekoei and Weber (2017) for an evaluation of this reform on
unemployed job seekers’ spell duration and reemployment wages.
75
We do not study the latter reform because of a regional reform that further increased PBD for workers older
than 50 and led to separations (and thus attrition) among those older workers (Jäger et al., 2018), that would
not allow for a measurement of wage effects.

104

Potential UI Duration Eligibility (Weeks)

Figure A.15: PBD Schedule - Treated and Control Years
40

38

36

34

32

30
30

35

40
Age

45

Treated Year (1988)

50

Control Year (1987)

Note: The figure plots potential benefit duration (PBD) schedule by age for individuals in 1988 and 1989. Before
1988, all individuals with at least five years of work experience in the past ten years were eligible for 30 weeks of
PBD. In 1989, individuals age 40-49 with the same experience were eligible for 39 weeks.

Figure A.16: Non-Parametric PBD Figures - One- and Two-Year Earnings Growth
Two-Year Earnings Growth
Earnings Growth dw/w (Levels and Diff)

Earnings Growth dw/w (Levels and Diff)

One-Year Earnings Growth
8

6

4

2

0
34

36

38
Age

40

42

Wage Growth '87-'88
Wage Growth '88-'89
Difference

15

10

5

0
34

36

38
Age

40

42

Wage Growth '86-'88
Wage Growth '88-'90
Difference

Note: These figures plot average earnings growth by age from 1987-1988 and 1989-1989 (the year the PBD
extension went into effect). Consequently, they mirror the non-parametric analysis for the replacement rate
reforms presented in the first two panels of Appendix Figures A.1-A.4.

105

Figure A.17: Difference-in-Difference Coefficient Estimates
Two-Year Earnings Growth

1

Earnings Growth Effect of PBD Extension

Earnings Growth Effect of PBD Extension

One-Year Earnings Growth

.8
.6
.4
.2
0
-.2
-.4
-.6
-.8
-1
1983

1984

1985
Placebo Years

1986

1987

1988

1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
-.2
-.4
-.6
-.8
-1
1983

Treated Year

1984

1985
Placebo Years

1986

1987

1988

Treated Year

Note: These figures report results from estimating a specification similar to Equation (19) but replacing the
reform-induced benefit changes with an indicator for being ages 39-42 in 1988 (treated by the PBD reform) and
adding age-specific fixed effects. We include the same controls included in specification (4) in Table 3.

106

K

Robustness: Constructing Gross Benefits

To take into account that unemployment insurance benefits are not taxed in Austria, we verify
that our results are robust to changes in gross benefits. Appendix Table A.6 reports those results.
Appendix Figure A.18 presents the graphical analysis. Since the benefit changes are now larger,
the implied gross-wage/gross-benefit sensitivities shrink compared to our main results using
net benefits. Since our tax calculator may only imperfectly approximate individuals’ actual
tax situation in particular in the early years of our sample, our main results use the raw net
(untaxed) benefit variation. We detail the tax calculator below.
Features of the Austrian Tax System We constructed a tax calculator that incorporates
the key elements of the Austrian income tax system:76
1. Base salary (Bemessungsgrundlage). Austrian salaries are paid in 14 installments,
usually of equal size. Twelve are paid monthly as a base salary, which is subject to a more
elaborate tax schedule and eligible for more credits and deductions. We observe the annual
pre-tax amount paid as base salary from each establishment to every worker in the ASSD.
2. Holiday bonuses (Sonderzahlungen). Austrian salaries are paid in 14 installments,
usually of equal size. The 13th installment is usually paid during the summer (Urlaubszuschuss) and the 14th before Christmas (Weihnachtsremuneration). They are subject to
a simpler tax schedule and social security contribution policies. We observe the annual
pre-tax amount paid as holiday bonuses from each establishment to every worker in the
ASSD.
3. Social security contribution. Each of three social welfare programs is partly financed
by contributions as a proportion of workers’ gross income: the unemployment insurance
system (Arbeitslosenversicherung), health insurance system (Krankenversicherung), and
old-age pension system (Pensionsversicherung). The proportions have changed over time.
The salary contributions to unemployment insurance can be found in § 61, section 1, of
the Unemployment Insurance Act (Arbeitslosenversicherungsgesetz, AlVG) through 1994
and in § 2, section 1, of the Labor Market Policy Financing Act (ArbeitsmarktpolitikFinanzierungsgesetz, AMPFG) from 1995 onward. The salary contributions for health
insurance and old-age pensions can be found in § 51, section 1, of the Social Security Act
(Allgemeines Sozialversicherungsgsetz, ASVG). There are also payroll contributions from
employers to these programs that are not counted. Social security contributions are not
taxed.
4. Base salary-only social security contributions. Workers make additional contributions as a proportion of their base salary to a national housing subsidy program (Wohnbauförderungsbeitrag) and the Austrian Chamber of Labour (Arbeitkammerumlage), an
organization that represents workers and consumers in Austria and is independent of the
trade unions and their federation (Österreichischer Gewerkschaftsbund, ÖGB). Unlike for
trade unions, membership in the Chamber and the associated base salary contribution
are compulsory for all Austrian workers. Together these contributions add 1 percentage
76

For the years after 2000, we draw on a tax calculator that David Card and Andrea Weber generously shared
with us.

107

point to the proportion of the base salary taken for social security programs, and the
contributions are not taxed.
5. Work-related expenses (Werbungskosten). There is a tax deduction for unavoidable
expenses during work. We use the amounts available to workers who are not self-employed,
which can be found in § 16, section 3, of the Income Tax Act (Einkommensteuergesetz,
EstG).
6. Special expenses (Sonderausgaben). There is a small tax deduction for various
“special expenses” such as charitable donations and church donations. The amounts can be
found in § 4, section 3, of the Income Tax Act.
7. Income tax schedules. Tax schedules for the base salary can be found in § 33, section
1, of the Income Tax Act and those for the holiday bonuses in § 67, section 1, of the Act.
We use the 1972 and 1988 Acts as well as intermediate reforms.
8. General tax credit (Allgemeiner Absetzbetrag). During our period of study, a tax
credit was provided to all Austrian taxpayers. The amount—or the earnings schedule on
which it is calculated in later years—can be found in § 33, section 5, of the Income Tax
Act of 1972 and subsequent amendments and in § 33, section 3, of the Income Tax Act of
1988 and subsequent amendments.
9. Commuting tax credit (Verkehrsabsetzbetrag). The Income Tax Act of 1988 introduced a tax credit for expenses related to commutes, and the amount can be found in § 33,
section 5.
10. Wage earner’s tax credit (Arbeitnehmerabsetzbetrag). Those who are not selfemployed can claim a small additional tax credit, the amount of which could be found in §
33, section 8, of the Income Tax Act of 1972 and subsequent reforms and in § 33, section 5,
of the Income Tax Act of 1988 and subsequent reforms.
Other Elements of the Austrian Tax System We have highlighted the key features of
the Austrian tax system. However, there are many other tax credits and deductions, such as
for households with children, pensioners, and those on disability and parental leave. Thus, our
calculations are for an individual who is not self-employed and ignore exemptions for specific
groups. In addition to focusing on observable characteristics of individuals in the ASSD, this
also is in line with how the pre-separation income base is meant to be calculated for UI benefits
after 2000, when benefits were determined using net incomes rather than gross incomes.
Calculating Net-of-Tax Rates We calculate the net income in the following steps, using
values for each feature of the tax system.
• For the base salary:
1. Calculate taxable income
= Gross base salary
− Social security contribution (as a proportion of gross earnings)
− Base salary-only social security contributions (as a proportion of gross earnings)
− Tax deduction for work-related expenses
− Tax deduction for special expenses
108

2. Calculate the tax burden using the tax schedules and the taxable income.
3. Calculate the tax owed, which is then set to 0 if negative
= Tax burden
− General tax credit
− Commuting tax credit
− Wage earner’s tax credit
4. Calculate net base salary
= Gross base salary
− Social security contribution (as a proportion of gross earnings)
− Base salary-only social security contributions (as a proportion of gross earnings)
− Tax owed
• For the holiday bonuses:
1. Calculate taxable income
= Gross holiday bonuses
− Social security contribution (as a proportion of gross earnings)
2. Calculate the tax burden using the (simpler) tax schedules and the taxable income.
There are no tax credits on the holiday bonuses, so this is also the tax owed. This
is set to 0 if negative.
3. Calculate net holiday bonuses
= Gross holiday bonuses
− Social security contributions (as a proportion of gross earnings)
− Tax owed
• Calculate total net earnings as the sum of the net base salary and the net holiday
bonuses.
• Calculate the net-of-tax rate by dividing the total net earnings by total gross earnings.
The 1972 Tax Schedule The Income Tax Act of 1972 introduced income taxes on individuals,
which went into effect for 1973 earnings. Prior to 1973, taxes were calculated on household
incomes. To keep the 1972 net-of-tax rate calculation in line with those of later years, we
extrapolate by assigning to each individual in 1972 the average 1973 net-of-tax rate of its
earnings percentile. This choice has no bearing on our results because we assign db/w from the
reform year to previous years to form placebos, i.e. the 1972 net-of-tax rate is not used in the
1976 reform sample.
Converting to Gross Units To make a direct gross-gross comparison, we convert each
individual’s UI benefit shift dbi,r,t (wi,r,t−1 ) in specification (19) into gross terms by dividing
by the individual’s net-of-tax rate in the base year t − 1. This inflates the change in the
nonemployment value.
Placebo Years We treat benefit changes in placebo years just as we do with our standard
benefit change (see Section 4.3.1), assigning individuals in pre-reform years the average db/(1−τ )w
of the eighth of a percentile in the reform year, where τ is the average tax rate.
109

Figure A.18: Overview of Non-Parametric Results with Gross UI Benefit Changes
(a) 1976 Reform

(b) 1985 Reform
15

Change (Pct Pts)

Change (Pct Pts)

20

10

0

5

0

-10
2000

10

2500

3000
3500
4000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year

Benefit Change (db/w)
One-Year Effects (dw/w)

4500

10000

Predicted Wage Effects
Two-Year Effects (dw/w)

15000
20000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Benefit Change (db/w)
One-Year Effects (dw/w)

(c) 1989 Reform

25000

Predicted Wage Effects
Two-Year Effects (dw/w)

(d) 2001 Reform

10

6

Change (Pct Pts)

Change (Pct Pts)

8
6
4
2

4

2

0

0
-2
5000

10000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Benefit Change (db/w)
One-Year Effects (dw/w)

15000

10000

Predicted Wage Effects
Two-Year Effects (dw/w)

15000
20000
25000
Nom. Earnings in Base Year
Benefit Change (db/w)
One-Year Effects (dw/w)

30000

Predicted Wage Effects
Two-Year Effects (dw/w)

Note: The figure plots robustness checks for the results reported in Figures 4(a) through 4(d). The specifications
reported here take into account that UI benefits are untaxed in Austria. To take non-taxation into account,
we translate the UI benefit shift, db/w reported in the solid green line above, into a change in (hypothetical)
gross benefits, dbGross /w, by scaling up the actual benefit shift by an individual’s average net-of-tax rate so that
both the benefit and the wage change are in gross units. See Appendix K for additional information on the tax
calculation.

110

Table A.6: Estimated Wage Effects with Shifts in Gross UI Benefits

Panel A: 1-Year Earnings Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Placebo: 3 Yr Lag

(5)

(6)

0.011
(.011)
-0.000
(.009)

-0.003
(.01)
-0.010
(.009)

0.009
(.011)
-0.006
(.01)

0.008
(.01)
-0.007
(.01)

0.013
(.009)
0.011
(.009)

0.017
(.009)
0.007
(.009)

Treatment Year

-0.003
(.01)

-0.001
(.011)

-0.014
(.01)

-0.011
(.01)

0.001
(.009)

-0.002
(.009)

Pre-p F-test p-val

0.493

0.545

0.414

0.385

0.322

0.182

R2
N (1000s)
Mincerian Ctrls
4-Digit Ind.-Occ. FEs
Firm-Year FEs

.048
7139

.067
7139
X

.076
7138

.094
7138
X
X

.257
6299
X

.281
6298
X
X
X

(5)

(6)

Placebo: 2 Yr Lag

X

Panel B: 2-Year Earnings Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Placebo: 3 Yr Lag

-0.001
(.014)

-0.014
(.013)

0.000
(.016)

0.000
(.015)

-0.002
(.014)

0.004
(.014)

Treatment Year

-0.001
(.02)

0.008
(.02)

-0.015
(.02)

-0.012
(.02)

-0.011
(.017)

-0.016
(.017)

Pre-p F-test p-val

0.947

0.291

0.992

0.995

0.894

0.771

R2
N (1000s)
Mincerian Ctrls
4-Digit Ind.-Occ. FEs
Firm-Year FEs

.103
5039

.125
5039
X

.14
5038

.16
5038
X
X

.305
4434

.332
4433
X
X
X

X

X

Note: The table reports results of a robustness check for the specifications reported in Table 3. The specifications
reported here take into account that UI benefits are untaxed in Austria. To take non-taxation into account, we
translate the UI benefit shift, db from specification (19), into a change in (hypothetical) gross benefits by scaling
up the actual benefit shift by an individual’s average net-of-tax rate so that both the benefit and the wage change
are in gross units. For further information on the specification see notes for Table 3. To calculate individuals’
net-of-tax rate, we rely on a purpose-built tax calculator for Austria. See Appendix Section K for details on the
Austrian income tax system and constructing gross benefits.

111

L

UI Benefit Schedules in Austria: 1972–2003
Figure B.1: UI Benefit Schedules 1972-1978

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1972

60000

50
0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50

60

1974 and 1975

60

1973 and 1974

60

1972 and 1973

0

1973

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1973

1974

1976

1975

60
0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50

60
50
10

1975

60000

60000

1977 and 1978

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1974

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

0

1976 and 1977

60

1975 and 1976

60000

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1976

60000

0

1977

Note: The dashed vertical lines in gray correspond to the social security earnings maximum.

112

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1977

1978

60000

Figure B.2: UI Benefit Schedules 1978-1987

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1978

60000

50
0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50

60

1980 and 1981

60

1979 and 1980

60

1978 and 1979

0

1979

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1979

1980

60
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

1982

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1982

60000

1983

1984

60
0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50

60
50
10

1985

60000

1986 and 1987

0

1984

60000

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1983

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

0

1985 and 1986

60

1984 and 1985

0

1981

50

60
50
10

1981

60000

60000

1983 and 1984

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1980

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

0

1982 and 1983

60

1981 and 1982

60000

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1985

60000

0

1986

Note: The dashed vertical lines in gray correspond to the social security earnings maximum.

113

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1986

1987

60000

Figure B.3: UI Benefit Schedules 1987-1996

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1987

60000

50
0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50

60

1989 and 1990

60

1988 and 1989

60

1987 and 1988

0

1988

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1988

1989

60
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

1991

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1991

60000

1992

1993

60
0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50

60
50
10

1994

60000

1995 and 1996

0

1993

60000

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1992

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

0

1994 and 1995

60

1993 and 1994

0

1990

50

60
50
10

1990

60000

60000

1992 and 1993

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1989

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

0

1991 and 1992

60

1990 and 1991

60000

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1994

60000

0

1995

Note: The dashed vertical lines in gray correspond to the social security earnings maximum.

114

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1995

1996

60000

Figure B.4: UI Benefit Schedules 1996-2003

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1996

60000

50
0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50

60

1998 and 1999

60

1997 and 1998

60

1996 and 1997

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

1997

1997

1998

60
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

2000

2000

60000

0

2001

0

10

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50

60

2002 and 2003

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
2002

1999

50

60
50
10

1999

60000

60000

2001 and 2002

0

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
1998

Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40

50
Benefits (b/w)
20
30
40
10
0

0

0

2000 and 2001

60

1999 and 2000

60000

60000

2003

Note: The dashed vertical lines in gray correspond to the social security earnings maximum.

115

20000
40000
Monthly Earnings (ATS)
2001

2002

60000

