                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ATTRIBUTING MEDICAL SPENDING TO CONDITIONS:
                           A COMPARISON OF METHODS

                                           David Cutler
                                         Kaushik Ghosh
                                        Irina Bondarenko
                                        Kassandra Messer
                                     Trivellore Raghunathan
                                          Susan Stewart
                                        Allison B. Rosen

                                       Working Paper 25233
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25233


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




We are grateful to the National Institute on Aging (P01-AG031098 and R37AG047312) for
research support and to Barry Bosworth and seminar participants for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25233.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by David Cutler, Kaushik Ghosh, Irina Bondarenko, Kassandra Messer, Trivellore
Raghunathan, Susan Stewart, and Allison B. Rosen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Attributing Medical Spending to Conditions: A Comparison of Methods
David Cutler, Kaushik Ghosh, Irina Bondarenko, Kassandra Messer, Trivellore Raghunathan,
Susan Stewart, and Allison B. Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 25233
November 2018
JEL No. I1

                                        ABSTRACT

Partitioning medical spending into conditions is essential to understanding the cost burden of
medical care. Two broad strategies have been used to measure disease-specific spending. The
first attributes each medical claim to the condition listed as its cause. The second decomposes
total spending for a person over a year to the cumulative set of conditions they have.
Traditionally, this has been done through regression analysis. This paper makes two
contributions. First, we develop a new method to attribute spending to conditions using
propensity score models. Second, we compare the claims attribution approach to the regression
approach and our propensity score stratification method in a common set of beneficiaries age 65
and over drawn from the 2009 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey. Our estimates show that the
three methods have important differences in spending allocation and that the propensity score
model likely offers the best theoretical and empirical combination.

David Cutler                                   Trivellore Raghunathan
Department of Economics                        University of Michigan
Harvard University                             teraghu@umich.edu
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                            Susan Stewart
and NBER                                       NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu                            1050 Massachusetts Ave
                                               Cambridge, MA 02138
Kaushik Ghosh                                  sstewart@nber.org
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Ave.                        Allison B. Rosen
Cambridge, MA 02138                            Department of Quantitative Health Sciences
ghoshk@nber.org                                University of Massachusetts Medical School
                                               368 Plantation Street, AS9-1083
Irina Bondarenko                               Worcester, MA 01605
University of Michigan                         Allison.Rosen@umassmed.edu
ibond@med.umich.edu

Kassandra Messer
University of Michigan
kasey@umich.edu
I. Introduction

       For many purposes, it is important to attribute medical spending to particular conditions.

For example, researchers and policy makers often ask questions such as: Does spending align

with the burden of disease, or are the two independent? How much of medical spending growth

is associated with the rising prevalence of chronic disease? Each of these questions requires a

condition-based look at spending.     In this paper, we compare different methodologies for

attributing spending to medical conditions.

       Cost of illness studies have a long tradition in health economics, dating back to the 1960s

(Scitovsky, 1967; Rice and Horowitz, 1967; Rice, 1967). The fundamental difficulty with

attributing spending to particular conditions is comorbidities. If all people had only one medical

condition at a time, it would be easy to measure condition-based spending. When people have

multiple conditions, however, this becomes more difficult. If a person has a heart attack from

which recovery is slow, is the extra spending during the post-acute period a result of an

abnormally slow recovery, or might it result instead from pre-existing mental illness, which

makes following a recommended medication and lifestyle pattern more difficult? One needs

some type of disease attribution methodology to answer this question.

       Traditionally, studies in this literature assign each claim to one or more conditions (e.g.,

Cooper and Rice, 1976; Berk, Paringer and Mushkin, 1978; Koopmanschap, 1995; Hodgson and

Cohen, 1999; Leon and Neumann, 1999; Druss et al., 2001, 2002; Cohen and Krauss, 2003;

Thorpe et al., 2004a, 2004b, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2010, 2013; Roehrig et al., 2009, 2011; and Starr

et al., 2014). In the case of the heart attack example noted above, spending in the post-acute

period would be allocated to either cardiovascular disease or mental illness based on which

diagnosis the physician recorded as being the primary cause of the visit – or perhaps split

                                                                                                 1
between multiple recorded diagnoses. The difficulty with this methodology is that physicians do

not necessarily solve the attribution question well. If the patient is re-hospitalized because

recovery from the heart attack is slow, the physician will (properly) record the new

hospitalization as caused by cardiovascular disease, even though that is just the symptom of

another problem.

       Thus, there is a simultaneous history of researchers exploring other ways to measure cost

for medical conditions. Typically, regression analysis is used to relate annual spending at the

person level to a set of medical conditions that a person has in that calendar year (e.g., Dudley et

al.,1993;Koopmanshap, 1998; Bloom et al., 2001; Sturm, 2002; Finkelstein et al., 2003a, 2003b,

2009; Akobundu et al., 2006; Trogdon et al., 2008; Honeycutt et al., 2009, 2013; Rosen and

Cutler, 2009; Roberts et al. 2010; Gregori et al., 2011). The resulting coefficients are then used

to attribute spending to conditions.

       Three issues come up in this type of analysis. First, most of the models for spending are

non-linear – often non-linear least squares or generalized linear models – and some method must

be used to attribute spending to conditions in a way that neither overcounts nor undercounts total

dollars. Trogdon et al. (2008) develop an attributable fraction methodology that does this, but it

can be very computationally intensive for models with many conditions.

       Second, these regressions typically have a large unexplained component – the constant

term and other covariates. It is not clear what condition to assign that spending to. Third,

regression models make parametric assumptions, and the results can be sensitive to violation of

these assumptions. As is well known, the ordinary least squares(OLS) method is not well suited

to handle expenditure data with common data problems like heteroskedasticity, heavy tails, and




                                                                                                  2
large outliers (Manning et al. 1998, 2001, 2005), Basu and Manning 2009; Jones, 2000;

Zaslavsky and Buntin, 2004; Cantoni and Ronchetti, 2006).

       This paper has two goals. Our first goal is to develop a method of spending attribution to

conditions that is more robust than claims and regression methods. We propose a two-step

propensity score methodology to do this. The first step uses a propensity score method to

compare people with a condition to observably similar people without that condition. The

difference in spending between those individuals is an estimate of the condition-specific cost. In

the second step, we propose a non-additive framework that models total spending as a non-linear

function of attributed costs and a number of comorbidities. This allows us to incorporate the

overall number of comorbidities into the estimation of the disease-specific spending. This

method also attributes spending to all medical conditions without any residual.

       We then compare three methods of allocating spending to conditions: a claims-attribution

approach along the lines of the earlier literature; a traditional regression specification; and the

propensity score methodology. The data that we use is the same for all three methods: the 2009

Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS).

       The results show significant differences between the approaches. The claims approach

differs the most from the two other approaches in attributing more of the cost to acute medical

conditions (e.g., a heart attack) relative to the regression or propensity score methods, which

attribute more spending to comorbid conditions (e.g., mental illness, diabetes, hypertension,

hyperlipidemia). In contrast to the regression approach, the propensity score approach benefits

from not having a large unexplained component.

       We also use a variety of statistical techniques to compare these models. In general, the

propensity score model does better at matching the distribution of individual-level spending than



                                                                                                 3
does the regression or claims-based model. In addition, the propensity score model has a lower

out-of-sample mean squared error for predicted spending. For this reason, we believe that the

propensity score model is likely the best way to measure condition-specific medical spending.

         The paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the data we employ. The

third section presents the different methodologies for measuring condition-specific costs, using

our specific data to highlight the issues in each case. The fourth section shows the results

comparing spending using the different methodologies. The last section concludes.



II.      Data

         Our primary data source is the 2009 Cost and Use sample of the Medicare Current

Beneficiary Survey (MCBS). 1 We restricted our sample to the population aged 65 and older

since the MCBS is nationally representative for the older population. Importantly, the MCBS

includes both community and institutionalized people. The MCBS has information on survey-

reported events, supplemented by Medicare claims.

         To define conditions, we started with the 259 Clinical Classification Software categories

delineated by the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality. Not all of these conditions have

a high prevalence in the elderly, and some combine categories that might usefully be

disaggregated for this group. After combining and disaggregating, we determined ex-ante a set

of 105 conditions: 98 diagnosed conditions; 3 undiagnosed conditions (high cholesterol, high

blood pressure, and diabetes), and 4 cancer screening variables (colon cancer, cervical cancer,

breast cancer and prostate cancer).


1
 The MCBS has two samples: a set of people who were enrolled for the entire year (the Access to Care sample) and
a set of ever-enrolled beneficiaries (the Cost and Use sample). The latter differs from the former in including people
who die during the year and new additions to the Medicare population. The Cost and Use sample adds up to
national spending totals, so we use those data.

                                                                                                                    4
       In any clinical taxonomy, there is always a residual category of conditions that are

difficult to disaggregate. We defined a category of “other conditions” that includes signs and

symptoms (for example, routine general medical examination at health care facility), residual

conditions and unclassified conditions (for example, recurrent hypersomnia), and some E codes

such as accidents).

       In a preliminary analysis, several of the calibrated conditions had too low a prevalence to

meaningfully estimate their cost in the elderly. Thus, for the purpose of cost estimation, we

combined these 105 conditions into 78 conditions with a larger sample size. The appendix

reports the prevalence of each condition (Raghunathan T, et al., 2017).

       While MCBS has many strengths, it also has some limitations, for which we developed

solutions. We sketch the issues and solutions here and provide more detail in the Appendix.

First, MCBS has incomplete or no claims information for beneficiaries enrolled in Health

Maintenance Organizations (HMOs). We reweighted the fee-for-service population to

compensate for this exclusion, matching HMO enrollees to comparable fee-for-service

beneficiaries. Second, we made an adjustment for the difference between survey spending and

national spending estimates, along with the lines of Selden et al. (2001) and Sing et al. (2006).

We began by removing expenditures from the NHEA for goods and services which were out of

the scope of the survey data. We then reallocated spending across service categories so that total

spending across service categories would match.        To ensure that the reallocated spending

matched national totals, we proportionately increased spending in each category so that total

survey spending equaled the NHEA estimate of spending for the elderly. The aggregate

adjustment was to increase survey spending by 11%, roughly evenly spread across service

categories (Rosen A, et al., 2017).



                                                                                                5
       Finally, the disease prevalence rates reported in MCBS for some conditions (for example,

hypertension and hyperlipidemia) are lower than those observed in surveys such as the National

Health and Nutritional Examination Survey (NHANES), which collects laboratory results. We

used the NHANES to calibrate the prevalence of conditions in MCBS to more accurately reflect

national levels. We term the resulting condition list the “calibrated medical conditions.” The

imputation procedure produced five imputed data sets. In our empirical analysis, we estimated

the models for each of the five imputed data sets. We used proc mianalyze in SAS 9.4 to

combine means and standard errors from the five imputed data sets using standard combination

rules (Little and Rubin, 1987; Li, Raghunathan and Rubin,1991).

       The distribution of per-person spending for the resulting data set is shown in the first part

of figure 1 and the first row of table 1. Mean per capita spending on medical care for the elderly

was $17,479 in 2009. The median is much lower: $7,281; as is well known, there is a long right

tail in spending, which can be seen in figure 1 and in the last two columns of table 1.



III.   Methods for Attributing Spending to Conditions

       There are two fundamental methodologies in the literature for attributing spending to

conditions: a claims-based method that assigns spending for particular claims to one or more

conditions coded as the reason for the medical visit, and a regression method that uses total

spending over a period of time and a set of medical conditions to decompose spending into

attributable conditions. We discuss each method in turn, highlighting how we implement each.

       Before we present our methodologies, we note one feature of the analysis. We seek to

estimate the partial effect of each condition on spending, controlling for all other conditions that

a person has. That differs from the total effect that spending on a disease might lead to,



                                                                                                  6
including its effects on the prevalence of other conditions.       As an example, suppose that

physicians treat hypertension more aggressively than in the past. That will raise spending on

hypertension. But it might lower overall spending if there are offsets in fewer heart attacks or

strokes. Our estimates will give us the additional spending on hypertension since we hold

constant the other cardiovascular conditions a person has. To estimate the total cost impact of

spending more on any condition, we would need a set of equations for how each condition

affects the incidence of others. We do not explore these inter-linkages in this paper.



A. CLAIMS-BASED METHOD

       In the claims-based method, claims for which there is only one diagnosis are easy to

assign to a disease. However, most medical claims have more than one condition associated

with them. A typical claim in Medicare data contains a principal diagnosis code (ICD9-CM) and

several other secondary diagnoses codes (sometimes up to 14). For example, a patient

hospitalized for a heart attack will likely also be diagnosed with other comorbid conditions, such

as congestive heart failure (CHF), diabetes, hypertension, or hyperlipidemia. The question to

address is how to estimate the amount spent on treating each of the conditions.

       In the first claims-based studies, developed in the 1960s, spending for each claim was

allocated to the principal diagnosis. Using data from the 1960s, Rice (1967) estimated that the

most costly conditions were diseases of the digestive system; mental, psychoneurotic and

personality disorders; and diseases of the circulatory system. The most recent work following

the claim-attribution methodology is by Thorpe et al. (2004a, 2004b, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2010,

and 2013) and Roehrig et al. (2009, 2011) and uses data from the Medical Expenditure Panel

Survey over the 1990s and 2000s. To address the problem of multiple conditions, Thorpe et al.



                                                                                                7
(2004a) estimate an “upper bound” (attributing total spending for each health care event to all the

conditions reported), a “lower bound” (summing spending from each medical event for which

only a single condition is reported) and a “best guess”, where claims with more than one listed

condition are divided using the relative spending of each condition in the single condition claims.

Using the 259 disease classifications in the Clinical Classification System (CCS) (Elixhauser,

Steiner, and Palmer, 2014) to define conditions, Thorpe et al. (2004a) estimate that the

conditions accounting for the most spending are heart disease, pulmonary disease, and mental

disorders. The finding that heart disease is the most costly condition has been mirrored in other

recent studies (Roehrig et al., 2009).

       Our version of the claims-based attribution method follows Thorpe’s best guess, making

adjustments as appropriate. To start, we note that this method is based on the observed claims

for each person, not the calibrated claims that we derived– except as noted below. In each set of

MCBS claims files (hospital inpatient, hospital outpatient, carrier, hospice, home health, skilled

nursing facility and durable medical equipment), we first identified claims with only one listed

condition. Table A6 in the Appendix gives detail as to whether each medical condition has

claims that satisfy the “single condition claim” criteria. Out of the seven different types of

claims, only carrier/physician and hospital outpatient claims have “single condition claims” –

that is, a claim with single diagnosis code listed in it – for all 98 medical conditions (excluding

the 3 undiagnosed conditions) and 4 cancer screening variables. In these data files, we estimated

the average cost for single claims for all 98 medical conditions and 4 screening variables.

       We used this information to apportion a cost to medical conditions for multiple condition

claims in these two files. For example, if the average cost of condition ‘a’ in the single condition

claims file is ca, and the average cost of condition ‘b’ in the single condition claims file is cb, a



                                                                                                   8
claim that listed both conditions ‘a’ and ‘b’ would be allocated ca/(ca+cb) to condition ‘a’, and

cb/(ca+cb) to condition ‘b’.

       Unfortunately, the “single-condition claim” criterion fails for inpatient, skilled nursing

facility, home health, durable medical equipment, and hospice claims. In the inpatient file, only

13 (e.g., breast cancer, prostate cancer) out of 102 medical conditions (excluding 3 undiagnosed

conditions) satisfy the “single condition claim” criteria. In skilled nursing facility file, only 36

(e.g., tuberculosis, HIV) out of 102 medical conditions satisfy the “single condition claim”

criteria. In the home health, hospice, and durable medical equipment files, 20, 40 and 59

conditions respectively satisfy the “single condition claim” criteria. This is one of the biggest

limitations of claims-based approach.

       To proceed, we used a methodology somewhat akin to the multiple condition

methodology presented above. We began with a sample of Medicare inpatient claims and

assigned each claim to one of the 78 conditions discussed above based on the principal diagnosis

of the claim. For each condition, we then averaged the DRG (diagnosis-related group) weight

for all of the associated claims. This gave us a rough measure of severity for the condition. We

used these relative severity weights to apportion the original claims to the multiple listed

diagnoses. For example, suppose there was a claim for $500 in the inpatient hospital file and

two conditions listed are diabetes and hypertension. Suppose further that in the full set of claims

for which diabetes was the principal diagnosis, the average DRG weight was 1.52, and in the set

of claims for which hypertension is the principal diagnosis, the average severity weight is 0.71.

We would assign 1.52/(1.52+0.71)*$500 to diabetes and 0.71/(1.52+0.71)*$500 to hypertension.

       The prescription drug data in MCBS have no diagnosis codes listed. Therefore, we

identified all medical conditions the person was treated for in 2009 using the diagnosis codes



                                                                                                  9
listed in their claims: inpatient, outpatient, skilled nursing facility, carrier, hospice, home health

and durable medical equipment. Each condition was counted once and assigned a DRG weight

based on inpatient admissions with that condition, as above. We then apportioned total

prescription drug spending for the year based on the share of these DRG weights to each

condition.

        Finally, for 5.3% of beneficiaries there were dollar amounts in the personal summary

file(s), but no claims.2 For these beneficiaries, we used the calibrated claims that we derived

using the NHANES instead of actual claims and assigned dollars to calibrated medical

conditions on that basis. The result of this process was a complete decomposition of medical

spending into 74 medical conditions and 4 cancer screening variables.

        Table 2 reports the total attributed spending by multi-level clinical classification system

(CCS) categories, and table A9 in the appendix reports spending for each of the 78 medical

conditions. Diseases of the circulatory system were the most expensive category, costing $148.1

billion and accounting for 23 percent of all personal health care expenditure. Diseases of the

nervous system and sense organs cost $64 billion, accounting for 10 percent of aggregate

personal health care. The next three most costly disease categories were diseases of the

musculoskeletal system and connective tissue ($62.2 billion, 10 percent); diseases of the

respiratory system ($53.4 billion, 8 percent); and endocrine; nutritional; and metabolic diseases

and immunity disorders ($49.2 billion, 8 percent). Together, these five disease groups accounted

for almost 59% of all personal health care spending. At the level of specific conditions, the most

expensive conditions were acute events with expensive and often prolonged hospitalizations:




2
  Person Summary or Service Summary files are created from the event-level files. The event-level files include self-
reported events, some of which are not paid under Medicare FFS, so there will be no corresponding claims.

                                                                                                                  10
acute myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, hematologic cancers, lung cancer, and acute renal

failure.

           One way to understand these results is to take the disease-specific spending and add it up

to the individual level, using the conditions diagnosed for each patient. The result is predicted

spending at the individual level, which can be compared to observed spending in the population.

Figure 1 and table 1 report the distribution of the person-level expenditures from the claims

model. By construction, mean person-level spending is the same as in the observed data. Median

spending is significantly higher with the claims-based attribution: $15,006, compared to $7,281

in the observed data. Effectively, the cost of high spending outliers is attributed to some

diseases, and these diseases are distributed throughout the population. Thus, the median

individual is estimated to be spending more than is true in practice whereas the high end spends

less. This is true to some extent for all of the methods we examine.

           For people with no claims, spending is zero; figure 1 shows that the claims-based method

effectively reproduces the share of people with zero spending.



B. REGRESSION APPROACH

           The second method of attributing spending to medical conditions is to use regression

analysis. Conceptually, the regression model relates total spending over the year to the full set of

conditions that a person has. The coefficients can then be used to find spending for each

condition. A typical equation is of the form:

           log(   + 1) =      +      +

           A good deal of work has considered how to model medical spending. Issues such as the

non-normal distribution of spending and heteroscedasticity are clearly important (Duan et al.



                                                                                                  11
1983; Manning 1998; Jones, 2000; Manning et al., 2001, 2005; Zaslavsky and Buntin, 2004;

Basu and Manning, 2009). The most common solutions to heavy tails are: (1) transformation to

deal with skewness (e.g., ordinary least square on ln(spending+1)) and use of smearing factors

for retransformation; and (2) different weighting approaches based on exponential conditional

model (ECM) and generalized linear model (GLM) approaches.

       Following Manning and Mullahy (2001), we explored several GLM estimation

techniques. First, (1) we fit models that are variants of generalized linear models (GLM) for

spending with a Gamma distribution and log link function. We also tried (2) a GLM model with

log(y+1) as the dependent variable with a Gaussian distribution and identity link. Other models

included (3) a cubic root model (cubic root of cost) and (4) a Box-Cox model.

       Some studies make an additional adjustment for people with no medical spending, for

example using a two-part model (Duan 1984, Mihaylova et al., 2011, Belotti et al., 2015): one

equation for the probability of positive spending and the second for the amount spent. We

estimate two-part models assuming the probability that a beneficiary has positive health care

spending is a probit. For people with non-zero spending, an OLS or GLM regression is run with

the same set of covariates as in the probit model (Belotti et al., 2015).

        We tried several two-part models with the following specifications: (5) generalized

linear models (GLM) for spending with a Gamma distribution and log link function; (6)

log(spending) as the dependent variable with a Gaussian distribution and identity link, and

finally (7) a cubic root model (cubic root of cost). We could not estimate the two-part Box-Cox

model as the STATA software used in the estimation does not support Box-Cox (Belotti et al.,

2015). In our data, only 2% of the sample has no spending in the year. This is not surprising




                                                                                            12
given the age of the population and its enrolment in Medicare. For this reason, we believe that

the two-part models do not offer a huge improvement over one-part models.

       A third concern that arises in the regression model is that conditions can be associated

with decreased spending – that is, there is no constraint that the coefficients on the conditions are

all positive. Generally, negative coefficients are ascribed to diagnostic mismeasurement (Hall

and Highfill, 2013a, 2013b). When relatively healthy people see physicians, physicians still

need some condition to code as the cause of the visit. In such circumstances, the physician may

code a relatively benign condition (hypertension or high cholesterol, for example) that is

common in the population and straightforward to justify.           For patients with a variety of

conditions, in contrast, physicians may focus on more acute conditions and not record risk

factors that have little immediate impact on health. Effectively, this will lead to lower spending

on less acute conditions than would be true in practice.

       Some studies address this concern by forcing the coefficients to be positive.             For

example, one could model spending as:

       log(   + 1) =       +    exp( ) +

In this equation, the coefficient on spending (exp(β)) can never be negative.           In practice,

however, this equation does not always converge; the β’s approach -∞, effectively wanting some

conditions to not affect spending. Other studies address the issue by defining hierarchical

categories to pull out difficult cases. For example, rather than coding for hypertension, the

regression might include categories for ‘hypertension without other conditions’, ‘hypertension

with heart disease’, and so on (Pope et al., 2004). Conditions are often defined so that spending

on every condition is positive. For our purposes, we do not wish to change the set of conditions




                                                                                                  13
across estimation methodologies. Thus, we let negative coefficients be negative and proceed as

if that is the true impact of the condition.

        To implement the regression models, we include as independent variables the 78

calibrated condition and screening indicators and other covariates that are expected to influence

medical costs. These include: health status compared to one year ago (somewhat better/much

better, about the same, somewhat worse/much worse); general health compared to others same

age (excellent, very good, good, fair, poor); death in calendar year, any difficulty lifting/carrying

10 pounds; any difficulty in stooping/crouching/kneeling; any difficulty walking 1/4 mi. or 2-3

blocks; any difficulty dressing; any difficulty eating; private health insurance coverage for the

calendar year; days in institution; count of inpatient nights; count of inpatient stays; current

smoker; body mass image; age dummies; education dummies (<9 years, 9-11 grade (including 12

with no diploma); high school grad/GED or equivalent, some college or AA degree; college

grad); ever served in armed forces; sex; marital status (married, widowed, divorced, separated,

never married); poverty category (poor, near poor, low income, middle income, high income);

race and ethnicity dummies (white, black, other; Hispanic ethnicity).

        As noted in section 1, to form an accurate diagnosis profile for each individual, we

imputed prevalence of diseases from NHANES using multiple imputations. This produces 5

imputed datasets, denoted Dm, for m=1,…,5. We then estimate five regressions, of the form:

        log(   + 1) =         +          +

where the regression is estimated using HMO-adjusted survey weights. We combine these

estimates and calculate appropriate standard errors using standard techniques (Little and Rubin,

1987; Li, Raghunathan and Rubin,1991). Table A7 in the appendix shows the coefficient

estimates from all five imputed data sets using the one-part model with the Gaussian distribution



                                                                                                  14
and identity link. Although they are not the primary object of our analysis, we remark briefly on

the estimates for the demographic characteristics. Generally, these are as expected. People who

die spend more, as do people who have difficulties with ADLs or IADLs. Among the more

surprising findings are that men spend less than women (conditional on their health conditions

and health status), as do smokers. Importantly, these covariates suggest that there is more to

spending than just the clinical factors.

       From our estimates in appendix table A7, two of the condition groups have negative

coefficients for all five of the replicates: Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) and Acute Renal Failure.

These are relatively less common (6% and 9% respectively), but the claims-based approach

attributed $2.2 billion and $7.7 billion to them respectively. We set spending to zero for those

two conditions (as in Hall and Highfill, 2013a, 2013b). In some cases, coefficients were negative

for only a selection of the five multiples. In this case, we treated those variables as missing and

averaged the coefficients over the remaining replicates.

       We did an extensive diagnosis of the residuals from all of the models to choose the most

appropriate regression specification, shown in figures A3-A6 in the appendix. Figure A3 shows

the kernel density plot comparison of the residuals (in blue) along with the normal density (in

red). Figure A4 shows the standardized normal probability plots of the residuals. Figure A5

shows the quantile of residuals relative to the normal distribution. Figure A6 shows the scatter

plot of the residuals relative to per person spending.

       All of these residual plots use the in-sample estimates. An alternative way to measure fit

is to use out-of-sample predictions. Table 3 shows the root mean square error (RMSE) based on

out-of-sample predictions; we estimate the model in a random half of the data (N=3,100) and

predict spending in the other half.



                                                                                                15
        The out-of-sample predictions show that the one-part model with log(spending+1) as the

dependent variable and with a Gaussian distribution and identity link had the lowest RMSE.

Figure A3 shows that this model also fit well. The one and two part cubic-roots were second

best. Surprisingly, the Gamma models with log link performed relatively poorly. These models

are sensitive to high-spenders with big residuals – as typified by people in nursing homes.

        The log specification implicitly assumes that each disease has a multiplicative effect on

spending. An additional transformation is needed to turn this into dollars, and to ensure that the

average dollars spent will match the known total. We follow a methodology described by

Trogdon et al. (2007, 2008) which estimates expenditures associated with co-occurring diseases

and reallocates these expenditures to individual diseases. For notational simplicity, we omit the

m superscript denoting each multiply imputed dataset. In practice, we estimate the equations

below for each data set and then average the estimates as noted above. We start by calculating

the fraction of spending attributable to all of the individual’s illnesses (   ):

                              $ %∙ $'(
                           !" #             (     )∙ $'
               =                     $ %∙ $'()            ,
                                !" #

           )
where *+ = , ∑,/) exp( ̂ ) is a smearing factor to estimate the average error term. Then, we

calculate the share * 0 % of spending by each individual that can be attributed to each diagnosed

condition:

                   2exp +0 % − 14 ∙ 0
        *1 =
               ∑70/)52exp +0 % − 14 ∙   06


We then disaggregate the observed cost at the individual level by taking the product of the

attributable fraction, the spending share for that condition, and the observed cost per person:




                                                                                               16
              ∙ *+ 0 ∙ 8:;< . To form an average cost per condition, we average spending over the
   (9)
 80 =

subjects with the condition of interest.

                                    (?)
                    (9)       ∑    = > @A ,0/)C
                  80      =       ∑ @A ,0/)C

         The second column of table 2 shows spending by multi-level CCS category, and table A9

in the appendix shows the spending attributed to each of the 78 medical conditions. The

regression estimates differ in many ways from the claims-based estimates. “Other conditions”

are much more important in the regression approach, accounting for 19 percent of spending

compared to 6 percent in the claims approach. Indeed, other spending is the leading cause of

spending in the regression approach. Subsequent analysis suggests that this is largely due to high

attributed spending for signs and symptoms. Circulatory disease is second in spending (19

percent).

         The third most expensive condition is not an actual condition; it is the unexplained

component – the constant term and other covariates. This picks up spending that the regression

does not attribute to any condition. Unfortunately for the regression approach, this is very large

– $58 billion, or 9 percent of total spending. The importance of this unattributed spending is one

argument against the regression approach.

         Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases and immunity disorders (8 percent) and

diseases of the nervous system and sense organs (7 percent) round out the top five. We present

more comparison below of how the regression and claims-based approaches estimate disease-

specific spending.




                                                                                               17
       To evaluate the distribution of individual spending resulting from this set of average

costs, we calculated the predicted spending for each person as the sum of averages cost for each

of the diagnosed conditions: DE = ∑0 80
                               (9)     (9)
                                               0.


       Figure 1 and table 1 report distribution of the estimates from the regression-based model.

The regression approach has less variability in predicted spending than the claims-based (and

propensity score) approaches.      Effectively, the regression approach has a difficult time

determining the cost of different conditions (as typified by the unexplained component), and thus

finds less variation in predicted spending across individuals. A related byproduct of this is that

the regression approach greatly understates the share of people with zero and very low spending.

Figure 1 shows essentially no mass at very low spending with the regression approach.



C. PROPENSITY SCORE METHOD

       Our proposed propensity score methodology consists of two steps: first, estimating the

average difference in spending for individuals with and without each disease and second,

incorporating the number of conditions and other measures of the amount of health care received

to refine the estimates of cost attributed to each condition. We repeated each step using each

multiply imputed dataset and average them as above. For notational ease, we omitted the m

superscript in our presentation.

       To estimate the average difference in spending 80 for individuals with and without the

condition of interest Dj, we began by estimating the probability of having condition Dj,

conditional on the available covariates and all other conditions; this estimated probability is

known as the propensity score. We computed the propensity score by fitting separate logistic

regression models for each condition, where Dj is the outcome. The covariates used in the


                                                                                               18
propensity score models were the same as the covariates used in the regression approach. For

each propensity score model, we normally included the other 77 calibrated health conditions as a

part of the X vector, but excluded conditions that had a deterministic or extremely tight

correlation with the condition of the interest. For example, in estimating the propensity of

hypertension, we did not condition on undiagnosed hypertension (the two are mutually

exclusive). Similarly, in estimating the probability of mammogram screening, we did not

condition on breast cancer (all people with breast cancer have mammograms).             Also, the

propensity of gender-specific diseases such as breast and prostate cancer were estimated only for

the relevant gender. We estimated the probability of death in a given year and then used the

estimated probability of death as a covariate in the propensity score models for the 78 calibrated

health conditions. We could not directly include death (as a binary variable) in the propensity

score models, as there was small fraction of decedents (roughly 5%) in any calendar year, and

including it in the logistic regression models with certain rare conditions as the outcome led to

separation of cases and controls, causing convergence issues with the model estimates. We did

not use spending as a covariate in any of our propensity score models.

       After computing the propensity scores for a disease category, subjects were grouped into

five homogeneous strata based on their propensity scores, using the quintiles of the propensity

score as cutoffs to determine groups. We then estimated the mean difference in expenditures

between cases and controls within each stratum, by simply taking the difference in average costs

between those with and without condition Dj within each stratum. Finally, we combined the

estimated difference in expenditures within each strata, weighting by the population size in each

stratum, to obtain an estimate of healthcare expenditure attributable for that disease category.

Using the propensity score to divide subjects into strata or subclasses, as described by



                                                                                               19
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), we could directly compare medical expenditures for individuals

with Dj and those without Dj within groups containing same covariate profiles, enabling us to

adjust for comorbidities and other covariates. Creating five strata using propensity score was

shown to be an effective method for applying causal inference to observational studies, removing

around 90% of the bias in the difference between the cases and controls caused by covariate

imbalance (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1984). Thus, our estimates are for expenditures attributable

to each condition, adjusted for all other conditions. This process of stratification and estimating

the attributable spending was done separately for each of the 78 conditions.

       We performed the Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness of fit test to assess our logistic

regression models used in computing the propensity scores (Hosmer and Lemeshow 2000).

Furthermore, we compared the distribution of covariates for those with the condition and those

without within each propensity score stratum in order to ensure a balance of covariates within

each stratum. We found good overlap in the covariate profiles between cases and controls to

allow us to properly estimate the attributable costs for each condition.

       From our propensity score models, we obtained estimates for the average difference in

spending among individuals with and without each condition of interest; however, these

estimates ignore several factors such as the number of diseases, severity, the number of days of

hospitalization, etc. that can affect the actual cost for each individual. The adjustment model

aims to model the observed cost as a function of the naïve cost (the sum of the costs of all the

conditions as estimated in the first step) and other factors: the number of health conditions,

history of hospitalization, institutionalization and death.

       First, we compared actual medical expenditures at the individual level reported in the

survey with predicted medical costs for each individual based our model estimates, obtained by



                                                                                                20
summing the relevant 80 estimates for each subject. When examining the difference between

observed and estimated costs, relationships became apparent between this difference and several

variables, such as the number of health conditions, history of hospitalization and

institutionalization, and death.           The relationships can be seen by plotting the error term,

measured as a difference between naïve predicted cost and true cost, against the aforementioned

covariates, all of which are proxies for the volume or intensity of care. Figure A7 in the

Appendix shows the different plots. Empirically, the difference is related to these characteristics.

For example, the institutionalized population spends even more than predicted given its medical

history.

       We developed an adjustment model that predicts subject-specific observed cost as a

product of the sum of the disease costs, 80 , and a polynomial dependent on the number of the

health conditions, history of hospitalization, institutionalization, and death within a given year:

       F(D ) = 8 G( 80              0 ),
                       0


where Dij is an indicator of disease j for subject i, and Ci is a polynomial

       8 =     H   + ∑I/)(J   I   KI ,

where K1,...K9 are variables corresponding to the number of comorbidities, that number squared,

an indicator for any hospitalization, number of nights in the hospital, number of hospital

admissions, number of days institutionalized, survival in the indicated year, number of months

survived for those who are deceased, and number of outpatient claims. Although we adjusted for

death in given year in our propensity models, it was through estimating the probability of death,

not directly conditioning on the indicator for death.           Several of the other variables in the

adjustment model were not included in the propensity score model due to either rarity or high


                                                                                                      21
correlation with calibrated conditions, which could lead to issues in fitting the logistic regression

model.

         When fitting our model, we constrained the adjustment factors 80 % so that the weighted

sum of predicted cost matched the weighted sum of observed cost. To do this we first fit the

model for 80 with no constraints and obtained estimates for            H ,…   J.   We then adjusted the

intercept,   H,   by adding a term so that

                                         G D = G 8 G 80            0
                                                          0


This model yielded subject-specific adjustment factors 8 % that incorporated covariates related

to the volume of medical care received. Constraining 80 ensured that the average predicted cost

from our model would be equal to the observed costs, guarantying that predicted spending would

match total spending in the population. Parameter estimates for the adjustment are displayed in

table A8.

         To integrate these adjustments to the estimated cost of specific health conditions, we first

aggregated the adjustment factors 8 for each disease j by taking the average of the individuals

with the condition j:

                  ∑ 8       0
         L0 =
                   ∑    0



Then, we applied this disease-specific adjustment factor L0 to the average difference in spending

for individuals with and without the condition of interest, by taking the product of

                            (PQ0)
   80 % and L0 :        80          = 80 L0 . The results are estimates of spending at the condition

level that are guaranteed to sum to total spending and that track the individual distributions of

spending as well as possible. As above, we averaged across 5 multiple imputed data sets using

                                                                                                    22
proc mianalyze in SAS 9.4. After fitting the adjusted model, we examined plots of the residuals

on the variables in the adjustment model to check that we correctly modeled the relationship

between cost and the number of health conditions, history of hospitalization and

institutionalization, and death.

       Table 2 reports the total attributed spending by multi-level CCS categories, and table A9

shows the specific conditions. Diseases of the circulatory system were the most expensive

category, costing $144.8 billion and accounting for 23 percent of personal health spending. The

next most expensive categories were “other conditions” (13 percent), diseases of the respiratory

system (10 percent), endocrine, nutritional; and metabolic diseases and immunity disorders (8

percent), and diseases of the nervous system and sense organs (7 percent). Together, these six

disease groups accounted for almost 61% of personal health spending. Two of the conditions

(cancer screening; complications of pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium) are estimated to

have negative spending. We remark on this below.

       Figure 1 and table 1 report distributions of the estimates from the propensity score model.

The propensity score approach shows a broader range of spending than the regression approach

but not as broad as the claims-based approach. Effectively, our second stage makes spending at

the individual level more dispersed than with the regression but does not allow as many very low

and high spenders as with the claims.



IV.    Comparison of Cost Attribution Results

       The previous section showed that spending for different conditions differs across the

methods. We start by showing more detail about these differences. Figure 2 shows two-way

scatter plots of average attributed cost for the claims-based, regression-based, and propensity



                                                                                               23
score approaches. Panel A compares the claims-attribution approach and the regression-based

approach. Panel B compares the claims attribution and propensity score approaches, and panel C

compares the regression and propensity score methods.

       The correlation between average disease-specific spending using the different approaches

is reasonably high: 0.27 between the claims-based approach and the regression approach, 0.71

between the claim-based approach and propensity score approach, and 0.56 between the

regression approach and the propensity score approach. The figures show that some large and

significant outliers influence the correlations.

       The average attributed cost from the claims-based method is higher for most of the

conditions than for the other two approaches. This is not surprising; the claims approach

estimates cost of the condition that resulted in the claim, whereas the propensity score and

regression methods estimate cost attributed to the condition regardless of whether it was

specified in the claim or remained latent. For example, the cost of a stroke that has a claim in a

given year is likely to be higher than a past stroke whose residual effects are still present. A

corollary of this is that the effective number of conditions for each claim is higher in the

regression and propensity score approaches.

       In general, acute medical conditions like acute myocardial infarction (AMI), cardiac

arrest, hematologic cancer, and hip fracture have significantly higher average costs in the claims-

based method than in the regression and propensity score methods.

       Not surprisingly, the average attributed cost from the regression method and the

propensity score method have much greater accord than either one has with the claim-based

approach. Most of the conditions are around the 45-degree line, with few exceptions that are off-

diagonal. The major differences are that conditions like lung cancer, hematologic cancer, and



                                                                                                24
schizophrenia have much higher average attributed cost in the propensity score method as

compared to the regression-based method. On the other hand, hypertension and signs and

symptoms have significantly higher attributed costs in the regression-based approach.

       Intuition suggests that expensive, rare diseases are likely to generate high spenders. The

regression method, by assuming parametric models and distributions, may smooth over these

extreme values, whereas the non-parametric propensity score approach gives higher weight to

these outliers. On the other hand, attributed cost estimation for very prevalent and less severe

conditions such as hypertension and signs and symptoms may be influenced by collinearity with

other conditions, which could be more of an issue for the regression approach.

       In addition to average spending per condition, we also care about total spending on each

condition – taking into account prevalence as well as cost per condition. Figure 3 shows the

scatter plot of total attributed spending between the three approaches. To a great extent, the

results in figure 3 mirror those in figure 2. The biggest outliers in the total spending figure are

hypertension and signs and symptoms. The regression approach estimates the highest spending

on these conditions, followed by the propensity score approach and then the claims-based

approach. It is natural that hypertension is attributed fewer dollars by claims than by overall

spending impact.

       Figure 4 shows the ratio of total costs for the propensity score method to the claims-

attribution method, using the total dollars displayed in Table 1. A ratio >1 implies that the

propensity score method attributes more spending than claims, and a ratio <1 implies the

opposite. Among the major identified diseases that are consistent with the ICD9-CM disease

chapters, the biggest ratios (>1) are for diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs (largely

anemia), injury and poisoning, and mental illness. Some of these are important comorbid



                                                                                                25
conditions. Anemia can generally be treated cheaply, but its presence indicates a more severe

form of the disease. Thus, it is natural that people with anemia spend a lot more than people

without. Similarly, mental illness has been shown in many studies to be a significant risk factor

for spending (Finkelstein, 2003b). People who are mentally ill spend more for all comorbid

conditions, even acute ones, than those without mental illness.

           A flip occurs at diseases of circulatory system, where the claims approach attributes more

dollars than the propensity score approach. Two ratios are negative for the conditions (cancer

screening; and complications of menopause, pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium) because

the PSM method attributed negative spending to those conditions whereas the claims approach

attributed positive spending. In the elderly population, complications of menopause, pregnancy,

childbirth, and the puerperium largely reflects menopause. Women coded for this may be

relatively healthy – if there were other, more severe conditions, they would likely be coded.

Screening may be negative for the same reason (because healthier people get screened) or

because screening prevents more expensive diseases.

           Using all three metrics, disease specific spending in the elderly population is very

skewed. In the claims-based approach, the top 5 (10) conditions account for 20% (36%) of total

dollars.     The shares are 45% (61%) for the regression approach and 29% (46%) for the

propensity score model.

           Table A9 in the appendix shows the average and total cost associated with each condition

using the propensity score method, alongside the other methods. The most expensive conditions

in table A9 generally cost about $3,000 to $4,000 annually. For example, the cost of lung cancer

ranges from $2,800 to $4,400. This is true using all methods and seems unusual given ex-ante

expectations. For example, the cost of almost any chemotherapy regimen will exceed the few



                                                                                                  26
thousand dollars that we estimate cancer to cost. The issue here is that not all of the prevalent

cases are incident cases. Imagine that a person was diagnosed with lung cancer in 2008, receives

the bulk of their care in that year and has a few visits for monitoring in 2009. We will record

that person as (correctly) having lung cancer in 2009, even though the case is not new. Further,

lung cancer spending will be relatively low in 2009 unless the person has a cancer recurrence.

The net effect will be relatively low average spending per case.

       If one were developing a model of lung cancer cost effectiveness, the spending we

estimate would be of limited use. For such a model, one would want to know spending by the

phase of cancer: the acute phase, maintenance phase, and (possibly) terminal phase. In studying

the decomposition of total spending into conditions, however, the estimate we have is very

relevant: it correctly indicates the average amount spent per person treated with cancer in the

given year for a representative cross-section of the population, as well as the total dollars in the

population.



V.     Discussion

       Our results show many similarities, but also important differences across the alternate

methods of assigning costs to medical conditions. The obvious question to ask is, which one is

best? There is no gold standard against which to compare the estimates from the different

methods. Thus, we cannot give a definitive answer to the question. Still, some observations are

possible.

       Statistically, one way to evaluate the models is by comparing in-sample predicted and

actual spending at the individual level. The root of the mean squared difference between actual

and predicted spending across individuals is $2,679 for the claims-based method, $3,032 for the



                                                                                                 27
regression-based method and $2,723 for the propensity score method. We also assessed the

correlation between observed and predicted costs using each of the three methods. The

correlation for the claims method is 0.63; the correlation for the regression approach is 0.61, and

the correlation for the propensity score approach is 0.63.

        Out-of-sample prediction is generally more informative than in-sample prediction, since

allowing more degrees of freedom inherently reduces in-sample discrepancies between actual

and predicted spending. In out-of-sample prediction, by contrast, allowing more degrees of

freedom may overfit the data. To form out-of-sample estimates, we divided the data into two

random sub-samples: one half for model-fitting and one half for prediction. We use the same

observations for fitting and prediction in each of the models so that the difference results only

from the ability to fit the underlying data. Table 3 shows the out-of-sample root mean square

errors (RMSEs) for the various methods. The propensity score approach has the lowest RMSE,

followed by the best regression model and last the claims-based model.

        The ability to implement the models is also important.        On this count, the claims-

attribution methodology suffers from several problems. First, it is difficult to implement the

methodology in a consistent manner. Because in most claims – especially the most expensive

ones – involve more than one condition, the claims-based methodology will depend on the

method used to parcel out costs into conditions. In our sample, 99.5% of dollars involve claims

having multiple conditions listed, and 98.4% of beneficiaries have multiple conditions. This

makes the claims-based estimation method extremely challenging. We made assumptions about

how to divide claims into component conditions, but the assumptions do not have a strong

theoretical rationale.




                                                                                                28
       In Thorpe et al.’s (2004a) analysis, there was little difference between the claims-

attribution model done different ways. However, Thorpe was using MEPS data for his analysis,

and utilization events in MEPS are reported by individuals, rather than providers.           Thus,

underreporting of less severe conditions is more likely. Further, Thorpe et al. (2004a) were

looking at the entire population rather than just the elderly; there is a much greater incidence of

comorbidity in the elderly than in the non-elderly population.

       Further, the claims-attribution methodology has difficulty with comorbid conditions that

are not central to the primary reason for health care utilization. Relative to the regression and

propensity score approaches, the claims-attribution methodology is low for anemia and mental

illness, each of which is likely to increase medical spending across-the-board.

       The regression and propensity score methods have a lot in common. Both methods

facilitate cost attribution to any condition of interest: claim-based, calibrated health condition,

self-report, or behavioral risk factors such as smoking. In addition, both methods are designed to

adjust for other diseases and demographic covariates.        The regression method is easier to

implement because it does not require a new model for each health condition. If the data fits the

parametric assumptions well and the set of health conditions is not highly correlated, then it

produces unbiased and efficient estimates of the attributed costs.

       However regression-based cost estimation has several limitations. First, it makes several

parametric assumptions, which may not be satisfied. Second, there is a large residual spending

amount that cannot be attributed to any disease. Third, some coefficients are estimated to be

negative, and the approach we follow assigns zero spending to them. Finally, the variability in

spending at the individual level implied by the regression approach is significantly smaller than

the actual variation.



                                                                                                29
       Relative to these issues, the propensity score approach has a number of strengths. It

requires fewer parametric assumptions and is, therefore, more robust with respect to the high

spenders and zero-spenders. Further, the second step of the propensity score approach allows us

to account for the number of comorbidities and volume of medical care received. These features

of the propensity score method permit us to relax the assumption that health care spending is

additive.

       In practice, the most important difference between the propensity score method and the

regression method is the importance of unattributed spending. There is a base of $58 billion (9

percent of total spending) that the regression does not attribute to any condition.        In the

propensity score model, by contrast, all spending is automatically allocated to conditions.

Across conditions, the major difference between the two approaches is the much greater total

attributed to hypertension and signs and symptoms using the regression model.

       While more research is certainly warranted, our tentative conclusion is that the propensity

score model offers a good theoretical and empirical methodology to decompose total medical

spending to conditions.




                                                                                               30
References

Akobundu E, Ju J, Blatt L, Mullins CD. Cost-of-Illness studies: a review of current methods.
      Pharmacoeconomics. 2006; 24(9):869–90

Basu A, Manning WG, “Issues for the next generation of health care cost analyses,” Medical
      Care, 2009; 47(suppl 7):S109-S114.

Berk A, Paringer L, Mushkin SJ, “The Economic Cost of Illness Fiscal 1975,” Medical Care,
      1978; 16(9):785-790.

Belotti F, Deb P, Manning WG, Norton EC, “twopm: Two-part models,” Stata Journal, 2015,
        15(1):3-20.

Bloom BS, Bruno DJ, Maman DY, Jayadevappa R. Usefulness of U.S. cost-of-illness studies in
      health care decision making. Pharmacoeconomics. 2001; 19(2):207–213.

Cantoni E, Ronchetti E, “A Robust Approach for Skewed and Heavy-Tailed Outcomes in the
      Analysis of Health Care Expenditures,” Journal of Health Economics, 2006; 25(2):198-
      213.

Cohen JW, Krauss NA, “Spending and Service Use among People with the Fifteen Most Costly
      Medical Conditions 1997,” Health Affairs, 2003; 22(2):129–138.

Cooper BS, Rice DP, “The economic cost of illness revisited,” Social Security Bulletin, 1976;
      39:21-36.

Druss BG, Marcus SC, Olfson M, Tanielian T, Elinson L, Pincus HA ,“Comparing the national
       economic burden of five chronic conditions,” Health Affairs, 2001; 20(6):233-242.

Druss BG, Marcus SC, Olfson M, Pincus HA, “The Most Expensive Medical Conditions in
      America,” Health Affairs, 2002; 21(4):105-111.

Duan, N. (1983). Smearing Estimate: A Nonparametric Retransformation Method. Journal of the
      American Statistical Association, 78(383), 605

Duan, N., W. G. Manning, Jr., C. N. Morris, and J. P. Newhouse. 1984. Choosing between the
      sample-selection model and the multi-part model. Journal of Business and Economic
      Statistics 2: 283–289.

Dudley RA, Harrell FE, Smith LR, Mark DB, et al., Comparison of analytic models for
      estimating the effect of clinical factors on the cost of coronary artery bypass graft
      surgery. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 1993; 46(3), 261-271.




                                                                                          31
Elixhauser A, Steiner C, Palmer L. “Clinical Classifications Software (CCS),” U.S. Agency for
       Healthcare Research and Quality, Available: http://www.hcup-
       us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs/ccs.jsp.

Finkelstein EA, Fiebelkorn IC, Wang G, “National medical spending attributable to overweight
       and obesity: how much, and who's paying?” Health Affairs, 2003a, w3:219-226.

Finkelstein EA, Bray JW, Chen H, Larson, MJ, et al., Prevalence and costs of major depression
       among elderly claimants with diabetes. Diabetes Care, 2003b, 26(2), 415–420.

Finkelstein EA, Trogdon JG, Cohen JW, Dietz W, “Annual medical spending attributable to
       obesity: payer-and service-specific estimates,” Health Affairs, 2009; 28(5):822-831.

Gregori, D., Petrinco, M., Bo, S., Desideri, A., Merletti, F., & Pagano, E. (2011). Regression
       models for analyzing costs and their determinants in health care: An introductory
       review. International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 23(3), 331-341

Hall A, Highfill T, “A Regression-Based Medical Care Expenditure Index for Medicare
      Beneficiaries,” BEA Working Paper, 2013a.

Hall A, Highfill T, “Calculating Disease-Based Medical Care Expenditure Indexes for Medicare
       Beneficiaries: A Comparison of Method and Data Choices,” NBER Working Paper No.
       19720, 2013b.

Hodgson TA, Cohen AJ, “Medical expenditures for major diseases, 1995,” Health Care
      Financing Review, 1999; 21(2):119-164.

Honeycutt AA, Segel JE, Hoerger TJ, Finkelstein EA, “Comparing cost-of-illness estimates
      from alternative approaches: an application to diabetes,” Health Services Research,
      2009; 44(1): 303-320.

Honeycutt, AA, Segel JE, Zhuo X, Hoerger TJ, Imai K, and Williams D, “ Medical Costs of
      CKD in the Medicare Population. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, 2013;
      24(9), 1478-1483.

Jones, A, “Health Econometrics.” In: Culyer A and Newhouse J (Eds.), Handbook of Health
       Economics, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2000.

Koopmanschap MA, Rutten FFH, van Ineveld BM, and van Roijen L, “The Friction Cost
     Method for Measuring Indirect Costs of Disease,” Journal of Health Economics, 1995,
     14(2):171-189.

Koopmanshap M. Cost-of-Illness Studies. Useful for Health Policy? Pharmacoeconomics. 1998;
     14:143–148




                                                                                            32
Leon J, Neumann PJ, “The cost of Alzheimer’s disease in man-aged care: a cross-sectional
      study,” American Journal of Managed Care, 1999; 5(7):867-877.

Li K, Raghunathan T, and Rubin D, “Large sample significance levels from multiply-imputed
       data using moment-based statistics and an F reference distribution,” Journal of the
       American Statistical Association, 1991; 86: 1065–1073.

Little R, and Rubin D, Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. New York: John Wiley & Sons,
        1987.

Manning WG, “The logged dependent variable, heteroscedasticity, and the retransformation
      problem,” Journal of Health Economics, 1998; 17(3):283–295.

Manning WG, Mullahy J, “Estimating log models: to transform or not to transform?” Journal of
      Health Economics, 2001; 20(4):461-494.

Manning WG, Basu A, Mullahy J, “Generalized Modeling Approaches to Risk Adjustment of
      Skewed Outcomes Data,” Journal of Health Economics, 2005; 24(3):465-488.

Mihaylova, B., A. Briggs, A. O’Hagan, and S. G. Thompson. 2011. Review of statistical
      methods for analysing healthcare resources and costs. Health Economics 20: 897–916.

Pope GC, Kautter J, Ellis RP, Ash AS, Ayanian JZ, Iezzoni LI, Ingber MJ, Levy JM, Robst J,
      “Risk Adjustment of Medicare Capitation Payments Using the CMS-HCC Model,”
      Health Care Financing Review, 2004; 25(4):119-141.

Raghunathan T, et al., “Model Based Estimation of Prevalence Rates and Trends Using
      Imperfect Data Sources,” mimeo (2017).

Roberts RR, Scott RD, Hota B, Kampe LM, Abbasi F, Schabowski S, Weinstein RA, et al.,
       “Costs Attributable to Healthcare-Acquired Infection in Hospitalized Adults and a
       Comparison of Economic Methods,” Medical Care, 2010; 48(11), 1026-1035.

Rosen AB, and Cutler DM, “Challenges in Building Disease-Based National Health
      Accounts,” Medical Care, 2009; 47(Supplement), S7-13.

Rosen A, et al., “Strengthening National Data to Better Measure What We Are Buying in Health
      Care: Reconciling National Health Expenditures with Detailed Survey Data”, NBER
      Working Paper No. 23290, Issued in March 2017

Rice DP, Horowitz LA, “Trends in medical care prices,” Social Security Bulletin, 1967; 30:13-
      28.

Rice DP, “Estimating the Cost of Illness,” American Journal of Public Health, 1967, 57(3):424-
      440.


                                                                                            33
Roehrig C, Miller G, Lake C, Bryant J, “National health spending by a medical condition, 1996–
       2005,” Health Affairs, 2009; 28(2):w358–w367.

Roehrig CS, Rousseau DM, “The Growth in Cost Per Case Explains Far More of US Health
       Spending Increases Than Rising Disease Prevalence,” Health Affairs, 2011; 30(9):1657-
       1663.

Rosenbaum, P. R. and Rubin, D. B. (1983). “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
      Observational Studies for Causal Effects”. Biometrika, 70: 41–55.

Rosenbaum, Paul R., and Donald B. Rubin. 1984. Reducing bias in observational studies using
      subclassification on the propensity score. Journal of the American Statistical
      Association 79(387): 516-524

SAS Institute Inc., SAS 9.4 Help and Documentation, Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc., 2002-2004.

Scitovsky AA, “Changes in the costs of treatment of selected illnesses,” 1951-1965. American
       Economic Review, 1967; 57(5):1182-1195.

Selden T, Levitt K, Cohen J, et al., “Reconciling Medical Expenditure Estimates from the MEPS
       and the NHA, 1996,” Health Care Financing Review, 2001; 23(1):161-178.

Sing M, Banthin JS, Selden TM, et al., “Reconciling Medical Expenditure Estimates from the
      MEPS and the NHEA, 2002,” Health Care Financing Review, 2006; 28(1):25-40.

Starr M, Dominiak L, Aizcorbe A, “Decomposing Growth In Spending Finds Annual Cost Of
       Treatment Contributed Most To Spending Growth, 1980-2006,” Health Affairs, 2014;
       33(5):823-831.

Sturm R, “The Effects of Obesity, Smoking, and Drinking on Medical Problems and Costs,”
      Health Affairs, 2002; 21(2):245-253.

Thorpe KE, Florence CS, Joski P. “Which medical conditions account for the rise in health care
      spending?” Health Affairs, 2004a; 23:w437-w445.

Thorpe KE, Florence CS, Howard DH, Joski P. “The impact of obesity on rising medical
      spending.” Health Affairs, 2004b; 24:w480-w486.

Thorpe KE, Florence CS, Howard DH, Joski P. “The rising prevalence of treated disease: effects
      on private health insurance spending.” Health Affairs, 2005; 24:w317-w325.

Thorpe KE, Howard DH. “The rise in spending among Medicare beneficiaries: the role of
      chronic disease prevalence and changes in treatment intensity.” Health Affairs, 2006;
      25(5):w378-w388.



                                                                                              34
Thorpe KE, Howard DH, Galactionova K. “Differences in disease prevalence as a source of the
      U.S.-European health care spending gap.” Health Affairs, 2007; 26(6):w678-w686.

Thorpe KE, Ogden LL, Galactionova K. “Chronic conditions account for rise in Medicare
      spending from 1987 to 2006.” Health Affairs, 2010; 29(4):718-724.

Thorpe KE. “Treated disease prevalence and spending per treated case drove most of the growth
      in health care spending in 1987–2009.” Health Affairs, 2013; 32(5):851-858.

Trogdon JG, Finkelstein EA, Nwaise IA, Tangka FK, Orenstein D, “The economic burden of
      chronic cardiovascular disease for major insurers.” Health Promotion and Practice, 2007;
      8(3):234-242.

Trogdon J, Finkelstein EA, Hoerger TJ, “Use of Econometric Models to Estimate Expenditure
      Shares,” Health Services Research, 2008; 43(4):1442‐1452.

Zaslavsky AM, Buntin MB, “Too much ado about two-part models and transformation?
       Comparing methods of modeling Medicare expenditures,” Journal of Health Economics,
       2004; 23(3):525-554.




                                                                                           35
                                   Figure 1: Distribution of Observed and Predicted Spending




Note: The distribution of observed cost was cut off at $100,000, omitting about 2% of beneficiaries. There are no beneficiaries with a
predicted spending above $80,500 in any of the models. Here, N=6,200 and weighted N=36,824,486. The regression and propensity
score methods are based on calibrated claims. The claims approach is based on actual claims except for about 5% of beneficiaries
with dollar amounts in the personal summary file(s) but no claims. For these beneficiaries, we used the claims imputed using the
NHANES and assigned dollars to calibrated medical conditions on that basis. PS-based – Propensity Score based method. Reg-based:
Regression based method. Claim-based: Claims based method.




                                                                                                                                    36
            Figure 2: Average Attributed Cost Using Three Attribution Methods


                                                                              Lung Cancer
                          AMI
                                        Cardiac arrest
                                                         Hematologic Cancer




                                                                                                Signs and Symptoms



                                                                     Hypertension




                                 AMI

                                                            Cardiac arrest
                      Hip Fracture




                                                                                                Schizophrenia



                                                              Signs and Symptoms




                                                            Signs and Symptoms



                                       Hypertension
                                                                                            Hematologic Cancer

                                                                                                                     Lung Cancer




                                                                                                   Schizophrenia




Note: Acute Renal Failure and Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) had negative coefficients in
Regression Model and no cost attributed. As a result, they are not included in the correlation or
in Panels A and C.

                                                                                                                                   37
Figure 3: Total Attributed Cost (Billions of 2010 US $) Using Three Attribution Methods




                                               Hypertension                 Signs and Symptoms




                                                       Signs and Symptoms




Note: Acute Renal Failure and Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) had negative coefficients in the
Regression Model and no cost attributed. As a result, they are not included in the correlation or
in Panels A and C.


                                                                                                 38
                           Figure 4: Ratio of Total Cost by Major CCS categories: Propensity Score vs. Claims

                                                                          2.02          16-Other conditions
                                                                         1.86           4-Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs
                                                                  1.35                  15-Injury and poisoning
                                                                 1.28                   5-Mental Illness
                                                                1.17                    8-Diseases of the respiratory system
                                                                1.12                    3-Endocrine; nutritional; and metabolic diseases and immunity disorders
                                                               1.09                     10-Diseases of the genitourinary system
                                                               1.02                     9-Diseases of the digestive system
                                                               1.00                     14 -Congenital Anomalies & Certain conditions in the perinatal period
                                                           0.98                         7-Diseases of the circulatory system
                                                         0.71                           1-Infectious and parasitic diseases
                                                         0.70                           6-Diseases of the nervous system and sense organs
                                                        0.63                            12-Diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
                                                        0.58                            13-Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue
                                                        0.54                            2-Neoplasms
                                         ‐0.11                                          11-Complications of pregnancy; childbirth; and the puerperium
         ‐3.80                                                                          17-Screening

 ‐5.00     ‐4.00   ‐3.00     ‐2.00   ‐1.00       0.00   1.00           2.00      3.00


Note: Bars show the ratio of total costs from the propensity score method to those from the claims-attribution method. The ratios are
based on total attributed dollars reported in Table 2. Ratio >1 indicates that the PSM method attributes more total spending than the
claims method, and ratio <1 implies the opposite. Other Conditions (top bar) include Signs and Symptoms, Residual, unclassified and
all other E codes. The propensity score method attributes negative spending to various cancer screenings and complications of
pregnancy, making the ratios negative.




                                                                                                                                                                39
                   Table 1: Characteristics of person-level spending from different methods
                                                                                        N (Weighted N) of
                                                                                         Beneficiaries with
                                Dollar Amount (Standard Error)                                Cost>=
                  Mean       25%ile       Median         75%ile      Min       Max         $100,000       $50,000
Observed         $17,479     $3,291       $7,281       $17,547       $0      $441,857         225           795
                  ($389)      ($76)       ($196)        ($525)                             (913,599)    (3,301,586)


Claims-based     $17,479      $8,573      $15,006      $24,230       $0       $80,500          0            153
                  ($213)      ($179)       ($271)       ($370)                                           (671,044)


Regression-      $17,479     $12,719      $17,726      $22,496     $1,818     $40,394          0             0
based             ($128)      ($204)       ($157)       ($191)


Propensity       $17,479     $10,236      $15,889      $23,202       $831     $63,242          0              36
score-based       ($238)      ($286)       ($246)       ($317)                                            (167,288)
Note: The table shows summary statistics for individual-level spending based on observed costs, costs using the
claims-based method, costs using the regression-based method, and costs using the propensity score-based method.




                                                                                                                      40
                       Table 2: Estimated Total Cost in 2009 (Billions of 2010 US $) Using Different Methods

                                                                     Total Attributed Cost (Billions)                % of Total Spending
                                                                                                Propensity                             Propensity
                                                                      Claims Regression           Score       Claims Regression          Score
Multi-level CCS                                                       Method       Method        Method      Method       Method        Method
7-Diseases of the circulatory system                                   $148.1       $119.3        $144.8      23.0%        18.5%         22.5%
16-Other conditions                                                     41.3        121.1           83.4       6.4%        18.8%         13.0%
8-Diseases of the respiratory system                                    53.4         35.5           62.4       8.3%        5.5%           9.7%
3-Endocrine; nutritional; & metabolic dz. & immunity disorders          49.2         48.9           54.9       7.6%        7.6%           8.5%
6-Diseases of the nervous system and sense organs                       64.0         43.0           44.9       9.9%        6.7%           7.0%
10-Diseases of the genitourinary system                                 38.1         28.6           41.6       5.9%        4.4%           6.5%
5-Mental Illness                                                        30.8         18.3           39.5       4.8%        2.8%           6.1%
15-Injury and poisoning                                                 27.5         26.1           37.0       4.3%        4.1%           5.7%
13-Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue         62.2         41.6           36.1       9.7%        6.5%           5.6%
4-Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs                        17.7         12.9           32.8       2.7%        2.0%           5.1%
9-Diseases of the digestive system                                      28.1         33.1           28.5       4.4%        5.1%           4.4%
2-Neoplasms                                                             41.4         27.6           22.5       6.4%        4.3%           3.5%
1-Infectious and parasitic diseases                                     20.3         12.6           14.4       3.2%        2.0%           2.2%
12-Diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue                         12.6         12.7            7.9       2.0%        2.0%           1.2%
14 -Congenital Anomalies & perinatal conditions                          4.6          2.4            4.6       0.7%        0.4%           0.7%
11-Complications of pregnancy; childbirth; and the puerperium            1.4          0.5           -0.2       0.2%        0.1%           0.0%
17-Screening                                                             3.0          1.9          -11.5       0.5%        0.3%          -1.8%
Other covariates (including intercept)                                               57.7                                  9.0%
Total                                                                   $644         $644          $644       100%         100%          100%
Note: The table is sorted from highest to lowest attributed total cost from the propensity score method. The multi-level CCS category “16-Other
conditions” includes Signs and Symptoms ($62.97 billion) and Residual, unclassified, all other E codes ($20.46 billion).




                                                                                                                                              41
      Table 3: Characteristics of Spending Using Out-of-Sample Predictions

                                                               Root Mean Square
Method
                                                               Error of Prediction
Claims Based Model                                                  $28,856

Regression Models
 One-part gamma –log link                                            $42,711
 One-part-cubic-root-cost-Gaussian with identity link                $25,228
 One-part-log(cost+1)-Gaussian-identity link                         $24,410
 One-part-Box-Cox model                                              $26,052
 Two-part-gamma-log-link                                             $42,042
 Two-part-cubic-root-cost-Gaussian-identity link                     $25,065
 Two-part-log(cost+1) –Gaussian-identity link                        $31,858

Propensity Score Method                                               $22,621
 Note: The data are divided into two sub-samples, one for model fitting and a second
for out-of-sample prediction. The Root MSE is for the out-of-sample prediction.




                                                                                       42
                                       APPENDIX
             Attributing Medical Spending to Conditions:
                   A Comparison of Methods




 In this appendix, we present various technical aspects of the data assembly and analysis.



 A.1 HMO enrollment adjustment

       MCBS has incomplete or no claims information for beneficiaries enrolled in Health

Maintenance Organizations (HMOs). In 2009, approximately one-quarter of elderly beneficiaries

were enrolled in HMOs (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014). To adjust for this, we developed a

weighting adjustment similar to the non-response adjustments performed for unit non-response

in national surveys (Little, 1986; Kreuter et al., 2010).

       We began by defining two groups: those with complete Medicare enrollment and those

enrolled in HMOs.       We define complete Medicare enrollment as: (1) no participation in

Medicare Advantage program for the year of study, and (2) enrollment in traditional fee-for-

service Medicare parts A & B for the full 12-month study period, unless the participant died

during the year.

       We used a propensity score method to create the adjustment weights. We performed these

adjustments separately for the community and institutionalized population. Since the majority of

our sample (~92%) consisted of community residents, we present the results for the community

population here. A logistic regression model was estimated using selected covariates


                                                                                              1
(demographics, health status, and socio-economic variables) to model traditional Medicare

enrollment. Table A1 gives the list of covariates used for such adjustments. Using the predicted

probability (p) of complete Medicare enrollment, the adjustment for HMO enrollees was

calculated as 1/p. Model fit was assessed by a Hosmer-Lemeshow test.

        Table A2 reports the Hosmer-Lomeshow goodness of fit statistics. In our estimation,

there were 10 groups and hence we had 8 degrees of freedom. The corresponding Chi-squared

values are also reported. The model passed the test suggesting a good fit.

       To assess balance in the community population, the propensity of complete Medicare

enrollment was estimated using Generalized Liner Models (GLM); F-ratios were reviewed for

significance. In the institutionalized population, regression models were performed for each

covariate   to   assess   the   association   with   the   propensity   for   complete   Medicare

participation. Using the residuals from each model, we calculated effect size to assess

balance. We then calculated the “final weight” as the product of the existing MCBS survey

weight and the Medicare HMO adjustment weight.

       Figure A1a gives the distribution of propensity scores for complete Medicare enrollment

for the 2009 Medicare community population. The overlap between the complete Medicare and

HMO populations was high. Table A3 shows the comparison between the complete Medicare

and HMO-adjusted elderly populations. In 2009, around 24.3 million elderly beneficiaries were

enrolled in traditional fee-for-service Medicare, and 12.5 million were in HMOs.             The

distributions of age, sex, race, education, marital status and health status were mostly similar

between the complete Medicare enrollment and HMO-adjusted populations.




                                                                                                2
A.2    Survey spending adjustment

       A second adjustment was made so that total medical spending in the MCBS matched

what was reported to be national spending on the elderly. This adjustment was performed in

several steps. First, we removed expenditures from the National Health Expenditure Accounts

(NHEA) for goods and services which are out of scope of the MCBS survey: other non-durable

medical equipment (2.7%), other personal healthcare (2.6%), graduate medical education and

disproportionate share medical payments to hospitals (1%), hospital non–patient revenue such as

in the gift shop and for parking (3.2%), and spending by foreign visitors (0.12%). In total, this

accounted for 9.6% percent of NHEA spending (Rosen et al., 2017, NHEA, 2014).

       Second, we redefined some categories of medical services in the NHEA and MCBS,

shifting expenditures as appropriate, to create consistent categories between the two sources.

Table A4 shows the adjustments we made and the dollar amounts moved. The total portion of

money shifted across categories was 4.2%.

       Third, we proportionately increased spending in the MCBS by the factors necessary to

have total survey spending equal the remaining portion of the NHEA total in each service-by-

payer category. Figure A2 gives the adjustment factors by each service category. Overall, the

NHEA-adjusted spending was 11 percent higher than the total spending reported in MCBS. The

adjustment was largest for home health (43%), but was generally small for the other types of

services.



A.3    Condition Definitions and Prevalence

       We developed a classification schema for medical conditions building upon the Agency

for Healthcare Research and Quality’s (AHRQ) Clinical Classification Software (CCS), which


                                                                                               3
aggregates the 14,000+ ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes and 3,900+ ICD-9-CM procedure codes into

a smaller number of clinically meaningful, mutually exclusive categories (Elixhauser, Steiner,

and Palmer, 2014). For brevity, we do not describe the full process of forming the categories

here; interested readers are referred to Raghunathan et al. (2001, 2017). Creation of the mutually

exclusive, collectively exhaustive categories required the clinical expertise of physicians, and

extensive data management and analytic investigation, which resulted in 101 medical condition

categories and 4 cancer screening categories (for breast, prostate, colon and cervical cancer).

       Our physician working group determined that a few conditions identified in larger CCS

categories should be stand-alone disease categories because of their clinical significance in the

elderly (mostly mental health). These were grouped into independent disease categories. For

example, while the CCS has a single “mood disorders” category, we separated this into two

separate groups – depression and bipolar disorder.

       Prevalence rates for some conditions in the MCBS were below those based on self-

reports and physical assessment in national surveys. This was generally true for chronic diseases

that are not serious enough to warrant a medical visit on their own, or at least not every year:

hypertension and high cholesterol, for example. By definition, undiagnosed conditions are also

not in MCBS. For such conditions, we used self-reports and diagnosed condition rates in

NHANES to estimate ‘calibrated’ health conditions that more accurately reflect national

prevalence rates. We term the results Calibrated Claims (CCL).

       The imputation method proceeded in several steps. We chose to impute the community

and institutionalized populations separately given the differences in these populations. We

began by appending data from MCBS (2009) and NHANES (2009-2010). Each person was

placed into one of three groups: having the condition in the self-report (NHANES) or claims



                                                                                                  4
(MCBS); not having the condition if the NHANES self-report indicated the beneficiary did not

have the health condition and there was no claim for the condition; and missing if there was no

claim for the health condition in the MCBS. We then had a standard missing data problem for

which we a used sequential regression multivariate imputation procedure.

       For conditions present in NHANES, let D(−j) denote the collection of disease indicators

for all diseases except disease j. We constructed a propensity score for having disease j based on

fitting a logistic regression model to the other conditions and exogenous covariates, X, and

predicting with (X, D(−j)) strata based on the propensity scores. Within each propensity score

class, we estimated the prevalence rate using the self-report, Sj, and the claims Cj . If the

prevalence rate based on the claims was greater than or equal to that based on the self-report,

then we set all missing Dj to 0. That is, no additional imputation was necessary and all those with

no claims were considered not to have that health condition. If the self-report prevalence rate was

greater than the prevalence rate based on the claims, we randomly set some missing Dj to 1 so

that the prevalence rates after the imputation matched the self-report prevalence rates. We used

five Bernoulli draws within each propensity score class to achieve this calibration, resulting in

five imputed data sets.

       Note that medical expenditure and health conditions without self-report are missing in the

NHANES portion of the appended data. To be fully conditional, these missing values were

imputed in the NHANES. These two steps – the disease imputations into MCBS and the medical

spending/health condition imputations into NHANES – were iterated across all diseases several

times until the multiply imputed prevalence rates stabilized.

       The regression relationship between the multiply imputed Dj and claims-based Cj for

conditions available in NHANES may be viewed as a measurement error model and this



                                                                                                 5
relationship is then used to calibrate other health conditions not present in NHANES. In this step,

we chose the most similar prevalent condition for the imputation.

       The NHANES is a sample of the community dwelling population only. Thus, the claims

imputation for the institutionalized sample required some differences. For this population, the

calibrated non-institutionalized MCBS data was considered as the ‘donor’ survey in imputing

condition prevalence in the institutionalized population. For each claim, subjects were matched

according to the estimated propensity of being institutionalized given the self-report and

demographic information, and the remaining claims. To estimate this propensity, logistic

regression was utilized with a forward selection procedure on the principal components of the set

of variables of interest. Principal component analysis was used in an effort to explain as much of

the variation in propensity scores as possible while avoiding a complete separation of data points

given the small number of people who are institutionalized. Assuming that the probability of

being calibrated is the same conditional on institutionalization status, calibrated conditions are

drawn for the institutionalized population matching the distribution for the community

population.

       The calibration process produces five imputed data sets for both community and

institutionalized populations. We use all five imputed data sets in our analysis using appropriate

survey weight and sample design adjustments. Importantly, prevalence based on the calibrated

conditions indicates diagnosis or treatment either currently or at any time in the past.

       Because some of our 101 calibrated condition categories have relatively low prevalence

in the elderly, even after calibration, we collapsed our initial set of 101 medical conditions to 74

conditions with generally higher prevalence.       Table A5 shows prevalence rates for the 74

calibrated medical conditions and 4 cancer screening variables. We have also aggregated these



                                                                                                  6
74 conditions into 17 multi-level categories (analogous to ICD-9-CM chapters), including one

for any cancer screening, which is how we group the table.




A.4     Analysis of different models

        Figure A3 shows the kernel density plot comparison of the residuals (in blue) along with

the normal density (in red). Figures A4–A6 show additional residual diagnostic plots, including

standardized normal probability plots of the residuals, quantile plots of the residuals, and scatter

plots of the residuals relative to person-level costs. The out-of-sample predictions show that the

one-part model with log(cost+1) as the dependent variable and with a Gaussian distribution and

identity link had the lowest RMSE. Figure A3 shows that this model also fit well. The one and

two part cubic-roots were second best. The Gamma models with log link performed relatively

poorly than expected. These models are sensitive to high-spenders with big residuals – as

typified by people in nursing homes.

        To evaluate the PSM estimates, we examined the relationship between predicted costs at

the individual level – estimated as the sum of the relevant       estimates for each subject – and

the observed cost. We plotted the error term, measured as the difference between naïve predicted

costs and true costs, against the number of health conditions, history of hospitalization and

institutionalization, and death. All these variables can be considered proxies for the volume or

intensity of care.

        Figure A7 shows multiple plots of the difference between naïve predicted and observed

costs using the propensity-score models. Figure A7A relates the spending error to the number of

calibrated conditions. When the number of comorbidities is low – roughly 3 or fewer – there is

no systematic difference between predicted cost and observed cost: the error is about zero.


                                                                                                  7
However, as the number of comorbidities increases, the naïve cost progressively overestimates

the observed cost. We have much fewer data for people with a very high number of conditions

(30 or more), but the estimates appear to come closer together after that point.

       Figure A7B considers whether this pattern is different for people living in the community

versus institutions.   Negative residuals are much more prevalent in the institutionalized

population, indicating that naïve costs underestimate observed costs for institutionalized

beneficiaries – a natural finding given the high cost of institutionalization. However, the

dependence on number of comorbidities remains similar in both groups.

       Figure A7C shows how number of hospitalizations affects costs, given the number of

health conditions. The incidence of hospitalization is associated with a higher number of

comorbidities. A subgroup of beneficiaries without hospitalizations shows a roughly linear

dependence of costs on the number of calibrated conditions. For the those who were hospitalized

at least for one night, the dependence is nonlinear, and the trend is similar to one observed in

Figure A7A.

       Finally, Figure A7D shows how survivor status affects costs. Death slightly reduces a

positive bias of naïve cost. All told, Figure A7 suggests a need for a non-linear adjustment to the

disease cost estimates. We have adjusted for the non-linearity on the propensity score models.




                                                                                                 8
References

Elixhauser A, Steiner C, Palmer L. “Clinical Classifications Software (CCS),” U.S. Agency for
       Healthcare       Research       and     Quality,       Available:     http://www.hcup-
       us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs/ccs.jsp.

Kaiser Family Foundation report on Medicare Advantage enrollment.
       http://kff.org/medicare/fact-sheet/medicare-advantage-fact-sheet/, May 2014, Internet
       accessed: 2015

Kreuter F, Olson K, Wagner J, Yan T, Ezzati-Rice TB, Casas-Codero C, Lemay M, Pitches A,
       Groves RM, Raghunathan T, “Using Proxy Measures and Other Correlates of Survey
       Outcomes to Adjust for Nonresponse: Examples from Multiple Surveys,” Journal of the
       Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 2010; 173(2):389-407.

Little RJ. “Survey non-response adjustments,” International Statistical Review, 1986; 54(2):139-
        157.

Meara, E., White, C., & Cutler, D. M. (2004). Trends In Medical Spending By Age, 1963-
      2000. Health Affairs, 23(4), 176-183

National Health Expenditure Data: http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and
       Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
       Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/NationalHealthAccountsHistorical.html: Internet
       accessed, 2014

Raghunathan, TE, Lepkowski JM, Hoewyk JV, Solenberger P, “A Multivariate Technique for
      Multiply Imputing Missing Values Using a Sequence of Regression Models,” Survey
      Methodology, 2001; 27(1):85-95.

Raghunathan T, et al., “Model Based Estimation of Prevalence Rates and Trends Using
      Imperfect Data Sources,” mimeo (2017).

Rosen A, et al., “Strengthening National Data to Better Measure What We Are Buying in Health
      Care: Reconciling National Health Expenditures with Detailed Survey Data”, NBER
      Working Paper No. 23290, Issued in March 2017

Rosenbaum, P. R. and Rubin, D. B. (1983). “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
      Observational Studies for Causal Effects”. Biometrika, 70: 41–55.

Rosenbaum, Paul R., and Donald B. Rubin. 1984. Reducing bias in observational studies using
      subclassification on the propensity score. Journal of the American Statistical
      Association 79(387): 516-524




                                                                                               9
Figure A1: Propensity Score for Complete Medicare Enrollment, 2009 Community Sample

                                      Figure A1a




                               Figure A1b

                               Complete =1




Note: Predictors in the propensity score model include demographics, health status (including
ADLs and IADLs), and socioeconomic variables. Here, 1 is complete Medicare enrollment (full-
year enrolment in traditional fee-for-service Parts A and B, and 0 includes at least some HMO
enrollment. Figure 1b implies that adjustment factors are in a tight range.

                                                                                          10
Figure A2: Ratio of total spending: Adjusted NHEA and MCBS by Service Categories

           1.60
                                                                              1.43
           1.40


           1.20    1.14                      1.14                     1.12             1.11
                                1.04                     1.01
           1.00
   Ratio




           0.80


           0.60


           0.40


           0.20


           0.00
                  Hosptial    Physician     Nursing   Prescription   Dental   Home     Overall
                   Care      and Clinical    Home        Drugs                Health
                             Services &
                                DME
                                                    Type of Service


Note: Figure 2 gives the adjustment factor for different types of services. Overall, the adjusted National
Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA) spending is 11 percent higher than the total spending reported in
2009 MCBS. We use these adjustment factors by service categories to adjust costs for MCBS-reported
services to the national level.




                                                                                                       11
Figure A3: Kernel density plot of residuals from Regression Models




                                                                     12
Figure A4: Standardized normal probability plot of residuals




                                                               13
Figure A5: The quantile of residual against the quintiles of the normal distribution




                                                                                       14
Figure A6: Scatter plot of Residuals




                                       15
      Figure A7: Difference between Naïve and Predicted Cost

                   Figure A7A: All individuals




Figure A7B: Separated by Community and Institutional Living Status




                                                                     16
                   Figure A7 C: Separated by hospitalization experience




                          Figure A7D: Separated by survivorship




Note: Figures show the error term, measured as the difference between naïve predicted cost and
true cost, against the number of health conditions, history of hospitalization and
institutionalization and death. The results suggest a need for the non-linear adjustment.



                                                                                           17
                          Table A1: List of covariates used in HMO adjustment




 [1]   Age                                                  [25]   Inpatient nights-continuous
 [2]   Age squared                                          [26]   Inpatient stays-continuous
 [3]   Asthma/emphysema                                     [27]   Male
 [4]   Blood cholesterol checked                            [28]   Mammogram/breast x-ray in last year
 [5]   Blood pressure checked-categorical                   [29]   Marital status category 2*Hispanic Race
 [6]   Routine place receive care*Employment status         [30]   Marital status category 4*Black Race
 [7]   Health compared to 1 yr ago-categorical              [31]   Marital status category 5*Hispanic Race
 [8]   Served in armed forces                               [32]   Marital status
 [9]   Died in study year                                   [33]   Number of people in household
[10]   Difficulty lifting/carrying 10 pounds-categorical    [34]   Pap smear in last year
[11]   Difficulty stooping/crouching/kneeling-categorical   [35]   Inpatient stays-squared
[12]   Difficulty walking 1/4 mi                            [36]   Pneumonia vaccination
[13]   Education-categorical                                [37]   Routine place receive care*Poverty status
[14]   Ever smoke                                           [38]   Poverty Status-categorical
[15]   Flu shot in last year                                [39]   Any difficulty dressing
[16]   Employment status-have job                           [40]   Any difficulty eating
[17]   Routine place receive care                           [41]   PSA test in last year
[18]   Self-reported health status-categorical              [42]   Race
[19]   Hearing                                              [43]   Poverty status category 5*Black Race
[20]   Wear hearing aid                                     [44]   Served in armed forces*Black Race
[21]   Height (cm)-continuous                               [45]   Employment status*Hispanic Race
[22]   Had hysterectomy                                     [46]   Inpatient stays*Hispanic Race
[23]   Number of days in institution-squared                [47]   Smoke now
[24]   Number of days in institution-continuous             [48]   Weight (kg)-continuous




                                                                                                          18
 Table A2: Hosmer-Lemeshow Goodness-of-Fit Test
                Hosmer and Lemeshow Goodness-of-
                            Fit Test
 Community        Chi-
                              DF       Pr > ChiSq
 Calibrated      Square
        1              7.40         8          0.49
        2              6.08         8          0.64
        3              9.51         8          0.30
        4              8.44         8          0.39
        5             14.39         8          0.07
This table shows the Hosmer-Lemeshow Goodness of Fit
test for the imputation used in the HMO adjustment.




                                                       19
                  Table A3: Complete Medicare and HMO Adjusted Samples

                                      Complete Medicare                    HMO Adjusted
                                          N=6,200                            N=6,200
                                         (Weighted                          (Weighted
Variables                               N=24,283,071)                      N=36,824,486)

Gender                                       Percent                           Percent
Men                                          42.14%                            43.43%
Women                                         57.86                             56.57
Age
65-69                                         25.45                              26.78
70-74                                         24.10                              24.15
75-79                                         19.81                              19.17
80-84                                         15.54                              14.71
≥85                                           15.09                              15.19
Race
White                                         83.42                              80.01
Black                                          6.86                               8.15
Other                                         11.30                              11.83
Education
<=High School                                 52.86                              53.94
Some College                                  26.09                              26.17
College and above                             21.05                              19.89
Married                                       52.55                              53.26
Health Status
Excellent                                     17.07                              16.45
Very good                                     30.74                              29.81
Good                                          32.50                              32.38
Fair                                          14.95                              16.12
Poor                                           4.74                               5.24
Note: Percentages and averages are weighted using sample weights. "Complete Medicare" population is
defined as follows: (1) no participation in a Medicare Advantage for the year of study, and (2) enrollment
in Medicare parts A & B for the full 12-month study period unless the participant died during the year.




                                                                                                       20
Table A4. Adjustments to the National Health Expenditure Accounts: Exclusions and Transfers for
Elderly

Health Care Service or Type of Expenditure                                       Amount in millions


Exclusions for Out-of-Scope Services or Expenditure
Other Non-Durable Medical Equipment a                                                   $19,327
                             a,d
Other Personal Health Care                                                              $18,685
                                                                 b
Graduate Medical Education and Disproportionate Share Payments                           $6,998
                      a
Non-Patient Revenue                                                                     $22,497
Exclusions for Out-of-Scope Populations
Foreign Visitors b                                                                        $700

Total Exclusions                                                                        $68,208

Transfers between Service Categories
Hospital-Based Personal Health Care b                                                     $693
                                   c
Hospital-Based Home Health Care                                                          $6,927
Hospital-Based Nursing Home Care c                                                       $5,672
DME provided by Physicians                                                                $477
Rx supplied in Hospitals b                                                               $1,187
Rx supplied by Physicians b                                                              $1,815
Other Professional Services provided in Physician Offices a                             $13,372
Total Transfers                                                                         $30,143

      a We follow Meara, White and Cutler (2004) and Sing et al. (2006) in this adjustment.
      b We follow Sing et al. (2006) in this adjustment.
      c We follow Meara, White and Cutler (2004) in this adjustment.
      d We exclude all expenditure on Other Health, Residential and Personal Health Care plus from
      the Hospital services estimated to be hospital-based Other PHC services.




                                                                                                     21
Table A5: List of Conditions in each multiple CCS categories and prevalence rates

                                                         Prevalence      Combined
                                                         (Calibrated     Prevalence
Multi-level CCS / Condition label(ID)                    Conditions)   (Multi-level CCS)
1-Infectious and parasitic diseases                                          65%
Immunizations and screening for infectious disease (4)      53%

Tuberculosis, STD, non-HIV, HIV, Other Infectious
disease (106)                                               28%

2-Neoplasms                                                                  50%
Cervical Cancer and Other Cancer (120)                      22%
Benign Neoplasm (13)                                        22%
Skin Cancer (8)                                             14%
Breast Cancer (9)                                            6%
Prostate Cancer (11)                                         6%
Colon Cancer (6)                                             3%
Lung Cancer (7)                                              2%
Hematologic Cancers (12)                                     2%
3-Endocrine; nutritional; and metabolic diseases and                         83%
immunity disorders
Hyperlipidemia (18)                                         62%
Other Endocrine Diseases (21)                               38%
Diabetes Mellitus (16)                                      32%
Thyroid Disorders (15)                                      28%
Gout and other crystal arthropathies (20)                    8%
Undiagnosed Diabetes Mellitus(17)                            2%
Undiagnosed Hyperlipidemia (19)                              2%
4-Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs                             35%
Anemias (22)                                                29%
Other Hematologic Disease (23)                              12%
5-Mental Illness                                                             46%
ETOH Abuse, Illicit Drug Use, Tobacco Use (107)             13%
Depression (28)                                             13%
Anxiety and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (108)             13%
Dementia (27)                                               12%
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder ADD-ADHD,
Mental Retardation (HCC term), Other Mental Health
Disorders (109)                                             10%
Schizophrenia (30)                                           5%
Bipolar disorder (29)                                        3%


                                                                                           22
Table A5 (Contd.): List of Conditions in each multiple CCS categories and prevalence rates

                                                            Prevalence       Combined
                                                            (Calibrated     Prevalence
Multi-level CCS /Condition label (ID)                       Conditions)   (Multi-level CCS)
6-Diseases of the nervous system and sense organs                               82%
Eye Disorders(45)                                              43%
Cataract(43)                                                   40%
Other Disease of the Central Nervous System (48)               31%
Glaucoma(44)                                                   20%
Other Ear Disorders(47)                                        16%
Vestibular Disorders(46)                                       14%
Headaches and Migraine(111)                                    12%
Parkinson's Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, Paralysis(110)         9%
Seizure Disorders(40)                                           6%
Otitis Media(36)                                                6%


7-Diseases of the circulatory system                                            90%
Hypertension(49)                                               71%
Other Vascular Diseases(62)                                    36%
Atrial Fibrillation and Flutter, Other Arrhythmias(112)        32%
Other Cardiovascular Diseases(61)                              31%
Coronary Atherosclerosis and other heart disease(52)           27%
Peripheral Vascular Disease(60)                                20%
Cerebrovascular disease(59)                                    18%
Congestive Heart Failure(56)                                   18%
Acute myocardial infarction(51)                                11%
Acute hemorrhagic stroke, Acute ischemic stroke(113)            9%
Deep Vein Thrombosis or DVT(64)                                 6%
Pulmonary Embolism(63)                                          4%
Undiagnosed Hypertension(50)                                    2%
Cardiac Arrest(55)                                              3%
8-Diseases of the respiratory system                                            66%
Respiratory symptoms(70)                                       38%
Acute respiratory infection(69)                                27%
Other Respiratory Diseases(71)                                 26%
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (aka Emphysema)(67)      18%
Asthma(68)                                                     14%
Pneumonia (65)                                                 11%
Influenza(66)                                                   3%


                                                                                              23
Table A5 (Contd.): List of Conditions in each multiple CCS categories and prevalence rates

                                                                   Prevalence       Combined
                                                                   (Calibrated     Prevalence
Multi-level CCS /Condition label (ID)                              Conditions)   (Multi-level CCS)
9-Diseases of the digestive system                                                     57%

Reflux/Ulcer Disease, Biliary Tract Disease, Liver Disease,           57%
Gastrointestinal Bleeding, Other Gastrointestinal Disorders(114)
10-Diseases of the genitourinary system                                                64%
UTI , Urinary Incontinence, Other Genitourinary Diseases(116)         54%
Acute Renal Failure(77)                                                9%
Chronic Renal Failure, End-stage Renal Disease (ESRD)(115)            15%
Hyperplasia of the Prostate(82)                                       15%
11-Complications of menopause; pregnancy; childbirth                                   10%
Menopause, Pregnancy and Childbirth, Contraception and                10%
Procreation(117)
12-Diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue                                        42%
Dermatologic Diseases(87)                                             42%
13-Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective
                                                                                       82%
tissue

Other Rheumatic Diseases(92)                                          58%
Osteoarthritis(89)                                                    49%
Back Pain(90)                                                         34%
Osteoporosis(91)                                                      18%
Rheumatoid Arthritis(88)                                               9%
                                                                                       10%
14-Congenital anomalies & Certain conditions originating in
the perinatal period
Congenital Disorders, Newborn conditions(118)                         10%
15-Injury and poisoning                                                                47%

Trauma, Fractures, Poisoning and other injury, Motor vehicle          46%
accident(119)
Hip Fracture(96)                                                       4%




                                                                                                 24
Table A5 (Contd.): List of Conditions in each multiple CCS categories and prevalence rates

                                                             Prevalence     Combined
 Multi-level CCS /Condition label (ID)                       (Calibrated    Prevalence
                                                             Conditions)    (Multi-level CCS)
 16-Other conditions                                                               83%
 Signs and Symptoms(99)                                          74%
 Residual, unclassified, all other E codes(101)                  48%
 17-Screening                                                                      41%
 Screening: Breast Cancer (102)                                  22%
 Screening: Prostate Cancer(104)                                 13%
 Screening: Cervical Cancer(105)                                  9%
 Screening: Colon Cancer(103)                                     8%

Note: CCS refers to 259 Clinical Classification Software categories delineated by the Agency for Health
Care Research and Quality. Prevalence rates are for health conditions that were ‘calibrated’ using
information from NHANES to refine the estimates of medical conditions in MCBS. First, missing data
on demographic, socio-economic and self-reported medical conditions in MCBS and NHANES were
imputed using a sequential regression multiple–imputation procedure. We then used a multi-step
calibration processes to impute a set of 101 health indicators and 4 screening variables that we call
“calibrated medical conditions.” This process included these steps: (1) calibration of conditions that have
Self-Report (SR) available in NHANES; (2) calibration of conditions with no Self-Report (SR) in
NHANES and (3) calibration of the institutionalized population for all conditions. This calibration
process produced five imputed data sets. The average prevalence rates reported here were calculated
using all five imputed data sets using MIANALYZE SAS 9.4. Table A3 is sorted from highest to lowest
prevalence within each broad disease category.




                                                                                                        25
         Appendix Table A6: Claims reporting single condition in different types of services in MCBS (2009)
                                                               Services With Single Condition Claims In MCBS

Conditions                                           Carrier   Outpatient      Inpatient    SNF   HHA    DME    Hospice   Rx
Immunizations and screening for infectious disease    Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Tuberculosis                                          Yes         Yes             No        Yes   Yes     Yes    Yes      N/A
STD, non-HIV                                          Yes         Yes             No        Yes   Yes     Yes    Yes      N/A
HIV                                                   Yes         Yes             No        Yes   Yes     Yes    Yes      N/A
Other infectious disease                              Yes         Yes             No        Yes   Yes     Yes    Yes      N/A
Cervical Cancer                                       Yes         Yes             No        Yes    No     Yes    Yes      N/A
Other cancer                                          Yes         Yes             No        Yes    No     Yes    Yes      N/A
Colon cancer                                          Yes         Yes             No         No    No     Yes    Yes      N/A
Lung Cancer                                           Yes         Yes             No         No    No     Yes    Yes      N/A
Skin Cancer                                           Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Breast Cancer                                         Yes         Yes            Yes         No    No     Yes    Yes      N/A
Prostate Cancer                                       Yes         Yes            Yes         No    No     Yes    Yes      N/A
Hematologic Cancers                                   Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No     Yes      N/A
Benign Neoplasm                                       Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Thyroid Disorders                                     Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Diabetes Mellitus                                     Yes         Yes             No         No    No     Yes     No      N/A
Undiagnosed Diabetes Mellitus                         N/A        N/A             N/A        N/A   N/A    N/A     N/A      N/A
Hyperlipidemia                                        Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Undiagnosed Hyperlipidemia                            N/A        N/A             N/A        N/A   N/A    N/A     N/A      N/A
Gout and other crystal arthropathies                  Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Other Endocrine Diseases                              Yes         Yes             No         No    No     Yes    Yes      N/A
Anemias                                               Yes         Yes             No         No   Yes     Yes     No      N/A
Other Hematologic Disease                             Yes         Yes             No         No    No     Yes     No      N/A
ETOH Abuse                                            Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Illicit Drug Use                                      Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Tobacco Use                                           Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Dementia                                              Yes         Yes            Yes         No    No     Yes    Yes      N/A
Depression                                            Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Bipolar Disorder                                      Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Schizophrenia                                         Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Anxiety                                               Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)                  Yes         Yes             No         No    No     No      No      N/A

                                                                                                                                26
        Appendix Table A6 (Contd.): Claims reporting single condition in different types of services in MCBS (2009)

Conditions                                          Carrier   Outpatient   Inpatient   SNF   HHA   DME    Hospice   Rx
Mental Retardation (HCC term)                        Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    No      No      N/A
Other Mental Health Disorders                        Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    No      No      N/A
Otitis Media                                         Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Vestibular Disorders                                 Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Other Ear Disorders                                  Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Parkinson's Disease                                  Yes         Yes          N0        No    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Multiple Sclerosis                                   Yes         Yes          N0        No    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Paralysis                                            Yes         Yes          No        No    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Seizure Disorders                                    Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Headaches                                            Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Migraine                                             Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Cataract                                             Yes         Yes          No        No    No    Yes     No      N/A
Glaucoma                                             Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Eye Disorders                                        Yes         Yes          No        No    No    Yes     No      N/A
Other Disease of the Central Nervous System (CNS)    Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Hypertension                                         Yes         Yes          No       Yes   Yes    No      No      N/A
Undiagnosed Hypertension                             N/A        N/A          N/A       N/A   N/A   N/A     N/A      N/A
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI)                    Yes         Yes          No        No    No    Yes     No      N/A
Coronary Atherosclerosis and other heart disease     Yes         Yes          No       Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes      N/A
Atrial Fibrillation and Flutter                      Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No     Yes      N/A
Other Arrhythmias                                    Yes         Yes          No        No    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Cardiac Arrest (includes VF)                         Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Congestive Heart Failure                             Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Acute hemorrhagic stroke                             Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Ischemic stroke                                      Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Cerebrovascular Disease                              Yes         Yes          No       Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes      N/A
Peripheral Vascular Disease                          Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Other Cardiovascular Diseases                        Yes         Yes          No        No    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Other Vascular Diseases                              Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Pulmonary embolism                                   Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    No     Yes      N/A
DVT                                                  Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    No      No      N/A
Pneumonia (non-TB, non-STD)                          Yes         Yes          No        No   Yes    Yes    Yes      N/A
Influenza                                            Yes         Yes          No        No    No    No      No      N/A
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary                        Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Asthma                                               Yes         Yes         Yes        No    No    Yes     No      N/A
Acute respiratory infection                          Yes         Yes          No       Yes   Yes    Yes     No      N/A
Respiratory symptoms                                 Yes         Yes          No        No    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Other Respiratory Diseases                           Yes         Yes          No       Yes    No    Yes    Yes      N/A
Reflux/Ulcer Disease                                 Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes      N/A

                                                                                                                          27
         Appendix Table A6 (Contd.): Claims reporting single condition in different types of services in MCBS (2009)
 Conditions                                                 Carrier        Outpatient         Inpatient    SNF HHA DME              Hospice         Rx
 Biliary Tract Disease                                        Yes              Yes               Yes       Yes     Yes     Yes        Yes          N/A
 Liver Disease                                                Yes              Yes               Yes       Yes     Yes     Yes        Yes          N/A
 Gastrointestinal Bleeding                                    Yes              Yes               Yes       Yes     Yes     Yes        Yes          N/A
 Other Gastrointestinal Disorders                             Yes              Yes               Yes       Yes     Yes     Yes        Yes          N/A
 Acute Renal Failure                                          Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No         Yes          N/A
 Chronic Renal Failure                                        Yes              Yes               No         No      No     Yes        Yes          N/A
 Endstage Renal Disease (ESRD)                                Yes              Yes               No         No      No     Yes        Yes          N/A
 UTI                                                          Yes              Yes               No        Yes      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Urinary Incontinence                                         Yes              Yes               No        Yes      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Other Genitourinary Diseases                                 Yes              Yes               No        Yes      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Hyperplasia of the Prostate                                  Yes              Yes               No         No      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Pregnancy and Childbirth                                     Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Menopause                                                    Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Contraception and Procreation                                Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Dermatologic Diseases                                        Yes              Yes               Yes        No     Yes     Yes         No          N/A
 Rheumatoid Arthritis                                         Yes              Yes               No         No      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Osteoarthritis                                               Yes              Yes               No        Yes      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Back Pain                                                    Yes              Yes               Yes        No      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Osteoporosis                                                 Yes              Yes               No         No      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Other Rheumatic Diseases                                     Yes              Yes               No        Yes     Yes     Yes         No          N/A
 Congenital Disorders                                         Yes              Yes               No         No      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Newborn conditions                                           Yes              Yes               No         No      No     Yes         No          N/A
 Trauma                                                       Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Fractures                                                    Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Poisoning and other injury                                   Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Motor vehicle accident                                       Yes              Yes               Yes       Yes     Yes     Yes         No          N/A
 Hip Fracture                                                 Yes              Yes               No        Yes     Yes     Yes         No          N/A
 Signs and Symptoms                                           Yes              Yes               No        Yes     Yes     Yes         No          N/A
 Residual, unclassified, all other E codes                    Yes              Yes               No        Yes      No     Yes        Yes          N/A
 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder                     Yes              Yes               No        Yes      No     Yes        Yes          N/A
 Screening: Breast Cancer                                     Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Screening: Colon Cancer                                      Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Screening: Prostate Cancer                                   Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Screening: Cervical Cancer                                   Yes              Yes               No         No      No     No          No          N/A
 Conditions satisfying single condition claim                 102              102               13          36     20     59          40            0
Note: This table reports the full set of 101 medical conditions and 4 screening variables. We have combined these 101 medical conditions to 74 conditions.
SNF: Skilled Nursing Facility, DME: Durable Medical Equipment; HHA: Home Health Agency.



                                                                                                                                                             28
             Appendix Table A7: Dependent variable: log(spending) : GLM (Gaussian distribution with identity link)
                                                                                      Coefficient/Standard Error (in parenthesis)

                                                                         Imputation   Imputation   Imputation    Imputation    Imputation
Disease Category                                                             1            2            3             4             5
Residual, unclassified, all other E codes                                  0.112         0.121        0.125         0.167            0.127
                                                                          (0.033)       (0.033)      (0.032)       (0.032)          (0.036)
Screening: Breast Cancer                                                  -0.014        -0.047        0.009         0.059           -0.014
                                                                          (0.041)       (0.044)      (0.042)       (0.043)          (0.047)
Screening: Colon Cancer                                                    -0.022        0.099        0.002         0.021            0.051
                                                                           (0.05)       (0.049)      (0.056)       (0.052)          (0.054)
Screening: Prostate Cancer                                                -0.015         0.059       -0.027         0.038            0.059
                                                                          (0.056)       (0.052)      (0.055)        (0.05)          (0.057)
Screening: Cervical Cancer                                                -0.036         0.025       -0.032        -0.133            0.024
                                                                          (0.066)       (0.056)      (0.051)       (0.075)          (0.053)
Tuberculosis, STD, non-HIV, HIV, Other Infectious disease                  0.026         0.018        0.008         0.033           -0.027
                                                                          (0.031)       (0.026)      (0.044)        (0.03)          (0.027)
ETOH Abuse, Illicit Drug Use, Tobacco Use                                  0.187         0.213        0.145         0.066            0.149
                                                                          (0.056)       (0.049)      (0.056)        (0.05)          (0.049)
Anxiety, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)                              0.057         0.077       -0.014         0.010            0.013
                                                                          (0.036)       (0.046)      (0.036)        (0.05)          (0.044)
ADD-ADHD, Mental Retardation (HCC term), Other Mental Health Disorders    -0.031         0.110        0.004         0.050           -0.003
                                                                          (0.072)       (0.041)      (0.054)       (0.049)          (0.049)
Prostate Cancer                                                            0.215         0.242        0.256         0.187            0.233
                                                                          (0.061)       (0.067)      (0.065)       (0.063)          (0.067)
Parkinson's Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, Paralysis                         0.072         0.073        0.150        -0.019            0.126
                                                                          (0.065)       (0.058)      (0.048)       (0.078)          (0.055)
Headaches, Migraine                                                        0.003        -0.112        0.068         0.066           -0.004
                                                                          (0.033)       (0.056)      (0.034)       (0.039)          (0.045)
Atrial Fibrillation and Flutter, Other Arrhythmias                         0.057         0.060        0.074        -0.002           0.099
                                                                          (0.033)       (0.034)      (0.033)       (0.033)          (0.03)
Acute hemorrhagic stroke, Acute hemorrhagic stroke                        -0.039         0.128        0.036         0.037           -0.084
                                                                          (0.058)       (0.045)      (0.044)       (0.062)          (0.057)



                                                                                                                                              29
        Appendix Table A7: Dependent variable : log(spending) : GLM (Gaussian distribution with identity link)

                                                                                            Coefficient/Standard Error (in parenthesis)

                                                                               Imputation   Imputation    Imputation    Imputation   Imputation
Disease Category                                                                   1            2             3             4            5

Reflux/Ulcer Disease, Biliary Tract Disease, Liver Disease, Gastrointestinal     0.238         0.202         0.224        0.198            0.136
Bleeding, Other Gastrointestinal Disorders                                      (0.036)       (0.036)       (0.036)       (0.04)          (0.037)

Chronic Renal Failure, Endstage Renal Disease (ESRD)                             0.051         0.089         0.043         0.051           0.064
                                                                                (0.051)       (0.037)        (0.04)       (0.049)         (0.061)
UTI, Urinary Incontinence, Other Genitourinary Diseases                          0.142         0.127         0.103         0.129           0.089
                                                                                (0.037)       (0.044)       (0.033)       (0.036)         (0.045)
Menopause, Pregnancy, and Childbirth, Contraception and Procreation              0.036         0.007        -0.006         0.017           0.070
                                                                                (0.049)       (0.051)       (0.04)        (0.052)         (0.046)
Congenital Disorders, Newborn conditions                                         0.069         0.096         0.040         0.114           0.070
                                                                                (0.052)       (0.039)       (0.063)       (0.047)         (0.052)
Trauma, Fractures, Poisoning and other injury, Motor vehicle accident            0.171         0.184         0.219         0.127           0.192
                                                                                (0.034)       (0.035)        (0.03)       (0.043)         (0.034)
Hematologic Cancers                                                              0.249         0.212         0.253        0.210            0.161
                                                                                (0.113)        (0.08)       (0.081)       (0.09)          (0.126)
Cervical Cancer, Other Cancer                                                    0.173         0.163         0.144        0.203            0.184
                                                                                (0.033)        (0.04)       (0.038)       (0.03)          (0.032)
Benign Neoplasm                                                                  0.062         0.134         0.111         0.161           0.134
                                                                                (0.044)       (0.037)       (0.045)       (0.033)         (0.036)
Thyroid Disorders                                                                0.037         0.060         0.053         0.045           0.032
                                                                                 (0.03)       (0.028)       (0.029)       (0.031)         (0.033)
Diabetes Mellitus                                                                0.186         0.176         0.173         0.160           0.204
                                                                                (0.029)        (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.029)         (0.028)
Undiagnosed Diabetes Mellitus                                                    0.224        -0.164        -0.123        -0.586           0.143
                                                                                (0.122)       (0.155)       (0.201)       (0.302)         (0.103)
Hyperlipidemia                                                                   0.122         0.147         0.130         0.142           0.102
                                                                                (0.035)       (0.032)       (0.042)       (0.036)         (0.041)
Undiagnosed Hyperlipidemia                                                      -0.157         0.170        -0.382        -0.161           0.223
                                                                                (0.218)       (0.168)       (0.289)       (0.256)         (0.187)




                                                                                                                                                    30
  Appendix Table A7: Dependent variable : log(spending) : GLM (Gaussian distribution with identity link)

                                                                               Coefficient/Standard Error (in parenthesis)

                                                                Imputation   Imputation   Imputation   Imputation    Imputation
Disease Category                                                     1            2            3            4             5
Gout and other crystal arthropathies                               0.007        0.072       -0.001       -0.025        -0.086
                                                                  (0.047)      (0.048)      (0.049)       (0.06)        (0.07)
Other Endocrine Diseases                                           0.087        0.019        0.069        0.092         0.096
                                                                  (0.038)       (0.04)      (0.032)      (0.038)       (0.032)
Anemias                                                            0.101       0.065         0.098         0.096        0.116
                                                                  (0.039)     (0.041)       (0.025)       (0.036)      (0.032)
Other Hematologic Disease                                          0.120       0.001         0.065         0.075        0.054
                                                                  (0.037)     (0.056)        (0.05)       (0.047)      (0.042)
Dementia                                                           0.108      -0.119         0.067        -0.010        0.127
                                                                  (0.051)     (0.094)       (0.047)       (0.06)       (0.035)
Depression                                                         0.021       0.088         0.101        0.068         0.093
                                                                  (0.045)     (0.041)       (0.035)       (0.04)       (0.036)
Bipolar Disorder                                                   0.062       0.017        -0.039         0.224       -0.014
                                                                  (0.079)      (0.07)       (0.081)       (0.083)      (0.118)
Schizophrenia                                                      0.037       0.075         0.118         0.093        0.057
                                                                  (0.085)     (0.061)       (0.065)       (0.062)      (0.057)
Otitis Media                                                       0.099      -0.053        -0.007         0.060        0.055
                                                                  (0.054)     (0.058)       (0.06)        (0.053)      (0.058)
Immunizations and screening for infectious disease                 0.111       0.095         0.070         0.111        0.087
                                                                  (0.032)     (0.029)       (0.039)       (0.035)      (0.038)
Seizure Disorders                                                  0.002      -0.037         0.012         0.151        0.096
                                                                  (0.058)     (0.066)       (0.076)       (0.055)      (0.066)
Cataract                                                           0.034       0.109         0.087         0.103        0.090
                                                                  (0.042)     (0.028)       (0.033)       (0.029)      (0.033)
Glaucoma                                                           0.087       0.113         0.114         0.046        0.098
                                                                  (0.031)     (0.025)       (0.028)       (0.038)      (0.029)
Eye Disorders                                                      0.123       0.112         0.086         0.056        0.115
                                                                  (0.036)     (0.027)        (0.03)       (0.038)      (0.031)
Vestibular Disorders                                              -0.025      -0.017        -0.022         0.027       -0.019
                                                                  (0.036)     (0.052)       (0.03)        (0.037)      (0.045)
Other Ear Disorders                                                0.079       0.065         0.042         0.062        0.096
                                                                  (0.037)     (0.038)        (0.04)       (0.032)      (0.033)


                                                                                                                                  31
Appendix Table A7: Dependent variable : log(spending) : GLM (Gaussian distribution with identity link)

                                                                             Coefficient/Standard Error (in parenthesis)

                                                               Imputation   Imputation   Imputation   Imputation    Imputation
Disease Category                                                   1            2            3            4             5
Other Disease of the Central Nervous System (CNS)                 0.092       0.169         0.118        0.090         0.130
                                                                 (0.039)     (0.031)       (0.036)      (0.039)       (0.036)
Hypertension                                                      0.346       0.330         0.311        0.334         0.385
                                                                 (0.051)     (0.048)       (0.049)      (0.059)       (0.058)
Undiagnosed Hypertension                                          0.191      -0.003        -0.233        0.291         0.090
                                                                 (0.156)     (0.195)       (0.196)      (0.242)       (0.194)
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI)                                 0.014       0.136         0.056        0.053         0.019
                                                                 (0.061)     (0.039)       (0.044)      (0.065)       (0.056)
Coronary Atherosclerosis and other heart disease                  0.152       0.130        0.133         0.169         0.146
                                                                 (0.033)     (0.032)       (0.03)       (0.034)       (0.034)
Cardiac Arrest (includes VF)                                      0.171       0.133         0.130        0.147         0.057
                                                                 (0.076)     (0.089)       (0.066)      (0.063)       (0.059)
Congestive Heart Failure                                          0.048      -0.026         0.044        0.032         0.040
                                                                 (0.033)     (0.047)       (0.037)      (0.041)        (0.04)
Cerebrovascular Disease                                           0.100       0.058         0.032        0.022         0.056
                                                                  (0.03)     (0.034)       (0.053)      (0.038)       (0.033)
Colon cancer                                                      0.117       0.064         0.066        0.106         0.155
                                                                 (0.076)     (0.109)       (0.092)      (0.071)       (0.055)
Peripheral Vascular Disease                                       0.010       0.018         0.034        0.021        -0.016
                                                                 (0.039)     (0.038)       (0.041)       (0.04)       (0.048)
Other Cardiovascular Diseases                                     0.069       0.119         0.129        0.135         0.095
                                                                 (0.029)      (0.03)       (0.032)       (0.03)       (0.035)
Other Vascular Diseases                                           0.069       0.091         0.061        0.048         0.068
                                                                 (0.032)     (0.035)       (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.026)
Pulmonary embolism                                                0.133      -0.099         0.004        0.055         0.071
                                                                 (0.062)     (0.117)       (0.085)       (0.08)       (0.076)
Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT)                                       -0.036      -0.193        -0.060        -0.044       -0.121
                                                                 (0.047)     (0.074)       (0.064)       (0.06)       (0.101)
Pneumonia (non-TB, non-STD)                                       0.011       0.043        -0.027       -0.008         0.063
                                                                 (0.043)     (0.042)       (0.046)      (0.044)       (0.044)
Influenza                                                         0.221       0.044         0.203        0.196        -0.091
                                                                  (0.06)     (0.076)       (0.077)       (0.06)       (0.113)


                                                                                                                                 32
      Appendix Table A7: Dependent variable : log(spending) : GLM (Gaussian distribution with identity link)

                                                                                  Coefficient/Standard Error (in parenthesis)

                                                                  Imputation   Imputation   Imputation   Imputation   Imputation
Disease Category                                                      1            2            3            4            5
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (aka Emphysema)               0.090        0.116        0.109         0.117        0.133
                                                                   (0.033)      (0.038)      (0.037)       (0.036)      (0.038)
Asthma                                                              0.108        0.090       -0.002         0.063        0.017
                                                                   (0.035)      (0.042)      (0.061)       (0.045)      (0.061)
Acute respiratory infection                                         0.049        0.065        0.066         0.048        0.026
                                                                   (0.027)      (0.029)      (0.036)       (0.031)      (0.029)
Lung Cancer                                                         0.252        0.240        0.248         0.226        0.195
                                                                    (0.08)       (0.07)      (0.081)       (0.091)      (0.086)
Respiratory symptoms                                                0.104        0.085        0.105         0.105        0.103
                                                                    (0.03)      (0.032)      (0.031)       (0.034)      (0.036)
Other Respiratory Diseases                                          0.101        0.099        0.100         0.066        0.122
                                                                   (0.024)      (0.031)      (0.036)       (0.036)      (0.032)
Acute Renal Failure                                                -0.056       -0.008       -0.007        -0.083       -0.061
                                                                   (0.062)      (0.043)      (0.062)       (0.078)      (0.076)
Skin Cancer                                                         0.021       -0.005        0.064         0.018        0.008
                                                                    (0.04)      (0.056)      (0.032)       (0.043)       (0.04)
Hyperplasia of the Prostate                                         0.257        0.226        0.230         0.177        0.150
                                                                   (0.058)      (0.059)      (0.053)       (0.068)      (0.065)
Dermatologic Diseases                                               0.106        0.103        0.076        0.109         0.150
                                                                   (0.032)      (0.033)      (0.032)       (0.03)       (0.027)
Rheumatoid Arthritis                                                0.083       -0.091        0.050         0.111        0.021
                                                                   (0.061)      (0.074)      (0.057)       (0.067)      (0.069)
Osteoarthritis                                                      0.028       -0.002       -0.003         0.005        0.016
                                                                   (0.033)      (0.045)      (0.034)       (0.043)      (0.043)
Breast Cancer                                                       0.132        0.192        0.228         0.200        0.131
                                                                   (0.066)      (0.063)      (0.052)       (0.062)      (0.062)
Back Pain                                                           0.078        0.059        0.088         0.135        0.078
                                                                   (0.031)       (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.036)      (0.029)
Osteoporosis                                                        0.039       -0.032        0.052        -0.028        0.080
                                                                   (0.039)      (0.046)      (0.033)       (0.043)       (0.03)


                                                                                                                                   33
      Appendix Table A7: Dependent variable : log(spending) : GLM (Gaussian distribution with identity link)
                                                                               Coefficient/Standard Error (in parenthesis)

                                                                 Imputation   Imputation   Imputation   Imputation    Imputation
Disease Category                                                     1            2            3            4             5
Other Rheumatic Diseases                                           0.169        0.184         0.161         0.213        0.176
                                                                   (0.04)      (0.039)       (0.038)       (0.044)      (0.035)
Hip Fracture                                                       -0.262       0.085        -0.042         0.091        0.049
                                                                   (0.122)     (0.064)       (0.074)       (0.075)      (0.053)
Signs and Symptoms                                                  0.475       0.438         0.498         0.401        0.468
                                                                   (0.052)      (0.05)       (0.053)       (0.052)      (0.051)
OTHER COVARIATES

Health compared to one year ago ( about the same)                  -0.184      -0.200        -0.178        -0.183       -0.200
                                                                   (0.055)     (0.055)       (0.055)       (0.056)      (0.054)
Health compared to one year ago ( somewhat worse/much worse)       -0.100      -0.118        -0.091        -0.103       -0.089
                                                                   (0.053)     (0.056)       (0.053)       (0.054)      (0.054)
Ever served in armed forces                                        0.102        0.129         0.088         0.114        0.137
                                                                   (0.07)      (0.071)       (0.069)       (0.069)      (0.069)
Death in year                                                       0.141       0.216         0.153         0.187        0.163
                                                                   (0.100)     (0.106)       (0.104)       (0.105)      (0.101)
Any Difficulty lifting/carrying 10 pounds.                          0.028       0.023         0.019         0.014        0.017
                                                                   (0.017)     (0.018)       (0.017)       (0.017)      (0.018)
Any difficulty stooping/crouching/kneeling                          0.039       0.039         0.041         0.037        0.027
                                                                   (0.019)     (0.019)       (0.019)       (0.021)      (0.021)
Any difficulty walking 1/4 mi. or 2-3 blocks.                       0.203       0.197         0.201         0.219        0.204
                                                                   (0.043)     (0.041)       (0.041)       (0.041)      (0.042)
Education-9-11 grade (includes 12 with no diploma)                  0.036       0.050         0.044         0.044        0.067
                                                                   (0.094)     (0.098)       (0.094)       (0.095)      (0.096)
Education- High school grad/GED or equivalent                       0.116       0.102         0.119        0.100         0.119
                                                                   (0.085)     (0.088)       (0.085)       (0.09)       (0.088)
Education- some college of AA degree                                0.218       0.211         0.223         0.206        0.231
                                                                   (0.098)     (0.099)       (0.098)       (0.102)      (0.104)
Education- college grad or more                                     0.243       0.213         0.242         0.215        0.230
                                                                   (0.087)     (0.089)       (0.088)       (0.095)      (0.095)
Ever smoked cigarettes/cigars/tobacco                               0.008       -0.023        0.010        0.002        -0.004
                                                                   (0.039)      (0.04)       (0.038)       (0.04)       (0.042)


                                                                                                                                   34
    Appendix Table A7: Dependent variable : log(spending) : GLM (Gaussian distribution with identity link)
                                                                               Coefficient/Standard Error (in parenthesis)

                                                                 Imputation   Imputation   Imputation   Imputation    Imputation
Disease Category                                                     1            2            3            4             5
General health compared to others same age (Very good)              0.089       0.125         0.110         0.115        0.109
                                                                   (0.069)      (0.07)       (0.066)       (0.072)      (0.073)
General health compared to others same age (Good)                   0.217       0.269        0.241          0.255        0.247
                                                                   (0.074)     (0.072)       (0.07)        (0.075)      (0.074)
General health compared to others same age (Fair)                   0.319       0.373         0.337         0.362        0.333
                                                                   (0.087)     (0.082)       (0.088)       (0.085)      (0.086)
General health compared to others same age (Poor)                  0.431        0.449         0.427         0.496        0.451
                                                                   (0.1)       (0.094)        (0.1)        (0.103)      (0.101)
Days in institution                                                 0.004       0.004         0.004         0.004        0.004
                                                                   (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Count of inpatient nights                                           0.005       0.006         0.006         0.005        0.005
                                                                   (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)
Count of inpatient stays                                            0.327       0.333         0.324         0.351        0.330
                                                                   (0.025)     (0.024)       (0.023)       (0.027)      (0.024)
Male                                                               -0.288      -0.314        -0.262        -0.263       -0.264
                                                                   (0.108)     (0.119)       (0.108)       (0.107)      (0.112)
Marital Status-Widowed                                             -0.011      -0.017         0.002         0.000       -0.004
                                                                   (0.036)     (0.037)       (0.036)       (0.037)      (0.037)
Marital Status-Divorced or Separated                               -0.098      -0.087        -0.072        -0.084       -0.090
                                                                   (0.082)     (0.084)       (0.083)       (0.08)       (0.084)
Marital Status- Never married                                      -0.394      -0.421        -0.388        -0.405       -0.431
                                                                   (0.161)     (0.162)       (0.161)       (0.16)       (0.159)
Poverty category ( near poor)                                      -0.069      -0.080        -0.071        -0.070       -0.107
                                                                   (0.092)     (0.091)       (0.094)       (0.095)      (0.096)
Poverty category (low income)                                      -0.044      -0.036        -0.038        -0.054       -0.035
                                                                   (0.077)     (0.083)       (0.083)       (0.086)      (0.083)
Poverty category (middle income)                                    0.050       0.046         0.050        0.030         0.032
                                                                   (0.074)     (0.073)       (0.078)       (0.08)       (0.077)
Poverty category (high income)                                      0.140       0.162         0.155         0.146        0.151
                                                                   (0.071)     (0.072)       (0.079)       (0.079)      (0.077)




                                                                                                                                   35
        Appendix Table A7: Dependent variable : log(spending) : GLM (Gaussian distribution with identity link)

                                                                                                          Coefficient/Standard Error (in parenthesis)
                                                                                         Imputation     Imputation     Imputation     Imputation     Imputation
 Disease Category                                                                            1              2              3              4              5
 Any difficulty dressing                                                                    0.065          0.104          0.049          0.075           0.076
                                                                                           (0.063)         (0.06)        (0.058)         (0.06)         (0.059)
 Any difficulty eating                                                                      0.083          0.082          0.124           0.132          0.123
                                                                                           (0.064)        (0.067)        (0.071)         (0.069)        (0.064)
 Private health insurance coverage for the year                                            -0.023         -0.030         -0.037          -0.020         -0.033
                                                                                           (0.059)        (0.059)        (0.061)         (0.059)        (0.059)
 Race- Black                                                                               -0.042         -0.065         -0.069          -0.053         -0.061
                                                                                           (0.085)        (0.085)        (0.081)         (0.086)        (0.087)
 Race- Hispanic                                                                             0.030          0.006         -0.004           0.011          0.031
                                                                                           (0.096)        (0.106)        (0.099)         (0.105)        (0.099)
 Race- Other                                                                                0.007          0.036          0.014           0.053          0.036
                                                                                           (0.096)         (0.09)        (0.092)         (0.098)        (0.093)
 Current smoker                                                                            -0.221         -0.227         -0.206          -0.224         -0.197
                                                                                           (0.111)        (0.114)        (0.106)         (0.108)        (0.107)
 Age of the beneficiary                                                                    -0.001          0.000         -0.001           0.000         -0.002
                                                                                           (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)
 Body Mass Index                                                                            0.003          0.003          0.003           0.002          0.004
                                                                                           (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)
 Intercept                                                                                   6.407            6.396       6.440            6.330          6.436
                                                                                             (0.31)          (0.293)     (0.319)          (0.311)        (0.314)
Note: The cost model regressed the logarithm of spending (plus $1) on the 78 condition and screening indicators and 22 demographic and other covariates.
Lifestyle covariates include information on inpatient activity and institutionalization, as well as difficulty with common life-skills such as eating, walking,
stooping, lifting and dressing. In addition to the common demographic characteristics such as age, race, and gender, the regression incorporates self-reported
indications of health comparisons to one year prior and to others of the same age as well as smoking history, poverty category, educational attainment, and
service in the armed forces. Two of the condition groups have negative coefficients for all five of the multiply imputed data sets: DVT and Acute Renal Failure.
As a result we are unable to attribute spending to these conditions. In the situation where coefficients were negative for only a selection of the five multiples they
were treated as missing in the subsequent steps of the analysis.




                                                                                                                                                                   36
                                         Table A8: Adjusted Observed Cost Model Estimates



Parameters                                                        Coefficient/Standard Error (in parenthesis)

Intercept                                                                          0.3956 (0.0462)

Number of comorbidities                                                           -0.0042 (0.0015)

Number of comorbidities squared                                                    0.0001 (0.0001)

Any hospitalization                                                               -0.1663 (0.0166)

Number of nights in hospital                                                       0.0143 (0.0004)

Number of hospital admissions                                                      0.0246 (0.0068)

Number of days in an institution                                                   0.0021 (0.0000)

Patient survived the calendar year                                                 0.0828 (0.0332)

Number of months survived in the calendar year (if deceased)                       0.0071 (0.0042)

Number of outpatient claims                                                        0.0058 (0.0007)




                                                                                                                37
                             Table A9: Attributed Cost by Medical Conditions using different methods

                                                               Average Cost                         Totals Cost (in Billions)
                                                                              Propensity                                Propensity
     ID        Multiple-CCS/Conditions               Claims   Regression        Score      Claims      Regression         Score

1-Infectious and parasitic diseases
               Immunizations and screening for
      4        infectious disease                     $22       $556             $15       $0.40          $10.89           $0.30
               Tuberculosis, STD, non-HIV, HIV,
     106       Other Infectious disease              2,469       163            1,372      19.88           1.68            14.14

2-Neoplasms
     6         Colon cancer                          2,802       807            1,240      1.89           0.92             1.41
     7         Lung Cancer                           4,102      2,758           4,444      2.30           1.56             2.52
     8         Skin Cancer                           1,547       126             308       5.17           0.65             1.58
     9         Breast Cancer                         1,737      1,286           1,123      2.86           2.59             2.28
    11         Prostate Cancer                       1,832      1,671            988       3.58           3.43             2.05
    12         Hematologic Cancers                   4,214      2,131           3,431      2.60           1.73             2.82
    13         Benign Neoplasm                       1,309       710             47        8.04           5.76             0.38
    120        Cervical Cancer and Other Cancers     2,410      1,317           1,143      15.00          10.90            9.46

3-Endocrine; nutritional; and metabolic diseases
and immunity disorders
     15       Thyroid Disorders                       859        322             448       7.10           3.29              4.59
     16       Diabetes Mellitus                       862       1,454           1,119      10.19          17.22            13.25
     17       Undiagnosed Diabetes Mellitus           637        485             43        0.01           0.33              0.03
     18       Hyperlipidemia                          623        806             720       14.04          18.51            16.57
     19       Undiagnosed Hyperlipidemia              540        445            -856       0.07           0.25             -0.51
     20       Gout and other crystal arthropathies    825        119             384       1.28           0.34              1.11
     21       Other Endocrine Diseases               1,362       639            1,422      16.47          8.92             19.81


                                                                                                                                     38
                       Table A9 (Contd.): Attributed Cost by Medical Conditions using different methods

                                                              Average Cost                        Totals Cost (in Billions)
                                                                             Propensity                               Propensity
   ID      Multiple-CCS/ Conditions                  Claims   Regression       Score      Claims      Regression        Score

4-Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs
   22       Anemia                                   $1,393     $948           $2,147     $12.22         $9.99          $22.62
   23       Other Hematologic Disease                1,818      662            2,328       5.44          2.87           10.15

5-Mental Illness
  107       ETOH Abuse, Illicit Drug and Tobacco     2,156      1,275          1,188      5.77           6.22            5.85
   27       Dementia                                 3,388       783           2,229      10.93          3.53            10.11
   28       Depression                               1,724       815           1,812      5.85           3.90            8.65
   29       Bipolar Disorder                         1,451       405            654       0.34           0.43            0.62
   30       Schizophrenia                            1,850       909           3,522      1.81           1.78            6.94
  108       Anxiety, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder   1,017       254            450       3.01           1.22            2.20

   109     Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
           Disorder ADD-ADHD., Mental
           Retardation (HCC term), Other Mental
           Health Disorders                          1,526       346           1,429       3.05          1.25            5.12

6-Diseases of the nervous system and sense
organs
   36       Otitis Media                              673        284            379       0.77           0.68            0.90
   46       Vestibular Disorders                      699        40             351       2.58           0.21            1.80
   47       Other Ear Disorders                       854        461            165       3.77           2.78            1.00
   110      Parkinson's Disease, MS, Paralysis       2,638       849           1,635      3.29           2.88            5.48
   40       Seizure Disorders                        1,893       549           1,984      1.61           1.16            4.07
   111      Headaches, Migraine                       753        199            169       1.85           0.93            0.77
   43       Cataract                                  960        490            146       12.40          7.21            2.15
   44       Glaucoma                                  701        544            141       3.70           3.95            1.02
   45       Eye Disorders                            1,017       615            174       14.25          9.69            2.75
   48       Disease of the Central Nervous System    2,089      1,192          2,203      19.76          13.53           24.99

                                                                                                                                   39
                       Table A9 (Contd.): Attributed Cost by Medical Conditions using different methods

                                                                   Average Cost                      Total Cost (in Billions)

                                                                                Propensity                             Propensity
    ID       Multiple-CCS/Calibrated Conditions           Claims   Regression     Score      Claims     Regression       Score

7-Diseases of the circulatory system
    49       Hypertension                                 $883       $2,619       $1,347     $22.33        $68.86         $35.42
    50       Undiagnosed Hypertension                      840        445          -897       0.18          0.37           -0.81
    51       Acute myocardial infarction (AMI)            4,680       459         1,142       4.63          1.98            4.71
    52       Coronary Athero. and other heart disease     2,524      1,371        1,687      24.64         13.40          16.49
   112       Atrial Fib. and Flutter, Other Arrhythmias   1,293       486         1,114      11.41          5.63          12.97
    55       Cardiac Arrest (includes VF)                 4,407      1,384        2,400       1.64          1.50            2.63
    56       Congestive Heart Failure                     2,009       375         2,514      10.18          2.41          16.20
   113       Acute hemorrhagic or Ischemic Stroke         2,473       452         1,593       5.09          1.46            5.06
    59       Cerebrovascular Disease                      1,470       514         1,341       7.60          3.46            9.01
    60       Peripheral Vascular Disease                  1,873       158         1,071      10.42          1.15            7.75
    61       Other Cardiovascular Diseases                2,692       971         1,346      25.66         11.05          15.32
    62       Other Vascular Diseases                      1,848       552         1,137      20.81          7.30          15.07
    63       Pulmonary embolism                           2,993       486         1,593       1.30          0.70            2.31
    64        Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT)                  2,259       -----       1,200       2.22          -----           2.68

8-Diseases of the respiratory system
    65       Pneumonia (non-TB, non-STD)                  2,909       285         2,318      8.01          1.14           9.31
    66       Influenza                                     958        897          170       0.29          1.13           0.21
    67       Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease        1,373      1,079        1,477      9.16          7.22           9.88
    68       Asthma                                       1,178       411          817       3.37          1.99           4.07
    69       Acute respiratory infection                   604        331          83        4.67          3.29           0.82
    70       Respiratory symptoms                         1,033       901         1,669      12.39         12.45          23.05
    71       Other Respiratory Diseases                   2,073       877         1,592      15.55         8.27           15.05



                                                                                                                                    40
                       Table A9 (Contd.): Attributed Cost by Medical Conditions using different methods

                                                          Average Cost                       Total Cost (in billions)
                Multiple-CCS/Calibrated                                  Propensity                               Propensity
     ID         Conditions                      Claims   Regression        Score      Claims   Regression           Score
9-Diseases of the digestive system
                Reflux/Ulcer Disease, Biliary
                Tract Disease, Liver Disease,
                Gastrointestinal Bleeding,
                Other Gastrointestinal
    114         Disorders                       $1,747     $1,588          $1,370     $28.06       $33.09          $28.52
10-Diseases of the genitourinary system
     77         Acute Renal Failure             3,738       ----           3,080       7.74         -----           10.65
    115         Chronic Renal Failure & ESRD    2,449       601            1,757       8.39         3.32            9.74

               UTI , Urinary Incontinence,
    116        Other Genitourinary Diseases     1,096       891            1,020      18.12         17.60           20.14

     82        Hyperplasia of the Prostate       813       1,369            187        3.85         7.65            1.05
11-Complications of menopause, pregnancy,
childbirth, and the puerperium
               Menopause, Pregnancy and
    117        Childbirth, Contraception and     563        130             -45        1.43         0.46            -0.16
               Procreation
12-Diseases of the skin and
subcutaneous tissue
     87        Dermatologic Diseases             912        817             509       12.61         12.70           7.91
13-Diseases of the musculoskeletal system
and connective tissue
     88        Rheumatoid Arthritis             2,130       399             843       2.66          1.26            2.71
     89        Osteoarthritis                   1,774       66              277       17.96         1.22            5.05
     90        Back Pain                        1,260       601             349       13.32         7.58            4.40
     91        Osteoporosis                     1,053       236             307       5.11          1.57            2.08
     92        Other Rheumatic Diseases         1,149      1,406           1,024      23.14         29.98           21.83

                                                                                                                               41
                            Table A9 (Contd.): Attributed Cost by Medical Conditions using different methods

                                                                             Average Cost                                Totals Cost (in Billions)

               Multiple-CCS/Calibrated                                                        Propensity                                       Propensity
     ID        Conditions                                      Claims       Regression          Score          Claims        Regression          Score
 14 -Congenital Anomalies & Certain
 conditions originating in the perinatal period

                 Congenital Disorders, Newborn
      118        conditions                                    $2,237           $654             1,272           $4.63          $2.38             $4.64
 15-Injury and poisoning
              Trauma, Fractures, Poisoning and
              other injury, Motor vehicle
     119      accident                                          2,033          1,520             2,163           25.83          25.46             36.25

      96         Hip Fracture                                   3,293           425               456            1.63            0.66              0.73
 16-Other conditions
     99       Signs and Symptoms                                 829           3,747             2,305           22.13         102.37             62.97

                 Residual, unclassified, all other E
      101        codes                                          1,182          1,051             1,146           19.20          18.76             20.46
 17-Cancer Screening
     102      Screening: Breast Cancer                           243            61                -350           1.79            0.50             -2.89
     103      Screening: Colon Cancer                            231            177               -561           0.67            0.52             -1.67
     104      Screening: Prostate Cancer                         90             157               -945           0.34            0.77             -4.67
     105      Screening: Cervical Cancer                         103            41                -691           0.21            0.13             -2.23
              Other covariates (including
              intercept)                                        N/A            1,566             N/A             N/A            57.68             N/A
Note: Cost attribution in the “claims based approach” is based on health conditions reported in 2009 MCBS. Cost attribution in Regression and Propensity Score
Method is based on calibrated health conditions (refer to data section for details on calibrated health conditions). Regression coefficients are negative in all five
imputed data set for Acute Renal Failure and Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT). No spending is attributed to these conditions in regression based approach. N/A =
Not applicable.

                                                                                                                                                                   42
