NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SAVING REGRET
Axel H. Börsch-Supan
Tabea Bucher-Koenen
Michael D. Hurd
Susann Rohwedder
Working Paper 25238
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25238

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We thank Laura Carstensen, Margie Lachmann, Andrew Parker and participants of workshops
held at the NBER and the Michigan Retirement Research Center for helpful discussions. Hurd
and Rohwedder gratefully acknowledge funding from the National Institute on Aging (P01
AG008291) for research support and data collection. Additional funding for data collection came
from the Max Planck Society. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Axel H. Börsch-Supan, Tabea Bucher-Koenen, Michael D. Hurd, and Susann
Rohwedder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Saving Regret
Axel H. Börsch-Supan, Tabea Bucher-Koenen, Michael D. Hurd, and Susann Rohwedder
NBER Working Paper No. 25238
November 2018
JEL No. D14,D15
ABSTRACT
We define saving regret as the wish in hindsight to have saved more earlier in life. We measured
saving regret and possible determinants in a survey of a probability sample of those aged 60-79.
We investigate two main causes of saving regret: procrastination along with other psychological
traits, and the role of shocks, both positive and negative. We find high levels of saving regret but
relatively little of the variation is explained by procrastination and psychological factors. Shocks
such as unemployment, health and divorce explain much more of the variation. The results have
important implications for retirement saving policies.

Axel H. Börsch-Supan
Max Planck Institute
for Social Law and Social Policy
Munich Center for the Economics of Aging
Amalienstraße 33
80799 Munich
Germany
and NBER
boersch-supan@mea.mpisoc.mpg.de
Tabea Bucher-Koenen
Max Planck Institute
for Social Law and Social Policy
Munich Center for the Economics of Aging
Amalienstraße 33
80799 Munich
Germany
bucher-koenen@mea.mpisoc.mpg.de

Michael D. Hurd
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER
mhurd@rand.org
Susann Rohwedder
RAND
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407
susannr@rand.org

Introduction and Literature
A large body of literature advocates paternalistic nudging to foster saving, especially
to provide for old age (Thaler 1994; Laibson 1997, 1998; Thaler and Sunstein 2003,
2009; Lewis 2008; Chetty et al. 2014). One prominent justification for these approaches
is the belief that many people procrastinate when it comes to saving decisions and that
individuals’ preferred choice, in hindsight, would be to have saved more than they
actually did.
An alternative explanation for such a shortfall in savings has to do with individuals’
uncertainty about their future life circumstances. Saving decisions are made in an
uncertain environment, and individuals may fail to assess adequately the probabilities of
various shocks: for example, they may overestimate the probability that life will continue
as always without major positive or negative shocks, and sometimes they will ignore or
entirely deny the possibility of facing major life-course disasters such as prolonged
unemployment, divorce, or a health shock that limits the ability to work. Even if
individuals correctly assess the probability of facing a major shock, in a world with
imperfect insurance, those who experience negative shocks may wish after the fact that
they had saved more.
If procrastination, economic shocks or both are important determinants of low levels
of retirement savings, most individuals would regret later in life the saving paths they
took, and interventions by policymakers would be justified. However, the empirical
observation that asset levels seem to be inadequate at retirement does not, by itself,
indicate the relative importance of these causes. Gabaix and Laibson (2017) provide a
model in which personality traits such as patience or procrastination and prediction errors
about future shocks can lead to observationally equivalent behavioral outcomes. A key
contribution of this paper is that we have obtained indicators for procrastination and lifetime shocks which permit us to separate the explanations, and to distinguish between the
potential causes for low wealth at retirement.
This distinction matters for public policy. If the root cause is shocks accompanied by
misperceptions of the likelihood of the shocks, the preferred policy course might involve
information and education to help individuals better assess the probability of major life-

3

course events. Another option would be to strengthen social insurance against
unemployment and work disability. However, if the root cause is procrastination, more
appropriate policies would likely involve automatic enrollment in retirement accounts or
even mandatory saving programs.
There is little empirical evidence on the saving behavior that individuals would have
chosen in hindsight, nor do we know much about how strongly procrastination and
probability misperception (or, more broadly, limitations on individuals’ ability to use
probabilities and think probabilistically) affect regret over past saving decisions. To fill
this empirical gap, we fielded a survey in the RAND American Life Panel. We asked
persons aged 60 to 79 whether, if they were given the chance to live their lives over
again, they would have saved differently earlier in their lives. As we will show in this
paper, depending on how the question was framed, some 61 percent to 67 percent said
they should have saved more (“had saving regret”). We asked respondents to tell us
which spending categories would have been targets for reduction in spending earlier in
life. Respondents who could not name a spending category for reduction were permitted
to revise their earlier expression of saving regret, but just 6.3 percent to 9 percent of those
who had expressed saving regret revised their answers, reducing the observed prevalence
of saving regret by between 4 and 5 percentage points. Accounting for those revisions,
we found that 59 percent of the population aged 60 to 79 wished they had saved more.
We realize that it is easy for respondents to wish they had saved more: no difficult
action such as reducing consumption is required. We have taken care in our survey
design to reduce such “cheap talk,” and one goal of our analyses of the data is to establish
the face validity of our regret measures by relating them to other measures that reflect the
actual financial situation. Thus, we measured wealth, income, living standard,
psychological and social factors and found that saving regret varies plausibly with those
characteristics. For example, high-wealth and high-income people have below-average
levels of saving regret. We asked about potential causes that could have precipitated
deviations from an anticipated saving path, such as positive and negative shocks, some of
which are difficult or impossible for individuals to anticipate. As will be discussed in
more detail below, among those with saving regret, 66 percent reported experiencing a

4

shock earlier in life leading to adverse economic consequences, compared with just 43
percent among those without saving regret. A gap between Social Security expectations
and realizations was also associated with saving regret: among those with regret, 38
percent reported that Social Security benefits were less than expected compared with just
26 percent among those without regret.
A main conclusion from our evidence on saving regret and its correlates is that, while
our psychometric variables measuring personality traits associated with procrastination
are jointly significant, their contribution to the explained variation in saving regret is
small, and there are few consistent patterns in how regret varies with them. In particular,
direct measures of procrastination have only modest explanatory power for regret.
Positive and negative shocks, in turn, explain much more of the variation and are
widespread, indicating that they are a major cause for saving regret. Their associations
with saving regret have a consistent and plausible pattern; the most obvious ones (e.g.,
unemployment and work-limiting health events) are highly significant.
The paper is related to the controversial question of whether households undersave.
In the US where public pension benefits are relatively low and private pensions are
increasingly of the defined contribution type, many economists (e.g., Laibson et al.1998;
Madrian and Shea 2001; Poterba, Venti, and Wise 2011; Stanford Center on Longevity
2016) argue that households undersave. However, this view is not undisputed. Scholz,
Seshadri, and Khitatrakun (2006) argue that 80 percent of U.S. households are saving at
least as much as an augmented life-cycle model would predict, and that the saving gap for
the remaining 20 percent is small. Hurd and Rohwedder (2012) estimate that 75 percent
of retirees have sufficient savings to reach the end of their lives with positive wealth.
Börsch-Supan et al. (2001), Brugiavini and Padula (2001), and Kitamura, Takayama, and
Arita (2003) have argued that the older cohorts in Germany, Italy, and Japan,
respectively, have actually oversaved, given the generous public pension levels that these
cohorts can still enjoy. The frequency of saving regret at older ages indicates that from a
subjective and ex-post point of view a majority of US households think that they have
undersaved.
This paper also helps to answer another fundamental question: what is an appropriate

5

way to model saving decisions? The life-cycle hypothesis of Modigliani and Brumberg
(1954) is the most widely used model to describe how people make such decisions. It has
been extended to include uncertainty about income and mortality (Skinner 1988; Yaari
1965). An early alternative model is based on myopia and time inconsistency (Strotz
1955; Phelps and Pollak 1968; Pollak 1968) and has later been framed as a model of
insufficient self-control (Thaler and Shefrin 1981; O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999; Rabin
2013a & b) and of hyperbolic discounting (Laibson 1997, 1998). Our finding of widespread saving regret is compatible with a life-cycle model augmented by the presence of
major life-course shocks and prediction errors.
The psychology literature provides ample support for an important role for
misjudging the frequency and consequences of major shocks. Over-optimism is
“expecting future outcomes that are better than reasonably likely” (Shepperd, Pogge, and
Howell 2017) and documented widely beginning with Weinstein (1980). When
individuals update their beliefs more in response to good news than to bad news, they
might fail to prepare for potential future problems or take too much risk.
Jefferson, Bortolotti, and Kuzmanovic (2017) point to two further phenomena, which
are related to over-optimism, namely the illusion of control, which is an exaggerated
belief in one’s capacity to control independent, external events, and the better than
average effect (also called the superiority illusion), which is the perception of oneself,
one’s past behavior, and one’s lasting features as more positive than is the case. Thus,
even if individuals know in principle that risks are present, they may underestimate the
probability that a negative event will happen to them personally either because they have
a superiority illusion, or because they hold unrealistic beliefs about their level of control
over external events.
Overconfidence and related phenomena may also increase an individual’s propensity
to underestimate the probability of shocks and/or the negative consequences of the
shocks. Literature reviews conducted by Barberis and Thaler (2003) and Dunning, Heath
and Suls (2004) found that overconfidence can lead an individual to think incorrectly that
they can control both the occurrence and the consequences of a shock, thus leading them
to assign too little likelihood to very costly outcomes.

6

Yet another mechanism to explain undersaving may be that individuals lack
information to form beliefs about the likelihood of some or even most adverse events. In
that case, working out an optimal saving plan is difficult if not impossible. Yet the
lifetime risk of important negative events is substantial: estimates from the NLSY79 of
the population-based observed risks show that baby boomers experienced an average of
5.6 periods of unemployment from age 18 to age 48 and had an almost 70 percent
likelihood of experiencing at least three periods of unemployment during that span (U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics 2018). The probability of divorce within 20 years after first
marriage was 48 percent for women and 44 percent for men in 2006-2010 (Copen et al.
2012). We know of no data on individuals’ subjective beliefs about the lifetime
likelihood of such major adverse life events, 1 but one piece of evidence is that individuals
tend to be overly optimistic with respect to their own health risks (Weinberg 1980;
Dunning, Heath and Suls 2004).
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section I sets up our theoretical
framework, while Section II describes how we collected our data and defined our key
variables. Section III presents the results, starting with the prevalence of saving regret,
and explains how it varies with socio-economic characteristics, personality traits, and
events in the past (“shocks”). The implications of these results are discussed in Section
IV while Section V concludes.

I. Theoretical Framework
Our analysis of the data is guided by the framework depicted in Figure 1, which
illustrates two broad sets of mechanisms (represented by the arrows B and C) governing
the accumulation of wealth at older ages. Accumulated wealth, in turn, is an important
determinant of saving regret (represented by Arrow A).
One set of mechanisms (Arrow B) illustrates how personality traits (“personality”),

1

The recent OECD “Risks that matter“ survey (OECD 2018) emphasizes the main life-course
risks (unemployment, divorce, disability) but does not provide subjective probabilities for these
events.

7

which are relatively stable over time, 2 affect wealth. Some of these traits, such as
conscientiousness and planning time horizon, may be labelled “positive” because they
lead to positive lifetime outcomes, while others, such as impulsiveness, may be labelled
“negative” because they lead to negative outcomes. Personality traits determine how
consistently decisions are made; how consistently plans are followed; whether people
procrastinate or not; whether they invest in financial literacy (Bucher-Koenen and
Lusardi 2011; Lusardi and Mitchell 2014); and how well they are informed about Social
Security benefits (Chan and Stevens 2008; Lamla and Gasche 2013) and life expectancy
(Smith, Taylor, and Sloan 2001). These traits are important determinants of life-cycle
choices such as education and career and savings rates, and therefore of accumulated
wealth at older ages. Personality traits may also have a direct effect on the way
individuals perceive their current economic situation (Arrow D), e.g., an optimistic
individual may see less reason for regret than a pessimistic individual with the same
amount of wealth.
[Figure 1 about here]
The second set of determinants of old-age wealth (Arrow C) represents external
factors or events that impinge on individuals, particularly positive or negative “shocks.”
Unanticipated shocks on the individual level might include, for example, unemployment,
health problems, and divorce. They may be unanticipated due to lack of knowledge (e.g.,
insufficient information about Social Security and pension benefits) or computational
ability (e.g., low level of cognition and/or numeracy). Such shocks affect wealth in
positive and negative ways and, thus, via wealth, affect the prevalence of saving regret. It
is less clear whether shocks directly affect regret after an individual takes the shock2

Personality traits have been found to be largely rank-order stable in later adulthood (Deary et al.
2000; Anusic and Schimmack 2016; Roberts and DelVecchio 2000; Cobb-Clark and Schurer
2012; Lucas and Donnellan 2011), that means that while personality may change somewhat with
age, the ranking of individuals in the population will be preserved so that those who scored high
along some trait will continue to score high relative to others. There is some evidence, however,
that certain major life events can affect personality traits (Löckenhoff et al. 2009; Specht, Egloff
and Schmukle 2011). Yet, Cobb-Clark and Schurer (2012) found that intra-individual changes in
personality are generally unrelated to adverse life events and small in magnitude.

8

induced change in wealth into account (represented by the dashed Arrow E).
Both types of deviations from a simple life-cycle model interact. Individuals with a
preponderance of positive traits are likely to pursue behaviors that increase the
probability of positive events and reduce the probability of negative events (Arrow F). 3
By virtue of accumulating higher savings, such individuals are better able to buffer the
effects of negative shocks on wealth (Arrow C). However, the effects of shocks can lead
to changes in personality (Arrow G), so causality can run in both directions. 4,5
The theoretical framework illustrates how an individual could deviate from the
conventional life-cycle model.
1. The individual procrastinates, i.e., sets up a life plan according to the life-cycle
model but then fails to execute this plan by postponing saving in favor of higher
consumption. Such a self-control problem constitutes a form of time-inconsistent
behavior which persists over time and leads to saving regret in hindsight.
2. The individual faces uncertainty over the future income path. He or she could
underestimate the probability of shocks that cause deviations from the average
income path. 6 While the precautionary saving motive would increase saving in
the face of uncertainty, underestimating the probability and the effect of shocks
will yield lower than optimal savings levels, which individuals then regret at
older ages. An extension is that the individual may not have well-formed
probabilities of the shocks, and so is not able to formulate even an approximation
to an optimal saving plan.
The first type of deviation, procrastination, can be modeled according to Thaler and
Shefrin (1981) as a continuing game between current and future self, where the

3

See for example Hampson (2017) for a review of the relationship between personality and health.
Reverse causality may also be present in the mechanisms that are represented by arrows B and C.
For example, being wealthy may reduce the size and probability of shocks by living in a healthier
environment (Currie et al. 2015).
5
See Bleidorn, Hopwood and Lucas (2018) for an overview of the psychology literature and
empirical findings on life events and personality change.
6
There could also be shocks to assets. For illustrative purposes we focus in the model on shocks to
the income path.
4

9

immediate future is discounted more strongly relative to the present than two equally
distant events further in the future. The current self at age j maximizes the objective
function
(1)

max { u(cj) + δ·β ·σj · Vˆ ( z j +1 )

}

by choosing current consumption cj, subject to a budget constraint and his or her beliefs

Vˆ ( z j +1 ) about the behavior of the future self for the future state described by zj+1. u(cj) is
the instantaneous utility function. Intertemporal discounting has three elements: β is the
pure time discount factor. In addition, the parameter 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1 expresses the extent of
shortsightedness or present bias. Complete myopia corresponds to δ=0. In this extreme
case, households focus on current utility only and ignore future utility. Finally,
households discount future utility with their unconditional survival probability σj,
expressing the uncertainty about the time of death. The value function Vˆ ( z ) for future
beliefs is computed recursively by
(2)

Vˆ ( z j ) = u( ĉ j ) + β·σj· Vˆ ( z j +1 )

.

Note that the present bias δ of the current self does not appear in the value computation.
The future self who is at age j + 1 will solve the standard program
(3)

max { u( cˆ j +1 ) + β·σj+1· Vˆ ( z j + 2 )

}

by choosing future consumption cˆ j +1 . 7
This model of procrastination has three key features: (a) the addition of a present bias
parameter δ which discounts the immediate future in addition to the standard discount
factor β and mimics hyperbolic discounting; (b) the distinction between the present bias δ
of the current self from the belief that the future self has no present bias; and,
consequently, (c) the distinction between actual consumption behavior cj from beliefs
7

In the language of O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999), this is a “naïve” hyperbolic household.

10

about future consumption behavior cˆ j +1 . The conflict between preferences and future
beliefs may occur for various reasons such as the monetary and psychic costs of decision
making; we therefore refrain from calling such behavior “irrational.”
The second deviation from the conventional life-cycle model, mis-estimation of the
probability of shocks, affects the expected budget constraint. We assume that households
expect an exogenously given age-specific wage income w until retirement age R and will
then receive a public pension b. With probability p, there will be a shock with effect S at
time J that puts the household on a higher or lower income path for the ages j>J. Hence,
expected disposable non-asset income yj is
(4)

yj = w

for j=0,…,J

yj = w + pS

for j=J+1,…, R-1

yj = b

for j ≥ R.

Denoting total assets by at,j, maximization of the household’s intertemporal utility is
subject to a dynamic budget constraint given by
(5)

a j +1 = a j (1 + rj ) + y j − c j

The literature on precautionary saving shows that aR is a monotonically declining
function of pS for S>0, i.e., the probability times the effect of a shock that permanently
reduces current income. 8
We summarize the predictions of the model. A procrastinating person has a low
value of δ . The literature on present bias shows that aR is a monotonically increasing
function of the parameter δ and thus that person will have low wealth at retirement. 9
Such a person will have saving regret. There is no need for uncertainty in the model.
Someone with a value of δ of 1.0 is not a procrastinator. Operating under uncertainty
8

Leland (1968); Skinner (1988); Kimball (1990); Aiyagari (1994); Lusardi (1998).
Strotz (1955); Phelps and Pollak (1968); Pollak (1968); Thaler (1994); Laibson (1997, 1998);
Angeletos et al. (2001); Madrian and Shea (2001); Choi et al. (2002); Rabin (2013a,b);
DellaVigna and Malmendier (2006).

9

11

with incomplete insurance, such a person may correctly estimate the probability of a
(negative) shock and engage in the proper amount of buffer stock saving. If the person is
unlucky, he or she will have low wealth at retirement but whether the person has saving
regret depends on the level of rationality: A hyper-rational person will not have regret
because the saving was optimal, given the information available at the time. However,
many (or all) people may use the ex post (negative) outcome when evaluating the saving
choice, and express regret. Underestimation of the probability of a (negative) shock or of
the effects of the shock will lead to the same predictions: a hyper-rational person will not
have saving regret (but will express regret about not knowing the true distribution or the
effects of the shock), but probably few persons are so hyper-rational and we would
expect that those experiencing negative shocks, whether or not they correctly assessed the
probabilities of the shocks, would express regret.
Both a high present bias (low δ; procrastination) and an underestimation of the
probability of shocks or their effects (low pS) can lead to saving regret. And in both
cases, wealth level at retirement, aR , is depressed. If we only have data on aR , but not
the savings history and the relevant subjective and objective probabilities of shocks, we
cannot identify how much of a (regretted) low level of aR is due to high present bias
(low δ) and how much due to an underestimation of the probabilities and the effect of
future shocks (low pS). 10 This paper uses data on indicators associated with present bias δ
and direct questions about actual shocks S to shed light on the question of whether regret
over low levels of aR is due to procrastination or shocks.

II. Data and Methods
A. The Sample
Our data come from the RAND American Life Panel (ALP). The ALP maintains a
sample of about 6,000 respondents who are interviewed regularly over the Internet. To
avoid selection due to lack of Internet access, any participant without such access was

10

This corresponds to Gabaix and Laibson (2017).

12

provided a laptop or an Internet service subscription. The sample is representative of the
U.S. population when applying weights. It has been recruited in several waves over time.
Seventy-five percent of the respondents were recruited using probability-based sampling,
while 25 percent were recruited through other efforts (Baird and Pollard 2017).
We designed ALP survey MS455, which was fielded from August through December
2016. 11 The sample was restricted to those aged 60 or older and the survey was
administered only in English. A total of 2,391 ALP panel members were selected to
participate; 1,728 completed the survey during the field period, corresponding to a
response rate of 72.3 percent. Of these, 90 percent pertain to the probability sample. We
confined our analytical sample to those aged 60 to 79 to reduce bias due to differential
mortality. On average, participants in the sample are 68 years old. 12 The sample size used
for our analysis is about 1,590 observations and varies slightly, depending on the
covariates used from earlier ALP waves.
B. Questionnaire and Measuring Saving Regret
The questionnaire began with items on socio-demographic and economic
characteristics, a battery of psychometric questions on personality traits, including
procrastinating behavior, and a set of questions about respondents’ assessment of their
income and living standards. See Appendix A for more details on the variables and for
the exact wording of critical questions. We also asked respondents about negative and
positive shocks in their earlier lives. Only after that did we ask households whether –
looking back to when they were around 45 years old – they would have saved more,
about the same, or less earlier in their lives if they were given the chance to re-do their
saving and spending. We randomly assigned two versions of this question. One version
was unframed (“would you save more over the years”) and the other, framed. The
objective of the framed version was to remind respondents that saving more requires an
effort: less consumption.
Measuring Saving Regret. The specific wording of these questions was:
11

In order to validate our results, we fielded a second survey about one and a half years later, see
Subsection IV.B.
12
Sample statistics are displayed in the Appendix Table A1.

13

Again please think back to when you were around 45 years old. Suppose you could re-do
your spending and saving from then to now, would you…
Version A: Save more over the years? / Save about the same over the years? / Save less
over the years? (unframed version)
Version B: Spend less and save more over the years? / Spend and save about the same
over the years? / Spend more and save less over the years? (framed version)
If respondents answered that they wished they had saved more, there was a follow-up
question asking for the categories of goods they would have spent less on. They were also
given the opportunity to revise their previous answer and choose “No way I could have
cut spending. I could not have saved more.”
Measuring Positive and Negative Income Shocks. We asked respondents if they
experienced unexpected positive or negative shocks during their lives. We asked about
negative shocks in the following way:
Sometimes people have negative surprises earlier in life that cause their finances to turn
out worse than expected. Did any of the following happen to you? Please check all that
apply.
A similar question was posed about positive shocks. See Appendix A for a full list of
answering options.
Psychometrics. We asked respondents to evaluate themselves along several
dimensions, such as a self-view on their general and financial planning behavior and
motivations. Several questions asked directly about procrastination, such as “How often
do you put things off you should do but aren’t really interested in?” Other questions
asked about time horizon or discounting, such as “Do you agree or disagree with the
following statements? People should do what they like today rather than putting it off
until tomorrow.” In total, we posed 19 self-assessments, but in this paper we reduced the
number analyzed to 12 because some had little explanatory power for saving regret. 13

13

See Appendix A for a complete listing and wording.

14

III. Results
A. Prevalence of Saving Regret
Table 1 presents the prevalence of saving regret among respondents given,
respectively, the unframed and the framed formats. For those viewing the unframed
format, 66.6 percent said they would save more if they could re-do their earlier life. We
did not use the word “regret” in the survey itself, but we will refer to this as “having
saving regret” as it appears in hindsight. The percentage of those having saving regret
was reduced to 60.9 percent when we framed the question by adding that saving more
implies spending less. This difference is statistically significant. We probed respondents
having saving regret to tell us which spending categories would have been targets for
reduction in spending earlier in life. The most frequently mentioned targets for spending
cuts earlier in life were “car” and “vacation” among men, and “clothing” and “vacation”
among women. For one answering option, we let them revise their earlier answer if they
could not think of a spending category they could have reduced. In the unframed version,
6.3 percent of those who voiced saving regret revised their answer, as did 9.0 percent in
the framed version of the question – leading to a reduction in the observed levels of
saving regret by 4.2 and 5.5 percentage points, respectively.
[Table 1 about here]
Combining the results from both versions of the question (Column ‘Total’), 63.6
percent of the 1,590 respondents voiced saving regret (Column ‘Before Revision’), and
58.5 percent maintained this answer even after probing for specific spending cuts
(Column ‘After Revision’). Saving regret was far from universal: More than a third of the
respondents are satisfied with their saving decisions earlier in life (34.7 percent before
revision and 39.8 percent after revision); a very small fraction would have saved less if
they could re-do their earlier life (1.7 percent).
B. Saving Regret by Socio-Demographic, Health, and Financial Status
Overall, the correlations between saving regret and socio-demographic and financial
variables are strong and exhibit plausible patterns. This is documented in Table 2.
Column 4 reports the combination of the framed and unframed versions of the saving

15

regret question after revision. Using results for saving regret before the revision changes
the level of regret but not the patterns of correlation.
[Table 2 about here]
The fraction reporting that they should have saved more was higher for those who are
younger; have separated or divorced; and have a low socio-economic status measured in
terms of income, wealth, and education. Respondents self-reporting fair or poor health
and memory problems also expressed saving regret more often. We note that, even
among those in the highest wealth quartile, 38.9 percent expressed saving regret; among
those in the lowest wealth quartile, 71.9 percent did so.
C. Personal Characteristics, Personality Traits, and Financial Literacy
As described in Section I, our analysis is guided by a broad classification into two
sets of mechanisms governing wealth at older ages. This subsection presents the first set,
which includes personal traits that are usually assumed to be relatively stable over time
(Arrow B in Figure 1). The underlying conjecture is that saving regret could emerge from
individuals’ inability to plan ahead and save sufficiently for their old age. This type of
behavior would be related to procrastination, the inability to motivate oneself to take
action, and/or lack of financial literacy. Table 3 displays how saving regret is related to
personal psychological characteristics. The questions on personality traits were asked
before the saving regret question in the course of the interview or in earlier ALP waves
that were targeted at financial planning horizon and financial literacy.
[Table 3 about here]
Responses to the items in Table 3, Panels A and B, were permitted in five categories:
strongly disagree, disagree, neither agree or disagree, agree, or strongly agree. Because of
(almost) empty cells or little difference in outcomes between some of the categories, we
have aggregated the two disagree categories and the two agree categories, respectively,
into one category each. In four of the five items in Panels A and B, the frequencies of
saving regret are not monotonic in the response categories. For example, the percentage
expressing regret among those that (strongly) disagreed with the statement “life is about
having fun” is 60.8 percent, the percentage among those who neither agreed or disagreed
is 52.3 percent, and the percentage among those who (strongly) agreed is 60.5 percent.

16

The one item exhibiting monotonicity is “do what you like today,” where the variation
between the low and high categories is about seven percentage points. This corresponds
approximately to the variation in average regret between wealth quartiles one and two
(Table 2), but is considerably less than the variation between quartiles three and four.
In Panel C, five out of seven items display non-monotonicity, and the last item “put
off difficult things” has little variation across the first two response categories, which
comprise 93 percent of the sample. That leaves the item “put things off you should do.”
There is substantial variation between “never” and the other categories, but just 5 percent
of respondents never “put things off.” The remaining item “give up before starting” has
considerable variation in average saving regret across the three categories that comprise
99.5 percent of the sample. Particularly the first two categories display considerable
discriminatory power: approximately half the sample is in each category, and the average
saving regret varies by 6.4 percentage points.
We conclude that there is quite limited and scattered systematic variation in saving
regret with the psychometric variables. Furthermore, the items in Panel C would,
according to their plain language, address procrastination; yet, among the seven items,
there is really only one that suggests procrastination leads to saving regret. 14
We merged information from other ALP waves about the financial planning horizon
(N= 1,206), financial literacy (N=922), and numeracy (N=1,056) (see Table 4). 15
[Table 4 about here]
Respondents have substantially different financial planning horizons: 4.4 percent
stated that they do not plan and 14.7 percent only planned for the next couple of months.
Yet, 16.3 percent of respondents planned for the next five to ten years and 11.9 percent
for more than ten years. The financial planning horizon and saving regret are significantly
correlated. Saving regret was highest among respondents who stated that they do not have
a financial plan (68 percent) or who only planned for the next few months (64.8 percent).

14

We also used the Big 5 personality traits (neuroticism, extroversion, agreeableness,
conscientiousness, openness) as an alternative to the psychometric scales, see Subsection IV.D.
15
See Appendix A for the list of questions used to construct the financial literacy and numeracy
scales.

17

It declines monotonically with the length of the planning horizon: among respondents
with a planning horizon that exceeds ten years, 50.8 percent expressed having saving
regret.
The relationship between saving regret and financial literacy is also strong.
Respondents with high or very high levels of financial literacy had significantly lower
saving regret (44.6 percent) compared to those with low or very low financial literacy,
where 68.2 percent and 81.0 percent, respectively, wished they had saved more.
Cognition may also play a role in saving regret. The bottom panel of Table 4 shows
the variation of saving regret by probability numeracy. For the bulk of the sample we
have data on numeracy (those with two, three or four correct answers). Saving regret was
lower among those who scored higher on numeracy, lending support to the hypothesis
that facility in probabilistic thinking is an important skill to successfully manage
uncertainties over the lifecycle.
D. Unanticipated Shocks
The second set of determinants of old-age wealth (Arrow C in Figure 1) is the
collection of external impingements on the individual, particularly positive or negative
shocks. Many households experienced shocks to their labor market status, earnings,
family situation and/or health. Some of these shocks may be hard to anticipate either in
their likelihood of occurring or in the financial burden they might cause. Feeling regret
about saving decisions may therefore also be related to the failure to anticipate shocks
and/or the tendency to underestimate their probability and impact due to overconfidence,
ignorance, or denial.
The shocks queried and the responses are displayed in Table 5. More than 55 percent
of respondents reported a shock with negative consequences for their wealth (‘any
negative shock’) and 43 percent reported a shock with positive consequences for their
wealth (‘any positive shock’). More than 20 percent experienced health limitations to
their work and 13.8 percent incurred large health expenses, 13.7 percent experienced
unemployment and 11.1 percent, a divorce or separation. For almost 20 percent of our
sample, investments turned out better than expected, and almost 15 percent received an
inheritance. It should be noted that the frequencies of these events are not necessarily the

18

population lifetime frequencies because we asked respondents about events that caused
their finances to turn out worse or better than expected. Some spells of unemployment,
for example, may have had little effect on finances and so would not have been reported.
Nonetheless, the lifetime frequency is substantial.
[Table 5 about here]
The prevalence of saving regret was much higher among those who experienced a
negative shock and substantially lower among those who experienced a positive shock.
This was particularly pronounced for those who suffered from unemployment (77.3
percent express regret) or a work-limiting health problem (79.4 percent express regret) or
large health-related expenses (68.1 percent with saving regret). All negative shocks,
except death in the family, show a highly significant relationship with saving regret.
In contrast, saving regret was substantially reduced among those whose earnings
turned out to be higher than expected (52.8 percent have saving regret), those whose
investments did better than expected (36.4 percent express regret), and those who
received an inheritance (46 percent with regret).
There is a modest negative correlation between having a positive shock and having a
negative shock (Table 6, Panel A). Among those who did not experience a negative
shock, 48 percent experienced a positive shock; among those who experienced a negative
shock, 41 percent experienced a positive shock. Some 23 percent experienced both
positive and negative shocks.
[Table 6 about here]
Panel B shows the corresponding percentage with saving regret. The variation is
substantial: 73.4 percent of those with a negative shock but not a positive shock (33.2
percent of the population) expressed regret while just 36.2 percent of those with a
positive shock but not a negative shock (21.1 percent of the population) expressed regret.
Thus, positive and negative shocks are discriminatory in predicting saving regret for
about half the population.
E. Multivariate Analysis
We estimated linear probability models where the outcome was whether saving regret
was reported. We combined versions A and B of the saving regret question (Section II.B)

19

and applied revisions if respondents decided to do so. The explanatory variables were
demographics, income, and wealth quartiles, personality traits, and indicator variables for
negative and positive shocks.
Table 7 shows extracts from two specifications, one that excludes the wealth quartiles
and one that includes them in order to separate the effects represented by Arrows A, B,
and C in Figure 1. 16 Following the idea that saving regret should be increasing in some of
the psychological variables and decreasing in others, they are entered as scalars. We find
that only two of the variables are significant at the 1 percent level in both specifications
and two others are marginally significant in model 1 but not in model 2. A change in
“Works best under pressure” from neither “agree” nor “disagree” to” (strongly) agree”
would change the frequency of expressing regret by 0.037. “Do what you like today” is
significant only at the 10 percent level when not including the wealth variables. This item
is not very discriminatory because 79 percent of the population (strongly) agrees. Among
the variables that are more directly interpretable as expressing procrastination, the item
“Put off things you should do” is not very discriminatory: 77 percent of the sample said
they put off things “some time,” and 16 percent “most of the time.” A movement
between those categories is associated with an increase in regret of 0.046. The effect is
marginally significant when not controlling for wealth. “Try several tasks, don’t complete
many” is associated with an increase in regret by 0.053, but is also not very
discriminatory as 89 percent of the sample is in the first two categories. Other seemingly
direct measures of the tendency to procrastinate such as “put off difficult things” have
only small and insignificant predictive power for the expression of regret.
[Table 7 about here]
Having had a negative shock increases the probability of expressing regret by 0.145
or 0.132, and having had a positive shock reduces that probability by 0.131 or 0.114.
Both are quite discriminatory in the population: 56 percent had a negative shock and 44
percent a positive shock. Having had only a positive shock rather than a negative shock
changes the probability of expressing regret by about 25 percentage points. This

16

See Appendix Table A2 for complete results.

20

difference is about the same as the difference between being in the top wealth quartile
rather than the second wealth quartile (see Table 2). When the shocks are entered
individually, the most important negative shock involves health problems that limit the
ability to work and unemployment, while the most important positive shock is having had
good investments (see Table A2 Columns 3 and 4).

IV. Discussion
We discuss our results in light of the following questions: Do our results have face
validity or do they simply reflect “cheap talk” in a survey? Are they stable over time and
how does saving regret compare with other regrets? How is saving regret related to
uncertainty about future events? What have we learned about the causes of saving regret
and their policy implications? Our discussion also includes robustness checks and
corroborating evidence.
A. Face Validity vs. “Cheap Talk”
It is easy for respondents to wish they had saved more: no difficult action such as
reducing consumption is required. Perhaps this question is similar to asking whether
respondents would like to have more wealth, in which case we would expect 100 percent
affirmation. Affirmation in the survey of the desire to have saved more, however, was
substantially less, about 58.5 percent (Table 1, Total After Revision). We aimed to reduce
“cheap talk” in our survey through our framing and probing design. The difference
between the framed and the unframed versions (67 percent vs. 61 percent prior to
probing) is statistically significant but economically small. Moreover, while probing and
giving respondents the opportunity to revise their initial responses resulted in a lower
prevalence of saving regret, the prevalence of revisions (6.3 percent and 9 percent in the
unframed and framed versions, respectively) was small relative to the initial prevalence
of saving regret.
There may still be some skepticism regarding the validity of the stated responses in
that they do not represent an assessment of respondents’ achieved economic position. Our
method of assessing validity was, first, to relate saving regret to other measures that
reflect the actual financial situation. We found that regret was strongly related to

21

economic position, especially wealth itself (Table 2). We found similar, albeit weaker,
correlations with income. The stronger correlation with wealth than with income is to be
expected because, of course, wealth itself is a measure of prior saving. Possibly stronger
evidence of validity was found by comparing variation across persons having regret with
other self-assessed measures of saving relative to actual needs or expectations of needs.
In the context of asking about negative shocks, we included an item “saved less than
expected.” We did not include this item in Table 5 because it is not itself an external
shock, although it could be the result of one or more external shocks. Some 15 percent of
the sample reported saving less than expected and 18 percent reported saving more than
expected. These seem like rather low rates of saving less or more than expected, but we
note that, when querying about shocks, we asked about surprises that caused “their
finances to turn out worse than expected,” or “better than expected,” which we interpret
to mean that the shock made a meaningful difference. Of the 15 percent who stated that
they saved less than expected, 82 percent expressed saving regret. Of the 18 percent who
saved more than expected, 40.5 percent expressed saving regret. An obvious question is,
why would someone who saved more than expected have regret? A possible answer is
that, when the saving was underway, the respondent did not have an accurate idea of the
wealth levels that would be required 15 or 20 years in the future. Or perhaps their saving
plan was flawed because they did not understand the frequency of shocks and/or the
consequences of shocks.
We asked our respondents whether their present income is sufficient for their present
needs (Table 8 – Panel A). Overall, 43.9 percent reported that income is always sufficient
to meet present needs; yet, 44.5 percent of that group wished they had saved more. This
finding also points to the role of uncertainty. Whether present income is sufficient for
present needs is known largely from day-to-day experience. But the amount of wealth
needed for future spending needs is uncertain. We addressed that issue by asking whether
respondents’ financial resources are adequate for future needs (Table 8 – Panel B).
Notably, about 23 percent answered either “uncertain” or “don’t know,” reflecting the
difficulty of predicting future needs due to uncertainties about both future shocks and
future tastes for consumption over a long retirement period. This is in sharp contrast with

22

the results shown in Panel A, where no respondents expressed uncertainty about present
needs. About 23 percent said that their financial resources are not enough or not nearly
enough to meet future needs, and around 80 percent of these respondents had saving
regret. We therefore find the same very strong relationship between adequate resources
and saving regret. Yet, among those with “more than enough” financial resources to meet
future needs, some 31 percent still wished they had saved more.
[Table 8 about here]
A more direct measure of uncertainty is the subjective probability of running out of
money. Table 8 – Panel C shows the subjective probability of running out of money and
saving regret. The subjective probability is divided into bins of width 10 percent
probability (except for the focal point of exactly 50 percent). The percentage of
respondents with regret increases with the subjective probability until it reaches the 70
percent to 90 percent range, after which there is no trend. In the lowest bin (0-10
percent), which comprises 30 percent of the sample, 44 percent reported saving regret.
Even among those with relatively small self-assessed chances of running out of money,
almost half express regret. One may interpret this as rather direct evidence of the role of
risk and of the desire to be protected against risky (bad) outcomes.
An additional indicator of the relationship between saving regret and the achieved
economic situation is subjective well-being with respect to the economic situation. A
remarkable 77 percent of our respondents are satisfied or neutral with respect to their
economic situation (Table 8 – Panel D). Among the dissatisfied respondents, 80 percent
expressed saving regret, compared to only 24 percent among the very satisfied.
Social Security is an important income source for most retired persons, so
expectations about the benefit level should be an important determinant of saving. We
asked respondents who are receiving Social Security to compare their benefit level with
expectations. The distribution of answers is shown in Table 8 – Panel E. There was a
general tendency for individuals to overestimate their Social Security benefits: the sum of
“a bit less” than expected and “a lot less” is 32.4 percent whereas the sum of “a bit more”
than expected and “a lot more” is 10.2 percent. There is a monotonic relationship
between overestimation of Social Security benefits and saving regret (Table 8 – Panel E),

23

and the level of regret in the top categories is substantially greater than in the other
categories.
Overall, we obtained a very consistent picture. The majority of our respondents (53.4
percent) said that they have enough resources to meet future needs, and even more were
satisfied with their economic situation. Saving regret was strongly related to the present
financial situation, the adequacy of an individual’s resources for future needs, and the
subjective probability of running out of money. While we cannot entirely rule out the
presence of “cheap talk,” the consistent pattern of correlations with measures of
economic status demonstrates the face validity of our regret measure.
B. Validation, Stability and Other Types of Regret
The psychological literature on experienced regret (Valenti, Libby, and Eibach
2011) 17 provides little guidance to judge whether our measure of the prevalence of saving
regret is large or small; whether individuals who express saving regret feel strongly about
the regret; whether the reports are stable over time; and how reliable they are. To address
these issues, we launched a second survey to provide evidence about whether regret is
strong or mild, and to determine whether people have regrets over a wide range of prior
choices. If the latter were the case, people who experienced bad outcomes might lack the
ability to place themselves ex ante and affirm that a good choice was made previously,
given the incomplete knowledge they had at the time. We fielded the second survey in the
ALP about one and a half years after the first, partly to the same people and partly to
other people. The overlap between the two ALP surveys includes 1,198 respondents. In
the second survey, we only used version B; that is, we reminded respondents that saving
more would require that they spend less. Additionally, we asked respondents about the
intensity of their regret:
How strongly do you wish you could redo your spending and saving? (1 – very strongly,
Experienced regret is a different concept from anticipatory regret. The latter is the base for a
theory of ex ante decision making (Loomes and Sugden 1982). The theory of anticipatory regret
was created in parallel to prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Croy, Gerrans, and
Speelman (2015) apply anticipatory regret theory to describe retirement savings intentions in
Australia.
17

24

2- strongly , 3- somewhat strongly, 4- not at all strongly)
Respondents were also asked about other types of regrets they might have. Specifically,
they were asked if they felt regret with respect to their educational and occupational
choices, their family life, the amount of time spent with friends and family, or other areas
they could specify freely.
The prevalence of saving regret remained remarkably stable – with 61 percent
expressing regret before revision in the first survey compared to 62.5 percent in the
second survey (Table 9). In both surveys, 77.3 percent gave the same answer to the main
saving regret question; 12.2 percent reported saving regret in the earlier survey and said
they “would save about the same” in the later survey; and 8.9 percent reported they
would “save about the same” in the earlier survey but reported saving regret in the later
survey.
In the second wave of data collection in which we asked respondents about the
intensity of their regret, 38 percent categorized their regret as “very strong,” 29 percent as
“strong,” 24 percent as somewhat strong, and only 8.4 percent as “not strong at all.”
Thus, about two-thirds of those expressing regret felt their regret strongly. Were we to
characterize the population prevalence of regret as those feeling strongly or very strongly,
the level would be about 40 percent (Table 9).
[Table 9 about here]
We compared the prevalence of regret in our survey with that measured in the scarce
literature about experienced regret. Morrison and Roese (2011) found that regrets related
to partnership and family are the most common (18 percent), less so regrets regarding
work and education (14 percent), and even less so regarding finance (10 percent). In stark
contrast, a recent nationwide survey by Bankrate (Bell 2016) found that 75 percent of
Americans experience regrets about their retirement savings. The percentage is higher
among those of retirement age than among younger people. In our second survey we
asked in the same format about other subjects of regret related to important decisions in
life: “if you could redo your choices would you want to?” We mentioned educational
choices, choice of partner, and choice of job, among others. In response, 39.7 percent
regretted their educational choices, 34.9 percent wished that they had spent more time

25

with family or friends, 27.8 percent regretted their occupational choices, and 25.6 percent
regretted their choice of partner (Table 9). Thus, according to our second survey, people
expressed regret at a relatively high frequency and across a number of domains. Saving
regret was expressed most frequently among all types of regrets discussed.
C. Saving Regret and Financial Situation
Our results display an apparent contradiction: By a number of measures, individuals
judged their current economic resources to be adequate, yet the expression of regret was
fairly widespread. A large fraction (43.9 percent) stated that their household income is
always sufficient for spending needs, yet 44.5 percent of those persons expressed regret.
One explanation may be that the question specifically refers to the present situation but,
at retirement age, people may better understand risk. A more forward-looking measure is
whether financial resources are enough for future needs (Table 8 – Panel B). Regarding
future needs, 53.4 percent stated that their resources are either “more than enough” or
“just enough” and 31 percent and 59 percent, respectively, expressed regret. These two
groups expressed uncertainty about running out of money. To quantify the subjective
view of risk, we asked about the subjective probability of running out of money with the
question “What are the chances that you will run out of money sometime in the future?”
The average probabilities are shown in Figure 2. Among those who, in Table 8, stated
that their economic resources were not nearly enough to meet future spending needs, the
average subjective probability of running out of money was 59 percent. Even among
those whose economic resources were more than enough, the average subjective
probability of running out of money was 14 percent. One might think that, for the latter
group, the subjective probability should be zero, but the open-ended comments showed
the effects of uncertainty: “We are fine now but, if one of us should need long-term
care….” (paraphrased to preserve anonymity).
[Figure 2 about here]
Some evidence for the role of risk is apparent in the age pattern of whether people
have enough resources to meet future needs (Figure 3). Among those in their early 60s,
about 30 percent stated they had not enough or not nearly enough; among those in their
late 70s, fewer than 15 percent made such an affirmation. Besides the resolution of

26

uncertainty that occurs with age, consumption may have declined more than expected,
e.g., due to deteriorating health (Börsch-Supan and Stahl 1991).
[Figure 3 about here]
D. Potential Causes of Saving Regret and Their Policy Implications
The multivariate regressions reported in Table 7 can be used to decompose the
variance in saving regret with respect to four groups of variables: demographics, wealth,
psychometric indicators for procrastination and related personality traits, and indicators
for positive and negative shocks whose probability and effect may have been
underestimated (Figure 4). The surprising result is that the psychometric variables related
to personality traits are able to explain only 1.6 percent of the total variance in saving
regret, while each of the other variable groups explains substantially higher fractions of
the variance than personality traits and is highly significant.
[Figure 4 about here]
One problem may be the model specification: regret is linear in the response
categories of the psychometric variables. However, the goodness of fit was not
significantly improved (or even decreased) when we entered the psychometric variables
as a set of dummy variables for each answer category (see Table A2, Column 8) or other
groups of answer categories than those shown in Table 7. We also replaced our set of
psychometric variables by the “Big 5” (John and Srivastava 1999). 18 Saving regret was
significantly higher among individuals with high values on the agreeableness scale and
lower for individuals with high values of openness. However, the overall explanatory
power of the Big 5 was relatively low; they did not perform significantly better than the
psychometric scales.
We can distinguish several ways in which uncertainty can lead to saving regret. First,
ex ante, individuals may adequately assess the probabilities of various shocks, but remain
unable to insure against them. Among those who experienced the negative outcome,
increased buffer stock saving would have increased overall utility. The expression of

18

The “Big 5” core dimensions of personality are openness to experience, conscientiousness,
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. Results of our analysis are available upon request.

27

regret would then be natural even among those who undertook the correct ex ante saving
plan. Second, individuals may correctly estimate the mean of the distribution of outcomes
such as the mean of the distribution of the costs of unemployment. However, they may
underestimate the variance of the distribution. More generally, they may underestimate
the number and magnitude of the various uncertainties in life. On reaching retirement,
those who experienced negative outcomes would likely express saving regret (due to too
little buffer-stock saving) but this regret would be due to a lack of knowledge about the
distribution of uncertain outcomes. Third, because of changes in the environment, the
actual distribution of positive and negative shocks might be different from the ex-ante
distribution. In this situation, individuals might have correctly engaged in buffer-stock
saving, given the existing distribution of outcomes, but the level of saving might be
inadequate due to increases in uncertainty.
The relationship between saving regret and experienced shocks that we have
documented does not allow us to distinguish between these three ways in which
uncertainty can lead to regret. A type of data outside of our study that may shed light on
the issue is subjective probability data. Such data can reveal whether the measured
probabilities of individuals are “rational” in the sense that they conform to historical
frequencies, but such an assessment is likely to be unsatisfactory because of the weak and
unknown link between the historical frequencies and the process of generating outcomes
in the future.
Distinguishing among the causes of saving regret matters for public policy. If the root
cause for regrettably low savings levels at retirement is found to be unanticipated shocks
whose probabilities and effects have been underestimated, preferred policies would
include information and education to help people better anticipate and understand the
effects of changes in the environment. Given the difficulty of accurately forecasting
external changes, another option would be social insurance against unemployment and
work disability. However, if the root cause is found to be procrastination, more
appropriate policy responses would include mandatory saving programs or paternalistic
nudging such as automatic enrollment in retirement plans.

28

V. Summary and Conclusions
Our survey found fairly high levels of saving regret, and the variation across
individuals is consistent with valid reporting. Thus, although we cannot rule out the
occurrence of “cheap talk” in the surveys, we believe that the data have face validity and
provide useful and novel insights.
A first conclusion is that we found only modest evidence for a relationship between
our measures of procrastination and the desire to re-optimize saving. Our psychometric
variables are jointly significant and they contribute to the explained variation in saving
regret, but their explanatory power is relatively low, the patterns of the variation are
inconsistent, and they do not match well an ex-ante description of procrastination.
A second conclusion is that shocks explain much more of the variation, and their
associations with saving regret have a consistent pattern from an ex-ante point of view.
The failure to anticipate negative shocks, i.e., underestimating their probability and
effects, may point to the larger relative importance of the lack of information compared
to procrastination.
A third conclusion is that, by a number of self-assessed measures, a substantial
percentage of respondents view their economic preparation to be adequate, yet they
nonetheless express saving regret. A psychological explanation for this result would
focus on ignorance and/or denial. An alternative, economic-focused explanation in the
context of difficult-to-know and changing uncertainties is that the risk environment
changed since an individual’s choices were initially made. Many may now think that
Social Security is genuinely risky whereas it may have been viewed as safe 10 to 20 years
ago; Medicare is facing funding problems; the provision of long-term care has become
more expensive and perhaps more risky due to an increased probability of extreme
longevity; in a world of defined contribution pensions, individuals must manage risky
investments and choose a rate of drawdown of wealth in the face of changing longevity;
and people have had fewer children who can act as intra-family insurance. Some
additional evidence about the importance of risk is that saving regret is high at the time of
or shortly before retirement but is much lower at older ages. We explain this shift by the
resolution of uncertainty and changes in consumption patterns as respondents age.

29

Independent of any actual increase in risk is the individual’s perception of risk.
Perhaps regret or the wish to re-do past decisions is part of the human condition. In a
stochastic environment, people must make an ex ante choice. If ex post the choice was
mistaken, fully rational people will still not regret the choice, thinking they made the best
choice, given the environment and uncertainty. But it is unlikely people are this rational.
Most people will use the information about the actual outcome when thinking about redoing that past choice. Thus, many people will have regret even though they chose well
ex ante; and even those with substantial economic resources can experience such regret.

30

References
Aiyagari, S Rao. "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, no. 3 (1994): 659-84.
Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman,
and Stephen Weinberg. "The Hyperbolic Consumption Model:
Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15, no. 3 (2001): 47-68.
Anusic, Ivana, and Ulrich Schimmack. "Stability and Change of Personality
Traits, Self-Esteem, and Well-Being: Introducing the Meta-Analytic
Stability and Change Model of Retest Correlations." Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 110, no. 5 (2016): 766.
Baird, Matthew D, and Michael Pollard. (2017). The RAND American Life
Panel: Technical Description,
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1651.html
Barberis, Nicholas, and Richard Thaler. "A Survey of Behavioral Finance."
Handbook of the Economics of Finance 1 (2003): 1053-128.
Bell, Claes. (2016). “Survey Finds Most Americans Have Financial Regrets”.
May 17. https://www.bankrate.com/finance/consumer-index/financialsecurity-charts-0516.aspx.
Bleidorn, Wiebke, Christopher J Hopwood, and Richard E Lucas. "Life Events
and Personality Trait Change." Journal of Personality 86, no. 1 (2018):
83-96.
Börsch-Supan, Axel, Anette Reil-Held, Ralf Rodepeter, Reinhold Schnabel, and
Joachim Winter. "The German Savings Puzzle." Research in Economics
55, no. 1 (2001): 15-38.
Börsch-Supan, Axel, and Konrad Stahl. "Life cycle savings and consumption
constraints." Journal of Population Economics 4, no. 3 (1991): 233-255.
Brugiavini, Agar, and Mario Padula. "Too Much for Retirement? Saving in Italy."
Research in Economics 55, no. 1 (2001): 39-60.
Bucher-Koenen, Tabea, and Annamaria Lusardi. "Financial Literacy and
Retirement Planning in Germany." Journal of Pension Economics &
Finance 10, no. 4 (2011): 565-84.
Chan, Sewin, and Ann Huff Stevens. "What You Don't Know Can't Help You:
Pension Knowledge and Retirement Decision-Making." The Review of
Economics and Statistics 90, no. 2 (2008): 253-66.
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Søren Leth-Petersen, Torben Heien Nielsen, and
Tore Olsen. "Active Vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-out in Retirement
Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 129, no. 3 (2014): 1141-219.

31

Choi, James J, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Andrew Metrick.
"Defined Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Choices, and the
Path of Least Resistance." Tax Policy and the Economy 16 (2002): 67-113.
Cobb-Clark, Deborah A, and Stefanie Schurer. "The Stability of Big-Five
Personality Traits." Economics Letters 115, no. 1 (2012): 11-15.
Copen, Casey E, Kimberly Daniels, Jonathan Vespa, and William D Mosher.
"First Marriages in the United States: Data from the 2006-2010 National
Survey of Family Growth. National Health Statistics Reports. Number
49." National Center for Health Statistics (2012).
Croy, Gerry, Paul Gerrans, and Craig P Speelman. "A Mediating Role for
Anticipated Regret in Predicting Retirement Savings Intention between
Groups with (without) Past Behaviour." Australian Journal of Psychology
67, no. 2 (2015): 87-96.
Currie, Janet, Lucas Davis, Michael Greenstone, and Reed Walker.
"Environmental Health Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600
Toxic Plant Openings and Closings." American Economic Review 105, no.
2 (2015): 678-709.
Deary, Ian J, Lawrence J Whalley, Helen Lemmon, JR Crawford, and John M
Starr. "The Stability of Individual Differences in Mental Ability from
Childhood to Old Age: Follow-up of the 1932 Scottish Mental Survey."
Intelligence 28, no. 1 (2000): 49-55.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier. "Paying Not to Go to the Gym."
American Economic Review 96, no. 3 (2006): 694-719.
Dunning, David, Chip Heath, and Jerry M Suls. "Flawed Self-Assessment:
Implications for Health, Education, and the Workplace." Psychological
Science in the Public Interest 5, no. 3 (2004): 69-106.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. "Myopia and Discounting." National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23254 (2017).
Hampson, Sarah. (2017). “Personality and Health,” Oxford Research
Encyclopedia of Psychology. December. DOI:
10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.013.121
Hurd, Michael D, and Susann Rohwedder. “Measuring Total Household Spending
in a Monthly Internet Survey: Evidence from the American Life Panel.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 17974 (2012).
Jefferson, Anneli, Lisa Bortolotti, and Bojana Kuzmanovic. "What Is Unrealistic
Optimism?". Consciousness and Cognition 50 (2017): 3-11.
John, Oliver P, and Sanjay Srivastava. "The Big Five Trait Taxonomy: History,
Measurement, and Theoretical Perspectives." Handbook of Personality:
Theory and Research 2 (1999): 102-38.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
Decision under Risk." Econometrica 47, no. 2 (1979): 263-292.

32

Kimball, Miles S. "Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large."
Econometrica Vol. 58, no. 1 (1990): 53-73.
Kitamura, Yukinobu, Noriyuki Takayama, and Fumiko Arita. "Household
Savings and Wealth Distribution in Japan." In Life-Cycle Savings and
Public Policy, 149-203: Elsevier, 2003.
Laibson, David. "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting." The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112, no. 2 (1997): 443-78.
Laibson, David. "Life-Cycle Consumption and Hyperbolic Discount Functions."
European Economic Review 42, no. 3-5 (1998): 861-71.
Laibson, David I, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, Robert E Hall, William G
Gale, and George A Akerlof. "Self-Control and Saving for Retirement."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998, no. 1 (1998): 91-196.
Lamla, Bettina, and Martin Gasche. "Erwarteter Bezug Von Grundsicherung Im
Alter: Verhaltensunterschiede Und Fehleinschätzungen." Schmollers
Jahrbuch 133, no. 4 (2013): 539-62.
Leland, Hayne E. "Saving and Uncertainty: The Precautionary Demand for
Saving." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 82, no. 3 (1968): 465-73.
Lewis, Carol. "Why Barack Obama and David Cameron Are Keen To 'nudge'
you." Times Online, July 14 2008.
Löckenhoff, Corinna E, Antonio Terracciano, Nicholas S Patriciu, William W
Eaton, and Paul T Costa Jr. "Self-Reported Extremely Adverse Life
Events and Longitudinal Changes in Five-Factor Model Personality Traits
in an Urban Sample." Journal of Traumatic Stress: Official Publication of
The International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies 22, no. 1 (2009):
53-59.
Loomes, Graham, and Robert Sugden. "Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of
Rational Choice under Uncertainty." The Economic Journal 92, no. 368
(1982): 805-24.
Lucas, Richard E, and M Brent Donnellan. "Personality Development across the
Life Span: Longitudinal Analyses with a National Sample from
Germany." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 101, no. 4
(2011): 847.
Lusardi, Annamaria. "On the Importance of the Precautionary Saving Motive."
The American Economic Review 88, no. 2 (1998): 449-53.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S Mitchell. "The Economic Importance of
Financial Literacy: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Economic Literature
52, no. 1 (2014): 5-44.
Madrian, Brigitte C, and Dennis F Shea. "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401
(K) Participation and Savings Behavior." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116, no. 4 (2001): 1149-87.

33

Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Brumberg. "Utility Analysis and the
Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data." Franco
Modigliani 1 (1954): 388-436.
Morrison, Mike, and Neal J Roese. "Regrets of the Typical American: Findings
from a Nationally Representative Sample." Social Psychological and
Personality Science 2, no. 6 (2011): 576-83.
O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. "Doing It Now or Later." American
Economic Review 89, no. 1 (1999): 103-24.
OECD. 2018. “Risks That Matter.” Paris: OECD.
Phelps, Edmund S, and Robert A Pollak. "On Second-Best National Saving and
Game-Equilibrium Growth." The Review of Economic Studies 35, no. 2
(1968): 185-99.
Pollak, Robert A. "Consistent Planning." The Review of Economic Studies 35, no.
2 (1968): 201-08.
Poterba, James M, Steven F Venti, and David A Wise. "Were They Prepared for
Retirement? Financial Status at Advanced Ages in the HRS and Ahead
Cohorts." In Investigations in the Economics of Aging, 21-69: University
of Chicago Press, 2011.
Rabin, Matthew. "An Approach to Incorporating Psychology into Economics."
American Economic Review 103, no. 3 (2013a): 617-22.
Rabin, Matthew. "Incorporating Limited Rationality into Economics." Journal of
Economic Literature 51, no. 2 (2013b): 528-43.
Roberts, Brent W, and Wendy F DelVecchio. "The Rank-Order Consistency of
Personality Traits from Childhood to Old Age: A Quantitative Review of
Longitudinal Studies." Psychological Bulletin 126, no. 1 (2000): 3.
Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun. "Are Americans
Saving “Optimally” for Retirement?". Journal of Political Economy 114,
no. 4 (2006): 607-43.
Shepperd, James A, Gabrielle Pogge, and Jennifer L Howell. "Assessing the
Consequences of Unrealistic Optimism: Challenges and
Recommendations." Consciousness and Cognition 50 (2017): 69-78.
Skinner, Jonathan S. "Risky Income, Life Cycle Consumption, and Precautionary
Savings." Journal of Monetary Economics 22, no. 2 (1988): 237-55.
Smith, V Kerry, Donald H Taylor, and Frank A Sloan. "Longevity Expectations
and Death: Can People Predict Their Own Demise?". American Economic
Review 91, no. 4 (2001): 1126-34.
Specht, Jule, Boris Egloff, and Stefan C Schmukle. "Stability and Change of
Personality across the Life Course: The Impact of Age and Major Life
Events on Mean-Level and Rank-Order Stability of the Big Five." Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 101, no. 4 (2011): 862.

34

Stanford Center on Longevity. 2016. “The Sightlines Project: Seeing Our Way to
Living Long, Living Well in 21st Century America.”
(http://sightlinesproject.stanford.edu).
Strotz, Robert Henry. "Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility
Maximization." The Review of Economic Studies 23, no. 3 (1955): 165-80.
Thaler, Richard H. "Psychology and Savings Policies." The American Economic
Review 84, no. 2 (1994): 186-92.
Thaler, Richard H, and Hersh M Shefrin. "An Economic Theory of Self-Control."
Journal of Political Economy 89, no. 2 (1981): 392-406.
Thaler, Richard H, and Cass R Sunstein. "Libertarian Paternalism." American
Economic Review 93, no. 2 (2003): 175-79.
Thaler, Richard H, and Cass R Sunstein. 2009. Nudge: Improving Decisions
About Health, Wealth, and Happiness: Penguin.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. “National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979
(NLSY79).” https://www.bls.gov/nls/nlsy79r25unempbyedu.xlsx,
retrieved July 31, 2018.
Valenti, Greta, Lisa K Libby, and Richard P Eibach. "Looking Back with Regret:
Visual Perspective in Memory Images Differentially Affects Regret for
Actions and Inactions." Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47,
no. 4 (2011): 730-37.
Weinstein, Neil D. "Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events." Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 39, no. 5 (1980): 806.
Yaari, Menahem E. "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the
Consumer." The Review of Economic Studies 32, no. 2 (1965): 137-50.

35

Tables
Table 1: Prevalence (in Percent) of Saving Regret by Framing (N= 1,590), Before and After Revision
Unframed
Framed
Total
Before
After
Before
After
Before
After
Wish to have
Revision
Revision
Revision
Revision
Revision
Revision
…saved more
66.6
62.4
60.9
55.4
63.6
58.5
…about the same
32.4
36.6
36.8
42.3
34.7
39.8
…saved less
1.1
1.1
2.3
2.3
1.7
1.7
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
N
776
814
1590
Note: Only respondents expressing saving regret were invited to revise. Those who no longer expressed
regret were assigned in this table to the category ”wish to have saved about the same” rather than to
“saved more.” Data are weighted.

36

Table 2. Saving Regret by Sociodemographic Characteristics
Saving Regret (After Revision)
Mean
Std.
T-test

N
In percent
Female
0
741
46.6
0.567
0.496
ref
1
849
53.4
0.601
0.490
*
Age
60-64
528
33.2
0.649
0.478
ref
65-69
478
30.1
0.634
0.482
ns
70-74
310
19.5
0.549
0.498
***
75-84
274
17.2
0.417
0.494
***
Marital status
married
997
62.7
0.571
0.495
ref
separated or divorced
278
17.5
0.673
0.470
***
widowed
221
13.9
0.518
0.501
ns
never married
93
5.9
0.622
0.487
ns
Education level
1.HS or less
739
46.5
0.607
0.489
ref
2.some coll or degr
391
24.6
0.652
0.477
ns
3.BA,BS
223
14.0
0.534
0.500
*
4.MA etc. to PhD
238
15.0
0.453
0.498
***
Wealth quartiles
1
211
13.3
0.719
0.451
ref
2
207
13.1
0.659
0.476
ns
3
210
13.2
0.554
0.498
***
4
205
12.9
0.389
0.489
***
missing
756
47.6
0.589
0.492
***
Income quartiles
1
393
24.7
0.674
0.469
ref
2
404
25.4
0.627
0.484
ns
3
379
23.8
0.568
0.496
***
4
389
24.5
0.464
0.499
***
missing
26
1.6
0.634
0.494
ns
Poor self-reported health
0
1202
75.6
0.543
0.498
ref
1
388
24.4
0.715
0.452
***
Memory problems
0
1394
87.7
0.574
0.495
ref
1
196
12.3
0.666
0.473
**
Note: We are reporting the mean and standard deviation of saving regret pooled. The t-test refers to a ttest of the indicated category vs. the reference category (ref). Ns= not significant, *,**, *** refer to
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, 1 percent significance level, respectively. Data are weighted.

37

Table 3: Saving Regret by Personality Traits
N
Panel A: Self-View
Self-confident
(Strongly) disagree
123
Neither
284
(Strongly) agree
1182
Works best under pressure
(Strongly) disagree
455
Neither
639
(Strongly) agree
496
Panel B: Financial View
Do what you like today
(Strongly) disagree
88
Neither
251
(Strongly) agree
1251
Life about having fun.
(Strongly) disagree
850
Neither
420
(Strongly) agree
320
Avoid unhealthy food or behaviors
(Strongly) disagree
440
Neither
546
(Strongly) agree
604
Panel C: Motivation
Put off things you should do
1 Never
76
2 Sometimes
1232
3 Most of the time
258
4 Always
24
Give up before starting
1 Never
750
2 Sometimes
760
3 Most of the time
72
4 Always
8
Try several tasks, don't complete many
1 Never
564
2 Sometimes
855
3 Most of the time
132
4 Always
39
Settle for mediocre results
1 Never
715
2 Sometimes
802
3 Most of the time
69
4 Always
3
Put off things not good at
1 Never
230

In percent

Saving Regret (After Revision)
Mean
Std.
T-test

7.8
17.9
74.4

0.581
0.607
0.58

0.496
0.489
0.494

ref
ns
ns

28.6
40.2
31.2

0.617
0.556
0.593

0.487
0.497
0.492

ref
**
ns

5.5
15.8
78.7

0.526
0.551
0.596

0.502
0.498
0.491

ref
ns
ns

53.5
26.4
20.1

0.608
0.523
0.605

0.488
0.5
0.49

ref
***
ns

27.7
34.3
38.0

0.569
0.628
0.558

0.496
0.484
0.497

ref
**
ns

4.8
77.5
16.2
1.5

0.459
0.589
0.599
0.639

0.502
0.492
0.491
0.49

ref
**
**
ns

47.2
47.8
4.6
0.5

0.547
0.611
0.711
0.524

0.498
0.488
0.458
0.53

ref
***
***
ns

35.5
53.8
8.3
2.4

0.537
0.625
0.569
0.459

0.499
0.484
0.497
0.51

ref
***
ns
ns

45.0
50.4
4.4
0.2

0.588
0.591
0.471
0.858

0.493
0.492
0.503
0.403

ref
ns
*
ns

14.5

0.585

0.494

ref
38

N
In percent
Saving Regret (After Revision)
2 Sometimes
1044
65.6
0.574
0.495
ns
3 Most of the time
293
18.4
0.607
0.489
ns
4 Always
23
1.5
0.798
0.411
**
Put off difficult things
1 Never
697
43.8
0.567
0.496
ref
2 Sometimes
776
48.8
0.592
0.492
ns
3 Most of the time
106
6.7
0.62
0.488
ns
4 Always
11
0.7
0.882
0.354
**
Lose motivation during tasks
1 Never
534
33.6
0.601
0.49
ref
2 Sometimes
993
62.4
0.58
0.494
ns
3 Most of the time
55
3.5
0.526
0.504
ns
4 Always
8
0.5
0.579
0.524
ns
Note: We are reporting the mean and standard deviation of saving regret pooled. The t-test refers to a ttest of the indicated category vs. the reference category (ref). Ns= not significant, *,**, *** refer to
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, 1 percent significance level, respectively. Data are weighted.

39

Table 4: Saving Regret, Financial Planning, Financial Literacy, and Numeracy

N

In percent

Saving Regret (After Revision)
Mean
Std.
T-test

Financial Planning Horizon
1.Next few months
234
14.7
0.648
0.479
ref
2.Next year
155
9.7
0.640
0.482
ns
3.Next few years
299
18.8
0.593
0.492
ns
4.Next 5-10 years
260
16.3
0.565
0.497
*
5.Longer than 10 years
189
11.9
0.508
0.501
***
6.I don't plan
70
4.4
0.680
0.472
ns
Missing
384
24.1
0.552
0.498
**
Financial Literacy
1 Very high & high
137
8.6
0.446
0.498
ref
2 Moderate
511
32.2
0.641
0.48
***
3 Low
201
12.6
0.682
0.467
***
4 Very low
73
4.6
0.810
0.396
***
Missing
668
42.0
0.517
0.500
ns
Numeracy
0 correct answers
43
2.7
0.450
0.508
**
1 correct answer
103
6.5
0.529
0.502
**
2 correct answers
272
17.1
0.659
0.475
ref
3 correct answers
491
30.9
0.581
0.494
**
4 correct answers
147
9.3
0.461
0.500
***
Missing
534
33.6
0.607
0.489
ns
Note: We are reporting the mean and standard deviation of saving regret pooled. The t-test refers to a ttest of the indicated category vs. the reference category (ref). Ns= not significant, *,**, *** refer to
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, 1 percent significance level, respectively. Financial planning,
financial literacy and numeracy were merged from other ALP surveys. That is why we have missing
values for individuals who did not participate in both survey waves. Data are weighted.

40

Table 5: Saving Regret and Negative/Positive Shocks

N

In
percent

Saving Regret (After Revision)
mean
Std.
T-test

Negative Shocks
Health limited work
357
20.7
0.794
0.405
***
Large health expense
238
13.8
0.681
0.467
***
Unemployment
237
13.7
0.773
0.420
***
Salary/earnings less than expected
192
11.1
0.759
0.429
***
Bad investments
145
8.4
0.699
0.460
**
Divorce or separation
197
11.4
0.744
0.438
***
Death in family
190
11.0
0.606
0.490
ns
Large (non-health) expense
231
13.5
0.691
0.463
***
Other
40
2.3
0.698
0.464
ns
Any negative shock
957
55.5
0.684
0.465
***
Positive Shocks
Respondent salary/earnings more
than expected
244
14.2
0.528
0.500
*
Spouse salary/earnings more than
expected
132
7.7
0.478
0.501
**
Worked more than expected
173
10.0
0.591
0.493
ns
Good investments
343
19.9
0.364
0.482
***
Received an inheritance
256
14.9
0.460
0.499
***
Other
48
2.8
0.486
0.504
ns
Any positive shock
742
43.1
0.492
0.500
***
Note: We are reporting the mean and standard deviation of savings regret pooled. The t-test refers to a
t-test of those reporting the respective shock vs. those not reporting such a shock. Ns= not significant,
*,**, *** refer to significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, 1 percent significance level, respectively.
Data are weighted.
Table 6: Saving Regret and the Experience of at Least One Negative/Positive Shock
Panel A: Distribution of Population According to Whether Positive or
Negative Shock Was Experienced (Weighted)
Negative
Positive
No
Yes
Total
No
22.74
33.19
55.92
Yes
21.14
22.94
44.08
Total
43.87
56.13
100.00
Panel B: Mean Saving Regret According to Positive or Negative
Shock (Weighted)
Negative
Positive
No
Yes
Total
No
0.548
0.734
0.658
Yes
0.362
0.612
0.492
Total
0.458
0.684
0.585
Note: Data are weighted.
41

Table 7: Extracts from Regressions. Effect on Probability of Expressing Saving Regret
Self View/Financial View (Scaled 1-5 from
“Strongly Disagree” to “Strongly Agree”)
Self-confident
Works best under pressure
Do what you like today
Life about having fun
Avoid unhealthy food or behaviors
Motivation (Scaled 1-4 from “Never” to “Always”)
Put off things you should do
Give up before starting
Try several tasks, don't complete many
Settle for mediocre results
Put off things not good at
Put off difficult things
Lose motivation during tasks
Negative Shock
Positive Shock
Wealth included
Observations
R2

Model 1

Model 2

-0.008
0.037***
0.026*
-0.020
0.011

-0.002
0.036***
0.023
-0.020
0.011

0.046*
-0.007
0.053**
-0.025
-0.011
0.026
-0.036
0.145***
-0.131***
No
1589
0.117

0.040
-0.004
0.053**
-0.021
-0.012
0.030
-0.038
0.132***
-0.114***
Yes
1589
0.129

F-tests
F(12,1558) = 2.06
F (12, 1554) = 1.90
Prob>F = 0.0171
Prob>F = 0.0299
F(30,1558) = 6.87
F(34, 1554)=6.76
Joint significance full model
prob>F = 0.000
prob>F = 0.000
Note: Regressions also include demographics (age, sex, marital status, education,
race/ethnicity, health, memory, and income). *,**,*** significant at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1
percent, respectively. The full regression results are reported in Appendix C Table A2.
Joint significance psychometric scales

42

Table 8. Saving Regret and Current and Future Financial Situation
Saving Regret (After Revision)
TN In percent
Mean
Sd
test
Panel A. Saving regret according to whether household income is sufficient
Yes, always
698
43.9
0.445
0.497
ref.
Most of the time
669
42.18
0.671
0.470
***
Rarely
223
14.0
0.765
0.425
***
Total
1590
100.0
0.585
0.493
Panel B. Financial resources to meet future needs
More than enough to meet your future needs
328
20.7
0.310
0.463
ref.
Just enough to meet your future needs
522
32.8
0.589
0.492
***
Not enough to meet your future needs
238
15.0
0.792
0.407
***
Not nearly enough to meet your future needs
132
8.3
0.826
0.381
***
Uncertain
273
17.2
0.617
0.487
***
Don‘t know
96
6.0
0.563
0.500
***
Total
1590
100.0
0.585
0.493
Panel C. Probability of running out of money
0-10
472
29.9
0.438
0.497
ref.
11-20
219
13.9
0.565
0.497
***
21_30
209
13.2
0.626
0.485
***
31-40
99
6.37
0.656
0.478
***
41-49
21
1.4
0.734
0.455
***
50
262
16.6
0.641
0.481
***
51-60
73
4.6
0.856
0.353
***
61-70
74
4.7
0.706
0.459
***
71-80
62
3.9
0.722
0.452
***
81-90
53
3.4
0.600
0.495
**
91-100
37
2.3
0.732
0.448
***
Total
1581
100.0
0.587
0.493
Panel D. Economic satisfaction
Very satisfied
171
10.8
0.244
0.431
***
Satisfied
723
45.5
0.522
0.500
***
Neither satisfied , nor dissatisfied
334
21.0
0.666
0.473
***
Very dissatisfied/dissatisfied
362
22.7
0.798
0.402
ref.
Total
1590
100.0
0.585
0.493
Panel E. Social Security receipt compared with expectations (respondents age 65 or older)
A lot more than you expected
25
2.7
0.464
0.510
ref.
A bit more than you expected
69
7.5
0.552
0.501
ns
About the amount you expected
526
57.56
0.513
0.500
ns
A bit less than you expected
191
20.95
0.658
0.476
*
A lot less than you expected
105
11.5
0.692
0.464
**
Total
916
100.0
0.566
0.496
Note: The data in Panel E. Social Security receipt compared with expectations are only reported for
respondents age 65 and older. Data are weighted.
43

Table 9: Comparing Saving Regret with Other Regrets and Intensity of Regret
Population
Expressing Regret
Intensity of Regret
In
Very
Somewhat Not at All
N
percent Strongly Strongly
Strongly
Strongly
Total
749
62.5
38.3
29.0
24.3
8.4
100.0
473
39.7
39.6
27.1
30.9
2.4
100.0

Spend less and save more
Get different education
Spend more time with family
and friends
416
34.9
43.4
30.1
22.5
4.2
100.0
Choose different occupation
332
27.8
29.9
29.3
38.3
2.6
100.0
Marry differently /or not at all
306
25.6
39.9
22.1
31.6
6.5
100.0
Have kids
120
10.1
17.3
36.0
36.1
10.6
100.0
Have no/fewer kids
62
5.2
17.1
23.4
27.1
32.5
100.0
Other regret
66
5.6
47.7
35.0
16.3
1.0
100.0
Note: This refers to the subsample of N=1,193 respondents who also participated in the second survey.
Intensity of regret refers to the subsample of individuals expressing regret. Data are weighted.

44

Figures

Figure 1: Theoretical Framework

45

Figure 2. Subjective Probability of Running Out of Money According to Whether Financial Resources
Are Adequate to Meet Future Spending Needs (N=1,221)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

more than enough

just enough

not enough

not nearly enough

Note: Bands refer to 95 percent confidence intervals. Data are weighted.
Figure 3. Percent with Financial Resources Not Enough or Not Nearly Enough by Age (N=1,590)
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79

-0.1

Note: Bands refer to 95 percent confidence intervals. Data are weighted.

46

Figure 4. Variance Decomposition: R-Squared, F-Statistic and P-Values

F(16,1572) = 7.07, p-value = 0.000

F(4,1585) = 18.65, p-value = 0.000

F(12,1577) = 2.17, p-value = 0.011

F(2,1587) = 60.95, p-value = 0.000

F(34,1554) = 6.76,
p-value = 0.000

Note: The full model refers to the model specified in Table 7 “Model 2”. The other models are defined
by including only the respective variable groups as explanatory variables.

47

Appendix: For Online Publication
A. Variables and Survey Questions
Variable

Survey Question /Coding

Saving regret
Wish saved more (before
revision)

Indicator if respondent wished to have saved more (version a) / spend less and
saved more (version b) over the years

Wish saved more (after
revision)

Wish saved more set to 1 if respondents answered “No way I could have cut
spending. I could not have saved more.”

Sociodemographic characteristics
Age

respondent age in years

Female
Married or marriage-like
relationship

respondent gender

High school or less

indicator for respondents education

(some) College education

indicator for respondents education

Bachelor's degree

indicator for respondents education

Master's degree of higher

indicator for respondents education

Households assets

Total household assets in $US

Household income

Total household income in $US

Black

indicator for respondent race/ethnicity

Hispanic

indicator for respondent race/ethnicity

Poor self rated health

Indicator if respondents rates own health as poor

Poor self rated memory

Indicator if respondent rates own memory as poor

respondent household status

Positive and negative shocks

Negative shocks

Sometimes people have negative surprises earlier in life that cause their finances
turn out worse than expected. Did any of the following happen to you? Please
check all that apply:

Health limited work

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Large health expense

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Unemployment

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Salary/earnings less than
expected

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Bad investments

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Divorce or separation

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Death in family

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Large (non-health) expense

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Other

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Positive shocks

Sometimes people have positive surprises earlier in life that cause their finances
turn out worse than expected. Did any of the following happen to you? Please
check all that apply:

Respondent salary/earnings
more than expected

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

48

Variable

Survey Question /Coding

Spouse salary/earnings more
than expected

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Worked more than expected

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Good investments

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Received an inheritance

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Other

indicator if respondents experienced this shock

Any negative shock

indicator if respondent experienced any negative shock

Any positive shock

indicator if respondent experienced any positive shock

Psychometric variables
Psychometric scales

Evaluated on a five-point Likert scale: Strongly
disagree/disagree/neither/agree/strongly agree

Self-view: self-confident

I am a self-confident person.

Self-view: works best under
pressure

I am a person who works best under pressure.

Financial-view: do what you
like today.

Do you agree or disagree with the following statements? "People should do what
they like today rather than putting it off until tomorrow"

Financial-view: life about
having fun

Do you agree or disagree with the following statements? "Life is about having
fun and spending all affordable money on that"

Financial-view: avoid unhealthy Do you agree or disagree with the following statements? "For the sake of my
food or behaviors.
health, I stay away from unhealthy foods or behaviors that I might enjoy"
Motivation: put off things you
should do

How often do you put things off you should do but aren’t really interested in?
Never/Sometimes/Most of the time/Always

Motivation: give up before
starting

How often do you give up before you start a task because you don’t know where
to start? Never/Sometimes/Most of the time/Always

Motivation: try several tasks,
don't complete many

How often do you try to do several things at once, not completing many?
Never/Sometimes/Most of the time/Always

Motivation: settle for mediocre How often do you settle for mediocre results when you could do better?
results
Never/Sometimes/Most of the time/Always
Motivation: put off things not
good at

How often do you put things off you are not good at? Never/Sometimes/Most of
the time/Always

Motivation: put off difficult
things

How often do you give up a task when it gets difficult? Never/Sometimes/Most
of the time/Always

Motivation: lose motivation
during tasks.
Probability Numeracy

How often do you lose motivation in the middle of a task?
Never/Sometimes/Most of the time/Always
Score ranging from 0 to 4 depending on the number of correctly answered
numeracy questions:
First, suppose this bowl has 10 white balls and no red balls. You will be asked to
draw one ball without looking. On a scale from 0 percent to 100 percent, what is
the percent chance that the ball you draw is red?

49

Variable

Survey Question /Coding
Now suppose that the bowl has 7 white balls and 3 red balls. You will be asked
to draw one ball without looking. What is the percent chance that the ball you
draw is white?
Imagine that the weather report tells you that the chance it will rain tomorrow is
70 percent. Assuming the weather report accurately reports the chance of rain,
what is the chance it will NOT rain tomorrow?
Imagine that whether it rains in your town and whether it rains in Paris are
unrelated. The chance that it will rain in your town tomorrow is 50 percent. The
chance that it will rain in Paris is also 50 percent. What is the chance that it will
rain both in your town and in Paris tomorrow?

Financial literacy
Interest rate

Score ranging from 0 to 3 depending on the number of correct answers to the
financial literacy questions:
Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2 percent
per year. After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account if
you left the money to grow: [more than $102, exactly $102, less than $102?
Don’t know.]

Inflation

Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1 percent per year
and inflation was 2 percent per year. After 1 year, would you be able to buy:
[more than, exactly the same as, or less than today with the money in this
account? Don’t know.]

Investment risk

Do you think that the following statement is true or false? “Buying a single
company stock usually provides a safer return than a Unit Trust. [True, False,
Don’t know.]

HH resources for future
financial needs

Financial planning horizon: next few months/ next year/ next few years/ next 510 years/ longer than 10 years/ I don't plan
Is [fill for total income] sufficient to meet your spending needs each month? Yes,
always/ Most of the time / Rarely/ Never
And now a view into the future: Taking into consideration all of your household's
wealth and future income and comparing them to your needs in the future, do
you think that your household's total financial resources are…? More than
enough to meet your future needs/ Just enough to meet your future needs/ Not
enough to meet you future needs/ Not nearly enough to meet your future
needs/ Uncertain/ Don't know

Probability of running out of
money

What are the chances that you will run out of money sometime in the future?
Please click a point on the scale. [Rabge 0 … 100]

Economic condition
satisfaction

How satisfied are you with your overall economic situation? Very
satisfied/satisfied/neither/dissatisfied/very dissatisfied

Financial planning horizon
HH total income sufficient

When you received Social Security income for the first time, did you receive…? A
Respondent actual vs expected lot more than expected/ a bit more than expected/ about the amount you
income from social security
expected/ a bit less than expected/ a lot less than expected

50

B Summary Statistics
Table A1. Summary Statistics
Wish saved more (before revision)
Wish saved more (after revision)
Age
Female
Married or marriage-like relationship
High school or less
(some) College education
Bachelor's degree
Master's degree of higher
Households assets
Household income
Black
Hispanic
Poor self-rated health
Poor self-rated memory
Negative shocks: health limited work
Negative shocks: large health expense
Negative shocks: unemployment
Negative shocks: salary/earnings less than
expected
Negative shocks: bad investments
Negative shocks: divorce or separation
Negative shocks: death in family
Negative shocks: large (non-health) expense
Negative shocks: other
Positive shocks: respondent salary/earnings
more than expected
Positive shocks: spouse salary/earnings more
than expected
Positive shocks: worked more than expected
Positive shocks: good investments
Positive shocks: received an inheritance
Positive shocks: other
Any negative shock
Any positive shock
Psychometric scales
Self-view: self-confident
Self-view: works best under pressure
Financial-view: do what you like today
Financial-view: life about having fun
Financial-view: avoid unhealthy food or
behaviors

N
1590
1590
1590
1590
1589
1590
1590
1590
1590
815
1570
1590
1590
1590
1590
1590
1590
1590

Mean
0.636
0.585
68.0
0.534
0.619
0.465
0.246
0.140
0.150
542858
55375
0.096
0.101
0.244
0.123
0.217
0.138
0.149

SD
0.481
0.493
5.6
0.499
0.486
0.499
0.431
0.347
0.357
1085240
75282
0.294
0.301
0.429
0.329
0.413
0.345
0.357

Min
0
0
60
0
0
0
0
0
0
-250000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Max
1
1
79
1
1
1
1
1
1
1.33E+07
2000000
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1590
1590
1590
1590
1590
1590

0.120
0.085
0.118
0.095
0.134
0.023

0.325
0.278
0.323
0.294
0.341
0.149

0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1

1589

0.149

0.356

0

1

1589
1589
1589
1589
1590
1590
1590

0.079
0.101
0.199
0.147
0.029
0.561
0.441

0.270
0.302
0.399
0.354
0.169
0.496
0.497

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1590
1590
1590
1590

3.854
3.024
3.954
2.557

0.838
0.977
0.828
1.053

1
1
1
1

5
5
5
5

1590

3.138

0.981

1

5
51

Motivation: put off things you should do
Motivation: give up before starting
Motivation: try several tasks, don't complete
many
Motivation: settle for mediocre results
Motivation: put off things not good at
Motivation: put off difficult things
Motivation: lose motivation during tasks
Numeracy
Financial literacy
Financial planning horizon
HH total income sufficient
HH resources for future financial needs
Probability of running out of money
Economic condition satisfaction
Respondent actual vs expected income from
social security

1590
1590

2.144
1.583

0.500
0.603

1
1

4
4

1590
1590
1590
1590
1590
1173
986
1202
1590
1590
1581
1590

1.777
1.598
2.069
1.642
1.709
2.565
3.207
3.187
1.701
3.047
27.904
3.443

0.697
0.583
0.619
0.636
0.554
0.982
0.838
1.495
0.700
2.024
26.431
0.958

1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
2

4
4
4
4
4
4
5
6
3
9
91
5

1115

3.314

0.887

1

5

52

C

Full results from Multivariate Regressions

We ran linear regressions where the dependent variable is saving regret (“wish I had saved more” with
framed and unframed versions combined and revisions included). The number of observations varies
slightly depending on the covariates included.
We added covariates stepwise. Model (1) and model (2) are the same models as reported in Table 7.
Model (1) includes demographic controls (age, gender, marital status, education, income, race/ethnicity,
health and memory problems), the psychometrics scales, and two indicators for any positive or negative
shock. We add wealth quartiles in model (2). In models (3) and (4) we add all positive and negative
shocks individually. Models (5), (6) and (7) include controls for numeracy, financial planning horizon and
financial literacy, respectively. Since these variables are matched from earlier waves we include
indicators if the variables are missing. In model (8) all psychometric indicators are added to the model as
dummy variables.
Table A2: Multivariate regressions on saving regret (OLS)

Age (ref: age 60 to 64)
Age 65 to 69
Age 70 to 74
Age 75 to 79
Female
Spouse
Education (ref: less than college)
Some college
Bachelor's degree
Master's degree of higher
Income (ref: 1 Q)
Income 2 Q
Income 3 Q
Income 4 Q
Income missing
Black
Hispanic
Fair or poor health
Memory problems

(1)
Without
Wealth

(2)
With
Wealth

(3)
With Ind.
Shocks
Without
Wealth

(4)
With Ind.
Shocks
With
Wealth

(5)
With
Numeracy

(6)
With
Financial
Planning

(7)
With
Financial
Literacy

(8)
With
Psycho
Ind.

-0.0173
(0.029)
-0.0598*
(0.033)
-0.162***
(0.041)
-0.0235
(0.025)
-0.0247
(0.026)

-0.0115
(0.029)
-0.0546
(0.033)
-0.154***
(0.041)
-0.0227
(0.025)
-0.0343
(0.026)

-0.0112
(0.029)
-0.0633*
(0.033)
-0.144***
(0.042)
-0.0211
(0.025)
-0.0152
(0.028)

-0.0066
(0.029)
-0.0593*
(0.033)
-0.141***
(0.042)
-0.0197
(0.025)
-0.0236
(0.028)

-0.0130
(0.029)
-0.0551*
(0.033)
-0.147***
(0.042)
-0.0280
(0.025)
-0.0300
(0.026)

-0.0093
(0.029)
-0.0521
(0.033)
-0.169***
(0.042)
-0.0168
(0.025)
-0.0324
(0.026)

-0.0134
(0.029)
-0.0588*
(0.034)
-0.170***
(0.047)
-0.0324
(0.025)
-0.0322
(0.026)

-0.0176
(0.029)
-0.0593*
(0.033)
-0.156***
(0.042)
-0.0205
(0.025)
-0.0390
(0.026)

0.0375
(0.037)
-0.0131
(0.041)
-0.0750*
(0.043)

0.0401
(0.036)
0.00300
(0.041)
-0.0605
(0.043)

0.0352
(0.037)
-0.0149
(0.042)
-0.0887**
(0.043)

0.0356
(0.037)
-0.00403
(0.042)
-0.0784*
(0.043)

0.0341
(0.037)
0.00889
(0.042)
-0.0469
(0.044)

0.0349
(0.036)
-0.00243
(0.041)
-0.0652
(0.043)

0.0421
(0.037)
0.00734
(0.041)
-0.0521
(0.043)

0.0435
(0.037)
0.00685
(0.042)
-0.0545
(0.043)

-0.0020
(0.039)
0.00885
(0.038)
-0.0565
(0.039)
-0.138
(0.110)
0.0547
(0.049)
0.0953*
(0.050)
0.0758**
(0.034)
-0.0494
(0.044)

-0.0045
(0.039)
0.0240
(0.038)
-0.0284
(0.040)
-0.147
(0.109)
0.0428
(0.049)
0.0847*
(0.050)
0.0671**
(0.034)
-0.0533
(0.043)

-0.0040
(0.039)
0.0146
(0.038)
-0.0376
(0.039)
-0.159
(0.109)
0.0561
(0.049)
0.0785
(0.050)
0.0637*
(0.036)
-0.0599
(0.044)

-0.0064
(0.039)
0.0285
(0.038)
-0.0132
(0.040)
-0.165
(0.108)
0.0462
(0.049)
0.0719
(0.050)
0.0571
(0.036)
-0.0637
(0.043)

-0.0024
(0.039)
0.0201
(0.039)
-0.0300
(0.040)
-0.151
(0.109)
0.0485
(0.050)
0.0833*
(0.050)
0.0740**
(0.034)
-0.0533
(0.043)

-0.0050
(0.039)
0.0283
(0.038)
-0.0267
(0.040)
-0.163
(0.109)
0.0436
(0.049)
0.0887*
(0.050)
0.0702**
(0.034)
-0.0510
(0.043)

-0.0084
(0.039)
0.0216
(0.038)
-0.0274
(0.040)
-0.152
(0.109)
0.0424
(0.049)
0.0765
(0.050)
0.0636*
(0.034)
-0.0556
(0.044)

-0.0001
(0.039)
0.0310
(0.039)
-0.0179
(0.040)
-0.126
(0.109)
0.0482
(0.049)
0.0914*
(0.050)
0.0607*
(0.034)
-0.0398
(0.044)

53

(1)
Without
Wealth

(2)
With
Wealth

(3)
With Ind.
Shocks
Without
Wealth

(4)
With Ind.
Shocks
With
Wealth

(5)
With
Numeracy

(6)
With
Financial
Planning

(7)
With
Financial
Literacy

-0.0080
(0.016)
0.037***
(0.013)
0.0259*
(0.015)
-0.0199
(0.013)
0.0113
(0.013)

-0.0020
(0.016)
0.036***
(0.013)
0.0227
(0.015)
-0.0198
(0.013)
0.0106
(0.013)

-0.0060
(0.016)
0.039***
(0.013)
0.0270*
(0.015)
-0.0162
(0.013)
0.0122
(0.013)

-0.0014
(0.016)
0.037***
(0.013)
0.0242
(0.015)
-0.0162
(0.012)
0.0115
(0.013)

-0.0015
(0.016)
0.034***
(0.013)
0.0221
(0.015)
-0.0204
(0.013)
0.0112
(0.013)

-0.0023
(0.016)
0.036***
(0.013)
0.0227
(0.015)
-0.0214*
(0.013)
0.00989
(0.013)

0.0001
(0.016)
0.035***
(0.013)
0.0225
(0.015)
-0.0204
(0.013)
0.0111
(0.013)

0.0458*
(0.027)
Give up before starting
-0.00653
(0.025)
Try several tasks, don't complete many 0.0533**
(0.021)
Settle for mediocre results
-0.0245
(0.025)
Put off things not good at
-0.0114
(0.024)
Put off difficult things
0.0256
(0.026)
Lose motivation during tasks
-0.0363
(0.027)
Any negative shock
0.145***
(0.025)
Any positive shock
-0.131***
(0.026)
Wealth (ref: 1Q)
Wealth Q2

0.0395
(0.027)
-0.00412
(0.025)
0.0526**
(0.021)
-0.0209
(0.025)
-0.0117
(0.024)
0.0297
(0.026)
-0.0376
(0.027)
0.132***
(0.025)
-0.114***
(0.026)

0.0384
(0.027)
-0.00387
(0.025)
0.0473**
(0.021)
-0.0199
(0.025)
-0.00751
(0.024)
0.0196
(0.026)
-0.0235
(0.027)

0.0333
(0.027)
-0.00210
(0.025)
0.0470**
(0.021)
-0.0173
(0.025)
-0.00770
(0.024)
0.0238
(0.025)
-0.0258
(0.026)

0.0363
(0.027)
-0.00191
(0.025)
0.0539**
(0.021)
-0.0188
(0.025)
-0.0125
(0.024)
0.0303
(0.026)
-0.0375
(0.027)
0.132***
(0.025)
-0.114***
(0.026)

0.0396
(0.027)
-0.00280
(0.025)
0.0519**
(0.021)
-0.0193
(0.025)
-0.0107
(0.024)
0.0277
(0.026)
-0.0405
(0.027)
0.130***
(0.025)
-0.114***
(0.026)

0.0404
(0.027)
-0.00429
(0.025)
0.0530**
(0.021)
-0.0202
(0.025)
-0.0145
(0.024)
0.0294
(0.026)
-0.0393
(0.027)
0.133***
(0.025)
-0.108***
(0.026)

0.137***
(0.025)
-0.113***
(0.026)

-0.0121
(0.053)
-0.0644
(0.049)
-0.182***
(0.052)
-0.0732*
(0.043)

-0.0055
(0.053)
-0.0622
(0.049)
-0.199***
(0.052)
-0.0775*
(0.043)

-0.0002
(0.053)
-0.0613
(0.050)
-0.194***
(0.052)
-0.0977**
(0.045)

-0.0009
(0.053)
-0.0582
(0.049)
-0.186***
(0.052)
-0.0791*
(0.044)

-0.0004
(0.053)
-0.0622
(0.050)
-0.202***
(0.052)
-0.0782*
(0.042)

Self view /Financial view:
Self confident
Works best under pressure
Do what you like today
Life about having fun
Avoid unhealthy food or behaviors
Motivation
Put off things you should do

Wealth Q3
Wealth Q4
Wealthmissing
Negative shocks:
Health limited work
Large health expense
Unemployment
Salary/earnings less than expected
Bad investments
Divorce or separation
Death in the family
Large (non-health) expense
Other negative shock
Positive shocks:
Respondent salary/earnings more
than expected
Spouse salary earning more than
expected

-0.0022
(0.053)
-0.0617
(0.049)
-0.199***
(0.052)
-0.0790*
(0.042)
0.0883**
(0.034)
0.0410
(0.036)
0.0791**
(0.034)
0.0181
(0.038)
0.0771*
(0.040)
0.0700**
(0.035)
-0.0595
(0.042)
0.0367
(0.035)
0.147**
(0.067)

0.0814**
(0.034)
0.0437
(0.036)
0.0720**
(0.034)
0.0168
(0.037)
0.0869**
(0.040)
0.0639*
(0.035)
-0.0565
(0.042)
0.0324
(0.035)
0.151**
(0.067)

0.0157

0.0170

(0.035)
-0.0960**

(0.035)
-0.101**

(0.046)

(0.046)

(8)
With
Psycho
Ind.

54

(1)
Without
Wealth

(2)
With
Wealth

Worked more than expected
Good investments
Received an inheritance
Other positive shock
Numeracy (ref: no correct answer)
1 correct
2 correct
3 correct
4 correct
Numeracy missing
Financial planning horizon (ref: next couple of months)
Next year
Next cuple of years
Next 5-10 years
Longer than 10 years
I do not plan
Finplan missing
Financial literacy (ref: very high & high)
Moderate
Low
Very low
Missing
Self view/Financial view (ref. "neither)
Self confidence (disagree)
Self confidence (agree)
Works best under pressure (disagree)
Works best under pressure dis(agree)
Do what you like today (disagree)
Do what you like today (agree)
Life about having fun (disagree)
Life about having fun (agree)
Avoid unhealthy food or behaviors
(disagree)
Avoid unhealthy food or behaviors
(agree)
Motivation (ref: never/some time)

(3)
With Ind.
Shocks
Without
Wealth
0.0454
(0.039)
-0.186***
(0.029)
-0.0593*
(0.031)
-0.128*
(0.066)

(4)
With Ind.
Shocks
With
Wealth
0.0464
(0.039)
-0.157***
(0.030)
-0.0554*
(0.031)
-0.131**
(0.066)

(5)
With
Numeracy

(6)
With
Financial
Planning

(7)
With
Financial
Literacy

(8)
With
Psycho
Ind.

0.0653
(0.108)
0.0868
(0.101)
0.0862
(0.100)
-0.0148
(0.104)
0.0254
(0.099)
0.0375
(0.052)
0.0484
(0.044)
0.0638
(0.045)
-0.0553
(0.049)
0.0286
(0.079)
0.0763
(0.046)
0.100**
(0.040)
0.0904*
(0.052)
0.142*
(0.077)
0.0988**
(0.043)
-0.0535
(0.053)
-0.0187
(0.033)
0.00792
(0.031)
0.079***
(0.028)
-0.0134
(0.056)
0.0341
(0.033)
0.0351
(0.028)
0.00717
(0.037)
-0.0460
(0.031)
-0.0338
(0.028)

55

(1)
Without
Wealth

(2)
With
Wealth

Put off things you should do. (most of
the time/always)

(3)
With Ind.
Shocks
Without
Wealth

(4)
With Ind.
Shocks
With
Wealth

(5)
With
Numeracy

(6)
With
Financial
Planning

(7)
With
Financial
Literacy

0.0256
(0.034)
0.0281

Give up before starting. (most of the
time/always)

(0.071)
0.0171

Try several tasks, don't complete
many. (most of the time/always)

(0.044)
-0.0791

Settle for mediocre results. (most of the
time/always)

(0.070)
-0.0311

Put off things not good at (most of the
time/always)

(0.035)
0.0891

Put off difficult things. (most of the
time/always)

(0.061)
-0.0344

Lose motivation during tasks. (most of
the time/always)
Constant
N
R-sq

(8)
With
Psycho
Ind.

0.361***
(0.131)
1589
0.117

0.420***
(0.134)
1589
0.129

0.338***
(0.131)
1588
0.140

0.398***
(0.133)
1588
0.149

0.369**
(0.163)
1589
0.135

0.402***
(0.136)
1589
0.136

0.333**
(0.138)
1589
0.133

(0.074)
0.651***
(0.078)
1589
0.128

56

