NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LONGER-RUN EFFECTS OF ANTI-POVERTY POLICIES ON DISADVANTAGED
NEIGHBORHOODS
David Neumark
Brian J. Asquith
Brittany Bass
Working Paper 25231
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25231

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We thank the Laura and John Arnold Foundation and the Employment Policies Institute for
support for this research. Asquith gratefully acknowledges funding from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation (grant G-2017-9813) and the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Any
opinions or conclusions expressed are the authors’ own and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Laura and John Arnold Foundation, Employment Policies Institute, the Sloan Foundation, or the
NBER. The funders have had no control over the content or conclusions of this research. We
received helpful comments from Matt Freedman, Hilary Hoynes, Joe Sabia, and from seminar/
conference participants at Bar Ilan University, DIW-Berlin, Hebrew University, IZA, the
Melbourne Institute, Nanyang Technical University, the National Tax Association Annual
Conference, the National University of Singapore, the Norwegian School of Economics,
Singapore Management University, the Tinbergen Institute, Tulane, UC-Berkeley, UCI,
Université Catholique de Louvain, and the University of Sydney. We are grateful for helpful
research assistance from Luis Munguia Corella. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by David Neumark, Brian J. Asquith, and Brittany Bass. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Longer-Run Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Disadvantaged Neighborhoods
David Neumark, Brian J. Asquith, and Brittany Bass
NBER Working Paper No. 25231
November 2018
JEL No. I38,J18,J2
ABSTRACT
We estimate the longer-run effects of minimum wages, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
welfare on key economic indicators of economic self-sufficiency in disadvantaged
neighborhoods. Our strongest findings are twofold. First, the longer-run effects of the EITC are
to increase employment and to reduce poverty and public assistance, as long as we rely on
national as well as state variation in EITC policy. Second, tighter welfare time limits also reduce
poverty and public assistance in the longer run; while the effect on public assistance result may
be mechanically related to loss of benefits, the effect on poverty is more likely behavioral. It is
harder to draw firm conclusions about minimum wages and welfare benefits. With some
specifications and samples, the evidence suggests that higher minimum wages lead to longer-run
declines in poverty and the share of families on public assistance, whereas higher welfare benefits
have adverse longer-run effects. However, the evidence on minimum wages and welfare benefits
is not robust – and the estimated effects of minimum wages are sometimes in the opposite
direction, including when we restrict the analysis to more recent data that is likely of more
interest to policymakers.
David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
Brian J. Asquith
W.E. Upjohn Institute
300 S Westnedge Ave
Kalamazoo, MI 49007
basquith86@gmail.com

Brittany Bass
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
bassb@uci.edu

I. Introduction
The long-running research and policy debates about anti-poverty policies have two
important shortcomings that we seek to begin to rectify in this paper. First, they have tended to
focus on short-term effects, rather than asking how these policies have affected income, and
economic self-sufficiency more generally, in the longer run. Second, they have largely ignored
“place,” focusing on program effects on individuals and their families, without asking whether
these policies have succeeded in lifting the economic fortunes of particularly disadvantaged
areas.
We counter these shortcomings, in studying the effects of the main anti-poverty policies
in the United States that attempt to increase income from work, or that substitute for income
from work and hence might strongly affect work incentives – minimum wages, the Earned
Income Tax Credit, and welfare. We estimate the longer-run effects of these policies on
measures of economic self-sufficiency – most importantly, poverty and receipt of public
assistance – and focus on their effects in neighborhoods that are initially disadvantaged. The
underlying potential mechanism we have in mind for differing longer-run effects of these
policies is that policies that encourage more work over time will lead to greater accumulation of
human capital, and hence higher wages and earnings.
Most research on minimum wages focuses on the short-term employment effects of
minimum wages – typically for teenagers (see the review in Neumark and Wascher, 2007) and
more recently for other low-wage workers, like restaurant workers (e.g., Dube et al., 2010).
This evidence tells us little or nothing about whether minimum wages reduce poverty even in
the short term, although that question has begun to get more attention (e.g., Dube, 2017; Sabia
and Burkhauser, 2010). Virtually no work has studied the longer-run effects of minimum
wages, with three exceptions: indirect evidence on training (or education), which could affect
earnings in the longer term (e.g., Acemoglu and Pischke, 2003); research directly estimating the
1

effects on adult earnings of exposure to a higher minimum wage as a teenager (Neumark and
Nizalova, 2007); and more recent work by Clemens and Wither (2016) reporting that binding
minimum wage increases during the Great Recession period lowered the income growth of
affected workers.
Research on the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) has also focused on short-run
employment effects (e.g., Meyer, 2010), although some work studies the effects of the EITC on
poverty (e.g., Neumark and Wascher, 2011). There are some exceptions, mostly in very recent
work. Dahl et al. (2009) examine longer-term effects of the EITC via work incentives,
estimating the impacts of a major federal expansion of the EITC on individual women’s
earnings up to five years later. 1 More recently, Neumark and Shirley (2017) adopt a longer-run
perspective, studying the effects of exposure to a more generous EITC over women’s 20s and
30s on subsequent wages and earnings. And taking an inter-generational perspective, Bastian
and Michelmore (forthcoming) estimate the effect of exposure in childhood on adult outcomes,
finding positive employment and earnings effects; they suggest that these results are driven by
labor supply (and hence earnings) impacts on parents.
The EITC is sometimes viewed as a more effective policy than the minimum wage to
increase income from work, in large part because it incentivizes work. This question can be
revisited in the longer-run perspective we adopt in this paper, recognizing the possibility that the
EITC could also have limited effectiveness in economically-disadvantaged areas if there are not
employment opportunities to be taken advantage of by those induced to look for work by a more
generous EITC.
Finally, the literature on welfare is extensive, and has focused on both employment
effects (e.g., Grogger, 2003) and distributional effects (e.g., Bitler et al., 2006). Again, there is

1
Card and Hyslop (2005) study longer-term effects of a similar program in Canada. There is also some research
tying the EITC to longer-term outcomes via effects on children. For a review of related work, see Neumark (2016).

2

very little work on longer-run effects, although Grogger (2009) and Hotz et al. (2006) study
whether welfare programs that encouraged employment (and in the latter case, training) boosted
longer-run earnings. Moreover, the question has been raised of whether welfare generates
longer-run dependency on government programs (e.g., Murray, 1983).
The existing research on these anti-poverty policies has focused nearly exclusively on
their effects on individuals or families, and not on effects on areas of concentrated disadvantage
or poverty. Perhaps the only exception (also a short-term analysis) is Thompson (2009), who
shows that federal minimum wage increases in the mid-1990s had more adverse effects on teen
employment in counties where minimum wages were more binding because of lower market
wages. Our paper goes well beyond Thompson’s analysis – studying a much longer time
horizon (1970-2010), including outcomes across all age ranges, and using a more disaggregated
level of geography (the Census tract) that better isolates disadvantaged neighborhoods. The
question of whether anti-poverty policies are beneficial or detrimental in helping to lift the
economic fortunes of particularly disadvantaged areas is important, given that there is scant
evidence that explicit place-based anti-poverty programs, such as enterprise zones, increase jobs
or reduce poverty in disadvantaged neighborhoods. 2
Geographically-concentrated poverty poses its own challenges above and beyond
individual poverty, perhaps most importantly for minorities, who tend to cluster residentially in
poor areas. 3 Moreover, research suggests that living in poverty areas creates extra hardships for
the poor and also for the non-poor residing in those areas, owing to less private-sector

2

See, e.g., Neumark and Simpson (2015) and Neumark and Young (2017). The latter paper does not examine
longer-run effects of explicit place-based policies, although research on this topic is in progress (Neumark and
Young, in progress).
3
American Community Survey (ACS) data from 2010 indicate that 50.4 percent of blacks, 44.1 percent of
Hispanics, but only 20.3 percent of whites, reside in areas where the poverty rate is 20 percent or higher (see
Bishaw, 2014, for more descriptive evidence). At the same time, poverty rate differences between these groups are
much smaller (see https://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/acsbr11-17.pdf, viewed March 31, 2017).

3

investment, higher crime, weaker labor market networks, poor health, etc. 4 Thus, if antipoverty policies inadvertently lead to greater poverty in areas of concentrated poverty, their
adverse consequences may be exacerbated, extending beyond those who are directly affected.
Conversely, policies that are help disadvantaged areas may have important short- and long-term
positive spillovers, as effects from disadvantaged neighborhoods can have lasting impacts on
the next generation (Chetty et al., 2014).
This paper is distinguished by a number of features. First, we simultaneously examine
the effects of multiple anti-poverty policies, which provides direct comparisons of their effects
and ensures that we do not spuriously attribute the effects of one policy to the effects of others.
Second, we estimate policy effects on disadvantaged areas. And third, we look at longer-run
effects, with a sample covering many decades.
To briefly summarize the results, our strongest findings are twofold. First, the longerrun effects of the EITC are to increase employment and to reduce poverty and public assistance,
as long as we rely on national as well as state variation in EITC policy. Second, tighter welfare
time limits also reduce poverty and public assistance in the longer run; while the effect on
public assistance result may be mechanically related to loss of benefits, the effect on poverty is
more likely behavioral. We also find some evidence that higher minimum wages, in the longer
run, lead to declines in poverty and the share of families on public assistance, whereas higher
welfare benefits have adverse longer-run effects, although the evidence on minimum wages and
welfare benefits is not robust to using only more recent data, nor to some other changes. 5
We want to be clear, at the outset, that identifying longer-run effects of policy –
especially multiple policies – is a challenge. We may rarely, if ever, have the kinds of

4

See the summary of the evidence in Federal Reserve System and Brookings Institution (2008).
Note that the evidence on welfare benefits does not imply that more generous welfare benefits do not help
recipients, but rather that more generous benefits may reduce the extent to which these recipients become
economically self-sufficient.

5

4

compelling identification strategies sometimes available to study the short-term effects of a
single policy. In contrast, the most feasible and convincing approach may be what we have
done in this paper – combining differencing strategies with a detailed look at potential threats to
identification, and at the sensitivity of the conclusions to sensible alterations in the sample, the
specification, etc. Nonetheless, even if one remains cautious about a causal interpretation of our
findings, the longer-term relationships we document provide interesting suggestive evidence
about the likely effects of alternative anti-poverty policies in the longer-run.
II. Research Strategy
Our econometric strategy is to use long-term panel data to estimate longer-run effects of
anti-poverty policies on economic outcomes in Census tracts that are initially disadvantaged,
relative to other tracts. 6 To explain the approach, denote tracts by c, states by s, counties by j,
and years by t. Denote by Ycst our economic outcomes variables; we focus on the poverty rate
and the share of households on public assistance, but study other outcomes as well. 7 Denote by
Pcst a vector of policies that can vary by state and year. And denote by DISbc a measure of
initial disadvantage defined at the tract level; DISbc is a dummy variable indicating that a tract
was in the top quartile of a measure of socioeconomic disadvantage (i.e., the mostdisadvantaged quartile) in the baseline period (b).
As control variables, we also include Census tract fixed effects (CTc), to account for

6
It would clearly also be interesting to estimate longer-run effects of anti-poverty policies on people or families.
There are not many data sets with which to do this, however, since the most compelling analyses requires longterm longitudinal data, as well as data covering many cohorts so that there is policy variation (ruling out the
National Longitudinal Surveys). As noted earlier, Neumark and Shirley (2017) estimate the long-term effects of
exposure to a more generous EITC, using the PSID. With the Census data we use in this present paper, we can
track areas over time (indeed, many decades), but not people.
7
Aside from policy concerns, our focus on poverty and public assistance is motivated by data limitations. As
discussed below, the data we use provide tract-level aggregates. Although we also estimate effects on average
earnings and employment rate measures, we cannot, for example, estimate effects on earnings and employment of
separate groups (such as single mothers) to better understand the estimated effects on family level outcomes such
as poverty. In current work using microdata (Neumark et al., in progress), we can do more to unpack the effects on
these outcomes on subgroups.

5

time-invariant heterogeneity across Census tracts. We also include a full set of interactions
between county dummy variables (COj) and year fixed effects (YRt). These interactions control
very flexibly for local shocks to economic outcomes that could potentially be correlated with
the policy variables. We cannot, of course, include tract-by-year interactions because these
would capture all of the variation in the dependent variables.
We also always include a control for the effects on tracts of long-term changes in the
structure of jobs in the aggregate economy. 8 We use the approach, originating with Bartik
(1991), of applying national time-series changes in aggregated sectoral employment to the tract
or other subareas, based on the tract’s or subarea’s sectoral composition in the baseline period.
While it is most natural to think of this in terms of industry, in the Neighborhood Change
Database (NCDB) we use, we can only do this for occupation. 9 To define this control variable,
let subscript k index occupations. Denote by SEcskb total employment in tract c, state s,
occupation k, and baseline period b, denote by AEkt aggregate (national) employment in each
period t in occupation k, and denote by AEkb aggregate employment in occupation k in the
baseline period b. Then tract (or subarea) employment based solely on aggregate developments
is predicted in each period after b by applying the national changes to the baseline composition,
as in
(1)

𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 = ∑𝑘𝑘 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 × �

𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘 −𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘

�. 10

For our baseline analyses, we extract from the NCDB measures of Y for 1980, 1990,

8

For example, it is widely agreed that declines in manufacturing hit narrow areas where manufacturing was
concentrated (think the South Side of Chicago, or Flint, Michigan), as highlighted in the seminal work of Wilson
(1990) or Autor et al. (2013).
9
The NCDB data does not provide tract-level information on the number of persons working in a specific industry.
Instead, it includes employment in nine categories of occupations (for persons 16+): professional and technical
occupations; executives, managers, and administrators; sales; administrative support and clerical; precision
production, craft, and repair; operators, assemblers, transportation, and materials; nonfarm laborers; service; and
farm workers or in forestry and fishing.
10 This control is entered in logs because the level can differ so much across tracts.

6

2000, and 2010, and measures of DISb for 1970. 11 We specify our model to estimate the longerrun impacts of the anti-poverty policies in P on initially disadvantaged tracts relative to other
tracts. The model we estimate is
(2)

Ycst = α + {DISbc∙Pcst}∙β + {DISbc∙Pcs,t−10}∙βL + CTc∙δ’ + {COj∙YRt}∙ω + θ∙ln(PSEcst) + εcst.
In equation (2), the parameters β and βL capture the contemporaneous and 10-year lag

effect of the policies in P. The main effects of policy variation on non-disadvantaged tracts
(with DISb = 0) are subsumed in the county-by-year fixed effects, since policy generally varies
at the state level (and very slightly at the county level). 12,13 The estimates of β and βL capture
the relative change in Y in disadvantaged tracts, versus more-advantaged tracts, that are
associated with the policy variation P.
Considered this way, β and βL are akin to triple-difference estimators. A basic tripledifference specification (ignoring the minor county variation in welfare benefits) would include
main effects of the policy variables (not interacted with the indicator for disadvantaged tracts),
year fixed effects, state fixed effects, the indicator for disadvantaged tracts, and interactions
between this indicator and the year and state fixed effects. Many of these are subsumed in the
richer control variables in equation (2). Specifically, including the county-by-year fixed effects
subsumes main policy effects, and the tract fixed effects subsume the indicator for
disadvantaged tracts as well as the interactions between this indicator and state fixed effects.
The model would still include the year-by-disadvantaged tract interactions, which would imply

11

DIS can be measured for later years, but we work with 1970 as our baseline in almost all of our analyses. As
explained in the data section below, the 2010 measures are actually 2006-2010 measures based on the ACS.
12
Welfare benefits have a limited degree of within-state variation, by county.
13
The inclusion of the county-by-year interactions and the focus on estimating the effects on most-disadvantaged
tracts is related to recent work on the identification of minimum wage effects (Dube et al., 2010; Allegretto et al.,
2011; Neumark et al., 2014). This work highlights the question of whether region-specific economic shocks are
correlated with minimum wage changes. However, when the county-by-year interactions are included,
identification of β and βL comes solely from within-county and year variation, and the bias from potential
correlations between state-level or county-level economic conditions and the (possibly endogenous) variation in
minimum wages or other policies at the state or county level is eliminated.

7

that the effects of policy are identified only from state-level variation; for example, differential
effects of federal EITC variation in disadvantaged relative to advantaged areas, common to all
states, would be absorbed in these interactions. It turns out, however – as we show later – that
the estimated effects of the EITC are extremely imprecise when we include the year-bydisadvantaged tract interactions, owing to relatively little state variation. Hence, our main
estimates do not include these interactions, and rely on federal as well as state EITC variation. 14
However, the inclusion of the county-by-year interactions controls for geographic heterogeneity
in shocks at a very granular level.
Aside from the controls we have discussed, the main model we use is parsimonious. It
does not control for other characteristics of the population that may have changed over time
(such as educational levels), because skill levels may be endogenous (e.g., Agell and
Lommerud, 1997), or there may be differential migration responses to policy in more- versus
less-disadvantaged areas. The exclusion of these compositional changes is appropriate in
estimating policy impacts on places. Nonetheless, we also present estimates of models that
allow for compositional shifts from migration, and find that the results are robust.
Naturally, to assess the robustness of our results and to gauge potential sources of bias,
we also estimate other variants of our specification. We discuss these modifications of our
analysis in the empirical section of the paper.
III. Data
Neighborhood Change Database
Our data on economic outcomes and other measures by tract come from the NCDB, 15

14

The key papers in the EITC literature – establishing positive employment effects of low-skilled mothers – also
use federal variation (Eissa and Liebman, 1996; and Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001). The same is true of the longerterm analyses discussed in the Introduction.
15
For a description of the data, see http://www.geolytics.com/USCensus,Neighborhood-Change-Database-19702000,Products.asp (viewed February 13, 2017).

8

which provides tract-level aggregates on the key outcomes we study – earnings, employment,
poverty, and public assistance. Importantly, the NCDB provides consistent tract definitions
over time. In particular, it includes historical tract populations, demographic, and
socioeconomic characteristics in 2010 Census tract geography, providing consistent longitudinal
measures of these variables. 16 However, because we estimate effects over many decades, based
on characteristics of tract residents in a much earlier period (using 1970 as our baseline period
to define DISb), we are restricted in the set of tracts we can use. 17
The NCDB includes data from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census, and from the
five-year rollups of the 2006-2010 ACS (which we sometimes refer to as “2010”). 18 The
NCDB excludes some variables otherwise publicly available from the Census (in the “Summary
Files”), such as crosstabs on education by employment status by age group. However, these
crosstabs were not published by the Census for 1970, and the age ranges that are reported
change in each Census wave, making reconciling them longitudinally difficult. Thus, the
NCDB remains the best public dataset for this analysis. 19
16

The NCDB-reported counts are reallocations of the Census’ reported counts that use a combined area and
population approach. Areal weights are determined from publicly available maps for all recent Census geography
so that it is possible to calculate the area overlay between tracts in different Census years. To account for the
uneven distribution of population within a tract, the NCDB exploits sub-tract geographic units, called Census
blocks, which first exist nationwide in the 1990 Census. Census blocks are not standardized by population, but
their decennial population counts are known and Census block boundaries never cross tract boundaries within the
same Census year. These Census blocks form the basis for more precisely mapping populations across Census
years and then aggregating the results to the tract level. More details on how the population reapportionment
occurred at finer geographic levels and was then reconciled across Census waves can be found in Tatian et al.
(2003).
17
The Census first fully tracted the nation in 2000 (Krieger, 2006). In 1990, the Census had tracts in all 50 states
plus Puerto Rico and U.S. outlying territories, but had only fully tracted six states: California, Connecticut,
Delaware, Hawaii, New Jersey, and Rhode Island. Prior to that, Census tracts were only drawn for large cities
(U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1994).
18
Specifically, the 1970 data come from the Fourth Count Summary Tape for Population and Housing; the 1980
and 1990 data come from the Summary Tape Files 3A of their respective years; the 2000 data come from the
Summary File 3A and Summary File 1; and the 2010 data come from the Summary File 1.
19
One key advantage of using the NCDB data is that the data are publicly available, and the analysis therefore can
be replicated and explored further by other researchers. The minimum wage literature, in particular, is replete with
exchanges, comments, and replications of the work of others, and in our view these exchanges and sharing of data
have been a critical part of the research endeavor and central to the high level of transparency to which researchers
on all sides of the minimum wage debate have contributed. Thus, we did not simply want to do this research using
confidential individual-level data with tracts identified – especially given that we are estimating and reporting on

9

The longer-run perspective of our project makes it useful to have data covering many
decades, and our specifications include 10-year lags, so that the first sample year we can use
with the NCDB is 1980. Although some of the relevant policy variation goes back to before
1940 (the minimum wage was created by the Fair Labor Standards Act in 1938), Census tracts
can only be identified in a small subset of areas for 1940 and 1950. 20 Thus, only beginning in
1960 can one use any Census data at the tract level to obtain a comprehensive look at the U.S.
as a whole, but to date, the 1960 Census is not included in the NCDB.
With regard to the policies we study, the inability to use the earlier years is not much of
a disadvantage. Most of the variation in the federal minimum wage, and all of the variation in
state minimum wages, occurred much later – most federal variation after 1960, and state
variation beginning in the late 1980s, and coverage of workers by the federal minimum wage
was not very broad until the beginning of the 1960s. 21 The other policies we study arise and
begin to vary later – welfare in the 1960s and again with welfare reform in the 1990s, and the
EITC at the federal level in the 1970s and at the state level in the 1980s. Thus, the constraint of
starting our analysis is 1980 (with DISb measured in 1970) is not too limiting.
Anti-Poverty Policies
We study the effects of minimum wages, the EITC, and welfare. 22 We view these three

very different types of analyses than what has been done in past research.
20
Census tract coverage and publicly available information prior to 1960 is limited. Only 45 cities were
consistently given Census tracts before 1960 (Bogue, 2000a, 2000b, 2000c).
21
See http://www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/coverage.htm (viewed February 13, 2015) and
http://www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/chart.htm (viewed February 13, 2015).
22
Two relatively major programs we do not consider are the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP,
previously Food Stamps), or the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit (CCTC). For SNAP/Food Stamp benefit
levels, only Alaska and Hawaii differ from federal guidelines. Prior to July 1, 1974, there was some spatial
variation through rollouts of when Food Stamps became active, although most urbanized, predominantly lowincome, and high black share counties had the program by 1970 (Almond et al., 2011), which again severely limits
variation in SNAP/Food Stamp benefits (in this case based on rollout). Since welfare reform in the 1990s,
SNAP/Food Stamps has had work, search, or training requirements, and hence potentially affects work incentives
through those mechanisms, although limited research suggests it does not, but is instead largely a supplement to
wages (for those able to work); see Rosenbaum (2013) and Moffitt (2015). The CCTC is a non-refundable credit,
unlike the EITC, and hence is thought to provide weak benefits to low-income families for whom the question of

10

policies as the intersection of the policies most central to anti-poverty efforts, and the policies
most likely to affect income and work.
Information on state minimum wages from 1983-2014 was taken from the data used in
Neumark et al. (2014). We extended the data back to 1960 relying on Quester (1980) and Sutch
(2010), 23 also cross-referencing dates and levels against state and federal sources. 24 We code
the minimum wage as the higher of the state or federal minimum wage, as is standard, since
lower state minimum wages, if they exist, apply to a tiny fraction of workers. In the analysis,
we lag the minimum wage one year for all outcomes except employment, because in the Census
data these outcomes are measured in the previous year; we do the same for the other policies,
for the same reason. Finally, we use the log of the minimum wage. 25
Figure 1 shows the minimum, average, and maximum minimum wage (measured on the
left-hand axis); the minimum values measure the federal minimum wage. The gray boxes
indicate the number of states with a minimum wage above the federal level (measured on the
right-hand axis). As the figure indicates, this latter number is trivial early in the sample, but the
number of states with higher minimum wages rises sharply in the 2000s, to over 30.
Information on the EITC comes from a database of historical parameters maintained by
the Tax Policy Center. 26 We use the percentage supplement in the federal EITC for a family
with two children on the phase-in range (F2%), which can be amplified by the state EITC,

economic self-sufficiency is most salient.
23
The main information in the latter is in the appendix of the working paper, at http://www.nber.org/dataappendix/w16355/Appendix%20A%20State%20Laws.pdf (viewed February 15, 2017).
24
If there was a conflict between sources, we chose the information in Quester (1980), to maintain consistency
when constructing the panel.
25
We use real (2014$) minimum wages, although with the log transformation and year effects, the deflator is
irrelevant. Historically, there has been some debate in the research literature over whether to define the minimum
wage relative to an average wage measure. In recent work, this approach has fallen out of favor, and the log of the
minimum wage is used instead. The data on minimum wages can be accessed at
http://www.socsci.uci.edu/~dneumark/datasets.html (viewed February 15, 2017).
26
See http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/sites/default/files/legacy/taxfacts/content/PDF/historical_eitc_parameters.pdf
(viewed October 11, 2016).

11

usually specified as a percentage supplement to the federal EITC (S%). Thus, our combined
variable is F2%∙(1 + S%), where F2% and S% are measured on a scale from zero to one. 27
Figure 2 shows the EITC variation, displayed in a similar way. There was no EITC in
1970, and no state variation until after 1990. By the end of the sample period there are 23 states
with an EITC supplement, and the maximum supplements increase the phase-in rate by over 15
percentage points.
We include two measures of welfare generosity or stringency. From 1962-1996, the
United States joint federal and state social assistance program was known as Aid to Families
with Dependent Children (AFDC). The program was reformed by Congress in 1996 and
rebranded as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). Our first measure is the
maximum payment for a family of three, usually held to be one adult and two dependent
children. 28 Second, for the post-welfare reform period, we include a dummy variable for
whether tight time limits were imposed. There were no time limits until welfare reform in 1996,
after which 10 states adopted limits of less than 60 months (in 2000, ranging from 21-48
months, but generally about two years), and most of the remaining states adopted time limits of
60 months. We use a time limit dummy variable that is equal to zero for all states before
welfare reform, and, after welfare reform, switches to one for states that imposed tight time
limits (less than 60 months), to capture states that more substantially tightened eligibility for
welfare. 29,30
27

State credits are fully refundable (as is the federal credit), except for Delaware, Maine, Rhode Island, and
Virginia. This would suggest that our estimates slightly understate the effects of refundable credits.
28
We are typically able to measure benefits this way, but in some cases, we can only determine the level of benefits
for a family of three. We always use the former when possible.
29
We also explored distinguishing between states that imposed tighter time limits and those that imposed limits of
60 months (versus none), although the results were not affected.
30
To be sure, there are many possible measures of welfare reform one could use (Fang and Keane, 2004).
However, including many measures would be problematic because of multicollinearity, perhaps especially in our
framework. Time limits seem like a good choice to capture the effects of welfare reform. A small but consistent
literature has shown that welfare time limits were a significant element of welfare reform distinguishing TANF
from AFDC, (Moffitt, 2007) and that they were responsible for decreasing welfare caseloads (e.g., Grogger, 2009).

12

All information on TANF comes from the Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database. 31
For AFDC, various sources were utilized. 32 Some states had benefit amounts that varied by
subarea. Only for Illinois, Louisiana, Vermont, and Virginia were the regional benefit levels
and geographies reported with enough consistency to reconstruct their longitudinal series, and
even then, we had to fill in missing years. 33 For the remaining states with region-specific
benefit amounts, in most cases the publications reported the highest payment amount across
regions, and this is what we used. However, in a few cases the publications did not consistently
state which region or amount they were reporting, so we could be overstating or understating
the benefit amount in certain years.
Figures 3 and 4 display information on the two welfare measures we use. Figure 3
graphs nominal benefit levels. There is substantial variation across states. Figure 4 displays
information on time limits.
Measuring Disadvantage
For our main analyses, we measure disadvantage as the share of the population living in
poverty in the baseline year. However, we also show key results for three alternative measures
of disadvantage: the share of the population with a high school degree or less; the share of the

31

See http://wrd.urban.org/wrd/Query/query.cfm (viewed February 16, 2017).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services publications (Characteristics of State Plans [various years])
provided program parameters for 1973-1976, 1978-1985, and 1988-1990. For 1994 and 1996, program parameters
came from U. S. House of Representatives publications (Green Book [various years]). For 1969 and 1970, publicly
available information was incomplete. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (various years)
publications on selected state maximum welfare payments were used where available. For program parameters for
years with missing data, the annualized growth rate between the two observed years that bracketed the missing year
or years was calculated, and the benefit amount for the missing year or years was assumed to equal the previous
year’s amount times one plus the annualized growth rate.
33
For these states, in years where the publications indicated that there was regional variation in benefit amounts but
did not report them, we used the following method to estimate the missing amounts. First, if for a year t with
missing data, years t-1 and t+1 are observed and are the same, then year t is assumed to be the same as those years.
If only one region’s amount was reported, we assumed the yearly growth rate was the same across regions, and
extrapolated to the missing year/region on that basis. For years where no region-specific amounts were reported or
specified, we used documents from the next year forward and used implied growth rates between known years to
infill the missing amounts.
32

13

population that is black; and the share of families headed by single mothers. 34 The results are
generally robust.
Figure 5 provides information on the geographic distribution of tracted areas as of 1970,
and of our disadvantage measure. The figure shows areas tracted in 1970, with differential
shading for tracts in the four quartiles of the share disadvantaged – based on the share in
poverty. The darkest shading is for the highest quartile of this share – i.e., the most
disadvantaged tracts. As the figure shows, a small geographic area was tracted, but the tracted
areas include most of the population. 35
IV. Results
Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics. Recall that these are means across tracts, not
individual units. The top panel reports means (and standard deviations) for the outcomes we
study. The earnings variable is average earnings per household, which we construct in the
NCDB from data on earnings per household with workers, and the computed share of
households with earnings. The earnings data are in nominal terms, which is why they rise
sharply. The employment rate is simply the employment-to-population ratio at the tract level.
The poverty rate measure is on a per person rather than per household or per family basis. Both
track U.S. statistics closely, despite being tract-level observations. 36
The share on public assistance is lower than the poverty rate (although it is a per

34

This is the share of families and subfamilies. While tracts with large Hispanic populations are also of interest
and likely, on average, to be disadvantaged, Hispanic ethnicity has not been measured consistently over the long
time span we study.
35
The sum of the tracted population in 1970 was 148,456,474 (found from the NCDB) against a total U.S. 1970
population of 203,302,031 (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2002), or 73 percent of the U.S. population. Using the
same sources, the figures are 80 percent and 99.99 percent of the population for 1980 and 1990, respectively.
36
See, e.g., https://data.bls.gov/timeseries/LNS12300000 (viewed February 16, 2017) and
http://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/income-poverty/historical-poverty-people.html (viewed
February 16, 2017).

14

household measure, and the poverty rate is lower at the family or household than at the
individual level). It drops sharply in the final years of the sample (the 2006-2010 period
covered by the ACS) because SSI is excluded in the NCDB data. This change should not
influence our results materially, since the definitional change should be captured in the year
effects that are included in the model; 37 moreover, we find that results are very similar for
poverty and for public assistance – and the change in the data affects only the latter.
The second panel reports descriptive statistics for our four outcome measures for the
disadvantaged tracts. As we would expect, earnings and employment are lower, and poverty
and the share on public assistance are higher. The bottom panel reports the disadvantage
measure for 1970. We report the mean as well as the 75th percentile of this measure; the latter is
the cutoff for defining DISb.
Baseline Regression Results
We report baseline results for earnings, employment, poverty, and public assistance in
Table 2. The table reports estimates of equation (2), reporting only the estimates of the
coefficients β and βL, on the variables DISbc∙Pcst and DISbc∙Pcs,t−10, respectively.
The estimates for average household earnings are in column (1). There is a positive and
statistically significant contemporaneous effect of minimum wages on earnings, but the 10-year
lag effect is negative and not statistically significant. Because earnings and the minimum wage
are measured in logs (as are the EITC and welfare benefit variables), the estimated coefficients
can be interpreted as the elasticities with respect to the minimum wage in the mostdisadvantaged (high-poverty) tracts, relative to other tracts. This way of specifying the model
allows comparisons with minimum wage-earnings elasticities reported in other studies –

37

The table does not show a decline from 1990 to 2000. While AFDC/TANF rolls declined over this period,
participation in SSI grew by an amount that offsets a large share of this decline (see, e.g., Figure IND 4,
https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/welfare-indicators-and-risk-factors-fourteenth-report-congress, viewed November 29,
2017).

15

although typically these other estimates are for low-skilled individuals and focus only on shortterm, contemporaneous effects. Short-term earnings effects could be negative, if there are
adverse impacts on employment or hours. However, contemporaneous wage elasticities in the
0.1 to 0.2 range are not uncommon (e.g., Allegretto et al., 2011). 38 The 0.15 estimate is in
column (1) is in the middle of this range.
There is also statistically significant evidence of a positive short-run effect of the EITC
on earnings, but no evidence of a longer-run effect. As discussed below, there is evidence of a
positive longer-run effect of the EITC on employment. The absence of an earnings effect may
reflect the fact that the EITC increases labor supply, which can depress market wages (Leigh,
2000). Finally, there is no evidence of statistically significant longer-run (or contemporaneous)
effects of either welfare benefit levels or time limits on average household earnings.
Results for the employment rate are reported in column (2). There is evidence of a
positive effect of minimum wages in the short run, with an elasticity of 0.24. This result
contrasts with a good deal of evidence in the broader literature on the employment effects of
minimum wages. But the estimates here are for different groups – residents of tracts that were
disadvantaged many decades back – as opposed to the low-skilled and usually very young
workers considered in most of the minimum wage literature. The longer-run estimated
employment effect is negative, but not significant (with an elasticity of −0.09).
We find a positive longer-run effect of the EITC on employment, with an elasticity of
0.025. We find no statistical evidence of a contemporaneous effect, and the point estimate is
negative, which differs from the EITC literature focused on low-skilled, often single mothers.
Again, this difference may reflect the fact that results for disadvantaged places can differ from
what has been found using individual- or household-level data on the most affected groups. We

38

There are exceptions. In a recent study of the Seattle minimum wage, Jardim et al. (2017) find negative effects
on earnings.

16

do find, however, that the estimated employment effect is larger for women than for men, which
is what the prior literature – focusing on employment of less-skilled women – would lead us to
expect (Appendix Table A1). 39
For the welfare variables, we find no statistically significant evidence of longer-run
effects on employment. This contrasts with the view that more generous welfare (higher
benefits, or no or longer time limits) creates work disincentives. There is evidence of a
significant negative short-run effect of tighter time limits, again contrary to the intended effect.
For two reasons, our most important results are for poverty and the share on public
assistance. First, these are the direct “targets” of anti-poverty policies. And second, evidence
on the longer-run effects of anti-poverty policies on poverty and receipt of public assistance
tells us more about the effects of these policies on economic self-sufficiency. It is important to
keep in mind that because both poverty and receipt of public assistance depend on the value of
family income relative to thresholds, and because effects on family income depend on who is
affected by the policies we consider, we should not necessarily expect a tight correspondence
between effects on these outcomes and the prior earnings and employment results.
Because we should expect similar results for poverty and public assistance, we discuss
these results together. The evidence on minimum wages in column (3) indicates that higher
minimum wages reduce poverty in the longer-run, with an elasticity of −0.15. There is also a
longer-run reduction in the share of households on public assistance, coupled with evidence of a
contemporaneous effect in the same direction. Past research on the short-run effects of the
minimum wage on poverty have generally not found a significant effect (e.g., Sabia and
Burkhauser, 2010), although the point estimates tend to be in the direction of reducing poverty,

39
The estimated difference between men and women is not large, but most evidence of positive employment
effects of the EITC for women focuses on unmarried women with children, whereas in the NCDB data we cannot
measure employment rates for women distinguished by marital status and number of children.

17

and Dube (2017) finds evidence of significant poverty reductions. Recent research has not
found that higher minimum wages reduce participation in public assistance programs in the
short-term (Sabia and Nguyen, 2017).
The estimates point to significant short-run and longer-run effects of the EITC in
reducing both poverty and the receipt of public assistance. The longer-run elasticities are −0.04
and −0.10, respectively. Note that the public assistance measure does not include the EITC, and
EITC payments do not count in the poverty measure, so that these results indicate that the EITC
reduces poverty and the receipt of other public assistance via behavioral changes – before taking
account of the EITC (paralleling findings in Neumark and Wascher, 2011).
Finally, the estimates indicate that more generous welfare benefits increase poverty and
public assistance receipt in the longer-run, with both elasticities around 0.17. The result for
receipt of public assistance may be somewhat mechanically linked to the level of benefits, given
benefits formulas as well as take-up effects, and the same is potentially true of time limits.
However, the fact that the results are so similar for poverty makes it more likely that we are
detecting behavioral effects. We also find that tighter time limits appear to reduce poverty and
public assistance. Note, however, that these effects of our two welfare measures are not
reflected in positive effects on earnings or employment. This is not necessarily a contradiction;
as noted earlier, because these outcomes are based on threshold definitions, there can be
changes in the distribution but not the level of earnings, and these distributional changes can
change the share poor or receiving public assistance. Moreover, time limits could reduce public
assistance receipt without necessarily increasing earnings or employment. However, we are
somewhat more cautious about the estimated longer-run effects of welfare benefits and time
limits because of the absence of positive longer-run effects on earnings or employment.
Before moving on to discuss additional analyses, we briefly discuss three other sets of
results that help establish the specification in Table 2 (and close variants thereof) as our
18

preferred specification. First, in Appendix Table A2, we report results paralleling those in
Table 2, but including the minimum wage, the EITC, and the welfare variables in separate
specifications, rather than simultaneously. The minimum wage results are not at all robust to
this alternative analysis, pointing to strong negative longer-run effects on employment, and
strong positive longer-run effects on poverty and public assistance. The EITC results, and more
so the welfare results, are robust. The minimum wage results are particularly interesting,
because it is very much the norm in the minimum wage literature to exclude other policies from
the regression models estimated (as it is, indeed, in many similar panel data analyses of the
effects of other policies). In our context, at least, given that precision of the estimates does not
decline much from including the three policies simultaneously (compare Table 2 and Appendix
Table A2), it is preferable to include the three policies simultaneously.
Second, in Appendix Table A3 we report the results (noted earlier) that we obtain
estimating a more saturated model including interactions between the indicator for
disadvantaged tracts (DISb) and year fixed effects. As the table shows, our estimated EITC
effects are far less precise, especially for the longer-run effects, with standard errors that
increase by a factor of 15 or more and lead to uninformative confidence intervals. Presumably
reflecting this, the estimated EITC effects diverge quite widely from Table 2, with opposite
signs for all of the estimated longer-run effects. The precision of the estimated effects of the
other policies does not change much, but given that we saw the importance of controlling
simultaneously for all three policies for pinning down the effects of minimum wages, it is not
surprising that the estimated effects of minimum wages change dramatically in Appendix Table
A3, pointing to large positive effects on poverty and public assistance. Because of the
imprecision of the estimated EITC effects, we do not use this more saturated specification. As
noted above, we already control for rich geographic heterogeneity in shocks to our outcomes.
Third, coding the generosity of welfare, especially post-welfare reform, is not as clear19

cut as, for example, coding the minimum wage. It is difficult to capture the effects of welfare
reform in a limited set of variables, as we noted earlier. One concern is that the effects of
welfare benefits pre- and post-reform can be quite different, because it became much harder to
get benefits in the latter period (e.g., Haveman et al., 2015). Our inclusion of the (tight) time
limits variable should help on this score, as it flags states with potentially more stringent rules in
the post-reform period. As another alternative, we modified the welfare benefits variable to also
include an interaction with a post-1996 dummy variable, to allow the effects of benefits to
change post-reform. (This variable was included in the same way as the main effect in the
preceding specifications – contemporaneous and lagged, with both also interacted with DISb.)
The results, reported in Appendix Table A4, are quite robust, although the estimated
longer-run effect of the EITC in reducing poverty – but not public assistance receipt – becomes
smaller and significant. The key question, though, concerns the effects of the welfare variables.
The interactions between the welfare benefit variables and the post-reform indicator are
positive, but not significant. The estimated effects of benefits on poverty and public assistance
in the pre-reform period remain positive and statistically significant, and the estimated effects of
tighter time limits remain negative and statistically significant. Thus, nothing in this analysis
indicates we need to distinguish the effects of welfare benefits pre- and post-reform.
Additional Analyses
We next turn to a number of additional analyses that assess the robustness or sensitivity
of the results, including to important variations in the “treated” and “control” tracts that identify
our effects. In our view, there are number of choices about precisely how to specify the model
or sample. Our preferred choices are reflected in the baseline estimates we just discussed. But
knowing how sensitive the results are to some of these choices naturally affects the confidence
with which one should view our findings.

20

First, we explore using alternative definitions of disadvantage for classifying tracts as
disadvantaged at baseline: the share of the population with a high school degree or less; the
share of the population that is black; and the share of families headed by single mothers. 40
These results are reported in Table 3. Focusing on our key results – the longer-run effects on
poverty and public assistance – the estimates are quite robust. We always find negative
estimated effects of the minimum wage and the EITC on poverty, although the estimates are
statistically significant only for the share black disadvantage measure. The evidence (including
statistical significance) is more robust for the effects of the minimum wage and the EITC in
reducing receipt of public assistance – especially for the EITC. The estimated effects of welfare
benefits and time limits in reducing poverty and public assistance are the most robust; the
magnitudes are similar across the three alternative measures of disadvantage, and most of the
estimated effects are statistically significant. 41
The second issue we consider is whether our results are driven by migration that changes
the composition of the population in tract. We assess this by adding controls for migration –
capturing the proportion that moved into the tract from the same county, or from anywhere else.
The estimates, reported in Table 4, are very robust to this change, indicating that compositional
changes are not influential.
Next, we vary the comparison or control tracts used to identify the longer-run effects of
anti-poverty policies on the most-disadvantaged tracts. First, we drop observations in the third
quartile of the observations used to define DISb. In this case, the “control” or “untreated” tracts
are more sharply delineated from the tracts in the top quartile of disadvantage because we omit

40

The correlations of the indicators for the most-disadvantaged quartiles are as follows: share poor and share black:
0.44; share poor and share single mothers: 0.38; and share poor and share low-education: 0.25. The corresponding
correlations for the actual shares, rather than the dummy variables for the top quartile of disadvantage, are 0.55,
0.62, and 0.26.
41
We also find robust evidence of positive longer-run employment effects of the EITC, although also of modest
reductions in average earnings – again presumably reflecting downward pressure on wages for some groups whose
employment does not increase (and whose employment or hours may decrease).

21

observations for which the share poor at the tract level is between the median and the 75th
percentile. Given that the policies we study would also be expected to affect low-wage earners
or low-income families in other tracts, the inclusion of tracts in the third quartile of the
distribution of disadvantage could bias our findings towards zero. We did not expect large
changes, given that the anti-poverty policies we study target disadvantaged people and families,
and there is considerable residential segregation by income across tracts (e.g., Watson, 2009).
The results reported in Table 5 bear this out. Consistent with our conjecture, nearly every
estimate in Table 5 is larger in absolute value than the corresponding baseline estimate in Table
2; and this is true for every statistically significant estimate in Table 2 (and Table 5). On the
other hand, the estimates are not very different between Tables 2 and 5. The similarity of the
estimates suggests that the effects we estimate are strongly concentrated in the tracts in the top
quartile of disadvantage, which is consistent with our research design.
The absence of much impact in the third quartile of disadvantage suggests that we might
find quite similar results if we estimate our model only for the top two quartiles of disadvantage,
estimating the longer-run effects of policy from changes in the most-disadvantaged tracts
relative to tracts in the third quartile. The estimates in Table 6 show that this is indeed the case.
Note, for example, that all of the longer-run effects of the minimum wage, the EITC, and our
two welfare variables remain statistically significant, while the point estimates for the EITC and
the welfare variables are generally smaller in absolute value. 42
We view the evidence in Table 6 as significantly bolstering a causal interpretation of our
findings. We think it is much less likely that there are different shocks hitting tracts in the top
(fourth) and third quartiles of the distribution of disadvantage, whereas this is more plausible, a

42
If the minimum wage effects are causal, one reason they may not weaken is that while minimum wage workers
are distributed throughout the family income distribution, the effect of the minimum wage in reducing poverty (or
public assistance) is concentrated in the poorest tracts.

22

priori, for tracts in the top quartile versus those in the first and second quartiles. Hence, the
similarity of results indicates that the rich controls in our model are adequately capturing
variation attributable to other shocks that is potentially correlated with our policy variables.
We next present a robustness analysis in which we move up the baseline year in which
we measure disadvantage by one decade – to 1980 – and estimate the models for 1990-2010
instead of 1980-2010. If the composition of tracts changed much from 1970 to 1980, then a
good part of our identification of effects for “disadvantaged” tracts may not reflect tracts that
are as likely to be disadvantaged in later years, given that we use data over four decades for our
main analysis. There is considerable persistence in our measure of disadvantage. However, the
classification of tracts as disadvantaged in 1980 is more persistent than the classification in
1970. The shares of the tracts in the top quartile of the poverty distribution in 1970 that are in
the top quartile one, two, and three decades later are 67.6 percent (1980), 59.2 percent (1990),
and 58.8 percent (2000). The corresponding shares based on the 1980 data are 71.9 percent
(1990), 71.8 percent (2000) and 61.7 percent (2010).
The results are reported in Table 7. The results for the EITC, and for welfare time
limits, are very robust to this change. We still find statistically significant evidence that the
longer-run effect of the EITC is to reduce poverty and public assistance (and to increase
employment). And we find similar evidence for welfare time limits. In contrast, however, the
results for minimum wages flip sign and become insignificant, as do the results for welfare
benefits. Especially insofar as policymakers should be more interested in results based on more
current data, this evidence suggests that we should not draw strong conclusions about the
beneficial longer-run effects of either minimum wages or more stringent welfare benefits.
Two of the prior analyses accounted for changes in the composition of tracts due to
migration (Table 5), or due to the passage of time (Table 7). Our next analysis explores a
hybrid of these two issues. Rather than fixing the classification of disadvantaged tracts in a
23

single baseline period (1970 in most tables, but as 1980 in Table 7), we allow the classification
of tracts to evolve over time. (That is, we modify equation (2), changing the dummy variable
for disadvantaged tracts from DISbc to DISc,t−10). 43 This specification allows the composition of
tracts to change over time, which implies that we are more certain that we are estimating 10year lags of policy effects for tracts that were disadvantaged 10 years prior. At this same time,
the composition changes could reflect long-term effects of policy, which is why we prefer the
specification using a fixed baseline.
The results are reported in Table 8. The results are generally quite similar for the EITC
and welfare, with two exceptions. First, the estimated longer-run effects of welfare benefits are
larger; and second, the evidence that the EITC reduces poverty in the longer-run is weaker,
although the evidence that it reduces public assistance does not change. More substantial is the
change in results for the minimum wage. The evidence in Table 8 indicates longer-run effects
that increase poverty and public assistance, with the effect on poverty statistically significant.
Coupled with the evidence in Table 7, this is another indication that we cannot draw robust
conclusions that higher minimum wages reduce poverty or public assistance in the longer run.
Our final analysis addresses additional evidence – in addition to the analysis using
different quartiles of disadvantage for comparisons – on a causal interpretation of the findings.
We add 10-year leads of our policy variables to our models, to see whether policy changes were
correlated with prior changes in outcomes, which could lead to biased estimates of policy
effects. For the leads corresponding to the most recent data in our sample, we use 2016 (for
welfare) or 2017 values (for the EITC and minimum wage) – depending on data availability –
which nearly correspond to 10 years after the midrange of the 2006-2010 period.
The results, reported in Table 9, indicate that there are some significant partial

43

The second and third terms in equation (2) become DISc,t−10∙Pcst}∙β + {DISc,t−10∙Pcs,t−10}∙βL.

24

correlations between our outcome variables and future policy changes. For the EITC, there are
positive partial correlations for poverty and the share on public assistance. If both EITC
generosity and poverty/public assistance are quite persistent over time, then this leading
relationship creates a bias against finding beneficial effects of the EITC. This is what we find,
as controlling for the leads generates stronger beneficial longer-run effects of the EITC on these
outcomes – thus strengthening our conclusions for the EITC. In contrast, this analysis
somewhat weakens the evidence that more generous welfare benefits increase poverty and
public assistance, and that tighter time limits reduce them. Still, these effects of welfare policy
on poverty remain statistically significant (only at the 10-percent level for time limits). 44,45
Finally, although the leading effects of minimum wages are not statistically significant,
including these leading effects eliminates the evidence of beneficial longer-run effects of
minimum wages in reducing poverty and public assistance receipt.
V. Conclusions
Our goal in this paper is to estimate the longer-run effects of anti-poverty policies on key
socioeconomic outcomes in disadvantaged areas. We study three policies – minimum wages,
the Earned Income Tax Credit, and welfare (and welfare reform) – and estimate how these
policies influence earnings and employment, and most important, poverty, and public
assistance, in the most disadvantaged areas. The kinds of longer-run effects we estimate differ
substantially from almost all research on the effects of these policies, although there are a few
44

The pattern of bias for time limits is the same as for the EITC. In column (3), there is an estimated negative lead
for tighter welfare time limits (significant at the 10-percent level). Assuming the same type of persistence, this
implies a bias towards finding that tighter time limits reduce poverty, consistent with the smaller effect of the
longer-run effect of tighter time limits once we include the leading effect (in the last row of column (3)). However,
the leading effect for welfare benefits is negative, which – assuming the same persistence – should imply a bias
against finding that more generous welfare benefits increase poverty and public assistance receipt. But including
the leading effects has the opposite effect. This may be related to differences in the persistence of welfare benefits,
especially coupled with the post-welfare reform issues discussed earlier.
45
One might wonder whether the evidence of leading effects we find is driven in part by defining disadvantage in
terms of the poverty rate, which is related to poverty and public assistance outcomes (although our outcomes are
measured in later decades). However, the estimated leading effects and the implications for the estimates were
similar using the other measures of disadvantage from Table 3 (results available upon request).

25

exceptions that focus on longer-run effects of a single one of these policies. Our consideration
of multiple policies simultaneously is unique, as is our relatively long-run focus and our
emphasis on disadvantaged areas.
We identify tracts that are initially disadvantaged in terms of a high share of residents
who are poor. We then estimate the longer-run effects of these alternative policies on key
economic indicators of economic self-sufficiency – in particular, poverty and the receipt of
public assistance, but also employment and earnings.
In our view, a few key general results emerge. First, although we find, in our baseline
specifications, that higher minimum wages lead to longer-run declines in poverty and the share
of families on public assistance, this evidence is not robust. In other analyses we run, including
limiting the analysis to more recent data or using a more recent definition of disadvantaged
tracts, the evidence points in the opposite direction.
Second, we find some evidence that higher welfare benefits had longer-run adverse
effects in increasing poverty and public assistance, whereas tighter welfare time limits reduce
poverty and public assistance in the longer-run. The evidence on welfare benefits is not robust
to the sample period. The evidence on time limits is not reflected in longer-run effects on
employment and earnings, although it does not necessarily have to be given that changes in the
distribution of earnings can generate changes in the share poor, and time limits can directly
impact eligibility for public assistance.
Finally, we find that the longer-run effects of the EITC are to increase employment and
to reduce poverty and public assistance. The EITC results do hinge on relying on national as
well as state variation in EITC policy.
In our view, our most robust findings are that the EITC has beneficial longer-run
impacts in terms of reducing poverty and public assistance, whereas there is essentially no
evidence that more generous welfare delivers such longer-run benefits, and some evidence that
26

more generous welfare has adverse longer-run effects on poverty and reliance on public
assistance – especially with regard to time limits.
The comparison across anti-poverty policies is perhaps the most important evidence we
provide. In our view, we have captured the main anti-poverty policies that target working-age
adults and that can affect both their work incentives and their income from work. Given the
strong, short-term pro-work incentives of the EITC established in other research, the evidence
we find of beneficial longer-run effects of the EITC might seem like a natural conclusion. But
it is by no means a foregone conclusion, as there is virtually no evidence on longer-run effects,
nor evidence that simultaneously looks as these key anti-poverty policies. And we caution that
more work is needed to pin down EITC effects, given that our results depend on using national
policy variation, while at least one paper has found beneficial (short-run) effects of the EITC
using only the state-level variation (e.g., Neumark and Wascher, 2011).
Our evidence on how anti-poverty policies change economic outcomes in disadvantaged
neighborhoods could connect in important ways to the intergenerational mobility literature,
which emphasizes the importance of place in longer-run economic outcomes. Moreover, it may
be possible to draw some specific policy links. For example, one key finding in this research is
that neighborhoods with larger fractions of single parents are associated with poorer future
outcomes for children (Chetty et al., 2014). This suggests that beneficial longer-run effects of
the EITC in reducing poverty could also lead to positive intergenerational effects.
Finally, we have focused on the longer-run effects of three key policies chosen because
they are most likely to affect work incentives. In principle, of course, a whole set of policies,
going back to early childhood interventions, could have longer-run effects on labor market
outcomes of individuals, families, and neighborhoods. 46 Most work, even on short-term policy

46

See the extensive inventory of such policies, and research summaries, in Neumark (2016).

27

effects on labor market outcomes, has focused on policies in isolation, and the same is true of
the much more miniscule literature on longer-run policy effects. We readily acknowledge,
however, that there is potentially a great deal more to be learned from simultaneously
considering the effects of more policies, including their interactions, although the empirical
challenges are likely to be severe. Moreover, the fact that some of our findings depend on the
sources of policy variation used to identify the effects we estimate highlights that there are
further challenges in estimating longer-run policy effects.

28

References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2003. “Minimum Wages and On-the-Job Training.”
Research in Labor Economics 22: 159-202.
Agell, Jonas, and Kjell Erik Lommerud. 1997. “Minimum Wages and the Incentives for Skill
Formation.” Journal of Public Economics 64(1): 25-40.
Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, and Michael Reich. 2011. “Do Minimum Wages Really
Reduce Teen Employment? Accounting for Heterogeneity and Selectivity in State Panel
Data.” Industrial Relations 50(2): 205-40.
Almond, Douglas, Hilary Hoynes, and Diane W. Schanzenbach. 2011. “Inside the War on
Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes.” Review of Economics and Statistics
93(2): 387-403.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review
103(6): 2121-68.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Bastian, Jacob, and Katherine Michelmore. “The Long-Term Impact of the Earned Income Tax
Credit on Children’s Education and Employment Outcomes.” Forthcoming in Journal of Labor
Economics.
Bishaw, Alemayahu. 2014. “Changes in Areas with Concentrated Poverty: 2000 to 2010.”
American Community Survey Reports. U.S. Census Bureau, June.
Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. “What Mean Impacts Miss:
Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments.” American Economic Review 86(4):
988-1012.
Bogue, Donald. 2000a. “Census Tract Data, 1940: Elizabeth Mullen Bogue File.” ICPSR02930v1. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor],
available at http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR02930.v1 (viewed February 15, 2015).
Bogue, Donald. 2000b. “Census Tract Data, 1950: Elizabeth Mullen Bogue File. ICPSR02931-v1.
Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor],
available at http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR02931.v1 (viewed February 15, 2015).
Bogue, Donald. 2000c. “Census Tract Data, 1960: Elizabeth Mullen Bogue File. ICPSR02932-v1.
Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor],
available at http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR02932.v1 (viewed February 15, 2015).
Card, David, and Dean R. Hyslop. 2005. “Estimating the Effects of a Time-Limited Earnings
Subsidy for Welfare-Leavers.” Econometrica 73(6): 1723-70.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where Is the Land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129(4): 1553-622.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2016. “The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession:
Evidence of Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers.”
Unpublished paper.
Dahl, Molly, Thomas DeLeire, and Jonathan Schwabish. 2009. “Stepping Stone or Dead End? The

Effect of the EITC on Earnings Growth.” National Tax Journal 62(2): 329-46.
Dube, Arindrajit. 2017. “Minimum Wages and the Distribution of Family Incomes.” IZA
Discussion Paper 10572.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. “Minimum Wage Effects Across
State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties.” Review of Economics and Statistics
92(4): 945-64.
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 605-37.
Fang, Hanming, and Michael P. Keane. 2004. “Assessing the Impact of Welfare Reform on Single
Mothers.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1-95.
Federal Reserve System and Brookings Institution. 2008. The Enduring Challenge of
Concentrated Poverty in America: Case Studies from Communities Across the U.S., available
at https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/1024_concentrated_poverty.pdf
(viewed February 13, 2017).
Grogger, Jeffrey. 2009. “Welfare Reform, Returns to Experience, and Wages: Using Reservation
Wages to Account for Sample Selection Bias.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(3):
490-502.
Grogger, Jeffrey. 2003. “The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on
Welfare Use, Work, and Income among Female-Headed Households.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 85(2): 394-408.
Haveman, Robert, Rebecca Blank, Robert Moffitt, Timothy Smeeding, and Geoffrey Wallace.
2015. “The War on Poverty: Measurement, Trends, and Policy.” Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management 34(3): 593-638.
Hotz, V. Joseph, Guido W. Imbens, and Jacob A. Klerman. 2006. “Evaluating the Differential
Effects of Alternative Welfare-to-Work Training Components: A Reanalysis of the California
GAIN Program.” Journal of Labor Economics 24(3): 521-66.
Hoynes, Hilary, Doug Miller, and David Simon. 2015. “Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit,
and Infant Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 79(1): 172-211.
Krieger, Nancy. 2006. “A Century of Census Tracts: Health & the Body Politic (1906-2006).”
Journal of Urban Health 83(3): 355-361.
Jardim, Ekaterina, Mark C. Long, Robert Plotnick, Emma van Inwegen, Jacob Vigdor, and Hilary
Wething. 2017. “Minimum Wage Increases, Wages, and Low-Wage Employment: Evidence
from Seattle.” NBER Working Paper No. 23532.
Ladd, Helen F. 1993. “Spatially Targeted Economic Development Strategies: Do They Work?”
Cityscape 1(1): 193-218.
Leigh, Andrew. 2010. “Who Benefits from the Earned Income Tax Credit? Incidence Among
Recipients, Coworkers, and Firms.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy
(Advances), 10(1): Article 45 (on-line).
Meyer, Bruce D. 2010. “The Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Recent Reforms.” In J.
R. Brown (Ed.) Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 24. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 153-80.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 1063-114.

Moffit, Robert. 2007. “Welfare Reform: The US Experience.” Working Paper 2008:13, Institute
for Labour Market Policy Evaluation, available at
https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/45781/1/573610746.pdf (viewed November 30,
2017).
Moffitt, Robert. 2015. “The U.S. Safety Net and Work Incentives: The Great Recession and
Beyond.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34(2): 458-66.
Murray, Charles. 1984. Losing Ground: American Social Policy, 1950-1980. New York: Basic
Books.
Neumark, David. 2016. Inventory of Research on Economic Self-Sufficiency. Economic SelfSufficiency Policy Research Institute, UCI. Available at
http://www.esspri.uci.edu/files/docs/2016/2016%20ESSPRI%20Preliminary%20Research%20
Inventory.pdf (viewed April 19, 2017).
Neumark, David, Brian Asquith, and Brittany Bass. In progress. “Understanding the Long-Run
Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Disadvantaged Neighborhoods.”
Neumark, David, and Olena Nizalova. 2007. “Minimum Wage Effects in the Longer Run.”
Journal of Human Resources 42(2): 435-52.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and J.M. Ian Salas. 2014. “Revisiting the Minimum WageEmployment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 67(Supplement): 608-48.
Neumark, David, and Peter Shirley. 2017. “The Long-Run Effects of the Earned Income Tax
Credit on Women’s Earnings.” NBER Working Paper No. 24114.
Neumark, David, and Helen Simpson. 2015. “Place-Based Policies.” In Handbook of Regional
and Urban Economics, Vol. 5, Gilles Duranton, Vernon Henderson, and William Strange, eds.
(Amsterdam: Elsevier), pp. 1197-287.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2011. “Does a Higher Minimum Wage Enhance the
Effectiveness of the Earned Income Tax Credit?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review
64(4): 712-46.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2007. “Minimum Wages and Employment.” Foundations
and Trends in Microeconomics 3(1-2): 1-186.
Neumark, David, and Timothy Young. In progress. “The Longer-Run Effects of Enterprise
Zones.”
Neumark, David, and Timothy Young. 2017. “Government Programs Can Improve Local Labor
Markets, But Do They? A Re-Analysis of Ham, Swenson, Imrohoroğlu, and Song (2011).”
IZA Discussion Paper No. 11168.
Quester, Aline O. 1980. “State Minimum Wage Laws, 1950-1980.” In Report of the Minimum
Wage Study Commission, Vol 2. The Commission, June 1981, 23-152.
Rosenbaum, Dorothy. 2013. The Relationship Between SNAP and Work Among Low-Income
Households. Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, Washington, DC.
Sabia, Joseph J., and Richard V. Burkhauser. 2010. “Minimum Wages and Poverty: Will a $9.50
Federal Minimum Wage Really Help the Working Poor?” Southern Economic Journal 76(3):
592-623.
Sabia, Joseph J., and Thanh Tam Nguyen. 2017. “Do Minimum Wages Really Reduce Public
Assistance Receipt?” Unpublished paper, San Diego State University.

Sutch, Richard. 2010. “The Unexpected Long-Run Impact of the Minimum Wage: An Educational
Cascade.” In P.W. Rhode, J.L. Rosenbloom, and D. Weiman (Eds.) Economic Evolution and
Revolution in Historical Time. Stanford: Stanford University Press, pp. 387-418.
Tatian, Peter A., Chris Hayes, Simone Zhang. 2003. “Neighborhood Change Database, 1970-2010
Tract Data, Data Users’ Guide Long Form Release, Appendix L.” Washington, D.C., The
Urban Institute, 2003, pp. 1-8.
Thompson, Jeffrey P. 2009. “Using Local Labor Market Data to Re-Examine the Employment
Effects of the Minimum Wage.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 62(3): 343-66.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1994. Geographic Areas Reference
Manual. Washington, D.C.: U. S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics
Administration, Bureau of the Census.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 2002. Measuring America: The Decennial
Censuses from 1790 to 2000. Washington, D.C.: U. S. Department of Commerce, Economics
and Statistics Administration, Bureau of the Census.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Various years. Characteristics of State Plans for
Aid to Families with Dependent Children. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Administration for Children and Families, Office of Family Assistance.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Various years. Aid to Families with
Dependent Children: State Maximums and Other Limitations on Money Payments, And
Federal Matching Provisions Under the Social Security Act. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Social and Rehabilitation Service, Office of
Information Sciences, National Center for Social Statistics.
Watson, Tara. 2009. “Inequality and the Measurement of Residential Segregation by Income in
American Neighborhoods.” Review of Income and Wealth 55(3): 820-44.
Wilson, William J. 1990. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public
Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

9.00

40

8.00

35

7.00

30

6.00

25

5.00

20

4.00

15

3.00
2.00

10

1.00

5

0.00

1970
Minimum

1980

1990

Maximum

2000
Average

2006-2010

No. state MWs > federal

Nominal minimum wage

Figure 1: State Level Minimum Wage Variation (Nominal)

0

No. > federal

Figure 2: State Level EITC Variation (Phase-In Rate, 2 Children)

Phase-in rate

0.50

20

0.40

15

0.30
10

0.20

5

0.10
0.00

1970
Minimum

1980
Maximum

1990

2000
Average

2006-2010

0

No. > federal

No. state EITCs > federal

25

0.60

Figure 3: Welfare Benefits (Nominal) for Family of Three
Montly benefits, family of 3 with 2
children

1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

1970

1980

Minimum

1990

2000

Maximum

2006-2010

Average

Figure 4: Welfare Time Limits
40
35

Number of states

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

1970

1980
60-month time limit

1990

2000
Shorter time limit

2006-2010

Figure 5: 1970 Disadvantage by Tract, Based on Share in Poverty, for Areas Tracted in 1970

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics on Outcomes and Tract Characteristics

Outcomes
Average earnings per household (nominal)
Employment rate, male and female civilians aged 16+
Employment rate, female civilians aged 16+
Employment rate, male civilians aged 16+
Share of population in poverty
Share of households on public assistance

1980
(1)

1990
(2)

2000
(3)

2006-2010
(average)
(4)

18,596.5
(7,510.8)
59.6
(10.6)
48.6
(10.4)
71.8
(12.2)
11.1
(10.5)
7.52
(8.19)

34,497.8
(16,825.4)
62.4
(11.4)
54.8
(11.3)
70.8
(12.5)
12.4
(12.4)
7.56
(8.51)

48,765.7
(24,482.2)
60.5
(11.2)
54.6
(10.9)
67.1
(12.7)
12.7
(11.7)
8.29
(8.18)

60,079.7
(32,631.8)
61.8
(11.2)
56.5
(11.4)
67.8
(13.5)
14.6
(13.1)
2.83
(3.68)

35,589.5
(18,342.4)
53.8
(12.8)
23.0
(14.8)
14.5
(11.1)

44,809.2
(26,095.8)
56.6
(12.9)
24.2
(16.1)
4.49
(5.22)

Outcomes: most-disadvantaged tracts (share in poverty, 1970)
Average earnings per household (nominal)
12,830.6
23,889.8
(5,361.9) (12,007.5)
Employment rate, male and female civilians aged 16+
52.4
54.9
(11.0)
(12.9)
Share of population in poverty
22.4
24.6
(13.5)
(16.0)
Share of households on public assistance
14.8
14.7
(11.8)
(12.2)
Measures of disadvantage, 1970
Mean (SD)
Initial share poverty
10.9
(9.72)

75th percentile
13.7

Notes: Table reports means for tract-level measures, not individual-level measures. Standard deviations are shown in
parentheses. Samples vary slightly across the different outcomes studied; sample sizes are reported in the following tables. The
estimates for the shares and percentiles of the disadvantage variables are for the samples used for the earnings regressions. The
public assistance definition excludes SSI for 2006-2010.

Table 2: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment Rate, Share in
Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Poverty Rate at Baseline (1970), 1980-2010
Public
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
assistance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log minimum wage
0.1474*
0.2359***
-0.0608
-0.3102*
(0.0865)
(0.0522)
(0.1272)
(0.1750)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.0945
-0.0925
-0.1464*
-0.3437**
(0.0656)
(0.0721)
(0.0824)
(0.1680)
Log EITC phase-in rate
0.0537**
-0.0168
-0.2095***
-0.1869***
(0.0256)
(0.0193)
(0.0303)
(0.0527)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
0.0087
0.0248***
-0.0415***
-0.1015***
(0.0109)
(0.0063)
(0.0146)
(0.0219)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0389
-0.0007
0.0308
0.0312
(0.0361)
(0.0191)
(0.0719)
(0.0822)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
-0.0158
0.0000
0.1661***
0.1671***
(0.0185)
(0.0113)
(0.0331)
(0.0404)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0068
-0.0282**
-0.0220
0.0088
(0.0230)
(0.0110)
(0.0246)
(0.0301)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0106
-0.0158
-0.0790***
-0.1027**
(0.0268)
(0.0134)
(0.0263)
(0.0491)
Adjusted R2
0.69
0.74
0.79
0.77
N
206,675
206,836
206,710
206,675
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The specification corresponds to equation (2) in the text; only the coefficients of DISbc∙Pcst and DISbc∙Pcs,t−10 are
reported. Earnings are defined as average earned income per household. All outcomes, and the minimum wage, EITC, and
welfare benefits variables, are in logs. (The EITC phase-in rate is scaled from zero to 100, with one replacing zero, prior to
taking logs.) Thus, the estimates of the minimum wage, EITC, and welfare benefits coefficients can be interpreted as
elasticities for the disadvantaged tracts (i.e., those in the top quartile of disadvantage), relative to other tracts. The welfare
time limits variable is a dummy variable, so its estimated effect approximates the percentage change in the outcome in
disadvantaged tracts when welfare time limits are shorter. ***, **, or * indicates statistically significantly different from zero at
the 1-, 5-, or 10-percent level. Standard errors are clustered by state.

Table 3: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, the Employment Rate, the Share in Poverty, and the Share on Public
Assistance, in Areas with Low Education, High Share Black, or High Share of Single Mothers at Baseline (1970), 1980-2010

Log minimum wage
10-year lag of log
minimum wage
Log EITC phase-in rate
10-year lag of log
EITC phase-in rate
Log maximum
welfare benefit
10-year lag of log
maximum welfare benefit
Welfare time limit
<60 months
10-year lag of welfare time
limits <60 months
Adjusted R2
N
Tract fixed effects
County x year interactions

Average earnings per household
Share
Share
Share
≤ HSG
black
SM
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.0307
-0.0811
0.0281
(0.0760)
(0.0604)
(0.0630)
-0.0267
-0.0625
-0.0299
(0.0654)
(0.0570)
(0.0598)
0.0659**
0.0485** 0.0683***
(0.0264)
(0.0235)
(0.0186)
-0.0271** -0.0363**
-0.0174
(0.0120)
(0.0165)
(0.0126)
0.1239***
0.1184**
0.0947**
(0.0292)
(0.0486)
(0.0429)
-0.0140
-0.0097
-0.0211
(0.0130)
(0.0139)
(0.0172)
-0.0001
-0.0247
-0.0066
(0.0187)
(0.0325)
(0.0310)
-0.0062
0.0028
0.0100
(0.0244)
(0.0288)
(0.0315)
0.69
0.69
0.69
206,617
206,675
206,675
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Employment rate
Share
Share
Share
≤ HSG
black
SM
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.1582*** 0.1494*** 0.2420***
(0.0421)
(0.0450)
(0.0434)
-0.0511
-0.0299
-0.0807
(0.0509)
(0.0742)
(0.0490)
-0.0057
-0.0106
-0.0220
(0.0154)
(0.0225)
(0.0145)
0.0162***
0.0101
0.0203***
(0.0056)
(0.0066)
(0.0070)
-0.0180
0.0165
0.0052
(0.0143)
(0.0262)
(0.0217)
0.0166**
-0.0035
0.0073
(0.0076)
(0.0140)
(0.0136)
-0.0242**
-0.0216*
-0.0167
(0.0110)
(0.0111)
(0.0107)
-0.0117
-0.0071
0.0035
(0.0140)
(0.0136)
(0.0138)
0.74
0.74
0.74
206,776
206,836
206,836
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Share
≤ HSG
(7)
-0.0534
(0.1247)
-0.0344
(0.0821)
-0.1131***
(0.0376)
-0.0085
(0.0162)
-0.1072*
(0.0591)
0.1406***
(0.0213)
-0.0242
(0.0209)
-0.0392
(0.0242)
0.79
206,652
Yes
Yes

Share in poverty
Share
Share
black
SM
(8)
(9)
0.0147
-0.0826
(0.0960)
(0.1152)
-0.1546**
-0.1751
(0.0689)
(0.1065)
-0.1558***
-0.1450***
(0.0231)
(0.0385)
-0.0350**
-0.0167
(0.0135)
(0.0147)
0.0081
0.0368
(0.0618)
(0.0743)
0.1238***
0.1081**
(0.0324)
(0.0457)
-0.0243
0.0038
(0.0237)
(0.0269)
-0.0515**
-0.0637**
(0.0196)
(0.0268)
0.79
0.79
206,710
206,710
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Share on public assistance
Share
Share
Share
≤ HSG
black
SM
(10)
(11)
(12)
-0.2128
-0.3243
-0.2889
(0.1795)
(0.2555)
(0.1922)
-0.2092
-0.2858*
-0.3311**
(0.1355)
(0.1567)
(0.1554)
-0.0972*
-0.1256*
-0.1569***
(0.0579)
(0.0662)
(0.0527)
-0.0611** -0.0980*** -0.0916***
(0.0234)
(0.0324)
(0.0231)
-0.1573*
0.0300
0.0454
(0.0827)
(0.0917)
(0.0784)
0.1673*** 0.1217***
0.1800***
(0.0278)
(0.0377)
(0.0394)
-0.0363
0.0138
0.0022
(0.0271)
(0.0318)
(0.0291)
-0.0965**
-0.0819
-0.1257**
(0.0448)
(0.0566)
(0.0567)
0.76
0.77
0.77
206,617
206,675
206,675
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: See notes to Tables 2. The specifications differ from those in Table 2 in the measures of disadvantage used. HSG=high school graduate. SM = single mothers.

Table 4: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment Rate, Share in
Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Share Poverty at Baseline (1970), with
Migration Controls
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Public
Outcomes
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
assistance
Log minimum wage
0.1606*
0.2413***
-0.0468
-0.3573**
(0.0879)
(0.0518)
(0.1341)
(0.1721)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.0842
-0.1056
-0.1593*
-0.3731**
(0.0698)
(0.0727)
(0.0839)
(0.1570)
Log EITC phase-in rate
0.0507*
-0.0200
-0.2121***
-0.1797***
(0.0266)
(0.0194)
(0.0313)
(0.0504)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
0.0101
0.0254***
-0.0432***
-0.1010***
(0.0110)
(0.0064)
(0.0151)
(0.0210)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0354
-0.0043
0.0274
0.0316
(0.0341)
(0.0204)
(0.0694)
(0.0730)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
-0.0080
0.0001
0.1676***
0.1423***
(0.0170)
(0.0115)
(0.0306)
(0.0373)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0066
-0.0287**
-0.0245
0.0102
(0.0227)
(0.0111)
(0.0249)
(0.0282)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0157
-0.0163
-0.0784***
-0.0901*
(0.0248)
(0.0137)
(0.0273)
(0.0461)
Proportion moved from within county
-0.3640***
0.0846**
0.6772***
0.2455***
(0.0721)
(0.0327)
(0.0385)
(0.0353)
Proportion moved from somewhere else
0.2078***
0.0315
0.1329*
-0.6933***
(0.0487)
(0.0194)
(0.0745)
(0.0923)
Adjusted R2
0.83
0.78
0.84
0.79
N
206,404
206,470
206,422
206,404
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The only difference is the addition of migration controls.

Table 5: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment Rate, Share in
Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Poverty Rate at Baseline (1970), 1980-2010,
Omitting 3rd Quartile of Disadvantage
Public
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
assistance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log minimum wage
0.1631
0.2749***
-0.0615
-0.3958*
(0.1075)
(0.0637)
(0.1631)
(0.2198)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.1162
-0.1058
-0.1990*
-0.3752*
(0.0802)
(0.0947)
(0.1014)
(0.1890)
Log EITC phase-in rate
0.0700**
-0.0190
-0.2687***
-0.2143***
(0.0304)
(0.0250)
(0.0373)
(0.0595)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
0.0062
0.0288***
-0.0510**
-0.1229***
(0.0153)
(0.0092)
(0.0198)
(0.0268)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0808
0.0083
0.0141
0.0007
(0.0526)
(0.0289)
(0.1048)
(0.1104)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
-0.0257
0.0004
0.2233***
0.2172***
(0.0244)
(0.0146)
(0.0431)
(0.0492)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0047
-0.0270**
-0.0466
0.0104
(0.0301)
(0.0122)
(0.0327)
(0.0333)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0152
-0.0135
-0.0865***
-0.1229**
(0.0379)
(0.0166)
(0.0321)
(0.0496)
Adjusted R2
0.71
0.75
0.81
0.78
N
154,922
155,065
154,954
154,922
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The only difference is omitting the third quartile of the disadvantage measure.

Table 6: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment Rate, Share in
Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Poverty Rate at Baseline (1970), 1980-2010,
Top vs. Third Quartile
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
Public
Assistance
(1)
(2)
(5)
(6)
Log minimum wage
0.1176
0.1870***
0.0088
-0.1133
(0.0704)
(0.0420)
(0.0734)
(0.0936)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.0533
-0.0606
-0.1412**
-0.3444**
(0.0526)
(0.0610)
(0.0689)
(0.1433)
Log EITC phase-in rate
0.0388*
-0.0063
-0.1478***
-0.1749***
(0.0216)
(0.0156)
(0.0219)
(0.0416)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
0.0074
0.0178***
-0.0221**
-0.0602***
(0.0074)
(0.0045)
(0.0098)
(0.0144)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0061
-0.0090
0.0298
0.0288
(0.0237)
(0.0162)
(0.0630)
(0.0711)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
-0.0046
-0.0013
0.0861***
0.1041***
(0.0135)
(0.0094)
(0.0286)
(0.0338)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
0.0043
-0.0270**
-0.0167
-0.0223
(0.0131)
(0.0120)
(0.0178)
(0.0257)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0036
-0.0138
-0.0757***
-0.0735*
(0.0152)
(0.0103)
(0.0199)
(0.0413)
Adjusted R2
0.65
0.7
0.79
0.79
N
103,444
103,488
103,451
103,444
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The only difference is that the 1st and 2nd quartiles of the disadvantage measure are omitted.

Table 7: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment Rate, Share in
Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Poverty Rate at Baseline (1980), 1990-2010
Public
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
assistance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log minimum wage
0.0955
0.0704
0.0632
0.3124
(0.1527)
(0.0917)
(0.3045)
(0.5551)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.1045
-0.1045
0.2064
0.3986
(0.1046)
(0.0718)
(0.1388)
(0.2653)
Log EITC phase-in rate
-0.0068
-0.0191
0.0057
0.1029
(0.0316)
(0.0213)
(0.0393)
(0.0819)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
-0.0229
0.0267***
-0.0927***
-0.2216***
(0.0170)
(0.0099)
(0.0225)
(0.0619)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.1392**
0.0624
-0.2085**
-0.4149**
(0.0525)
(0.0454)
(0.0882)
(0.1790)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
0.0883**
-0.0207
-0.0591
-0.1408
(0.0419)
(0.0354)
(0.0636)
(0.1054)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
0.0013
-0.0241*
-0.0119
-0.0233
(0.0251)
(0.0135)
(0.0215)
(0.0243)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0064
-0.0115
-0.0578**
-0.1274**
(0.0275)
(0.0142)
(0.0269)
(0.0513)
Adjusted R2
0.68
0.75
0.81
0.76
N
175,098
175,232
175,129
175,098
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The only difference is the sample period, and the baseline year for defining disadvantage.

Table 8: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment Rate, Share in
Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Poverty Rate (10 Years Prior), 1980-2010
Public
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
assistance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log minimum wage
-0.1104
0.1861***
-0.0206
-0.3688
(0.0662)
(0.0544)
(0.1304)
(0.2540)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.1390***
-0.1423***
0.2055***
0.1728
(0.0374)
(0.0339)
(0.0707)
(0.1276)
Log EITC phase-in rate
0.0488**
-0.0466**
-0.0477
0.0094
(0.0234)
(0.0180)
(0.0358)
(0.0738)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
-0.0336***
0.0227**
-0.0079
-0.1063**
(0.0119)
(0.0091)
(0.0209)
(0.0405)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0467**
-0.0090
-0.0913***
-0.0074
(0.0220)
(0.0106)
(0.0235)
(0.0344)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
0.0150
0.0079
0.0770***
0.1330***
(0.0177)
(0.0146)
(0.0248)
(0.0353)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0084
-0.0352**
0.0343
0.0234
(0.0292)
(0.0152)
(0.0277)
(0.0188)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0091
-0.0033
-0.0734***
-0.2091***
(0.0256)
(0.0178)
(0.0274)
(0.0518)
Adjusted R2
0.68
0.74
0.79
0.76
N
226,747
226,893
226,787
226,747
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The only difference is that the “baseline” disadvantage dummy variable DISb is defined as of 10
years prior to the observation rather than in a fixed baseline year (1970 in most of our analyses) – i.e., DISc,t−10 instead of
DISbc.

Table 9: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment Rate, Share in
Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Poverty Rate at Baseline (1970), 1980-2010,
with 10-year Policy Leads
Public
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
assistance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
10-year lead of log minimum wage
0.0851
0.0161
-0.0419
0.1597
(0.0820)
(0.0527)
(0.1531)
(0.1489)
Log minimum wage
0.1240*
0.2433***
0.0347
-0.2133
(0.0688)
(0.0458)
(0.1049)
(0.1350)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.1473
-0.1146
0.1618
0.0339
(0.0931)
(0.0780)
(0.0995)
(0.1545)
10-year lead of log EITC phase-in rate
-0.0430
0.0134
0.2507***
0.3500***
(0.0373)
(0.0166)
(0.0590)
(0.0751)
Log EITC phase-in rate
0.0368
-0.0219
-0.0958**
-0.0246
(0.0340)
(0.0211)
(0.0380)
(0.0571)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
0.0164
0.0193***
-0.1065***
-0.2166***
(0.0160)
(0.0054)
(0.0221)
(0.0317)
10-year lead of log maximum welfare benefit
-0.0097
0.0188
-0.1264*
-0.2090***
(0.0401)
(0.0280)
(0.0734)
(0.0680)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0574
-0.0083
-0.0315
-0.0344
(0.0379)
(0.0245)
(0.0630)
(0.0709)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
-0.0067
-0.0009
0.0950***
0.0601
(0.0226)
(0.0124)
(0.0315)
(0.0372)
10-year lead of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0131
0.0112
-0.0362*
-0.0099
(0.0124)
(0.0097)
(0.0211)
(0.0272)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0093
-0.0312**
0.0007
0.0184
(0.0251)
(0.0119)
(0.0222)
(0.0309)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0192
-0.0102
-0.0512*
-0.0530
(0.0294)
(0.0139)
(0.0290)
(0.0419)
Adjusted R2
0.69
0.74
0.79
0.77
N
206,675
206,836
206,710
206,675
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The only difference is the addition of 10-year leads of the policy variables.

Appendix Table A1: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Male and Female
Employment Rates in Areas with High Poverty Rate at Baseline (1970), 19802010
Male
Female
employment
employment
(1)
(2)
Log minimum wage
0.1800***
0.2647***
(0.0555)
(0.0585)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.0084
-0.1366
(0.0537)
(0.0875)
Log EITC phase-in rate
-0.0062
-0.0138
(0.0169)
(0.0222)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
0.0189**
0.0246***
(0.0084)
(0.0064)
Log maximum welfare benefit
-0.0001
0.0112
(0.0185)
(0.0222)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
0.0112
-0.0174
(0.0112)
(0.0133)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0237**
-0.0334***
(0.0114)
(0.0123)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0251*
0.0008
(0.0147)
(0.0149)
Adjusted R2
0.71
0.66
N
206,823
206,791
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The only difference is the dependent variables.

Appendix Table A2: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment
Rate, Share in Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Poverty Rate at Baseline (1970),
1980-2010, One Policy at a Time
Public
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
assistance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I. Minimum wages
Log minimum wage
0.1505***
0.0955***
-0.2120***
-0.2133**
(0.0473)
(0.0271)
(0.0713)
(0.0960)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.3381***
-0.1353***
0.5672***
0.6021***
(0.0311)
(0.0266)
(0.0303)
(0.0527)
II. EITC
Log EITC phase-in rate
0.0926***
0.0229***
-0.1430***
-0.1113***
(0.0126)
(0.0080)
(0.0091)
(0.0124)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
-0.0030
0.0031
-0.0110
-0.0459***
(0.0051)
(0.0044)
(0.0068)
(0.0057)
III. Welfare
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0964***
0.0261
-0.2302**
-0.3222***
(0.0316)
(0.0192)
(0.1048)
(0.0989)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
0.0635***
0.0289***
-0.0561**
-0.0756**
(0.0162)
(0.0094)
(0.0267)
(0.0300)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
0.0361**
-0.0171
-0.0844***
-0.0295
(0.0175)
(0.0119)
(0.0271)
(0.0318)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0004
0.0094
-0.1458***
-0.2399***
(0.0173)
(0.0084)
(0.0277)
(0.0383)
Adjusted R2
0.69
0.74
0.79
0.77
N
206,675
206,836
206,710
206,675
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The difference in this table is that each panel reports estimates of the specification using
minimum wage, EITC, and welfare variables separately, rather than simultaneously.

Appendix Table A3: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment
Rate, Share in Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Poverty Rate at Baseline (1970),
1980-2010, Saturated Model Absorbing Federal Variation Across Disadvantaged vs. Advantaged Tracts
Public
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
assistance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log minimum wage
0.0745
0.2223***
0.3598**
0.2552
(0.0968)
(0.0789)
(0.1563)
(0.1980)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.1598**
-0.0960
0.3478***
0.3161**
(0.0782)
(0.0766)
(0.0952)
(0.1294)
Log EITC phase-in rate
-0.1003
-0.0494
-0.1924
-0.0100
(0.0989)
(0.0449)
(0.1312)
(0.1792)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
-0.0326
0.0404
0.2063
0.3811
(0.1559)
(0.0567)
(0.2410)
(0.3237)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0642*
-0.0022
-0.1221***
-0.1714**
(0.0376)
(0.0193)
(0.0453)
(0.0643)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
0.0018
0.0017
0.0826***
0.0492
(0.0240)
(0.0139)
(0.0255)
(0.0340)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0104
-0.0290**
-0.0166
0.0194
(0.0226)
(0.0112)
(0.0221)
(0.0230)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0212
-0.0166
-0.0521
-0.0553
(0.0280)
(0.0140)
(0.0329)
(0.0571)
Adjusted R2
0.69
0.74
0.79
0.77
N
206,675
206,836
206,710
206,675
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The only difference is the inclusion of the DISb∙YR interactions.

Appendix Table A4: Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on Average Earnings per Household, Employment
Rate, Share in Poverty, and Share on Public Assistance in Areas with High Share Poverty at Baseline
(1970), Separate Effects of Welfare Benefits Post-Welfare Reform, 1980-2010
Public
Earnings
Employment
Poverty
assistance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log minimum wage
0.1193
0.1883***
-0.0294
-0.2503
(0.0895)
(0.0519)
(0.1409)
(0.1834)
10-year lag of log minimum wage
-0.1381
-0.1021
-0.2096**
-0.3784**
(0.0899)
(0.0825)
(0.1009)
(0.1597)
Log EITC phase-in rate
-0.0491
-0.0680
-0.2971**
-0.2072
(0.0923)
(0.0507)
(0.1474)
(0.2795)
10-year lag of log EITC phase-in rate
0.0157
0.0266***
-0.0289
-0.0930**
(0.0138)
(0.0062)
(0.0203)
(0.0353)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0453
-0.0109
0.0455
0.0485
(0.0379)
(0.0234)
(0.0726)
(0.0814)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
-0.0147
0.0037
0.1549***
0.1538***
(0.0208)
(0.0108)
(0.0297)
(0.0404)
Log maximum welfare benefit
0.0227
0.0650**
-0.1366
-0.1832
x post-welfare reform
(0.0503)
(0.0319)
(0.0979)
(0.1679)
10-year lag of log maximum welfare benefit
-0.0058
-0.0562*
0.1499
0.1854
x post-welfare reform
(0.0545)
(0.0327)
(0.1041)
(0.1603)
Welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0079
-0.0284**
-0.0250
0.0065
(0.0231)
(0.0112)
(0.0244)
(0.0310)
10-year lag of welfare time limits (< 60 months)
-0.0118
-0.0116
-0.0895***
-0.1143**
(0.0283)
(0.0128)
(0.0298)
(0.0505)
Adjusted R2
0.69
0.74
0.79
0.77
N
206,675
206,836
206,710
206,675
Tract fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County x year interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The only difference is the additional set of welfare benefit variables interacted with the postwelfare reform (year > 1996) variable.

