NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLITICAL DISCRETION AND ANTITRUST POLICY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT MCKINLEY
Richard B. Baker
Carola Frydman
Eric Hilt
Working Paper 25237
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25237

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We thank Paul Rhode, Timothy Guinnane, and Peter Rousseau for their thoughtful suggestions.
We would also like to thank seminar participants at Michigan, UC Santa Barbara, Wharton, Yale
and the NBER Summer Institute. Additionally, special thanks Cristina Ferlauto, Miranda Miao,
Alex Mitchell, Shrey Santosh Shetye, and Katherine Strair for research assistance. The authors
declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Richard B. Baker, Carola Frydman, and Eric Hilt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Political Discretion and Antitrust Policy: Evidence from the Assassination of President McKinley
Richard B. Baker, Carola Frydman, and Eric Hilt
NBER Working Paper No. 25237
November 2018
JEL No. N11,N21,N31,N41,N81
ABSTRACT
We study the importance of discretion in antitrust enforcement by analyzing the response of asset
prices to the sudden accession of Theodore Roosevelt to the presidency. During McKinley’s term
in office the largest wave of merger activity in American history occurred, and his administration
did not attempt to use antitrust laws to restrain any of those mergers. His vice president, Theodore
Roosevelt, was known to be a Progressive reformer and much more interested in controlling
anticompetitive behavior. We find that firms with greater vulnerability to antitrust enforcement
saw greater declines in their abnormal returns following McKinley’s assassination. The transition
from McKinley to Roosevelt caused one of the most significant changes in antitrust enforcement
of the Gilded Age—not from new legislation, but from a change in the approach taken to the
enforcement of existing law. Our results highlight the importance of enforcement efforts in
antitrust.
Richard B. Baker
School of Business
The College of New Jersey
2000 Pennington Road
Ewing, NJ 08628
rbennettbaker@gmail.com
Carola Frydman
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-frydman@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Eric Hilt
Wellesley College
Department of Economics
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ehilt@wellesley.edu

1 Introduction
Over the past 40 years, the level of concentration within many sectors of the American economy has increased
substantially. This rise in concentration has been associated with a decline in competition and labor’s share
of income, and a slowdown in aggregate output (Barkai, 2016; Autor et al., 2017; De Loecker and Eeckhout,
2017; Grullon et al., 2017).1 The failure of antitrust authorities to restrain these developments has provoked
concerns that existing antitrust statutes may no longer offer regulators adequate tools for policing anticompetitive behavior.2 Yet government agencies often hold significant discretion over regulatory enforcement,
and some have argued that stronger enforcement of existing statues could have gone a long way towards
reigning in anticompetitive forces (Baker et al., 2018). Disentangling the effects of the substance of existing statutes from the efforts exerted to enforce them is quite difficult, in no small part because enforcement
efforts are typically not easy to measure or even observe.
We study an extraordinary episode from the Gilded Age in which the enforcement of antitrust statutes
was suddenly strengthened, and show that political discretion over antitrust enforcement can have meaningful
consequences for the economy. No period in American history witnessed a more significant consolidation
of economic activity into large firms than the Great Merger wave of 1895–1904 (Nelson, 1959; Lamoreaux,
1985). William McKinley, who was elected president in 1896, was generally friendly towards business
interests, and did not attempt to use the Sherman Act to challenge these mergers. His assassination by an
anarchist in September 1901 presents a unique opportunity to study the effects of a change in the president’s
attitude towards enforcement of antitrust laws at a time when all other institutions remained unchanged. In
contrast to McKinley, Theodore Roosevelt, who succeeded him as president, had been openly critical of
big business. The sudden accession of a well-known Progressive reformer to the presidency likely shifted
expectations regarding the aggressiveness with which antitrust laws would be enforced.
We use the stock market’s reaction to the McKinley assassination to measure the expected impact of this
change in preferences over antitrust enforcement. The quasi-random nature of the assassination enables us
to estimate the market’s reaction in a way that election outcomes, which were generally well anticipated, do
1

Though the recent rise in concentration is well documented, there is an active ongoing debate on the degree to
which market power has changed in recent decades. See, among others, De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), Gutierrez
and Philippon (2017), Traina (2018), and Hall (2018).
2
For example, an influential piece in the New York Times argued that “The century-old antitrust laws do not seem
up to the task. Perhaps it is time to create laws for a new Gilded Age and provide regulators the power to determine if
megadeals are truly good for America” (“Changing Old Antitrust Thinking for a New Gilded Age,” 22 July 2014.) A
2016 report by The Roosevelt Institute, a think tank, also called for new antitrust laws (Abernathy et al., 2016).

1

not (see Rhode and Strumpf, 2004). The assassination did not coincide with any other major changes; the
composition of Congress, the courts, and even the attorney general remained unchanged. But a president who
wanted vigorous antitrust enforcement unexpectedly replaced one who had not. In response to the shooting
of McKinley, the value of NYSE-traded firms fell by an average of 6.2 percent. To put this magnitude
in perspective, the stock market declined by only 1.6 percent on average over the six other presidential
assassinations and nearly successful assassination attempts we have identified. Importantly, the change in
aggressiveness with which antitrust laws were expected to be enforced meant that firms that had engaged
in mergers prior to the assassination were more likely to be vulnerable. We find that following McKinley’s
shooting, firms involved in recent mergers saw declines in their abnormal returns that were 1.5 to 2 percentage
points greater than those of other firms. We also identify a group of firms that were likely to have been
expected to benefit from stronger antitrust enforcement and show that the decline in their abnormal returns
was about 2 to 3 percentage points smaller than that of other firms. These results suggest that investors
expected a change in antitrust enforcement, and that they anticipated that these new policies would have
meaningful impacts.
A possible source of concern regarding these estimates is that the effects of the change from McKinley
to Roosevelt may have been confounded with the effects of a presidential assassination. The fact that an
anarchist shot the president, for example, may have been perceived as a sign of rising political instability.
Yet the experience with McKinley offers a unique opportunity to address this concern. President McKinley
initially survived the shooting, and three days later his doctors announced that they expected him to make
a “full recovery.” When that prognosis was announced, the losses experienced following his shooting were
largely reversed, and firms particularly vulnerable to antitrust enforcement saw differentially large gains.
Then, seven days following the shooting, it was suddenly announced that McKinley was in fact near death.
Upon receiving this news, the market reversed again, with an overall fall in share prices of similar magnitude.
Since the effects from political unrest should have been reflected in prices on the day of the shooting, this
latter decline in stock prices suggests that investors instead reacted to expected policy changes that would
result from Roosevelt becoming president. Finally, Roosevelt’s statements when he ultimately took the oath
of office defied expectations and signalled that he would follow McKinley’s policy agenda; these resulted in
differential gains for firms that would have been more likely targets of renewed efforts to enforce antitrust
statues.
An additional source of concern is that the transition from McKinley to Roosevelt may have been re2

garded as harmful to particular firms for reasons unrelated to antitrust enforcement. For example, Roosevelt
may have been perceived as less friendly to corporations affiliated with major donors to McKinley’s campaign, such as those connected to J.P. Morgan & Company, or the founders of Standard Oil, and to be more
friendly towards firms whose executives or directors were personally connected to him. If those firms were
also more likely to be part of mergers or cartels, this could explain the effects we observe on firms that had
engaged in recent mergers. Yet our results are robust to controlling for affiliations with those donors, or to
ties to Roosevelt. It is also possible that Roosevelt’s policy agenda may have differed from McKinley’s on
issues beyond antitrust enforcement. We show that the two most plausible policy differences—on tariffs and
labor relations—are unlikely to be the main drivers of our results.
Once in office, Roosevelt violated his pledge to follow McKinley’s agenda and began to enforce the
Sherman Act more aggressively. To validate our approach to estimating the role of antitrust issues in the
market’s reaction to the assassination, we use an event study methodology to analyze the stock market’s
response to the announcement of his first antitrust suit. On February 19, 1902, Roosevelt’s attorney general
announced that he was going to file suit against the Northern Securities Company, an enormous holding
company formed by J.P. Morgan in 1901 that controlled several major competing railroads. Plans for this
suit were kept secret, which enables us to observe the market’s assessment of the expected change in antitrust
doctrine that would result from the suit. Our analysis indicates that many of the firms whose shares performed
worse in response to bad news regarding McKinley’s health also suffered differentially low abnormal returns
following the announcement of the suit.
The analysis of stock market returns only allows us to study the effects expected by investors over a very
short horizon. To provide insights into the longer-run effects of stricter enforcement of antitrust statutes, we
construct a panel of accounting data for NYSE-listed railroads, and investigate whether the profitability of
those most likely to have been affected by Roosevelt’s policy changes declined differentially.3 The results
suggest that the railroads that were differentially vulnerable to stricter antitrust enforcement did indeed see
their profitability fall, by about 10 percent more than that of other firms. Although we cannot use this
difference-in-difference approach to assess the welfare impact of the change in policies, our findings at
least suggest that stronger enforcement of antitrust laws may have had strong and persistent redistributive
3

We restrict this analysis to railroads for two reasons. First, many of the industrial companies in our sample were
formed in the years immediately prior to 1901, meaning that there would be little or no “pre-period” for the analysis.
But more importantly, as we will see below, many industrial firms disclosed very little accounting data regarding their
operations, whereas railroads were required to do so by the Interstate Commerce Commission.

3

consequences.
Our results highlight the importance of enforcement efforts in antitrust. Recent years have witnessed
growing interest in reforms intended to reinvigorate antitrust (see Shapiro, 2018, and the references cited
therein). The transition from McKinley to Roosevelt had a significant impact on firm valuations, and resulted
in a large number of antitrust suits by the federal government that almost certainly would not have been
initiated under McKinley. The structure of antitrust enforcement is much more institutionalized today than it
was in 1901 (Crane, 2011), and recent presidential administrations have exhibited a high degree of continuity
in their approaches to the issue (Crane, 2012). Nonetheless, scholars interested in designing strategies to
address the growth of economic concentration should not neglect the role of enforcement efforts. One of the
most significant changes in antitrust enforcement of the Gilded Age resulted not from new legislation, but
from a change in the approach taken to the enforcement of existing law when Roosevelt became president.
More generally, our findings imply that, in at least some circumstances, discretion over the enforcement
of the law may be just as important as the substance of the law itself. A substantial literature has analyzed
the choice between rules and discretion in a variety of policy contexts.4 The results of this paper suggest
that the adoption of rules may not eliminate or even significantly constrain discretion. Our paper also relates
to the literature on the effects of policy uncertainty or political risk on economic activity and equity markets
(Baker et al., 2016; Pástor and Veronesi, 2012). Although that work has primarily focused on aggregate
sources of risk, Hassan et al. (2017) have shown that exposure to political risk varies considerably across
firms, depending on how likely they are to be the target of regulatory efforts. We advance this literature
with our analysis of a historical episode that demonstrates that discretion over the enforcement of existing
regulations may be an important source of political risk for firms.
This paper also contributes to an older literature that has utilized stock prices to evaluate the effects
of antitrust regulation on American companies. These studies often find modest to negligible effects of
antitrust enforcement (Binder, 1988; Bittlingmayer, 1993), merger activity (Eckbo and Wier, 1985), and
forced dissolution of trusts (Burns, 1977).5 One potential limitation of these studies, however, is that they
4

The classic example is monetary policy (Friedman, 1948 is an early contribution), but some of the other contexts
in which the choice has been studied include financial regulation (Tarullo, 2001; Brunnermeier et al., 2009), loan
rate setting (Cerqueiro et al., 2011), emergency liquidity provision (Hauck and Vollmer, 2013), and bank supervision
(Lastra, 2013).
5
In contrast, Prager (1992) finds that various decisions related to the Northern Securities case had a significant legal
precedent effect on the value of other railroads from 1901 to 1905. Mullin et al. (1995) find large positive effects on
the value of downstream customers of US Steel following the initiation of the (unsuccessful) suit for its dissolution in
1911.

4

focus mostly on events that were likely to have been anticipated by the market, and were therefore largely
priced in during the period under analysis. In contrast, we study unanticipated events and find larger negative
effects of antitrust enforcement on potential targets.
We also add to a literature that uses the deaths of national leaders to study their effects on institutional
development (for example, Jones and Olken, 2005; 2009). In contrast to theories that hold that social and
economic forces, rather than particular individuals, determine the course of history, this literature finds that
individual leaders do matter and emphasizes the role of historical contingency in economic development.
The results of this paper are consistent with that literature in that they imply that the accession of Roosevelt
to the presidency resulted in significant changes in economic policy. The accession of Roosevelt may in
fact have marked a significant turning point in American history, making a total consolidation of power by
plutocratic interests, or a rise to the presidency of a radical populist, less likely.
Finally, our results also shed some light on the longstanding debate among historians regarding the
McKinley and Roosevelt presidencies. Whereas McKinley is traditionally viewed as a puppet of plutocrats
(Josephson, 1934), a revisionist view has argued that he had shifted toward a more reformist orientation
by the time of his assassination and would have acted against the trusts had he served out his second term
(Phillips, 2003; Morgan, 2003). Likewise Roosevelt is often portrayed as a bold reformer (Morris, 2001;
2002), whereas others have argued that he was in fact quite conservative (Kolko, 1967), and that he “might
not perhaps have been a progressive at all if it were not for the necessity of fending off more radical threats”
(Hofstadter, 1955). The large stock price movements documented in this paper around McKinley’s assassination imply that the market perceived Roosevelt to be quite different from McKinley in his stance toward
business.

2 Historical Background: McKinley, Roosevelt, and the Assassination
2.1 McKinley and Antitrust
William McKinley’s rise to the presidency in 1896 was largely due to the efforts of political entrepreneur
Mark Hanna, who engineered McKinley’s campaigns for Governor of Ohio, Congress, and President of
the United States. A businessman with interests in banking, newspapers, and several other sectors, Hanna
became active in politics as a representative of “the business interest” in the Republican Party (Croly, 1912:
145).
5

Hanna’s success as the chair of the Republican National Committee was due in part to his abilities as a
fundraiser. He appealed directly to the wealthiest industrialists and financiers for contributions, and quickly
amassed unprecedented sums to finance the 1896 presidential campaign (Pollock, 1926). The political platform of the Democratic Party also aided Hanna’s fundraising efforts. Whereas the Republicans endorsed the
gold standard, the Democrats nominated William Jennings Bryan, a populist who advocated for free coinage
of silver at an overvalued rate and for the regulation of trusts. Hanna obtained significant contributions from
the financial and industrial interests that were most threatened by the prospect of a Bryan presidency, such
as Standard Oil and J.P. Morgan, and raised at least $3.5 million (Eichengreen et al., 2017), whereas the
Democrats’ campaign budget was just over $400,000 (Croly, 1912: 220).6
During McKinley’s presidency, the greatest wave of industrial mergers in American history took place.
Its onset was triggered by a variety of forces (Lamoreaux, 1985), including an unintended consequence
of the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, the first federal antitrust statute. As interpreted by the courts, the
Sherman Act prohibited anticompetitive practices such as price fixing and pooling arrangements. Yet in its
E. C. Knight decision of 1895, the Supreme Court held that since manufacturing itself was not commerce,
the monopolization of manufacturing capacity through horizontal mergers was not subject to the federal
government’s constitutional power to regulate interstate commerce.7 This decision was widely interpreted
as holding that mergers among competitors did not violate the Sherman Act (Bittlingmayer, 1985). Thus
competing firms would run afoul of the law if they formed a cartel, but apparently would not if they simply
merged. A massive wave of industrial mergers followed during the years 1895–1904; these were largely
horizontal mergers, and many of the new combinations individually controlled more than 70% of the national
market for their goods (Moody, 1904; Nutter, 1951). Appendix Section A.3.3 presents a detailed description
of the history of antitrust legislation during that time.
Although not as large, a significant wave of railroad mergers also occurred during McKinley’s presidency,
particularly in 1900 and 1901. The Supreme Court’s Trans-Missouri and Joint Traffic Association decisions
held that the Sherman Act applied to railroads and that price-fixing arrangements among railroads were
6

As a constant share of GDP, the Republican budget in the 1896 campaign is equivalent to $4.2 billion in 2016, much
more than the estimated $2.65 billion spent in total on the 2016 presidential campaign. In contrast, the Republicans had
raised only $1.6 million for the presidential campaign of 1892 (C. N. Bliss, Jr., in Senate Subcommittee on Campaign
Finance (1913: vol 1, p. 204); data for the 2016 campaign reported in www.cbsnews.com/news/election-2016s-pricetag-6-8-billion/, accessed 12 February 2018).
7
United States v. E. C. Knight, 156 U.S. 1 (1895).

6

illegal.8 Although a number of different factors contributed to the subsequent mergers, and although the
E.C. Knight decision did not directly address the issue of whether the merger of competing railroads would
violate the Sherman Act, these decisions likely contributed to subsequent railroad merger activity.
The McKinley administration made no attempt to enforce the Sherman Act against any of these firms;
during his presidency, “antitrust enforcement reached a low-water mark equaled during no other period”
(Thorelli, 1955: 405). McKinley’s attorneys general explained this inaction by stating that the E. C. Knight
decision tied their hands, as it held that mergers were not reached by the Sherman Act (Letwin, 1965: 13742). Yet this ignored the possibilities presented in the subsequent Trans-Missouri, Joint Traffic and Addyston
Pipe decisions, and the fact that the government’s strategy in the E. C. Knight case was poorly conceived.9
A presidential administration hoping to restrain anticompetitive mergers could have at least tested these
possibilities; that McKinley’s attorneys general never did reflects a policy preference.

2.2 Vice President Roosevelt
McKinley’s Vice President, Theodore Roosevelt, was quite different. As Governor of New York, he enacted
important Progressive reforms, including a corporate franchise tax, and successfully opposed the reappointment of a corrupt “machine politician” as the state’s regulator of insurance companies (Roosevelt, 1920:
285-304). His annual message as governor in 1900 focused on the trust problem, and detailed many abuses
perpetrated by large corporations, including “unfair competition,” “raising of prices,” and the “crushing out
of competitors who do no act improperly.” As a state governor, he did not specifically comment on federal
antitrust enforcement, but he did call for corporation laws to include stricter disclosure requirements, to help
with the design and enforcement of business regulations (Roosevelt, 1926).
Following the battle over the choice of insurance commissioner, representatives of New York’s insurance
companies urged Senator Thomas C. Platt, boss of New York’s Republican machine, to find a way to remove
him from office. Since Roosevelt was an extremely popular politician, challenging his renomination for
governor would have been folly. Instead, a plan was devised to add him to the national ticket, to replace
8
United States v. Trans-Missouri Freight Association, 166 U.S. 290 (1897); United States v. Joint Traffic Association, 171 U.S. 505 (1898).
9
As Letwin (1965: 161-67) notes, if the government had focused on the commercial activities of the firm, it would
likely have been decided differently. One of the authors of the Sherman Act, Senator George Edmunds, was more
forceful: “if the famous Knight case had been instituted and carried forward with suitable allegations of the precise
nature and history of the Knight affair, and had been supported, as it could have been, by adequate proof of the facts
it set forth, I believe the Supreme Court of the United States would not have had the least difficulty in preventing the
carrying on of the combination under consideration, and putting an end to it ...” (Martin, 1908: 156).

7

the recently deceased Vice President Hobart. Although neither Hanna nor McKinley publicly opposed the
nomination, behind the scenes Hanna tried to build support for other candidates. In one heated outburst,
Hanna presciently exclaimed: “Don’t any of you realize that there’s only one life between that madman and
the Presidency?”10 But the support Roosevelt received at the Republican convention proved impossible to
resist; Hanna quietly withdrew his objections, and Roosevelt himself accepted.
Privately, Roosevelt had expressed concerns regarding the McKinley Administration’s extreme forbearance with respect to antitrust enforcement, and its electoral consequences for the Republican Party.11 In
public, however, he aggressively defended the McKinley Administration’s achievements.

2.3 The Assassination and Roosevelt’s Accession to the Presidency
On Friday September 6, 1901, President McKinley was shot twice by an anarchist while attending the PanAmerican Exhibition in Buffalo, New York. The best qualified surgeon available to treat him was a gynecologist with no experience with bullet wounds. The surgery was only partially successful, and one of the
bullets was not found (Rauchway, 2003).
The shooting occurred at around 4 PM, just as the stock market closed. That evening, in the hotels
where traders gathered after hours, “the air was filled with rumor and speculation” regarding the shooting
and its consequences for financial markets.12 Journalists asked prominent figures for comments regarding
the possible consequences of Roosevelt becoming president. Many praised Roosevelt’s essential “ability and
integrity” and predicted that becoming president would make him “conservative and cautious,” perhaps in
an attempt to calm investors.13 Yet some commentators were openly (if tactfully) pessimistic, and reported
a “belief that Roosevelt is somewhat adversely inclined towards corporations,” and that under a Roosevelt
presidency, “all manufacturing and financial interests will suffer, and, of course, railroads will be seriously
affected.”14 One prominent commentator argued that a Roosevelt presidency would be bad for merger activity, stating that “plans for combinations in the railroad world will, however, have to wait until the news
10

Quoted in Leech (1959: 537). Morgan (2003: 376) presents a slightly different version of this quotation.
For example, Roosevelt wrote to Henry Cabot Lodge: “Around the State of New York I am surprised to find
how many of the workingmen who were with us three years ago, are now sullenly grumbling that McKinley is under
Hanna’s dictation; that Bryan is the only man who can control the trusts; and that the trusts are crushing the life out of
the small men, etc., etc.” (10 August 1899, in Roosevelt, 1951a).
12
“Market to Be Supported,” New-York Daily Tribune 7 September 1901.
13
“Think Business Interests Safe,” Chicago Tribune, 7 Sept. 1901.
14
Cleveland Plain Dealer, 8 September 1901; Chicago Tribune, 7 Sept. 1901.
11

8

from Buffalo is definitely more reassuring.”15
On Saturday September 7, the market declined sharply, with stocks falling 6.2 percent on average. Fearing runs by depositors, the New York Clearinghouse Committee authorized a series of emergency measures
to support the commercial banking system, and prominent financiers resolved to support prices on the stock
market. Over the following days, the treasury also supported market liquidity through open-market purchases
of federal debt securities.16
Following his surgery, McKinley’s condition improved, and his physicians offered optimistic assessments of his chances.17 When the markets reopened on Monday, September 9, firms’ valuations largely
recovered, with an average increase of 3.3 percent. Still, financial markets continued to follow the daily reports of McKinley’s condition very closely. “The prevailing opinion,” according to the Chicago Tribune, was
that “the stock market will be controlled largely during the coming week by the nature of the bulletins sent
from the President’s bedside.”18 These remained consistently favorable, and by September 10 physicians
declared that McKinley was “practically out of danger.”19
In the early morning hours of Friday September 13, however, McKinley’s condition suddenly became
grave.20 The market opened on the 13th with heavy declines, and by the time it closed, prices had fallen by
an average of 5.1 percent. This magnitude is similar to the decline experienced on September 7 in response
to the shooting. But the decline on the 13th was purely a response to the expected transition from McKinley
to Roosevelt; any adverse consequence of the shooting itself, such as expectations of greater social conflict
due to the rise of anarchism, should have already been reflected in asset prices following the 7th.
President McKinley died at 2:15 AM on Saturday the 14th, and the NYSE was closed in mourning on
that day. After taking the oath of office, Roosevelt announced: “In this hour of deep and terrible national
bereavement I wish to state that it shall be my aim to continue absolutely unbroken the policy of President
McKinley for the peace and prosperity and honor of our beloved country.” Roosevelt also stated that he
would retain McKinley’s entire cabinet. This dispelled fears that he would break with McKinley on key
policy issues and was interpreted as a sign that “the president’s death would not be disturbing” to financial
15

Henry E. Wallace, in New-York Daily Tribune 8 September 1901.
These events are detailed in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle, 4 January 1902, p. 13-14.
17
For example, the front page of the New York Times reported that “Mr. Roosevelt gets reassuring news” on September 8, and that “Physicians say they are certain he will get well. All symptoms favorable” on September 9.
18
Chicago Tribune 9 September 1901.
19
“President Past the Crisis,” New-York Daily Tribune 11 September 1901.
20
The physician’s bulletin issued at 3 AM stated that “the worst is feared. His death might occur any time,” New
York Times, September 13, 1901.
16

9

markets.21 When the market reopened on Monday the 16th, prices increased 4.9 percent on average.
Our empirical analysis, therefore, utilizes the four most relevant dates described above to discern the
effects of a change in policy between McKinley and Roosevelt: September 7 and 13, dates when the market
received negative news about McKinley’s health, and September 9 and 16, when the market was told that
McKinley would survive and that Roosevelt would continue with McKinley’s agenda, respectively.22

2.4 Impact of the Assassination in Historical Perspective
One way to gauge the magnitude of the expected change in policy resulting from the sudden transition from
McKinley to Roosevelt is to compare its effect on stock prices to those associated with other assassinations
and assassination attempts made on U.S. presidents. Table 1 presents the stock market’s one-day reaction to
assassination attempts in which someone actually fired a gun at the president.23
It should be noted that the variation of the timing of the different shootings relative to the opening hours
of the NYSE, and the variation in the institutional response of the NYSE to the news of the shooting, limits
comparability across events. For example, trading on the NYSE was halted shortly after President Kennedy
was assassinated, which may have curtailed the decline in prices on that day. Nonetheless, some suggestive evidence on the perceived significance of the transition from McKinley to Roosevelt relative to other
assassinations can be found in the table.
Excluding McKinley’s, the shootings resulted in an average decline in share prices of 1.6 percent, suggesting that the transition from the president to the vice president typically does not signify a dramatic change
in policy. Yet the stock market’s decline in reaction to the shooting of McKinley was nearly four times as
large as the average for the other events, and about twice as large as the decline in prices when President
Garfield was shot, the second-largest stock market reaction of record. McKinley’s was also the only presidential assassination that produced elevated economic policy uncertainty in Baker et al.’s (2016) study of
twentieth century data.
The only similar event that provoked a reaction comparable to the one caused by McKinley’s shooting
21

Commercial and Financial Chronicle, 4 January 1902, p. 14.
One concern regarding stock market data is that they could reflect other sources of volatility, for example related
to seasonal effects. Yet the standard deviation of daily returns of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) and Dow
Jones Transportation Average (DJTA) over September 6–16, 1901, was 0.030 and 0.025, respectively, nearly four times
larger than it was on average over those same days in the years 1898–1904 excluding 1901 (0.009 for the DJIA and
0.007 for the DJTA); the p-value of the difference is less than 0.0000001 in both cases.
23
Table 1 excludes an attempt made on the life of President Andrew Jackson on January 30, 1835, as it occurred
prior to the invention of the telegraph, making the arrival of news in New York difficult to time.
22

10

was the heart attack suffered by President Eisenhower on the evening of Saturday, September 24, 1955. On
the following Monday, shares on the NYSE fell by an average of 6.6 percent.24 The market reacted strongly
to Eisenhower’s heart attack because it came so late in his first term that it was believed he would not be able
to run for reelection and a Democrat would likely win the presidency in 1956.25 Thus, the stock market’s
response to the accession of Roosevelt to the presidency was roughly comparable in magnitude to the effect
of a transition from a Republican to a Democrat at the height of the Cold War.
The strong stock market reaction to McKinley’s assassination suggests that Roosevelt was perceived to
be quite different from McKinley, and less friendly toward business interests. It contradicts the arguments
of some revisionist historians that Roosevelt’s administration is best understood as a continuation of trends
that developed under McKinley (for example, Phillips, 2003). In particular, Roosevelt’s antitrust agenda was
expected to differ significantly from McKinley’s.
Some evidence that the market’s assessments were correct is found in Figure 1, which presents the annual
number of antitrust cases pursued by the federal government from the introduction of the Sherman Act in
1890 until the end of Roosevelt’s second term. McKinley’s administration initiated just three antitrust cases,
a historically low number, whereas 43 were begun during Roosevelt’s presidency. These counts of cases
actually understate the difference across the two administrations, since they do not distinguish among the
economic importance of the defendants. Whereas McKinley’s administration pursued cases against coal
dealers in California, and livestock dealers in Kansas City, Roosevelt initiated suits against some of the
largest corporations of the time, including Standard Oil, American Tobacco, Du Pont, and several major
railroads.
The strong aggregate reaction of the stock market to news relating to Roosevelt becoming president,
however, could have reflected investors’ views about a variety of other policies. To determine the effects of
a sudden change in the expected enforcement of antitrust laws, our analysis compares the variation in market
values for firms more and less likely to be directly affected by such changes in policy.
24

Calculated from CRSP; 950 price changes relative to the previous day were observed.
“Stock market trading, brokers said, appeared to be dominated by the conviction that President Eisenhower would
not again be a candidate, and ... that only he could win in 1956 for the Republicans. Traders were credited with
believing that a Democratic Administration would not be so friendly to business” (New York Times, 27 September
1955).
25

11

3 The Effect of McKinley’s Assassination on Firms
3.1 Construction of the Sample
Our analysis focuses on the variation in market values of publicly traded firms in response to the assassination. In this section, we present a brief description of the sources and methods used to construct a new
dataset containing a variety of firm characteristics, while the Appendix presents more detailed information.
Our initial sample includes all railroads and industrial firms with shares listed on the NYSE in 1901. To
calculate these firms’ stock returns, we collect daily closing prices of common shares and information on
dividend payouts from the New York Times from September 3 to September 21. At the time, the stock market
was relatively illiquid; we observe prices on at least one date for only 99 of the 134 companies we identify
as having common stock listed on the NYSE.
We focus on abnormal returns to remove the effects of general stock market price movements. We
estimate the market-model parameters over the 75 trading days prior to September 3, and exclude from the
analysis those companies for which we observe returns on fewer than half of those dates. In addition, we
collect whatever accounting data and firm characteristics are available from contemporary sources such as
Moody’s Manual. Our main sample consists of 48 firms (28 railroads and 20 industrial firms) for which
we observe abnormal stock returns and basic firm characteristics. Appendix Section A.3.1 shows that our
results are robust to instead using unadjusted returns, which allow us to include in the sample a total of 71
firms.
It should be noted that many firms whose values were likely to have been quite sensitive to changes in
antitrust enforcement, such as Standard Oil, are not included in our data because they were not listed on the
NYSE. Our estimates may therefore understate the true impact of Roosevelt’s accession to the presidency.

3.2 Hypotheses and Main Variables
3.2.1 Vulnerability to Antitrust Enforcement
If investors expected Roosevelt to act more aggressively than McKinley toward anticompetitive behavior,
the market values of firms that were likely to become subject to antitrust enforcement would have suffered
disproportionately on days of bad news concerning McKinley’s health. By contrast, we would expect these
firms’ valuations to gain disproportionately on the days that doctors said McKinley would recover and that

12

Roosevelt stated he would follow McKinley’s agenda. Yet identifying the firms that were particularly vulnerable to stronger enforcement of the Sherman Act presents a challenge. It may not have been clear, for
example, which strategies Roosevelt’s administration would have been most likely to pursue, or how receptive the courts would have been to those strategies.
We argue that firms that had participated in merger activity in the years leading up to the assassination
would have been considered more likely targets of renewed efforts to enforce the Sherman Act. This insight
allows us to propose two characteristics of firms that were likely correlated with expectations of differential
sensitivity to stronger antitrust enforcement.
First, firms formed through recent mergers were likely among the most vulnerable to antitrust enforcement. The Supreme Court’s 1895 E.C. Knight decision was generally interpreted as holding that the Sherman
Act did not apply to mergers, and the McKinley Administration validated this interpretation by not attempting to enforce the Sherman Act against any mergers. The industrial consolidations undertaken during the
great wave of mergers that followed the Supreme Court’s decision were likely conceived with the expectation that they were exempt from antitrust law, and their design, and conduct, likely reflected this belief.
These mergers also attracted a great deal of attention in the press, partly because of their massive scale, but
also because in some cases firms that had participated in cartels to restrain competition were consolidating
to protect their rents. If Roosevelt had been expected to strengthen enforcement of the Sherman Act, these
firms would have been among some of the most likely targets. Therefore, we construct an indicator variable,
Merger, for industrial firms that were incorporated in 1895 or later as a product of consolidations, since these
firms would have been differentially vulnerable to antitrust enforcement.
Among the railroads in our sample, there was no equivalent post-1895 merger wave, because many of
these firms were in receivership in the wake of the Panic of 1893. However, some significant merger activity
among railroads did occur in 1900 and 1901, after the industry had recovered, and after the Supreme Court’s
Joint Traffic Association and Trans Missouri decisions, which held that cartels among railroads were illegal.
These mergers included some very large, high-profile firms, and may have also been undertaken with the
expectation that they were unlikely to be subject to antitrust enforcement.26 Thus, we identify railroads that
26
Among these mergers was the joint acquisition of the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy by the Northern Pacific
Railroad and the Great Northern Railroad. This latter merger was subsequently cemented through the formation of the
Northern Securities Company, which owned all three railroads. The legal actions of Roosevelt’s government against
this holding company are the focus of our analysis in Section 5. Contemporary commentary emphasized the role of acquisitions in the industry during this period in bringing competitive railroads together and highlighted their importance
for the railroad valuations (see, for example, Sage et al. 1901).

13

were involved in merger activity in the 1899–1901 period from various editions of the Moody’s Manual and
the Poor’s Manual, and designate them as differentially vulnerable to antitrust enforcement.
Our second measure is based on firms that would likely have benefited from stricter antitrust enforcement: those that had recently planned, or announced, mergers that ultimately failed to occur. These included
competitors of dominant firms in their industry and relatively weak firms that sought to strengthen their
positions through mergers, but failed.27 If these firms faced competition from larger or more efficient rivals, they would have benefited from stricter antitrust enforcement. We create an indicator variable, Merger
Fail, that identifies any firm in our sample that was mentioned in the year preceding the assassination in the
Commercial and Financial Chronicle, one of the major business news outlets at that time, as considering,
announcing, or being rumored to engage in a merger that failed to occur. While we show that our main results
are robust to this alternative measure, we can only observe those failed mergers that progressed enough to
be reflected in the press. Thus, our analysis focuses primarily on the recent merger variable.
In Appendix Section A.3.3, we present a brief description of the history of antitrust doctrine to further
validate our approach to identifying firms that were differentially vulnerable to more aggressive antitrust
enforcement, and also perform robustness analyses to evaluate the importance of alternative measures related
to antitrust, such as the degree of concentration of business activity in the firm’s industry.

3.2.2 Other Firm Characteristics
Firms that engaged in merger activity, or those that failed at it, may have differed from those that did not in
other respects. Thus, an important concern for our analysis is that our main variables of interest may reflect
the effect on stock market valuations of other firm characteristics correlated with mergers but unrelated
to antitrust enforcement. Our analysis, therefore, includes a variety of firm characteristics that may have
resulted in differential stock price responses following the assassination.
The first is the amount of accounting data that the sample firms actually disclosed to investors. In 1901,
NYSE-listed firms were subject only to weak disclosure requirements, which were not rigorously enforced
by the exchange. Many industrial firms published little detail in their income statements, and some produced
no income statements at all.
27

For example, Glucose Sugar Refining, a smaller and weaker competitor of the dominant American Sugar Refining,
announced in June 1901 that they had begun negotiations with National Starch and other glucose producers to merge
into a larger and stronger firm. However, several directors opposed the initial proposal, and the merger initially failed.
It was ultimately consummated in 1902 (Dewing, 1914; p. 87).

14

As governor of New York, Roosevelt advocated for stricter disclosure requirements for major corporations, and made them the centerpiece of his discussion of the trust problem in his 1900 annual message.
Roosevelt argued that a requirement for more detailed disclosures would address the problem of “misrepresentation or concealment regarding material facts,” which he considered to be among the “chief abuses” of
the trusts. He also regarded disclosure as a necessary first step for the design of a policy program to restrain
the trusts: “there may be other remedies, but what these are we can only find out by publicity” (Roosevelt,
1926: 46–47). Financiers with ties to major trusts were concerned about the possibility that Roosevelt would
impose new disclosure requirements, and met with him immediately after he took office to try to persuade
him against doing so.28
Corporations that had chosen to disclose little accounting information, perhaps to evade regulatory
scrutiny, may have been expected to suffer under a Roosevelt presidency. In order to address this possibility, we obtained the financial statements of all sample firms published in their most recent annual reports, as
reproduced in Moody’s, and measure the detail of their income statements by counting the number of lines.29
At the time, railroads were subject to standardized disclosure requirements imposed by the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), so there was no variation in the number of income statement lines among those
firms. To account for the fact that our measure of income statement detail will be correlated with being a
railroad, which itself may have been perceived to be differentially affected under Roosevelt, in all of our
regressions we include an indicator for railroads interacted with the relevant event dates.
The second set of characteristics capture political connections to McKinley or Roosevelt. A significant
body of work has shown that the political connections of firms may affect their market valuations, both
in modern economies as well as in the past (see, for example, Fisman, 2001; Ferguson and Voth, 2008;
Fisman et al., 2012; and Braggion and Moore, 2013). Firms managed by individuals who had personal ties
to McKinley or Hanna, or who had contributed to McKinley’s campaign, might have been perceived to lose
political influence in the event of McKinley’s death, for example. In contrast, firms with ties to Roosevelt
28
In early October 1901, two J.P. Morgan & Company partners, George W. Perkins, who had known Roosevelt since
he was governor of New York, and Robert Bacon, one of Roosevelt’s Harvard classmates, met with Roosevelt. Of the
meeting, Roosevelt wrote: “Perkins wanted me to ... accept the publication of what some particular company chose to
publish, as a favor, instead of demanding what we think ought to be published from all companies as a right” (Letter
to Douglas Robinson, 4 Oct 1901, in Roosevelt 1951b).
29
We focus on income statements because they presented information of the greatest value to antitrust enforcement,
such as revenues, costs, and profits. Many industrials published income statements of only a few lines, with no information at all on revenues or costs, and some published no income statements at all. In contrast, nearly all sample firms
published at least a rudimentary balance sheet.

15

may have differentially benefited when the likelihood of the transition increased. As such firms may also
have engaged in merger activity, it is important to control for such ties in the analysis.
To measure ties to McKinley and/or Hanna, we construct an indicator variable, Donor, for firms owned
or managed by major donors to the McKinley campaign. Although no comprehensive list of donors exists,
the two largest donors were J.P. Morgan and Standard Oil. We identify firms affiliated with J.P. Morgan,
Standard Oil, or the Rockefellers (the major owners of Standard Oil), as indicated in Moody (1904). If those
donations were perceived to buy influence with McKinley, but not with Roosevelt, the affiliated firms could
have suffered differentially in response to the assassination.
To study the role of personal ties to Roosevelt, we identify whether any director of a firm had a connection
to Roosevelt while he was a student at Harvard. Specifically, we identify the names of graduates of Harvard
in 1880 (Roosevelt’s class) and the names of members of clubs of which Roosevelt was also a member that
were in the graduating classes of 1877 to 1883. We create an indicator variable, Roosevelt, that takes the
value one for companies that had a director or officer (as listed in the Moody’s Manual) who was in one of
these clubs or graduated from Harvard in 1880. Approximately 17% of the firms in our sample had such a
connection.
By contrast, McKinley did not have such personal connections to directors of major corporations because
he was from a modest family in Ohio, did not attend prominent educational institutions, and was not a member
of elite social organizations.30 An attempt to link members of McKinley’s Civil War regiment, the 23rd Ohio
Infantry, to corporate directors and officers produced no matches. Thus, we cannot assess the role of personal
connections to McKinley, and focus solely on ties with campaign donors.
Finally, the assassination of McKinley may have introduced greater uncertainty regarding the outlook
for future economic policy and conditions in the market for reasons other than changes in antitrust policy.
If the rise in uncertainty differentially affected the valuations of larger or more profitable firms, which may
have been more likely to engage in mergers, we may erroneously attribute the effects of the assassination to
antitrust enforcement. Unfortunately, the lack of consistent financial statements precludes us from obtaining
reliable measures of cash flow, profitability, or total assets for a large fraction of our sample. Therefore, we
use the log of the book value of total capital, which we can observe for all firms in the sample, to control for
30

McKinley graduated from Albany Law School with William E. Barnett, future director of the New York, New
Haven and Hartford Railroad, and Goodwin Stoddard, future director of the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad Company.
While these two companies were listed on the NYSE in 1901, their shares were illiquid and did not trade on days of
interest surrounding the assassination of President McKinley.

16

firm size.31

3.3 Summary Data
Table 2 presents summary statistics for the 48 firms with data on abnormal returns, which are the main focus
of our analysis. A detailed tabulation of firm characteristics for the individual firms in this sample is provided
in Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2.
An indication that merger activity was quite common during McKinley’s presidency is that our sample
is evenly split between firms that had recently engaged in a merger, presented in column (1), and those that
had not, shown in column (2). These two groups of firms were remarkably well balanced along several
important characteristics—for example, each group was composed of 14 railroads and 10 industrial firms,
and contained four firms with connections to Roosevelt. Column (3) shows that there were also no noticeable
differences in firm size, or in the export share of the firms’ products. We also find no statistically-significant
differences in the disclosure of information in the firms’ income statements, both when we focus on the entire
sample and when we restrict the data to industrial firms. However, recent-merger firms were more likely
to be connected to major donors to the McKinley campaign and were younger. These characteristics may
have made these firms more vulnerable to higher economic uncertainty or to a transition from McKinley to
Roosevelt, independent of any changes in antitrust policy. We therefore control for firm characteristics and
political connections in our empirical analysis.

4 Impact of the Assassination on Firm Values
The daily abnormal return of NYSE-listed stocks on the dates surrounding the assassination are illustrated
in Figure 2, with those of recent mergers presented separately from other firms. The recent mergers exhibit
sharp declines on September 7 and 13, the dates when the market responded to McKinley’s shooting and
expected death, which are offset by strong increases on September 9 and 16, the dates when the market was
told that McKinley would survive, and that Roosevelt would continue with McKinley’s agenda. In contrast,
the other firms’ returns exhibit much more muted changes on those dates. This is a clear indication that the
transition to Roosevelt was expected to reduce the value of the firms we designate as vulnerable to stricter
31

We do observe dividend payouts, a measure imperfectly correlated with profitability, for all firms in the sample.
Reassuringly, controlling for the firms’ dividend payout rates prior to the assassination does not materially affect our
main estimated effects for recent mergers (results not shown).

17

antitrust enforcement. In what follows, we explore these differences in greater depth.

4.1 Baseline Specifications
We estimate regression models in which we interact our variables for sensitivity to antitrust enforcement
with indicators for the four dates when the market responded to significant news regarding the transition
from McKinley to Roosevelt: September 7, McKinley’s shooting; September 9, the prognosis that McKinley
would survive; September 13, McKinley’s expected death; and September 16, Roosevelt’s statement that he
would continue “absolutely unbroken” with McKinley’s agenda.
Our panel data regressions for the 14 trading days the NYSE was open between September 4 and September 21, 1901, take the following form:
ARit = λ1 (Mergeri × Sept 7t ) + λ2 (Mergeri × Sept 9t )
+λ3 (Mergeri × Sept 13t ) + λ4 (Mergeri × Sept 16t ) + γi + δt + ϵit ,

(1)

where ARit is firm i’s abnormal return on day t; Mergeri is our indicator for firms that were differentially
vulnerable to stricter antitrust enforcement; γi are firm fixed effects; and δt are fixed effects for each trading
day in the sample. The parameters of interest are λ1 to λ4 , which capture the differential effect of negative
or positive news on McKinley’s condition for firms that were particularly sensitive to a stronger antitrust
regime. To control for the effects of ties to the Presidents or other firm characteristics, we interact those
variables with the same four event dates. In all specifications, we control for firm size and an indicator for
railroads (interacted with event dates), and cluster standard errors by firm.
Table 3 presents the results for specifications that analyze the effect of the recent merger variable on
abnormal returns. Consistent with the replacement of McKinley by Roosevelt being harmful to the valuations
of firms that were sensitive to greater antitrust enforcement, the estimates in column (1) indicate that the
recent mergers in our sample saw their abnormal returns fall by an additional 175 basis points (bps) on
September 7, a sizable effect relative to the average decline of 103 bps on that date. When the stock market
rose in response to good news on McKinley’s health on September 9, the abnormal returns of recent merger
firms differentially increased by a similar amount, 197 bps.
When McKinley’s health took a turn for the worse, on September 13, the abnormal returns of firms that
had engaged in mergers declined relative to others by 141 bps, and they increased by 197 bps on September
18

16, when Roosevelt reassured markets. Importantly, any impact of the assassination attempt, rather than the
change in the identity of the president, would already have been reflected in prices on September 7 and 9.
The remarkably similar estimated effects on September 13 and 16, therefore, suggest that the presidential
transition itself was the primary concern of investors. The pattern of stock returns is consistent with recent
merger firms losing about 1.4 to 1.9 percentage points of their value relative to other firms in the sample in
response to an increase in the perceived likelihood of stronger antitrust enforcement.
Next, we investigate whether the effects we ascribe to antitrust enforcement were due to other firm
characteristics that may have been correlated with our antitrust variables. In column (2), we allow the returns
to vary on the relevant dates by the level of firm disclosure, as measured by total income statement lines.
The estimated parameters indicate that, relative to a firm with no income statement (0 lines), a firm reporting
5 lines (the median length for industrial firms in the sample) saw its value rise by about 90-125 basis points
on days of increased probability of a change in administration, and decline by 70-110 basis points when
McKinley’s policies were perceived to be more likely to continue. To the extent that a lack of disclosure
of financial information facilitated collusion or abuses by the trusts, we would expect those firms that were
more transparent to have been less impacted by a transition to Roosevelt. Our findings are consistent with
this interpretation, although the estimated magnitudes are smaller and not quite as consistent as that of the
parameters associated with the recent merger variable. More importantly, the estimated effects on recent
mergers are unaffected by including these controls, suggesting that our baseline results are unlikely to be
driven by characteristics associated with firm transparency, or a perception that Roosevelt would strengthen
corporate regulation on issues unrelated to antitrust.
To rule out the possibility that our results are driven by political or personal connections to the presidents,
in column (3) we include interactions for firms controlled by major donors to McKinley and add an indicator
for firms managed or controlled by individuals with personal ties to Roosevelt. And the specification in column (4) adds log firm age as a measure of more mature or stable firms. The estimated parameters associated
with these variables (presented in the Appendix) are generally imprecise, but more importantly, the effects
of Merger are robust to the inclusion of these additional controls, which include those that differed across
the two groups of firms in Table 2. The magnitudes of the estimated coefficients are quite stable across the
different specifications, and most of them remain statistically significant.
Two points should be noted about the interpretation of our baseline results. First, as in any event study
design, the estimated effects are based on expected values. That is, we measure the effect of a new antitrust
19

regime on firm values, weighted by the probability of such change actually occurring. To the extent that the
probabilities were seen as relatively low for the typical firm engaged in recent mergers, our results suggest
that a change in antitrust enforcement was expected to have sizable effects on the value of prosecuted firms.
A second and more important point is that we cast the interpretation of our findings as reflecting the
expectations of investors of stronger enforcement of existing antitrust statues. An alternative interpretation
could be that investors may instead have expected a change in the law. The historical context of our event
suggests that this was unlikely. At the time of the assassination, both houses of Congress were controlled
by the Republican party, which included a substantial, strongly pro-business faction that had traditionally
opposed new antitrust legislation. Between 1881 and the assassination of McKinley, in fact, 45 separate
pieces of antitrust legislation had been proposed in Congress, most in the 1890s (Mitchell, 2007: 122).
Nearly all of them had been defeated in Congress, usually stalled in committee. Roosevelt’s accession to
the presidency did not change the composition of Congress, which ultimately controlled the fate of any new
legislation. Indeed Roosevelt repeatedly sought new antitrust legislation during his presidency, and was met
with little success (Crane, 2008).
In Table 4, we focus instead on the Merger Fail variable, an indicator for firms that would benefit from
stronger antitrust enforcement. The specifications replicate those in Table 3. Consistent with these firms
benefiting from a Roosevelt presidency, their valuations were more resilient on the two days of bad news
regarding McKinley’s health, when the stock market tanked, but rose by less on the days when it seemed
that McKinley would survive or that Roosevelt would follow McKinley’s agenda. Although the estimated
magnitudes vary somewhat more across the four days, they are all statistically significant, and robust to the
inclusion of our various controls for firm characteristics.

4.2 Alternative Policy Preferences
Roosevelt’s policy agenda may have been expected to differ from McKinley’s on issues beyond antitrust
enforcement. An important source of concern for our empirical approach is that the firms we designated as
vulnerable to antitrust enforcement may also have been vulnerable to changes in other policies Roosevelt
was expected to enact.
On what was likely the most important economic policy issue of the time, commitment to the gold
standard, Roosevelt did not in fact differ from McKinley. However, Roosevelt’s preferences differed from
McKinley’s on another important issue, tariff policy. Whereas McKinley favored tariffs quite strongly, and
20

had been a sponsor of tariff legislation while in Congress, Roosevelt was more of a free-trader. Businesses
that had previously benefited from tariff protection may, therefore, have seen their valuations fall in response
to Roosevelt unexpectedly becoming president. To address this possibility, we control for the trade exposure
of our sample firms, measured as the share of output that was exported at the industry level for the industrial
firms in our sample. For railroads, we construct data on the share of revenues accounted for by export
products.
In Panel A of Table 5, we include our measure of exposure to exports in regressions otherwise identical
those presented in columns (1) and (4) of Table 3. The signs of the estimated parameters for this variable are
generally consistent with the notion that Roosevelt’s agenda would benefit exporters. But including these
interactions does not meaningfully change the estimated magnitudes associated with the antitrust variables.
McKinley and Roosevelt may also have differed on their views on labor issues. McKinley was not as
anti-labor as some of his contemporaries, and unlike President Cleveland before him, he did not pursue any
Sherman Act cases against unions. Nonetheless, Roosevelt was relatively friendly towards labor interests,
and he helped to enact several important pieces of labor legislation as governor of New York. Firms that
were differentially vulnerable to labor activism would perhaps have seen their valuations fall in response to
Roosevelt unexpectedly becoming president. Unfortunately, there is no firm- or industry-level data on labor
strife available for our period. We instead use an event study analysis of a major labor strike that occurred
during Roosevelt’s administration to assess whether our results could be related to changes in expected labor
relations policy.
Specifically, in Panel B of Table 5 we analyze the market’s reaction to Roosevelt’s intervention in an ongoing coal strike among miners in Pennsylvania’s anthracite coal fields. Previous presidents had generally
intervened on behalf of employers in labor relations disputes, if they intervened at all. As the strike dragged
on, mine operators called for Roosevelt to end the strike by deploying federal troops to ensure the safety of
those miners who desired to work and their families. The operators argued that the president was granted the
authority to do so under the Sherman Act of 1890, as they viewed the union as a unlawful cartel. Roosevelt
disagreed; only in response to concerns that the coal strike, which began in May 1902, might substantially
raise coal prices for households over the winter did Roosevelt decided to intervene, but he did so in a relatively neutral way. On October 1, 1902, Roosevelt announced that he would meet with representatives of
government, management, and labor at the White House in order to facilitate a resolution to the dispute. This
marked a substantial change from historical precedent.
21

If recent mergers were correlated with sensitivity to a change in labor relations policy, then those firms
should have performed differentially worse in response to the announcement of the conference. Panel B
of Table 5 presents the results of regressions similar to those reported in columns (1) and (4) of Table 3,
but using cumulative abnormal returns during an eight day window around the October 1 announcement.
The estimated effects are, on average, positive, and not statistically significant, but the coefficients are too
imprecisely estimated to confidently rule out a sizable negative effect. These results, therefore, provide
some suggestive evidence that, at least as indicated by this event, the effects on firm valuations that we
estimate around the presidential assassination are unlikely to be primarily driven by expectations of changes
in policies to favor workers.

5 Litigation against Northern Securities
Our analysis of the events surrounding McKinley’s assassination suggests that investors believed that the
replacement of McKinley by Roosevelt would result in more aggressive antitrust enforcement. To test this
interpretation of our results, and the validity of the recent merger variable as an indicator of sensitivity to
antitrust issues, we study the stock market’s reaction to an event that revealed new information on Roosevelt’s
approach to antitrust: the announcement of Roosevelt’s first antitrust suit. Unlike the assassination event, this
one was unquestionably an indication that more aggressive antitrust enforcement was in store. Other suits
filed subsequently by Roosevelt potentially revealed additional information about the enforcement strategy
he chose to pursue, but only the first suit was kept secret before its announcement, and is therefore suitable
for an event study.
In November of 1901, just after Roosevelt had become president, J.P. Morgan created an enormous
holding company, the Northern Securities Company, to jointly own the capital stocks of two major competing
railroads, the Northern Pacific and Great Northern, as well as third that connected them to Chicago, the
Chicago, Burlington and Quincy. The shear scale of the firm, with $300 million in capital, along with
its potential to monopolize rail transportation in a large area of the country, concerned Roosevelt. Recent
Supreme Court decisions, such as Trans Missouri and Joint Traffic, held that the Sherman Act applied to
railroads, and that collusive behavior among them violated the act. However, on the theory that the E. C.
Knight decision indicated the Sherman Act did not apply to mergers, these firms had been joined together
via a holding company. Roosevelt asked Attorney General Philander Knox to quietly study the possibility

22

of pursuing an antitrust action against the company, explaining in his autobiography that he felt “It was
necessary to reverse the Knight case” (Roosevelt 1920: 443). Knox studied the matter carefully, ultimately
concluding that the Knight case had been poorly argued and a different strategy was possible in a suit against
Northern Securities, which had a reasonable chance of success (Morris 2002: 88).
On February 19, 1902, after the stock market closed, Knox made the following announcement regarding
the forthcoming legal actions against Northern Securities: “Some time ago the president requested an opinion
as to the legality of this merger, and I have recently given him one to the effect that, in my judgment, it violates
the provisions of the Sherman Act of 1890, whereupon he directed that suitable action should be taken to
have the question judicially determined” (quoted in Meyer, 1906: 258).32 The actual suit was filed on March
10, 1902.
The timing made it quite a shock. The Supreme Court was then considering a case filed by the attorney
general of Minnesota against the railway combination, and was expected to announce its decision on Monday,
February 24, 1902.33 Contemporary reports suggest that the market expected the Supreme Court to reject
Minnesota’s suit, and the announcement of a federal suit just before the Supreme Court’s decision generally
came as a surprise.34
The announcement confirmed that Roosevelt would indeed attempt to pursue a more aggressive antitrust
agenda. In its effort to obtain a judgment that a merger of competitors violated the Sherman Act, the suit
sought to expand the boundaries of antitrust doctrine, with potentially far-reaching consequences. Yet, on
February 20, it could not have been clear whether the suit would be successful, or if it were, how broad
and applicable the decision would ultimately be. The implications beyond railroads, or even beyond the
three railroads included in the merger, would not have been so clear. We therefore study the effect of the
unexpected announcement of the federal case against Northern Securities on the market values of firms that
we designated as differentially sensitive to more aggressive antitrust enforcement.
32

In response, on February 23 J. P. Morgan himself went to Washington to meet with Roosevelt and Knox, bringing
then-Senator Mark Hanna and Senator Chauncey Depew with him. Unaccustomed to policy decisions that concerned
his interests being made without his consultation, Morgan said, characteristically: “If we have done anything wrong,
send your man to my man and they can fix it up” (Quoted in Bishop, 1920: 184). Over the subsequent weeks, Morgan conferred repeatedly with Hanna regarding the case, but the case against Northern Securities followed its course
(Strouse 2000: 442).
33
On January 7, 1902, the attorney general of Minnesota, on behalf of his state and with the support of several other
western states, moved for leave to file a bill of complaint against the company before the U.S. Supreme Court (Meyer,
1906).
34
The Washington Post, for example, stated that the “announcement from Washington was therefore a rude shock to
all of this optimistic sentiment that has been carefully nurtured in the financial district” (February 21, 1902).

23

Figure 3 shows average cumulative abnormal returns separately for the firms that had engaged in recent
mergers and those that had not, for all trading days from February 14 to March 1, 1902. We normalize the
returns to zero for February 14, and cumulate them forward from that date. The returns of merger firms were
similar to those of other firms until February 19, when they began to decline. Since the announcement that
the government was going to challenge the merger happened late in the day, the filing primarily impacted
stock prices on February 20.
It is possible that Roosevelt may have unintentionally revealed that a suit was forthcoming, which may
explain the decline in abnormal returns among recent mergers on February 19. On the 18th, Roosevelt met
with Mark Hanna and asked his opinion regarding the combination. Hanna, who was a shareholder and a
close associate of some of the Northern Securities insiders, expressed enthusiastic support for the firm. It is
not clear whether Hanna interpreted Roosevelt’s question as a sign that an antitrust suit was in the works,
and when the suit was actually announced Hanna is said to have been “thunderstruck” (Morris 2002: 89).35
But if Hanna had mentioned his conversation to others, or if Roosevelt had any other conversations about
the firm on that day that are not known to historians, this could explain the fall in returns in anticipation of
the announcement.
In any case, following the 20th, the returns of merger firms remained below those of non-merger corporations for at least a week. Importantly, this pattern was not driven by any direct effects on the shares of
Northern Securities, as this firm is not included in our sample. Thus, the figure presents suggestive evidence
that the revelation of the stronger stance of Roosevelt’s administration against trusts differentially affected
those firms that we characterize as ex-ante more sensitive to more aggressive antitrust enforcement.36
To more formally analyze the effect of the Northern Securities litigation on the market values of NYSElisted firms, we employ an event study methodology. For each firm in the sample, we calculate cumulative
abnormal returns from February 20 to March 1, 1902, and relate them to our measure of the threat of being
subjected to antitrust suits. Our empirical strategy consists of estimating:

CARi = α + βMergeri + δXi + ϵi
35

(2)

This may indicate that Hanna did not anticipate a suit, but it may also indicate that he did not expect one so soon.
Prager (1992) studies, instead, the effects on railroad valuations of the circuit courts’ decisions that sided with the
government’s case in 1903. He finds that stock prices declined during those dates, and suggests that Northern Securities
was an important development in antitrust policy because it established new precedent for railroad mergers.
36

24

where CARi is firm i’s cumulative abnormal return from February 20 to March 1; Mergeri is an indicator for
firms that were more likely to be targets of antitrust litigation due to recent merger activity; and Xi includes
controls for firm-specific characteristics.
Table 6 presents the results; we modify the specifications presented across the different columns from
those of Table 3 above, in response to the different character of the information revealed by the filing of the
suit. In column (1), we include minimal controls. The results indicate that recent mergers lost about 1.3
percent of their value relative to other firms, a magnitude that is generally consistent with those associated
with days of bad news regarding McKinley’s health. In column (2), we include our measure of accounting
disclosure, and find that it has little effect on returns. This is consistent with our interpretation of that variable
as highlighting companies that would be affected by stronger disclosure requirements, the likelihood of which
was not affected by the Northern Securities suit. As the suit was filed against a railroad, and the potential
impact of any decision on firms outside the railroad industry could have been seen as ambiguous, in column
(3) we add an indicator for railroads. This has little impact, and does not affect the magnitude of the merger
variable.
Finally, in column (4) we add an indicator for firms affiliated with J.P. Morgan & Company. Morgan
had engineered Northern Securities and was the most influential financier of his era. Roosevelt and Morgan
saw each other partly as rivals (Wiebe, 1959), and one concern about the results could be that they reflect the
expectation that Morgan firms would receive greater regulatory scrutiny. Although imprecisely estimated,
the coefficient on the Morgan variable is negative. More importantly, however, the estimate on the merger
variable is unaffected by the inclusion of the Morgan control.
By focusing on returns cumulated from February 20, our results are conservative and exclude the potential impact of anticipation effects. In the appendix, we show that our results are robust to performing the
event study over different windows around the announcement of the administration’s action against Northern
Securities, and that they double in size when we begin the analysis on February 18 or 19. We also show that
the estimated effects are similar when we focus instead on unadjusted returns and when we include controls
for various measures of market concentration and coordination through common ownership.
The relative decline in abnormal returns for recent merger firms is consistent with the suit being interpreted as a sign that stricter antitrust enforcement was likely, and recent mergers were among those likely
to face greater antitrust scrutiny. It is important to note that these coefficients likely understate the overall
effect of the suit, because none of the railroads involved in the Northern Securities combination had shares
25

of common stock that traded on the NYSE at the time, and thus are not included in the sample.

6 Accounting Returns of Railroads
Our focus on stock market returns enables us to measure the impacts of expected changes in policy, since
we can measure returns at a high-frequency immediately as events unfolded. These results are by nature
short run and based on expectations, and therefore do not allow us to address whether stronger antitrust
enforcement actually had consequences on the economy over a longer time span. To provide some insights
into this question, we next investigate whether Roosevelt’s agenda actually affected the financial outcomes
of the firms we designated as vulnerable to stronger antitrust enforcement. Specifically, we study whether
the profitability of those firms fell relative to others in the years following Roosevelt’s ascension to the
Presidency. We focus our analysis exclusively on railroads because industrial firms did not consistently
produce detailed financial statements at the turn of the century.
To perform these tests, we collect annual accounting data for all sample railroads from 1895 to 1905.37
We measure accounting profitability as return on assets (defined as net income divided by total assets), and
use it to estimate regressions of the following form:
πit = θMergeri × Post1901t + γi + δt + ϵit ,

(3)

where πit is the return on assets of railroad i in year t; Mergerit is our firm-specific measure of vulnerability
to stricter antitrust; Post1901t is an indicator for the years following 1901, when Roosevelt was president;
and γi and δt are railroad and year fixed effects, respectively. The coefficient of interest, θ, is the post-1901
difference-in-differences in the profitability of railroads that were recent mergers relative to others. To avoid
confounding the estimated effects with differences in railroad size, all our regressions control for the lagged
value of log assets, a more precise measure of size than the value of capital used in the analysis of stock
returns. Standard errors are clustered by firm.
The results are presented in Table 7. The estimated effects in column (1) indicate that the profitability of
those railroads engaged in mergers prior to McKinley’s assassination experienced a decline of 0.5 percentage
37

We stop the analysis in 1905 because the Hepburn Act passed in 1906. This law strengthened the powers of the
Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), the agency in charge of regulating railroads. Any subsequent changes in railroad profitability may, therefore, have been caused by stricter ICC regulation, rather than stricter antitrust enforcement.

26

points more than others on average from 1901 to 1905, relative to the difference in ROA between these
two groups of railroads in prior years. The economic magnitude of this effect is quite significant, as it
represents about 10.2 percent of the mean 1901 profitability rate in the sample. This result is robust to
allowing for differential post-assassination effects by firm size (in column (2)), as well as in the level of
financial leverage and firm age (in column (3)). These results suggest that firms engaged in recent mergers
were not only expected to suffer under Roosevelt by investors, but that they actually did so. It is important to
note, however, that our difference-in-difference design does not allow us to determine the aggregate effects
of the policy change on the railroad industry, or its welfare effects on the economy more broadly.

7 Conclusion
We study the assassination of President William McKinley in September 1901 to estimate the potential scope
of political discretion in the aggressiveness of antitrust enforcement. The news of McKinley’s shooting
provoked a significant fall in stock prices. This decline was reversed when doctors subsequently announced
that they expected McKinley to recover, and this reversal was itself reversed when McKinley’s condition
suddenly became grave. The latter fall in stock prices in response to the expectation that McKinley would
die was purely a response to the transition from McKinley to Roosevelt, and not a reaction to the fact that
an anarchist shot the president, which had occurred 7 days earlier. These swings in market values were
borne differentially by firms that were particularly sensitive to changes in antitrust enforcement, as were the
declines in the market associated with the surprise announcement of Roosevelt’s first antitrust suit.
At the time Roosevelt took office, antitrust enforcement was at a historic low point, and the Supreme
Court’s E.C. Knight decision seemed to foreclose any possibility of pursuing a more aggressive approach. Yet
when he unexpectedly became president, asset price changes indicated that there was considerable discretion
available to him in antitrust enforcement, and that he would utilize that discretion. As one of the authors
of the Sherman Act, Senator George Edmunds, stated, “What is needed is not, so much, more legislation
as competent and earnest administration of the laws that exist” (quoted in Letwin, 1965: 141). Perhaps
something similar is true today, in the sense that recent administrations may have not been as aggressive and
innovative as they could have been in enforcing existing rules.
The longer-run consequences of the assassination, relative to the counterfactual of McKinley serving
out his second term, are not easy to infer. At the end of his term as vice president in 1904, Roosevelt may

27

have run for president and won, in which case his accession to the presidency in 1901 simply accelerated
changes that would have occurred anyway. Yet it is possible that a different Republican, one more sympathetic toward the trusts, may have prevailed in 1904. Growing economic concentration may have been
accompanied by growing political influence of big business, potentially threatening both economic growth
and democracy (Zingales, 2017). Roosevelt was no radical, and indeed the Tillman Act of 1907 prohibiting
direct contributions from corporations to political campaigns was enacted partly in response to the funding
that his own 1904 campaign had received from plutocratic interests. But Roosevelt’s independent, reformminded presidency may have prevented some developments that could have been quite harmful for American
democracy.

28

Bibliography
Abernathy, Nell, Mike Konczal, and Kathryn Milani. 2016. Untamed: How to Check Corporate, Financial,
and Monopoly Power. New York: Roosevelt Institute.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2017. “The Fall
of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms.” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 23396.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4): 1593–1636.
Baker, Jonathan B., Jonathan Sallet, and Fiona Scott Morton, eds. 2018. “Unlocking Antitrust Enforcement.” Special issue, Yale Law Journal 127 (7).
Barkai, Simcha. 2016. “Declining Labor and Capital Shares.” Working Paper, London Business School.
Binder, John J. 1988. “The Sherman Antitrust Act and the Railroad Cartels.” Journal of Law and Economics
31 (2): 443–68.
Bishop, Joseph Bucklin. 1920. Theodore Roosevelt and His Time, Shown in His Own Letters. New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Bittlingmayer, George. 1985. “Did Antitrust Policy Cause the Great Merger Wave?” Journal of Law and
Economics 28 (1): 77–118.
Bittlingmayer, George. 1993. “The Stock Market and Early Antitrust Enforcement.” Journal of Law and
Economics 36 (1): 1–32.
Braggion, Fabio, and Lyndon Moore. 2013. “The Economic Benefits of Political Connections in Late
Victorian Britain.” Journal of Economic History 73 (1): 142–76.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Andrew Crocket, Charles Goodhart, Avinash D. Persaud, and Hyun Shin. 2009.
The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation. Geneva: International Center for Monetary and
Banking Studies, and CEPR.
Burns, Malcolm R. 1977. “The Competitive Effects of Trust-Busting: A Portfolio Analysis.” Journal of
Political Economy 85 (4): 717–39.
Cerqueiro, Geraldo, Hans Degryse, and Steven Ongena. 2011. “Rules Versus Discretion in Loan Rate
Setting.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 20 (4): 503–29.
Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. 1990. Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism. Cambridge:
Harvard/Belknap.
Crane, Daniel A. 2008. “Antitrust Antifederalism” California Law Review 96 (1): 1–62.
Crane, Daniel A. 2011. The Institutional Structure of Antitrust Enforcement. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Crane, Daniel A. 2012. “Has the Obama Justice Department Reinvigorated Antitrust Enforcement?” Stanford Law Review Online 65 (13): 13–20.
Croly, Herbert. 1912. Marcus Alonzo Hanna: His Life and Work. New York: MacMillan.

29

De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implications.” Working Paper.
Dewing, Arthur S. 1914. Corporate Promotions and Reorganizations. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Dimson, Elroy. 1979. “Risk Measurement when Shares are Subject to Infrequent Trading.” Journal of
Financial Economics 7 (2): 197–266.
Eckbo, B. Espen, and Peggy Wier. 1985. “Antimerger Policy under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act: A Reexamination of the Market Power Hypothesis.” Journal of Law and Economics 28 (1): 119–49.
Eichengreen, Barry, Michael R. Haines, Matthew S. Jaremski, and David Leblang. 2017. “Populists at the
Polls: Economic Factors in the 1896 Presidential Election.” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 23932.
Eysenbach, Mary Locke. 1976. American Manufactured Exports, 1879–1914. New York: Arno Press.
Ferguson, Thomas, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2008. “Betting on Hitler—The Value of Political Connections
in Nazi Germany.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1): 101–37.
Fisman, David, Raymond J. Fisman, Julia Galef, Rakesh Khurana, and Yongxiang Wang. 2012. “Estimating the Value of Connections to Vice-President Cheney.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis &
Policy 12 (3).
Fisman, Raymond. 2001. “Estimating the Value of Political Connections.” American Economic Review 91
(4): 1095–1102.
Friedman, Milton. 1948. “A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability.” American Economic
Review 38 (3): 245–264.
Gutierrez, German, and Thomas Philippon. 2017. “Comments on ‘The Rise of Market Power and the
Macroeconomic Implications’ by De Loecker and Eeckhout.” Working Paper.
Griggs, John W. 1899. Annual Report of the Attorney-General of the United States for the Year 1899.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Grullon, Gustavo, Yelena Larkin, and Roni Michaely. 2017. “Are U.S. Industries Becoming More Concentrated?” Working Paper.
Hall, Robert E. 2018. “New Evidence on the Markup of Prices over Marginal Costs and the Role of MegaFirms in the US Economy.” Working paper.
Hassan, Tarek A., Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun. 2017. “Firm-Level Political
Risk.” Working paper, Boston University.
Hauck, Achim and Uwe Vollmer. 2013. “Emergency Liquidity Provision to Public Banks: Rules Versus
Discretion.” European Journal of Political Economy 32: 193–204.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1955. The Age of Reform. New York: Vintage.
Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken. 2005. “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and Growth
Since World War II.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3): 835–64.
Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken. 2009. “Hit or Miss? The Effect of Assassinations on Institutions and War.” AEJ: Macroeconomics 1 (2): 55–87.
30

Josephson, Matthew. 1962 [1934]. The Robber Barons. New York: Harcourt.
Kolko, Gabriel. 1967. The Triumph of Conservatism: A Reinterpretation of American History, 1900-1916.
Chicago: Quadrangle Paperbacks.
Kovacic, William E., and Carl Shapiro. 2000. “Antitrust Policy: A Century of Economic and Legal Thinking.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (1): 43–60.
Lamoreaux, Naomi R. 1985. The Great Merger Movement in American Business, 1895–1904. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Lastra, Rosa M. 2013. “Defining Forward-Looking, Judgment-Based Supervision.” Journal of Banking
Regulation 14 (3–4): 221–227.
Leech, Margaret. 1959. In the Days of McKinley. New York: Harper & Brothers.
Letwin, William. 1965. Law and Economic Policy in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Martin, Henry B. 1908. “Statement, on Behalf of the American Anti-Trust League.” In Amendment of
Sherman Antitrust Law: Hearings Before the Subcommittee of the Judiciary, United States Senate.
Washington: Government Printing Office.
Meyer, Balthasar Henry. 1906. “A History of the Northern Securities Case.” Economics and Political
Science Series, University of Wisconsin 1 (3): 215–350.
Mitchell, Lawrence E. 2007. The Speculation Economy: How Finance Triumphed Over Industry. San
Francisco: Berrett Koehler.
Moody, John. 1904. The Truth About the Trusts. New York: Moody Publishing Co.
Morgan, H. Wayne. 2003. William McKinley and His America. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.
Morris, Edmund. 2001. The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt. New York: Modern Library.
Morris, Edmund. 2002. Theodore Rex. New York: Random House.
Mullin, George L., Joseph C. Mullin, and Wallace P. Mullin. 1995. “The Competitive Effects of Mergers:
Stock Market Evidence from the U.S. Steel Dissolution Suit.” The RAND Journal of Economics 26
(2): 314–30.
Nelson, Ralph L. 1959. Merger Movements in American Industry, 1859-1956. Princeton: Princeton University Press, for NBER.
Nutter, Warren G. 1951. The Extent of Enterprise Monopoly in the United States, 1899-1939: A Quantitative Study of Some Aspects of Monopoly. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi. 2012. “Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock Prices.” Journal of Finance 67 (4): 1219–64.
Phillips, Kevin. 2003. William McKinley. New York: Times Books.
Pollock, James K. 1926. Party Campaign Funds. New York: Knopf.
Prager, Robin A. 1992. “The Effects of Horizontal Mergers on Competition: The Case of the Northern
Securities Company.” The RAND Journal of Economics 23 (1): 123–33.
31

Rauchway, Eric. 2003. Murdering McKinley: The Making of Theodore Roosevelt’s America. New York:
Hill and Wang.
Rhode, Paul W., and Koleman S. Strumpf. 2004. “Historical Presidential Betting Markets.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 18 (2): 127–41.
Rhodes, James Ford. 1922. The McKinley and Roosevelt Administrations. New York: MacMillan.
Roosevelt, Theodore. 1920. Theodore Roosevelt: An Autobiography. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Roosevelt, Theodore. 1926. The Works of Theodore Roosevelt, Vol XV: State Papers as Governor and
President, 1899–1909. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Roosevelt, Theodore. 1951a. The Letters of Theodore Roosevelt, Vol II: The Years of Preparation, 1898–
1900. Edited by Elting E. Morison. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Roosevelt, Theodore. 1951b. The Letters of Theodore Roosevelt, Vol III: The Square Deal, 1901–03. Edited
by Elting E. Morison. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Sage, Russell, James J. Hill, Charles M. Schwab, Charles R. Flint, F. B. Thurber, and James Logan. 1901.
“Industrial and Railroad Consolidations.” The North American Review 172 (534): 641–700.
Senate Subcommittee on Campaign Contributions. 1913. Testimony Before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Privileges and Elections, United States Senate. 2 vols. 62nd Congress, 3rd Session. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Shapiro, Carl. 2018. “Antitrust in a Time of Populism.” International Journal of Industrial Organization,
in press.
Strouse, Jean. 2000. Morgan: American Financier. New York: HarperPerennial.
Tarullo, Daniel K. 2001. “Rules, Discretion, and Authority in International Financial Reform.” Journal of
International Economic Law 4 (4): 613–82.
Thorelli, Hans B. 1955. The Federal Antitrust Policy: Origination of an American Tradition. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Traina, James. 2018.“Is Aggregate Market Power Increasing? Production Trends Using Financial Statements.” New Working Paper Series No. 17, Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State,
University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Troesken, Werner. 2000. “Did the Trusts Want a Federal Antitrust Law? An Event Study of State Antitrust
Enforcement and Passage of the Sherman Act.” In Public Choice Interpretations of American Economic History, edited by Jac C. Heckelman, John C. Moorhouse, and Robert M. Whaples, 77–104.
Norwell: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wiebe, Robert H. 1959. “The House of Morgan and the Executive, 1905–13.” American Historical Review
65 (1): 49–60.
Zingales, Luigi. 2017. “Towards a Political Theory of the Firm.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 31
(3): 113–30.

32

12

Harrison

Cleveland

McKinley

Roosevelt

10

8

6

4

2

0
1890

1892

1894

1896

1898

1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

Figure 1: Annual Number of Federal Antitrust Cases Under Different Presidents, 1890-1908

33

lt
se
ve

−

Ro
o

H

ea
lth

+
ea
lth
H

ot
Sh

9

Average abnormal return
−.01
0
.01

.02

7

−.02
4

5

6

10
11
12
13
16
Trading day, September 1901

Recent Merger

17

18

20

21

Non−Recent Merger

Figure 2: Average Daily Abnormal Returns around McKinley Assassination Event

34

ile
d
it
F
Su

Average cumulative abnormal return
−.01 −.005 0
.005 .01 .015
14

15

17

18

19
20
21
24
25
26
Trading day, February/March 1902

Recent Merger

27

28

01

Non−Recent Merger

Figure 3: Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns following Northern Securities Suit Announcement
Notes: We set abnormal returns equal to zero for all firms on the 14th and cumulate forward from February
15. For each trading date t, the cumulative returns displayed are the group averages of the sum of abnormal
returns for each firm from February 15 to date t. The attorney general announced his intention to initiate the
suit on the 19th after the market was closed.

35

Table 1: Presidential Assassination Attempts and the Stock Market: Price Response to News of Shootings
Date and Time of
Shooting

Date of Trading on
News of Shooting

Mean Percent
Change, NYSE

Outcome for
President

Lincoln

Friday April 14, 1865,
10:25 PM

Monday April 17
(NYSE closed April 15)

-0.7%

Death,
Next day, 7:22 AM

Garfield

Saturday July 2, 1882,
9:30 AM

Same day

-3.3%

Death,
79 days later

McKinley

Friday Sept. 6, 1901,
4:07 PM

Following day

-6.2%

Death,
8 days later

Roosevelt

Wed. Feb. 15, 1933,
9:35 PM

Following day

-2.1%

Survived;
Was unhurt

Kennedy

Friday Nov. 22, 1963,
1:30 PM

Same day
(Trading halted 2:07 PM)

-2.8%

Death,
Same day, 2:00 PM

Ford

Monday Sept. 22, 1975,
6:25 PM

Following day

-0.48%

Survived;
Was unhurt

Reagan

Mon. March 30, 1981,
2:27 PM

Same day

-0.2%

Survived

President

Note: Franklin D. Roosevelt was President-Elect at the time of the shooting attempt on his life. For shootings prior
to Roosevelt, the percent change in share prices computed as an equal-weighted index from closing NYSE prices
reported in the New York Times. For the subsequent shootings, the percent change in share prices is calculated from
closing NYSE prices as reported in CRSP. The number of securities for which prices were observed on the day prior to
the shooting, and also on the day when trading reflected the news of the shooting, was 16 for the Lincoln assassination,
63 for Garfield, 79 for McKinley, 311 for Roosevelt, 1,144 for Kennedy, 1,468 for Ford and 1,520 for Reagan. All
times are reported as EST.

36

Table 2: Summary Statistics

Panel A: All Firms
I. S. Lines
Donor
Roosevelt
Log(Age)
Log(Capital)
Railroad
Export/Output
JP Morgan Firm

Observations

Merger
(1)

No Merger
(2)

Difference
(3)

20.9583
[14.6420]
0.3333
[0.4815]
0.1667
[0.3807]
1.8477
[0.9284]
18.0661
[0.9713]
0.5833
[0.5036]
9.2908
[4.1793]
0.1250
[0.3378]

21.6250
[14.4156]
0.0833
[0.2823]
0.1667
[0.3807]
2.8346
[0.9338]
17.6861
[0.8244]
0.5833
[0.5036]
9.2235
[3.2661]
0.0417
[0.2041]

-0.6667
(4.1942)
0.2500**
(0.1139)
-0.0000
(0.1099)
-0.9869***
(0.2688)
0.3800
(0.2600)
-0.0000
(0.1454)
0.0673
(1.0827)
0.0833
(0.0806)

24

24

48

5.7000
[6.9290]

-1.6000
(2.3357)

10

20

Panel B: Industrial Firms Only
I. S. Lines
4.1000
[2.5582]
Observations

10

Notes: Columns (1) and (2) report means with standard deviations in
brackets. Column (3) reports the difference in means estimated from regressions with a dummy for recent mergers and presents robust standard
errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

37

Table 3: McKinley Assassination Event Analysis using Abnormal Returns, Recent Mergers

Merger x Sept. 7
Merger x Sept. 9
Merger x Sept. 13
Merger x Sept. 16

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0175*
(0.0095)
0.0197***
(0.0061)
-0.0141*
(0.0081)
0.0197**
(0.0084)

NO
NO
NO
YES

-0.0160*
(0.0092)
0.0191***
(0.0060)
-0.0150*
(0.0077)
0.0189**
(0.0082)
0.0025**
(0.0010)
-0.0014**
(0.0006)
0.0018
(0.0020)
-0.0022**
(0.0010)
NO
NO
NO
YES

-0.0205**
(0.0094)
0.0199***
(0.0067)
-0.0181**
(0.0082)
0.0216**
(0.0090)
0.0030***
(0.0010)
-0.0016**
(0.0007)
0.0011
(0.0025)
-0.0021*
(0.0011)
YES
YES
NO
YES

-0.0205*
(0.0108)
0.0194**
(0.0084)
-0.0114
(0.0097)
0.0175*
(0.0093)
0.0030***
(0.0010)
-0.0016**
(0.0007)
0.0010
(0.0026)
-0.0021*
(0.0012)
YES
YES
YES
YES

603
0.1898

603
0.2181

603
0.2536

603
0.2590

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

I. S. Lines x Sept. 7
I. S. Lines x Sept. 9
I. S. Lines x Sept. 13
I. S. Lines x Sept. 16
Donor x Event Dates
Roosevelt x Event Dates
Log(Age) x Event Dates
Firm, Date Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Abnormal Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

Notes: This table presents estimates obtained from different versions of Equation (1). The variable Merger indicates
differential vulnerability to more aggressive antitrust enforcement. September 7 and 13 were dates with bad news
regarding McKinley’s health; September 9 and 13 presented good news regarding his health and the likelihood that
Roosevelt would follow his agenda, respectively. All regressions include log capital and an indicator for railroads
interacted with the event dates (September 7, 9, 13, and 16). Standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are
reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

38

Table 4: McKinley Assassination Event Analysis using Abnormal Returns, Failed Mergers

Merger Fail x Sept. 7
Merger Fail x Sept. 9
Merger Fail x Sept. 13
Merger Fail x Sept. 16
I. S. Lines x Event Dates
Donor x Event Dates
Roosevelt x Event Dates
Log(Age) x Event Dates
Firm, Date Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Abnormal Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0292***
(0.0081)
-0.0168**
(0.0065)
0.0256***
(0.0092)
-0.0351***
(0.0084)
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES

0.0251***
(0.0079)
-0.0145**
(0.0066)
0.0253**
(0.0095)
-0.0325***
(0.0083)
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES

0.0223***
(0.0076)
-0.0154**
(0.0060)
0.0244***
(0.0088)
-0.0346***
(0.0096)
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES

0.0207***
(0.0071)
-0.0133**
(0.0057)
0.0234***
(0.0074)
-0.0318***
(0.0088)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

603
0.2252

603
0.2369

603
0.2572

603
0.2803

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

Notes: This table presents estimates obtained from different versions of Equation (1). The variable Merger Fail
indicates firms that would be expected to benefit from more aggressive antitrust enforcement. September 7 and 13 were
dates with bad news regarding McKinley’s health; September 9 and 13 presented good news regarding his health and
the likelihood that Roosevelt would follow his agenda, respectively. All regressions include log capital and an indicator
for railroads interacted with the event dates (September 7, 9, 13, and 16). Standard errors adjusted for clustering by
firm are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

39

Table 5: Exploring Alternative Policy Differences: Exports and Coal Strike
Panel A: Exports

Merger x Sept. 7
Merger x Sept. 9
Merger x Sept. 13
Merger x Sept. 16
Export/Output x Sept. 7
Export/Output x Sept. 9
Export/Output x Sept. 13
Export/Output x Sept. 16
I. S. Lines x Event Dates
Donor x Event Dates
Roosevelt x Event Dates
Log(Age) x Event Dates
Firm, Date FEs
Observations
R-squared
Abnormal Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

Panel B: Coal Strike Event

(1)

(2)

-0.0178*
(0.0094)
0.0201***
(0.0060)
-0.0149*
(0.0078)
0.0197**
(0.0084)
0.0010
(0.0013)
-0.0015*
(0.0008)
0.0018
(0.0011)
-0.0001
(0.0015)
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES

-0.0208**
(0.0103)
0.0197**
(0.0076)
-0.0127
(0.0092)
0.0173*
(0.0091)
0.0016
(0.0013)
-0.0019**
(0.0009)
0.0019*
(0.0010)
-0.0004
(0.0015)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

603
0.2016

603
0.2767

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

Merger

(3)

(4)

0.0134
(0.0107)

-0.0517
(0.0890)

0.0082
(0.0110)
0.0042***
(0.0014)
0.0062
(0.0113)
-0.0273**
(0.0122)
-0.0054
(0.0047)
-0.1780*
(0.0884)

47
0.0614

47
0.3145

0.0047
0.0353

0.0047
0.0353

I. S. Lines
Donor
Roosevelt
Log(Age)
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Cum. Abn. Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

Panel A Notes: This panel presents versions of the regressions presented in Table 3 in which we control for the
export share of the sample firms’ products interacted with the assassination event dates. The variable Merger indicates
differential vulnerability to more aggressive antitrust enforcement. All regressions include log capital and an indicator
for railroads interacted with the event dates (September 7, 9, 13, and 16). Standard errors adjusted for clustering by
firm are reported in parentheses.
Panel B Notes: This table presents results of an event study of the announcement on October 1, 1902, that Roosevelt
would intervene in the anthracite coal strike, a significant departure from historical precedent in the approach to labor
relations taken by the president. The dependent variable is abnormal returns cumulated from October 1 to October 8,
1902. All regressions also include log capital and an indicator for railroads as controls. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

40

Table 6: Northern Securities Event Analysis using Cumulative Abnormal Returns

Merger

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0130*
(0.0071)

-0.0159**
(0.0065)
0.0004
(0.0003)

-0.0157**
(0.0066)
0.0007
(0.0005)
-0.0070
(0.0180)

0.0968
(0.0725)

0.1112
(0.0668)

0.1040
(0.0761)

-0.0159**
(0.0068)
0.0006
(0.0005)
-0.0064
(0.0181)
-0.0074
(0.0049)
0.0911
(0.0780)

48
0.1260

48
0.1767

48
0.1779

48
0.1839

0.0066
0.0239

0.0066
0.0239

0.0066
0.0239

0.0066
0.0239

I. S. Lines
Railroad
JP Morgan Firm
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Cum. Abn. Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

Notes: This table presents estimates obtained from different versions of Equation (2). We study the effects of the
announcement on February 19, 1902, that an antitrust suit would be filed against the Northern Securities Company.
The dependent variable is abnormal returns cumulated from February 20 to March 1, 1902. All regressions also include
log capital and log age as controls. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

41

Table 7: Profitability of Railroads under Roosevelt versus McKinley 1895–1905

Post 1901 ×
Merger

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.005*
(0.003)

-0.005**
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)

-0.021***
(0.007)
YES
YES

-0.023***
(0.007)
YES
YES

-0.005**
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.00003
(0.011)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.023***
(0.007)
YES
YES

267
0.871

267
0.873

267
0.873

Log(Assets)
Leverage
Log(Age)
Lagged Log(Assets)
Firm Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

Notes: This table presents estimates for different versions of Equation (3), obtained from a panel of 28 railroads over
the years 1895-1905. The dependent variable is Return on Assets, measured as net income divided by total assets.
Standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

42

A Data Appendix
A.1 Variable Definitions
Stock Returns: The main focus of our analysis are abnormal returns, calculated using daily stock price data
and dividend payout information hand-collected from the New York Times on the days surrounding President McKinley’s assassination. For each stock, returns (R) are calculated as
Rt =

Pt + Dt
− 1,
Pt−1

where P represents price, D represents the dividend on days the stock goes ex-dividend, and t indexes
trading day. Alpha and beta are estimated for each security using Dimson’s (1979) method with three
leads and three lags on the market index to address liquidity concerns. The estimating equation follows:
Rt = α +

3
∑

βk+4 ∗ It+k + ϵt ,

k=−3

where I represents the relevant market index. For industrial firms we use the Dow Jones Industrial
Average and for railroads we use the Dow Jones Transportation Average as the market index. Abnormal
returns (AR) are then calculated for each firm as follows:
ARt = Rt − α̂ −

3
∑

β̂k+4 ∗ It .

k=−3

Pre-period price data was collected for the 75 trading days between May 29 and August 30, 1901, from
the New York Times in order to estimate α̂ and β̂ for each stock. Due to low liquidity, however, prices
are not observed on many days for some firms in the pre-period. Thus, our sample is restricted to stocks
for which at least 38 returns are observed in the pre-period. Furthermore, we restrict the sample to firms
with an r-squared greater than or equal to 0.32 for railroads and 0.24 for industrial firms in the estimation
of α̂ and β̂. These cutoffs represent the 25th percentile of r-squared within each sector after imposing
the restriction on the number of returns available in the pre-period. Those firms excluded by this second
restriction are missing returns for 22 days of the pre-period on average, while those that pass are missing
returns for 8 days on average. These restrictions are made to exclude companies from the analysis for
which we cannot obtain reliable estimates of α̂ and β̂.
Merger: This indicator identifies firms that engaged in merger activity in the years prior to the assassination.
The variable takes the value one for industrial firms that were incorporated after 1895. We utilize the
historical record to verify that all of these firms were the product of consolidations of various smaller
firms during the Great Merger Wave. For railroads, this variable takes the value of one for firms with
merger activity during the period 1899–1901. This captures mergers occurring after the Supreme Court’s
1898 decision on United States v. Joint Traffic Association, which one could argue were more likely
to have been enacted to avoid antitrust scrutiny. To identify merger activity we consulted the Moody’s
Manual and Poor’s Manual of the Railroads of the United States and noted railroads that acquired a major
stake in another railroad and railroads in which a controlling stake was purchased.
Merger Fail: An indicator variable that takes the value one for firms for which a clear rumor of or plan for
a merger with a specific company was announced in The Commercial and Financial Chronicle between
July 1, 1900, and June 30, 1901, but the merger had not been completed by December 1901, and zero
43

otherwise.
Community of Interest: An indicator variable that takes the value of one for subordinate (or controlled) railroads in ‘communities of interest’ (that is, groups of railroads with common ownership stakes or board
seats that could be used to coordinate actions), as identified by Moody (1904). We verify Moody’s categorization utilizing The Moody’s Manuals, and add the Canadian Pacific railroad, which had controlling
shares in several American roads that were not part of other groups, as an additional community of interest. We set the variable to zero for industrial firms in the sample.
Donor Firm: An indicator variable that takes the value of one for firms affiliated with J. P. Morgan, the
Rockefellers, or Standard Oil (the largest donors to McKinley’s presidential campaign), and zero otherwise. The firms designated as affiliated with Morgan are those listed by Moody (1904) as being under
“Morgan domination” or “Morgan control,” a subset of those with J.P. Morgan & Company partners on
their boards. The Standard Oil firms include a number of firms founded by or strongly affiliated with
the Rockefellers or Standard Oil as noted by Moody (1904). We include firms connected to the Rockefellers because William Rockefeller, brother of John D. Rockefeller and an executive at Standard Oil, also
assisted Hanna in raising funds from other wealthy donors for the McKinley campaign (Rhodes, 1922).
Export/Output: Eysenbach (1976) provides estimates of “exports as a percentage of gross output” for 17
industries for American firms in 1899 in Appendix Table 15. Industrial firms in our sample are matched
to these industries using their descriptions in the 1901 edition of the Moody’s Manual. For railroads, we
calculate the percentage of revenues associated with export products among railroads within each of the
ICC’s ten geographical regions. We first use data from the 1901 Annual Report of the ICC, which details
the proportion of different categories of railroad freight by geographical division. We then use tables from
the Historical Statistics of the United States to calculate the percentage of each type of product that was
exported. For each railroad, the export measure is calculated as: the percentage of revenues accounted for
by freight multiplied by the sum of the percentages of freight that was accounted for by different products
multiplied by the percentage of each product category that was exported.
Income Statement Lines: A count of the number of substantive lines provided in the income statement of
each firm, excluding lines containing intermediate items such as ‘subtotals.’ Railroads were required to
report standardized, detailed income statements to the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), which
were then published in the ICC’s annual reports. Thus, for all railroads this variable takes the value 33, the
number of lines on the ICC income statements. For industrial firms we checked the Moody’s Manual, the
Manual of Statistics Stock Exchange Handbook, and the New York Times guide to investors published in
September 1901 for income statements. When income statements were present in more than one source,
this variable is a count of the number of lines in the most detailed statement. For firms that did not report
an income statement in any of these publications, the income statement lines takes a value of zero. One
NYSE company, American Locomotive, was founded in June of 1901, and therefore does not appear in
the sources we relied on for financial statements. We have been unable to determine whether investors had
access to an income statement at the time of the assassination (or what was known about their dividend
rate at that time), and therefore exclude the company from the analysis.
JP Morgan Firm: An indicator variable that takes the value of one for firms affiliated with J. P. Morgan,
and zero otherwise. These firms are listed by Moody (1904) as being under “Morgan domination” or
“Morgan control,” a subset of those with J.P. Morgan & Company partners on their boards.
Leverage: Book value of leverage (long-term debt/total assets). Long-term debt includes bonds and other

44

long-term interest-bearing liabilities (e.g. mortgages and equipment trusts), as reported in the firms’
balance sheets.
Log(Age): The natural log of one plus 1901 minus the year of incorporation for each firm. The year of
incorporation was collected from the 1901 edition of the Moody’s Manual.
Log(Assets): The natural log of total assets, as reported in the firms’ balance sheets.
Log(Capital): The natural log of the sum of the preferred and common shares outstanding multiplied by
their respective par values. Preferred shares outstanding, common shares outstanding, and the par value
of each were collected from the firm’s capital stock description from the 1901 edition of the Moody’s
Manual.
Market Concentration: The relative extent of monopoly by 2 digit SIC codes. Source: Table 39, p 144-147,
for Manufacturing and Table 41, p 151, Table 9, p 40, and Table 10, p 41, for Mining, Transportation,
Communication, and Public Utilities, Nutter (1951). This variable takes a value of zero for railroads.
Market Share: The percentage of the market controlled by the largest firm in the sector in which the firm
operates, where sectors are defined at the 3 and 4 digit SIC codes. Source: Table 37, p 129-141, Nutter
(1951). This variable takes a value of zero for railroads.
Railroad: An indicator variable that takes the value of one for firms that are listed in the “Eleventh Section:
Steam Railroad Securities” of the 1901 Moody’s Manual beginning on page 1161, and zero otherwise.
Return on Assets: The ratio of net income to total assets, obtained from the firms’ income statements and
balance sheets.
Roosevelt: An indicator variable that takes the value of one for firms with directors or executives who
attended Harvard with Theodore Roosevelt. Roosevelt matriculated at Harvard in the fall of 1876 and
graduated in 1880. While attending Harvard he was a member of the following clubs: Alpha Delta Phi,
Delta Kappa Epsilon, Hasty Pudding, Phi Beta Kappa, and Porcellian. We collected the names of the
members of these clubs for the graduating classes of 1877–83, who would likely have overlapped with
Roosevelt, from club catalogs. We also collected the names of those in the graduating class of 1880
from the Harvard University catalog. Using these lists and a listing of executives and directors of firms
collected from the 1901 Moody’s Manual, we identified firms with connections to Roosevelt.

A.2 Full Results from Main Tables
The tables of results in the paper suppress a number of parameters, to keep the tables from becoming too
lengthy. In Appendix Tables A.3 and A.4 we show specifications previously presented in Tables 3 and 4,
respectively, displaying coefficients on additional variables of interest.

A.3 Robustness Checks
A.3.1 Baseline Effects—McKinley’s Assassination
In this section, we present additional tests to assess the robustness of our main estimated effects for recent
mergers discussed in Section 4.1 of the paper.

45

Our main analysis takes into account differences in firm stability by allowing for differential effects of
log capital, a proxy for firm size, on each of the four relevant dates around McKinley’s assassination. Here,
we replicate this analysis by also including in the regressions other relevant firm characteristics. In Appendix
Table A.5 we include log assets. This measure is arguably a more precise proxy for firm size than the log
capital variable that we use in all our specifications, but unfortunately we do not observe it for those firms
that do not disclose balance sheets. Despite the loss of observations, the estimated effects when we include
controls for the value of assets are similar to when we do not.
In the paper, we focus the analysis on abnormal stock returns to avoid confounding our estimates with
cross-sectional differences in price co-movement with the overall market. This approach reduces the number
of observations significantly because it limits the sample to those firms that traded frequently enough to be
able to estimate their CAPM betas prior to the assassination, as described in Appendix Section A.1. In
Appendix Table A.6 we replicate our main analysis utilizing instead unadjusted returns as the dependent
variable. To ensure a minimum level of liquidity, in column (1) we restrict the sample to the firms whose
common stocks traded at least 100 shares—the minimum requirement to observe a traded price in The New
York Times—on each of the four event days. The estimated coefficients get a bit smaller and imprecise,
reflecting the fact that low-volume stocks tended to have relatively small unadjusted returns. However, the
patterns across dates remains similar—returns of recent merger firms declined on dates of bad news about
McKinley’s health, and increased when there was positive news about the continuity of his policies. In
columns (2) to (5), we restrict the sample to the 48 firms that we include in our baseline specification, but we
focus on unadjusted returns instead. The estimated effects are similar to those obtained when using instead
abnormal returns, as shown in Table 3.
A.3.2 Baseline Effects—Northern Securities
In Section 5 of the paper, our event-study analysis of the Northern Securities litigation, presented in Table 6,
focuses on abnormal returns cumulated from February 20 to March 1, 1902. Here, we show that the results
are robust to defining the event over alternative windows. For ease of comparison, column (1) of Appendix
Table A.8 reproduces column (4) of Table 6. In columns (2) and (3), we allow for anticipation effects, starting
to cumulate returns on February 19 or February 18, respectively. The estimated effects become larger and
more precise when we allow for the potential leakage of information to the market prior to Attorney General
Knox’s announcement.
A potential concern with our main analysis in Table 6 is that other news may have differentially affected
firms over a period of nine trading days following the announcement of the suit. To address this problem, we
again define the start of the event period on February 20, but instead cumulate returns over shorter windows—
eight trading days in column (4) and five trading days in column (5). In both cases, the estimated effects
are remarkably similar to those obtained in the baseline estimation, revealing that our main results are not
highly sensitive to the window of the analysis.38
In Appendix Table A.9 we replicate the baseline event study for the Northern Securities event utilizing
instead cumulative unadjusted returns as the dependent variable, which allows for a larger number of firms
to be included in the analysis. To ensure a minimum level of liquidity, in column (1) we restrict the sample to
those NYSE-traded firms for which we observe common stock prices on at least three of the nine trading days
following, and at least one of the eight trading days prior to, February 19, 1902, (inclusive). The estimated
coefficient is a bit larger in magnitude and slightly less precise; still, the results are remarkably similar to the
cumulative abnormal returns results presented in Table 6. In columns (2) through (5) we restrict the sample to
the 48 firms that we include in our baseline specification, using cumulative unadjusted returns. The estimated
38
One firm, American Cotton Oil, is excluded when cumulating from February 20 to February 25 (as shown in
Appendix Table A.8 column [5]) because no shares of this firm’s common stock are traded during the cumulation
period.

46

effects for firms that engaged in recent mergers are negative and statistically significant, consistent with the
main results presented in Table 6.
A.3.3 Legal History and Measures of Sensitivity to Antitrust Enforcement
Our hypothesis is that McKinley and Roosevelt differed in their stance toward antitrust enforcement. Thus,
we would expect changes in the probability of a transition from President McKinley to Roosevelt to differentially affect the market performance of firms that could be subject to antitrust suits, or that could be
differentially affected by new antitrust precedents. A significant challenge for our analysis is to identify
these firms. In this section, we expand the paper’s description of the history of antitrust doctrine to provide
further justification for our variable, which is based on recent merger activity. We also provide evidence that
our analysis is robust to considering alternative indicators based on more modern views of anticompetitive
behavior, such as market concentration.
Antitrust doctrines were changing rapidly at the turn of the twentieth century. In the 1880s, as industrial
interests organized in large combinations, or “trusts,” state attorneys first used quo warranto suits—legal actions against a corporation incorporated in the state for violating their charters or engaging in illegal acts—but
trusts sometimes evaded state courts by reincorporating in friendlier states or adopting different organizational forms. Between 1888 and July 1890, thirteen states passed antitrust statues. These laws typically
included stronger penalties than those later introduced by the Sherman Act, and gave most state courts the
power to effectively terminate a trust in that state by revoking its charter (Troesken, 2000).
The states’ ability to efficiently restrain “bad” combinations by applying common law and their own
antitrust laws was limited because the constitution gives Congress the authority to regulate interstate commerce. In July 1890 Congress passed the first federal antitrust law, the Sherman Act. The act banned any
contract in restraint of trade, but the broad terms of the law allowed sufficient leeway to distinguish between
beneficial forms of cooperation that promoted economic growth and those that suppressed competition (Kovacic and Shapiro, 2000). Which specific practices (such as predatory pricing, price fixing, and many others)
were considered violations of the law was evolving over time as the courts were confronted with interpreting
the Act. The Addyston Pipe decisions by the Court of Appeals (in 1898) and the Supreme Court (in 1899)
helped establish that the Sherman Act would be governed by a rule of reason. In this case, six pipe makers
engaged in bid rigging to guarantee that one of the members in the agreement would win projects adjudicated by municipalities using an auction system. The Court of Appeals stated that if the primary purpose of
an agreement was to restrain trade, then the agreement was invalid under the law, even if the combination
charged reasonable prices. In his opinion, future President Taft argued that the association had acquired the
power to charge unreasonable prices, even if they had yet to do so. In Addyston Pipe and Steel Company
v. United States (175 U.S. 211 [1899]), the Supreme Court further argued that purely private contracts that
directly restrain commerce were in violation of the law. By the time of McKinley’s assassination, the courts’
interpretation of Section I of the Sherman Act made clear that anticompetitive practices that could restrain
trade would be found to be in violation of the law.
The Act, however, did not seem to prohibit large concentrations of market power per se. In United States
v. E. C. Knight Co. (156 U.S. 1 [1895]), the Supreme Court ruled that a series of mergers that gave the
American Sugar Refining Company (the Sugar Trust) 98% of the nation’s sugar refining capacity did not
constitute interstate commerce, and was therefore not a violation of the Act.
The Knight case was generally interpreted to hold that it was pointless to attempt to utilize the Sherman
Act against anticompetitive mergers. For example, Attorney General Griggs in his 1899 annual report,
written at the peak of the Great Merger Movement, presented a detailed discussion of the Knight case and
the jurisdictional problems it posed for suits against mergers, and then stated:
In all instances the Department has been governed only by a sincere desire to enforce the law
as it exists and to avoid subjecting the Government to useless expense and the law officers
47

of the Government to humiliating defeat by bringing actions where there was a clear want of
jurisdiction.... (Griggs, 1899: 29)
Given this precedent, it is unlikely that a policy maker concerned with anticompetitive behavior would
attempt to prosecute firms simply because they enjoyed large market shares–though clearly these firms would
have been at risk if they had employed any illegal tactics in protecting their market shares or exploiting them
in other markets.
Our main strategy is, therefore, to focus on firms that had engaged in mergers in the years prior to the
assassination, as firms that could no longer collude given the interpretation of Section I often chose instead
to merge to be able to preserve monopoly power. The legal history, therefore, validates our choice of focus
on merger activity to identify those firms that may have been perceived to be more likely to suffer disproportionately from stronger enforcement of antitrust rules. In what follows, we further validate our analysis
by showing that our results are robust to including controls for various measures of market concentration.
Unfortunately, there is no systematic information on the market shares for the individual firms in our
sample at the time of the assassination. Instead, we rely on industry-level measures constructed by Nutter
(1951).39 Appendix Table A.7 replicates the results from Table 3 in the paper but adds as well controls
for market concentration interacted with the relevant event dates. In columns (1) and (2), our measure of
concentration is the percentage of the market controlled by the largest firm, where markets are defined at the
3 and 4 digit SIC codes as in Nutter (1951: Table 37, p 129-141). In columns (3) and (4), we use instead
Nutter’s measure of the ‘relative extent of monopoly’ (Nutter, 1951; Table 39, p 144-147, Table 41, p 151,
Table 9, p 40, and Table 10, p 41). Relative extent of monopoly is defined at the two-digit SIC level as the
percentage of total value-added accounted for by monopolistic industries at the four-digit SIC level, where
monopolistic industries are those in which the four-firm concentration ratio is greater than one half. In both
cases, including our measures of industry concentration does not affect the estimated coefficients for recent
mergers.
Finally, in columns (5) and (6) we take into account that the inability to collude on rates in the aftermath
of the Sherman Act led some railroads to form ‘communities of interest,’ by which a group of investors either
individually or through a major railroad would take ownership shares or board seats in other railroads to help
coordinate policies. We create an indicator variable for those firms in such a community that were not the
dominant firm. These subordinated firms had likely the most to lose from stronger antitrust enforcement, as
they would otherwise have to compete with the dominant firms in the group. Again our results show that the
inclusion of this variable does not affect our main estimated effects for recent mergers.
In Appendix Table A.10, we use a similar strategy to investigate the robustness of the estimated effects for
the Northern Securities event study to the inclusion of the three alternative measures of market concentration
and firm coordination. None of these variables have on their own a significant or sizable differential effect
on the cumulative abnormal returns of railroads following the announcement of the suit. Moreover, their
inclusion does not affect our main estimated effects for recent mergers. In combination with the results
presented in Appendix Table A.7, these results suggest that operating in industries where the dominant firms
had large market shares, or utilized common ownership to coordinate policies, was not per se sufficient for
being affected differentially by the changes in policies between the two administrations.
The case against Northern Securities Corporation that we analyze in the paper indicates the Act was
initially used by Roosevelt’s government to forestall mergers that conferred monopoly power, and that investors anticipated so at the time of McKinley’s assassination. To provide further validation that our measure
39

To establish the industrial code for the manufacturing firms in our sample, we use the code assigned to each of
these firms for the year 1917 by Chandler (1990). When a firm in our sample is not listed by Chandler, we match
the industry description provided in the Moody’s Manuals to the definitions of standardized codes provided by the
U.S. Department of Labor (http://www.osha.gov/pls/imis/sic_manual.html). For firms that Chandler scored, the two
methods produce the same codes.

48

of recent mergers is a reasonable indicator of the investors’ perception of firms’ differential vulnerability to
changes in antitrust enforcement at the time, we next relate the our measure to firms that were actually prosecuted for antitrust violations. Specifically, we identify the firms in our sample that were defendants in
antitrust cases initiated under Roosevelt. It is important to note that only a small number of firms were subject to legal action, and that some prominent ones, such as Standard Oil, are not included in our sample due
to the lack of stock price data. For the sample of 134 railroads and industrial firms that traded on the NYSE
after June 1, 1901, and were still listed by the NYT as either active or inactive in September, the likelihood
of actual antitrust prosecution was significantly higher (16.7%) for those firms that we categorized as having
engaged in merger activity, relative to a much lower 5.8% for those firms with no recent mergers (p-value
= 0.072 from univariate regressions with clustered standard errors). The pattern is relatively similar (20.8%
versus 8.3%) for the smaller sample of 48 firms for which we can calculate abnormal returns, though the
difference is no longer statistically significant.

49

Table A.1: Firm Attributes

Firm Name
Amalgamated Copper
American Car & Foundry
American Cotton Oil
American Smelting & Refining
American Sugar Refining
Anaconda Copper Mining
Colorado Fuel and Iron
Columbus & Hocking Coal & Iron
Glucose Sugar Refining
International Paper
International Power
National Biscuit
National Lead
Pressed Steel Car
Republic Iron & Steel
Tennessee Coal, Iron & Railroad
United States Leather
United States Rubber
United States Steel
Virginia-Carolina Chemical
Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe
Baltimore & Ohio
Canadian Pacific
Chesapeake & Ohio
Chicago Great Western
Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific
Chicago & Alton
Chicago, Indianapolis & Louisville
Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul
Chicago Terminal Transfer
Delaware & Hudson
Erie
Illinois Central
Louisville & Nashville
Missouri, Kansas & Texas
Missouri Pacific
New York Central & Hudson River
New York, Ontario & Western
Pennsylvania
Reading
Southern
Southern Pacific
St. Louis & San Francisco
St. Louis Southwestern
Texas & Pacific
Union Pacific
Wabash
Wisconsin Central

Recent
Merger

Failed
Merger

Donor

Roosevelt

JP Morgan
Firm

Railroad

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: See appendix text for a description of the variables.

50

Table A.2: Firm Attributes (Continued)

Firm Name
Amalgamated Copper
American Car & Foundry
American Cotton Oil
American Smelting & Refining
American Sugar Refining
Anaconda Copper Mining
Colorado Fuel and Iron
Columbus & Hocking Coal & Iron
Glucose Sugar Refining
International Paper
International Power
National Biscuit
National Lead
Pressed Steel Car
Republic Iron & Steel
Tennessee Coal, Iron & Railroad
United States Leather
United States Rubber
United States Steel
Virginia-Carolina Chemical
Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe
Baltimore & Ohio
Canadian Pacific
Chesapeake & Ohio
Chicago Great Western
Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific
Chicago & Alton
Chicago, Indianapolis & Louisville
Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul
Chicago Terminal Transfer
Delaware & Hudson
Erie
Illinois Central
Louisville & Nashville
Missouri, Kansas & Texas
Missouri Pacific
New York Central & Hudson River
New York, Ontario & Western
Pennsylvania
Reading
Southern
Southern Pacific
St. Louis & San Francisco
St. Louis Southwestern
Texas & Pacific
Union Pacific
Wabash
Wisconsin Central

Capital

Income
Statement Lines

Year of
Incorporation

Export/Output

155,000,000
60,000,000
30,435,700
100,000,000
73,936,000
30,000,000
25,000,000
7,000,000
37,665,600
39,849,500
8,000,000
53,061,100
29,809,400
25,000,000
47,497,900
22,553,060
125,139,600
47,191,500
1,014,959,700
24,000,000
216,199,530
104,361,217
96,171,000
60,543,100
40,176,490
60,000,000
39,086,800
15,000,000
96,397,400
30,000,000
34,658,200
176,240,200
76,000,000
55,000,000
68,280,300
76,616,873
115,000,000
58,118,382
202,200,800
140,000,000
180,000,000
197,832,148
46,747,400
21,650,000
38,706,000
204,511,000
52,000,000
27,436,000

0
8
7
5
0
0
23
6
3
6
4
5
5
4
6
3
0
10
0
3
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33

1899
1899
1889
1899
1891
1895
1892
1883
1897
1898
1899
1898
1891
1899
1899
1860
1893
1892
1901
1895
1895
1827
1881
1878
1892
1880
1900
1897
1863
1897
1823
1895
1850
1850
1896
1876
1869
1879
1846
1871
1894
1884
1896
1890
1874
1897
1889
1899

7.121
2.840
13.361
7.121
13.361
7.121
5.046
5.046
13.361
3.082
2.840
13.361
11.383
2.840
5.046
5.046
4.475
2.505
5.046
11.383
13.012
8.500
11.326
8.648
13.893
12.797
12.028
8.039
13.505
6.252
8.920
8.438
10.014
10.830
14.075
12.981
6.927
9.006
8.257
9.124
9.797
12.103
13.009
14.333
13.334
13.239
7.253
13.321

Notes: See appendix text for a description of the variables.

51

Table A.3: McKinley Assassination Event Analysis using Abnormal Returns, Recent Mergers

Merger x Sept. 7
Merger x Sept. 9
Merger x Sept. 13
Merger x Sept. 16

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0175*
(0.0095)
0.0197***
(0.0061)
-0.0141*
(0.0081)
0.0197**
(0.0084)

-0.0160*
(0.0092)
0.0191***
(0.0060)
-0.0150*
(0.0077)
0.0189**
(0.0082)
0.0025**
(0.0010)
-0.0014**
(0.0006)
0.0018
(0.0020)
-0.0022**
(0.0010)

-0.0205**
(0.0094)
0.0199***
(0.0067)
-0.0181**
(0.0082)
0.0216**
(0.0090)
0.0030***
(0.0010)
-0.0016**
(0.0007)
0.0011
(0.0025)
-0.0021*
(0.0011)
0.0209**
(0.0100)
-0.0052
(0.0076)
0.0158
(0.0105)
-0.0118
(0.0138)
0.0124
(0.0078)
-0.0062
(0.0052)
-0.0213
(0.0131)
0.0100
(0.0129)

YES

YES

YES

-0.0205*
(0.0108)
0.0194**
(0.0084)
-0.0114
(0.0097)
0.0175*
(0.0093)
0.0030***
(0.0010)
-0.0016**
(0.0007)
0.0010
(0.0026)
-0.0021*
(0.0012)
0.0209**
(0.0101)
-0.0052
(0.0076)
0.0149
(0.0091)
-0.0117
(0.0132)
0.0124
(0.0080)
-0.0064
(0.0055)
-0.0179
(0.0131)
0.0091
(0.0127)
0.0000
(0.0035)
-0.0005
(0.0035)
0.0062
(0.0056)
-0.0042
(0.0038)
YES

603
0.1898

603
0.2181

603
0.2536

603
0.2590

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

I. S. Lines x Sept. 7
I. S. Lines x Sept. 9
I. S. Lines x Sept. 13
I. S. Lines x Sept. 16
Donor x Sept. 7
Donor x Sept. 9
Donor x Sept. 13
Donor x Sept. 16
Roosevelt x Sept. 7
Roosevelt x Sept. 9
Roosevelt x Sept. 13
Roosevelt x Sept. 16
Log(Age) x Sept. 7
Log(Age) x Sept. 9
Log(Age) x Sept. 13
Log(Age) x Sept. 16
Firm, Date Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Abnormal Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

Notes: All regressions include log capital and an indicator for railroads interacted with the event dates (September 7,
9, 13, and 16). Standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

52

Table A.4: McKinley Assassination Event Analysis using Abnormal Returns, Failed Mergers

Merger Fail x Sept. 7
Merger Fail x Sept. 9
Merger Fail x Sept. 13
Merger Fail x Sept. 16

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0292***
(0.0081)
-0.0168**
(0.0065)
0.0256***
(0.0092)
-0.0351***
(0.0084)

0.0251***
(0.0079)
-0.0145**
(0.0066)
0.0253**
(0.0095)
-0.0325***
(0.0083)
0.0019**
(0.0009)
-0.0011**
(0.0005)
0.0007
(0.0021)
-0.0012
(0.0012)

0.0223***
(0.0076)
-0.0154**
(0.0060)
0.0244***
(0.0088)
-0.0346***
(0.0096)
0.0024**
(0.0010)
-0.0012**
(0.0006)
-0.0002
(0.0025)
-0.0009
(0.0013)
0.0042
(0.0094)
0.0090
(0.0069)
0.0035
(0.0107)
0.0039
(0.0145)
0.0163**
(0.0072)
-0.0101**
(0.0050)
-0.0183
(0.0126)
0.0093
(0.0125)

YES

YES

YES

0.0207***
(0.0071)
-0.0133**
(0.0057)
0.0234***
(0.0074)
-0.0318***
(0.0088)
0.0024**
(0.0010)
-0.0012**
(0.0005)
-0.0000
(0.0024)
-0.0008
(0.0013)
0.0060
(0.0089)
0.0066
(0.0064)
0.0062
(0.0096)
0.0012
(0.0139)
0.0165**
(0.0077)
-0.0104**
(0.0050)
-0.0138
(0.0114)
0.0086
(0.0115)
0.0035
(0.0036)
-0.0044
(0.0034)
0.0095**
(0.0040)
-0.0064*
(0.0036)
YES

603
0.2252

603
0.2369

603
0.2572

603
0.2803

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

I. S. Lines x Sept. 7
I. S. Lines x Sept. 9
I. S. Lines x Sept. 13
I. S. Lines x Sept. 16
Donor x Sept. 7
Donor x Sept. 9
Donor x Sept. 13
Donor x Sept. 16
Roosevelt x Sept. 7
Roosevelt x Sept. 9
Roosevelt x Sept. 13
Roosevelt x Sept. 16
Log(Age) x Sept. 7
Log(Age) x Sept. 9
Log(Age) x Sept. 13
Log(Age) x Sept. 16
Firm, Date Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Abnormal Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

Notes: All regressions include log capital and an indicator for railroads interacted with the event dates (September 7,
9, 13, and 16). Standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

53

Table A.5: McKinley Assassination Event Analysis using Abnormal Returns, Robustness to Assets

Merger x Sept. 7
Merger x Sept. 9
Merger x Sept. 13
Merger x Sept. 16
Log(Assets) x Sept. 7
Log(Assets) x Sept. 9
Log(Assets) x Sept. 13
Log(Assets) x Sept. 16
I. S. Lines x Event Dates
Donor x Event Dates
Roosevelt x Event Dates
Log(Age) x Event Dates
Firm, Date Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Abnormal Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0185*
(0.0096)
0.0219***
(0.0061)
-0.0116
(0.0085)
0.0204**
(0.0089)
-0.0039
(0.0039)
0.0056**
(0.0026)
0.0085*
(0.0043)
-0.0004
(0.0031)
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES

-0.0164*
(0.0092)
0.0212***
(0.0060)
-0.0127
(0.0079)
0.0194**
(0.0087)
-0.0062
(0.0041)
0.0066**
(0.0027)
0.0071
(0.0048)
0.0013
(0.0029)
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES

-0.0200**
(0.0097)
0.0225***
(0.0070)
-0.0167*
(0.0086)
0.0229**
(0.0100)
-0.0037
(0.0041)
0.0063**
(0.0028)
0.0048
(0.0053)
0.0043
(0.0055)
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES

-0.0190*
(0.0111)
0.0212**
(0.0084)
-0.0111
(0.0101)
0.0181*
(0.0099)
-0.0039
(0.0045)
0.0067**
(0.0032)
0.0025
(0.0060)
0.0057
(0.0056)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

575
0.1982

575
0.2321

575
0.2641

575
0.2701

-0.0005
0.0197

-0.0005
0.0197

-0.0005
0.0197

-0.0005
0.0197

Notes: All regressions include log capital and an indicator for railroads interacted with the event dates (September 7,
9, 13, and 16). Standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

54

Table A.6: McKinley Assassination Event Analysis using Unadjusted Returns, Recent Mergers

Merger x Sept. 7
Merger x Sept. 9
Merger x Sept. 13
Merger x Sept. 16
I. S. Lines x Event Dates
Donor x Event Dates
Roosevelt x Event Dates
Log(Age) x Event Dates
Firm, Date Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.0161*
(0.0095)
0.0120*
(0.0064)
-0.0134
(0.0081)
0.0121
(0.0089)
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES

-0.0235**
(0.0103)
0.0207***
(0.0066)
-0.0176**
(0.0087)
0.0219**
(0.0091)
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES

-0.0235**
(0.0105)
0.0207***
(0.0067)
-0.0176**
(0.0087)
0.0220**
(0.0092)
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES

-0.0211*
(0.0109)
0.0180**
(0.0074)
-0.0161*
(0.0088)
0.0200**
(0.0097)
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES

-0.0115
(0.0112)
0.0134
(0.0086)
-0.0031
(0.0100)
0.0089
(0.0107)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

869
0.6799

603
0.7636

603
0.7636

603
0.7712

603
0.7822

0.0012
0.0377

0.0000
0.0376

0.0000
0.0376

0.0000
0.0376

0.0000
0.0376

Notes: In Column (1) the sample is restricted to firms whose common stocks traded at least 100 shares on all four
event dates. In Columns (2) through (6) the sample is limited to the firms that appear in our abnormal returns analysis.
All regressions include log capital and an indicator for railroads interacted with the event dates (September 7, 9, 13,
and 16). Standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

55

Table A.7: McKinley Assassination Event Analysis using Abnormal Returns, Robustness to Market Share,
Market Concentration, and Community of Interest

Merger x Sept. 7
Merger x Sept. 9
Merger x Sept. 13
Merger x Sept. 16
Market Share x Sept. 7
Market Share x Sept. 9
Market Share x Sept. 13
Market Share x Sept. 16

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0167*
(0.0088)
0.0199***
(0.0060)
-0.0150*
(0.0082)
0.0197**
(0.0083)
-0.1673*
(0.0837)
0.0649
(0.0460)
0.0836
(0.0658)
0.0367
(0.1051)

-0.0199*
(0.0102)
0.0195**
(0.0084)
-0.0121
(0.0100)
0.0175*
(0.0093)
-0.1295**
(0.0536)
0.0525
(0.0490)
0.0850
(0.0659)
0.0366
(0.0960)

-0.0172**
(0.0080)
0.0199***
(0.0058)
-0.0141*
(0.0081)
0.0201**
(0.0080)

-0.0197*
(0.0106)
0.0193**
(0.0085)
-0.0116
(0.0097)
0.0177*
(0.0092)

-0.0174
(0.0109)
0.0197***
(0.0071)
-0.0134
(0.0090)
0.0191**
(0.0092)

-0.0198*
(0.0115)
0.0193**
(0.0089)
-0.0096
(0.0108)
0.0169*
(0.0097)

0.1166**
(0.0460)
-0.0326
(0.0284)
-0.0038
(0.0490)
-0.0297
(0.0460)

0.0795*
(0.0430)
-0.0124
(0.0311)
-0.0107
(0.0370)
-0.0119
(0.0426)
-0.0054
(0.0118)
0.0011
(0.0080)
-0.0077
(0.0113)
0.0061
(0.0095)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

Market Concentration x Sept. 7
Market Concentration x Sept. 9
Market Concentration x Sept. 13
Market Concentration x Sept. 16
Community of Interest x Sept. 7

NO
NO
NO
NO
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

NO
NO
NO
NO
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

-0.0004
(0.0114)
0.00001
(0.0079)
-0.0036
(0.0100)
0.0033
(0.0090)
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES

603
0.2175

603
0.2768

603
0.2249

603
0.2696

603
0.1904

603
0.2620

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

-0.0007
0.0196

Community of Interest x Sept. 9
Community of Interest x Sept. 13
Community of Interest x Sept. 16
I. S. Lines x Event Dates
Donor x Event Dates
Roosevelt x Event Dates
Log(Age) x Event Dates
Firm, Date Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Abnormal Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

Notes: Specifications in columns (1) and (2) include a measure of market share interacted with event dates. Specifications in columns (3) and (4) include a measure of market concentration interacted with event dates. Specifications
in columns (5) and (6) include an indicator for being a subordinate member of a railroad community of interest interacted with event dates. All regressions include log capital and an indicator for railroads interacted with the event dates
(September 7, 9, 13, and 16). Standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

56

Table A.8: Northern Securities Event Analysis using Cumulative Abnormal Returns

Merger
I. S. Lines
Railroad
JP Morgan Firm
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Cum. Abn. Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.
CAR Window:
Begin Date
End Date

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.0159**
(0.0068)
0.0006
(0.0005)
-0.0064
(0.0181)
-0.0074
(0.0049)
0.0911
(0.0780)

-0.0298***
(0.0098)
0.0009
(0.0009)
0.0001
(0.0301)
-0.0065
(0.0071)
0.1174
(0.1183)

-0.0314**
(0.0117)
0.0012
(0.0011)
-0.0050
(0.0379)
-0.0085
(0.0083)
0.2077
(0.1601)

-0.0147**
(0.0064)
0.0003
(0.0004)
0.0043
(0.0137)
-0.0058
(0.0053)
0.1089
(0.0723)

-0.0150*
(0.0075)
-0.0004
(0.0009)
0.0180
(0.0277)
-0.0176**
(0.0068)
0.0411
(0.0848)

48
0.1839

48
0.2723

48
0.3068

48
0.2760

47
0.1738

0.0066
0.0239

0.0040
0.0313

0.0107
0.0365

0.0071
0.0206

0.0053
0.0232

02/20/1902
03/01/1902

02/19/1902
03/01/1902

02/18/1902
03/01/1902

02/20/1902
02/28/1902

02/20/1902
02/25/1902

Notes: This table presents estimates obtained from different versions of Equation (2). We study the effects of the
announcement on February 19, 1902, that an antitrust suit would be filed against the Northern Securities Company.
The dependent variable is abnormal returns cumulated over the range of dates specified under CAR Window. All
regressions also include log capital and log age as controls. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

57

Table A.9: Northern Securities Event Analysis using Cumulative Unadjusted Returns

Merger

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.0180*
(0.0106)

-0.0191**
(0.0077)

-0.0173**
(0.0070)
-0.0003
(0.0003)

-0.0166**
(0.0071)
0.0005
(0.0006)
-0.0234
(0.0191)

0.1893**
(0.0922)

0.0840
(0.0670)

0.0751
(0.0688)

0.0510
(0.0784)

-0.0170**
(0.0073)
0.0005
(0.0006)
-0.0225
(0.0191)
-0.0108*
(0.0056)
0.0321
(0.0813)

90
0.1843

48
0.1811

48
0.1977

48
0.2094

48
0.2204

-0.0019
0.0357

-0.0106
0.0257

-0.0106
0.0257

-0.0106
0.0257

-0.0106
0.0257

I. S. Lines
Railroad
JP Morgan Firm
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Cum. Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

Notes: This table presents estimates obtained from different versions of Equation (2). We study the effects of the
announcement on February 19, 1902, that an antitrust suit would be filed against the Northern Securities Company.
The dependent variable is unadjusted returns cumulated from February 20 to March 1, 1902. All regressions also
include log capital and log age as controls. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

58

Table A.10: Northern Securities Event Analysis using Cumulative Abnormal Returns, Robustness to Market
Share, Market Concentration, and Community of Interest

Merger
Market Share

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0155**
(0.0064)
-0.0165
(0.0150)

-0.0159**
(0.0068)
0.0064
(0.0691)

-0.0148**
(0.0070)

-0.0156**
(0.0066)

-0.0160**
(0.0069)

-0.0170**
(0.0071)

-0.0165
(0.0113)

-0.0103
(0.0317)
0.0056
(0.0067)
0.0809
(0.0737)
YES
YES
YES

Market Concentration
Community of Interest
Constant
I. S. Lines
Railroad
JP Morgan Firm
Observations
R-squared
Cum. Abn. Return:
Mean
Std. Dev.

0.1251*
(0.0736)
NO
NO
NO

0.0889
(0.0804)
YES
YES
YES

0.1266*
(0.0733)
NO
NO
NO

0.0937
(0.0789)
YES
YES
YES

0.0092
(0.0073)
0.0971
(0.0687)
NO
NO
NO

48
0.1630

48
0.1843

48
0.1619

48
0.1869

48
0.1553

48
0.1910

0.0066
0.0239

0.0066
0.0239

0.0066
0.0239

0.0066
0.0239

0.0066
0.0239

0.0066
0.0239

Notes: This table presents estimates obtained from different versions of Equation (2). We study the effects of the
announcement on February 19, 1902, that an antitrust suit would be filed against the Northern Securities Company.
The dependent variable is abnormal returns cumulated from February 20 to March 1, 1902. Specifications in columns
(1) and (2) include a measure of market share. Specifications in columns (3) and (4) include a measure of market
concentration. Specifications in columns (5) and (6) include an indicator for being a subordinate member of a railroad
community of interest. All regressions also include log capital and log age as controls. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

59

