NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ACCOUNTING FOR FIRM HETEROGENEITY WITHIN U.S. INDUSTRIES:
EXTENDED SUPPLY-USE TABLES AND TRADE
IN VALUE ADDED USING ENTERPRISE AND ESTABLISHMENT LEVEL DATA

James J. Fetzer
Tina Highfill
Kassu W. Hossiso
Thomas F. Howells, III
Erich H. Strassner
Jeffrey A. Young
Working Paper 25249
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25249

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We would like to thank Shari Allen, John Bockrath, Jeffrey Bogen, Edward Dozier, Andre
Garber, Alexis Grimm, C. Omar Kebbeh, Fritz Mayhew, and Dan Yorgason for input in
preparing this paper. We would also like to thank Paul Farello, Susan Houseman, Kristy Howell,
Raymond Mataloni, and J. David Richardson for their valuable comments. The statistical analysis
of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, under arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality
requirements. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not be
attributed to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, the United States
government or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by James J. Fetzer, Tina Highfill, Kassu W. Hossiso, Thomas F. Howells, III, Erich H.
Strassner, and Jeffrey A. Young. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Accounting for Firm Heterogeneity within U.S. Industries: Extended Supply-Use Tables and
Trade in Value Added using Enterprise and Establishment Level Data
James J. Fetzer, Tina Highfill, Kassu W. Hossiso, Thomas F. Howells, III, Erich H. Strassner,
and Jeffrey A. Young
NBER Working Paper No. 25249
November 2018
JEL No. D57,F23,F6
ABSTRACT
This paper presents experimental tables created by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
comparing industry-specific shares of the components of total output of globally engaged firms
located in the United States that are part of a multinational enterprise with those of firms that are
part of an enterprise entirely located in the United States. Recent research has shown both the
importance of accounting for trade in value added when estimating bilateral trade flows and that
multinational enterprises located in the United States account for the lion’s share of U.S. trade in
goods and services. However, trade in value added is typically accounted for using input-output
tables that are aggregated across all types of firms. The experimental tables are consistent with
other research showing that value added as a share of output is lower for foreign-owned firms
compared with domestic-owned firms and that exports and imports as a share of output is larger
for foreign-owned firms. We also find heterogeneity in the composition of output among different
types of domestic-owned firms. Future work will analyze this heterogeneity in more detail using
establishment-level data on production and trade.
James J. Fetzer
Bureau of Economic Analysis
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
james.fetzer@bea.gov
Tina Highfill
Bureau of Economic Analysis
tina.highfill@bea.gov
Kassu W. Hossiso
Bureau of Economic Analysis
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
kassu.hossiso@bea.gov

Thomas F. Howells, III
Bureau of Economic Analysis
thomas.howells@bea.gov
Erich H. Strassner
Bureau of Economic Analysis
erich.strassner@bea.gov
Jeffrey A. Young
Bureau of Economic Analysis
jeff.young@bea.gov

Accounting for Firm Heterogeneity within U.S. Industries: Extended Supply-Use Tables
and Trade in Value Added using Enterprise and Establishment Level Data
James J. Fetzer, Tina Highfill, Kassu W. Hossiso, Thomas F. Howells III, Erich H. Strassner, and
Jeffrey A. Young 1
This paper presents experimental trade-in-value added statistics estimated from extended
supply-use tables (SUTs) for the United States for 2005 and 2012 that account for firm
heterogeneity. We also present preliminary output from a microdata linking project between
the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and the U.S. Census Bureau on the U.S. semiconductor
and other electronic components manufacturing industry to show how different firm
characteristics account for heterogeneity. Our experimental results show that imported content
of exports as a share of exports varies notably by firm-type within most industries, and that the
imported content of exports is concentrated in a few industries, the largest being petroleum
manufacturing. Based on these experimental results, most content of exports by firms in goods
producing industries is from U.S. multinational enterprises (MNEs) and most content of exports
in services industries is from non-MNEs. Estimates based on our microdata linking project
suggest that production patterns by ownership, firm size class, and export intensity each exhibit
firm heterogeneity to some extent. The ownership criteria best accounts for heterogeneity in
the value added share of production among the three criteria, while firm size class accounts for
heterogeneity in the export share of production better than the ownership criteria.

1 Introduction
There is a growing body of research on improving the measurement of Trade in Value
Added (TiVA) statistics and the supply-use tables (SUTs) on which they are based. As noted in
Fetzer, Howells, Jones, Strassner, and Wang (2016), this work began with efforts in academia

1

All of the authors are at the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce
(james.Fetzer@bea.gov, tina.highfill@bea.gov, kassu.hossiso@bea.gov, thomas.howells@bea.gov,
erich.strassner@bea.gov, and jeff.young@bea.gov). We would like to thank Shari Allen, John Bockrath, Jeffrey
Bogen, Edward Dozier, Andre Garber, Alexis Grimm, C. Omar Kebbeh, Fritz Mayhew, and Dan Yorgason for input in
preparing this paper. We would also like to thank Paul Farello, Susan Houseman, Kristy Howell, Raymond Mataloni,
and J. David Richardson for their valuable comments. The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S.
multinational companies was conducted at the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, under
arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and should not be attributed to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, the
United States government or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1

(e.g. Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP)), in government (e.g. U.S. International Trade
Commission (USITC) and the World Input-Output Database (WIOD)), and in international
organizations (e.g. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and
World Trade Organization (WTO)). Research has shown that bilateral trade balances measured
using TiVA statistics can be very different from those based on gross trade flows, which is not
surprising since a sizeable share of trade is composed of intermediate goods that have crossed
borders multiple times (Johnson and Noguera (2012)). TiVA statistics may enhance trade policy
and trade theory by revealing differences in competitiveness and comparative advantage that
are not apparent from gross bilateral trade flows and by providing other insights about direct
and indirect interdependencies among international trading partners. 2
As noted by Fetzer and Strassner (2015) and others, national statistical offices (NSOs)
have found direct measurement of TiVA to be impractical, and their efforts to measure TiVA
more accurately have focused on refining national-level SUTs that can be combined into a
global SUT to estimate TiVA indirectly. Since this approach to measuring TiVA for a given
country depends on the SUTs for the country itself as well as all its major trading partners, NSOs
have been engaged in cross-country efforts to build technical knowledge and capacity in the
NSOs of partner countries and to reconcile conceptual and measurement asymmetries among
national-level SUTs. For example, NSOs from Canada, Mexico, and the United States are
collaborating to produce regional North American SUTs and associated TiVA statistics in 2018,

2

See Dervis, Meltzer and Foda (2013) “Value-Added Trade and Its Implications for Trade Policy”
http://www.brookings.edu/research/opinions/2013/04/02-implications-international-trade-policy-dervis-meltzer

2

and plan to introduce extended SUTs by 2020. Peluso et al. (2017) outlines the conceptual
methodology, data requirements, and technical issues associated with construction of these
tables and statistics, which will also be used in multilateral efforts by the OECD and Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC) countries to produce a consistent set of inter-country inputoutput tables (IOTs).
In this paper, we extend work by Fetzer et al. (2016) to estimate experimental extended
SUTs for the United States for 2011. The tables for 2005 and 2012 presented in this paper will
be used by the (APEC) TiVA initiative in the development of regional extended SUTs for these
two years. Similar to Fetzer et al. (2016), we build on SUTs for the United States published by
the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) (Young, Howells, Strassner, and Wasshausen 2015).
Unlike previous work, we use an unpublished decomposition of the purchaser value use table
into basic value, import, tax, trade margin, and transportation matrices in place of the
estimated matrices using a quadratic programming approach. We also disaggregate SUTs by
firm type based on the methodology of Fetzer and Strassner (2015) using BEA statistics on the
Activities of Multinational Enterprises (AMNE). However, in this paper we rely on
establishment-based data from BEA’s SUTs rather than relying directly on enterprise-based
Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income data. We also derive symmetric industry-byindustry extended IOTs from the extended SUTs along with associated TiVA statistics.
TiVA estimates are most rigorously calculated using inter-country IOTs that account for
the production of all countries in the world. However, TiVA statistics have also been calculated
from single-country IOTs in research such as Ma, Wang, and Zhu (2015) and Tang, Wang, and
3

Wang (2014). Following their approach, we calculate implied domestic value added using the
Leontief inverse of the U.S. IOT to calculate single-country TiVA statistics. 3
For comparison purposes, these statistics include measures based both on standard
SUTs as well as extended SUTs that incorporate information on firm-level heterogeneity. The
comparative analysis of these two sets of statistics allows us to understand better how firms
within industries engage in global value chains and to see more clearly how the incorporation of
firm heterogeneity provides a more accurate measure of TiVA.
These tables are a precursor to more precise estimates of extended SUTs that will
eventually result from ongoing collaboration between the BEA and the U.S. Census Bureau on a
microdata linking project to improve the statistics related to global value chains. Linking the
BEA data to Census establishment level data will allow us to identify establishments that are
part of MNEs and other firm types rather than having to adjust discrepancies that arise when
we apportion the components of output based on enterprise-level MNE estimates that have
been converted to the establishment level. We also include early results from this project in
the form of a case study showing a partial extended SUT for the semiconductor industry.
Economy-wide totals for the case study come from establishment-level Census of Manufactures
data. Within these totals, we identify firm characteristics of ownership using the AMNE data
from BEA, firm size class from enterprise-level aggregations of the Longitudinal Business
Database, and data on export intensity from the Economic Census and the Annual Survey of
Manufacturers. While we are not able to report the actual extended SUTs for the

3

The Leontief inverse is a matrix that shows the full requirements (both direct and indirect) of a sector.

4

semiconductor industry due to disclosure restrictions and the need to use data from other
industries outside of the case study, we are able to show the existence of firm heterogeneity
due to characteristics including ownership, firm size class, and export intensity.

2 Literature Review
The extended SUTs in this paper expand on work done by Fetzer et al. (2016) to
estimate experimental extended SUTs for the United States for 2011, which decomposed
industry output by firm type, estimated extended IOTs, and estimated TiVA indicators using a
single-country IOT model.
A growing literature has found evidence of heterogeneity in value added, trade, and
imported intermediates between foreign- and domestic-owned enterprises across a broad
group of countries including the United States, Japan, China, and many European countries
(Fetzer and Strassner (2015), Piacentini and Fortanier (2015), Ahmad, Araujo, Lo Turco, and
Maggioni (2013), and Ma et al. (2015)). Also, work by Ito, Deseatnicov, and Fukao (2017) has
found heterogeneity in production destined for export versus production destined for domestic
consumption. These patterns are consistent with the productivity sorting hypothesis of Melitz
(2003) and Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004), which explains how a firm’s level of global
engagement tends to be positively associated with its level of productivity. Zeile (1998) also
found that valued added as a share of gross output was smaller for U.S. affiliates than U.S.
parent firms for most manufacturing industries in 1989 and 1994.

5

Research that estimates IOTs by type of firm have used a variety of methodologies.
Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2012) and Ma et al. (2015) use constrained optimization to extend
IOTs to include both processing and normal trade and to separate foreign-owned enterprises
from Chinese-owned enterprises. Ito et al. (2017) use matched employer-employee data for
Japan to split Japanese output in the OECD Inter-Country IOT into exports and domestic sales.
Cadestin et al. (2017) split the WIOD database by firm type using the OECD AMNE database and
national source data. Saborío and Torres-Mora (2018) create ESUTs for Costa Rica using data on
firms operating in free trade zones where over one-half of foreign direct investment in Costa
Rica is concentrated. Bernhard, Hambÿe, and Hertveldt (2018) use firm-level data on exporters
to disaggregate manufacturing industries in the Belgian SUTs by exporters and non-exporters.
Ahmad (2018) suggests that breaking out ownership by foreign- and domestic-owned MNEs is
in ESUTs is useful because of their considerable presence in economic activity and trade.
Most researchers, such as Ito, Deseatnicov, and Fukao (2017) and Cadestin et al. (2017),
calculate TiVA estimates based on inter-country IOTs, but some generate TiVA estimates using
single-country tables, such as Fetzer et al. (2016). As noted by Ma et al. (2015), single-country
models are limited to estimating the domestic content of exports, a measure that excludes
domestic value added that has been re-imported. Los, Timmer, and de Vries (2016) indicate
that domestic value added in gross exports can be estimated from the difference in reported
gross domestic product (GDP) and hypothetical GDP estimated from a single country IOT
assuming the country does not export. However, they indicate that global IOTs are required to
decompose domestic value added by end use including the extent to which it is absorbed
6

abroad. Johnson (2018) indicates that single country IOTs can be used to estimate the domestic
value added and import content in exports, but that a multicountry IOT is needed to
decompose import content into foreign value added.

3 Data
We used data from two main sources: 1) a time series of SUTs published as part of BEA’s
industry accounts and 2) AMNE data and trade in services data collected and published as part
of BEA’s international accounts. In addition to these two primary datasets, we also made direct
use of several datasets from the Census Bureau. Estimates were prepared for 2005 and 2012 to
align with the years chosen by APEC for the ongoing regional APEC TiVA initiative.
3.1 Supply-Use Tables
The SUTs for the United States are the foundation on which the experimental extended
SUTs were constructed. The supply-use framework comprises two tables. The supply table
presents the total domestic supply of goods and services from both domestic and foreign
producers that are available for use in the domestic economy. The cells in the main part of the
supply table, referred to as the make matrix, show domestic production and indicate the
amount of each commodity (row) produced by each industry (column). The make matrix plus an
additional column showing the amount of each commodity that was imported give the total
supply of each commodity at basic prices (i.e. market prices at the factory door less taxes and
subsidies). The remaining columns are valuation adjustments, including trade margins,

7

transportation costs, taxes, and subsidies, that transform total supply for each commodity from
basic prices to purchasers’ prices.
The use table shows how the supply of each commodity from the supply table is used by
domestic industries as intermediate inputs and by final users. The cells in the primary section
of the use table indicate the amount of a commodity (row) purchased by an industry (column)
as an intermediate input in the industry’s production process. The cells in the remaining
columns of the table show the flow of each commodity to different components of final
demand, including personal consumption, private investment, government consumption and
investment, inventory change, and exports. The cells in the remaining rows indicate how the
components of value added in an industry are allocated and capture the value of labor and
capital inputs used in an industry’s production process. 4
The tables presented here are part of a time series of SUTs, now covering the period
1997-2016, that were first released by BEA in September of 2015.5 These data are updated and
released on an annual basis, consistent with the annual revision of the Industry Economic
Accounts.6 The release of these tables is part of BEA’s long-term plan to make U.S. data on
output, intermediate inputs, and value added available in a format that is well suited for
preparation of TiVA statistics.

4

Young et al. (2015).
For a full discussion of the supply-use framework and the methodology followed by BEA to prepare the
new tables, see Young et al. (2015).
6
Barefoot, Gilmore, and Nelson (2017).
5

8

Starting with the September 2015 release, data previously presented only in the makeuse format were presented in the more internationally recognized supply-use format.
Presentation in this format helps to facilitate ongoing efforts to link U.S. data with SUTs from
other countries, a step necessary to derive the full suite of TiVA-related statistics. In addition,
the SUTs incorporate important valuation changes that bring the tables into better alignment
with international standards and enhance the suitability of the tables for use in TiVA analysis. 7
BEA has recently conducted additional research allowing the breakdown of the use
tables valued at purchaser prices into subcomponent matrices necessary for calculating TiVA
statistics. This decomposition includes separate matrices for domestically-produced inputs
valued at basic prices, imported inputs at cost, insurance, and freight (CIF) prices, trade
margins, transportation costs, taxes on products, duties on imports, and subsidies on products.
Developing these matrices for the use table is more resource intensive than bringing the supply
table up to purchasers’ prices where only an additional six columns need to be added. In
addition to their importance for preparing TiVA statistics, another reason to undertake this task
is to facilitate compiling a supply and use table in volume terms. While each of the
decomposed matrices is not currently published, these additions were available for purposes of
this paper. 8 The availability of these matrices is a significant improvement as the decomposed

7

Beginning with the comprehensive update of the industry accounts scheduled for publication on
November 1, 2018, BEA will begin featuring supply-use tables as the primary format for publishing input-output
data. Make-use tables will continue to be published, but will be released as a supplementary product rather than
as the featured set of tables.
8
BEA is currently investigating options for making these tables available to the public.

9

component matrices did not need to be approximated as previously using a quadratic
programming constrained optimization model on data from the published BEA SUTs.
3.2 Activities of Multinational Enterprises
Firm heterogeneity is introduced into the SUTs through the incorporation of BEA AMNE
statistics; this addition is partly what distinguishes them as extended SUTs. These statistics
cover the financial and operating characteristics of U.S. parent companies (domestic-owned
MNEs) and U.S. affiliates that are majority-owned by foreign MNEs (foreign-owned MNEs). They
are based on legally mandated surveys conducted by BEA and are used in a wide variety of
studies to estimate the impact of MNEs on the domestic (U.S.) economy and on foreign host
economies.
We use data from the inward AMNE surveys to measure the presence of foreign-owned
MNEs and data from the outward AMNE surveys for domestic-owned MNEs for 2005 and 2012.
The data include components of value added, sales, and trade in goods for both domesticowned MNEs and foreign-owned MNEs for 31 industries for which the relevant data were
published for both surveys. Because AMNE data points are sometimes suppressed to avoid
disclosure of firm-level data, we use distributions from non-suppressed data items as a basis for
estimating suppressed values.
For domestic-owned MNEs, we exclude those that are majority-foreign-owned from the
published outward AMNE data. These companies appear in both the inward and the outward
AMNE datasets. Because the extent of the overlap is not published and because directly
removing the overlapping companies could lead to implicit disclosure of firm-level data, we first
10

remove the overlap at the all-industry level and then estimate industry-level overlaps based on
distributions of published inward AMNE statistics by industry. That is, we assume that the
extent of the overlap is proportional to the size of inward AMNE data by industry. We remove
the industry-level estimates of the overlap from the domestic-owned MNE data set, leaving
strictly domestic-owned MNEs that can be used to create extended SUTs and calculate TiVA
statistics.
We also allocate BEA trade in services data by firm type. Trade in services data collected
on BEA’s BE-125 (selected services and intellectual property), BE-45 (insurance services), and
BE-185 (financial services) surveys for 2012 were matched to the firms’ responses on the BEA
AMNE surveys to identify services exported and imported by domestic-owned MNEs and
foreign-owned MNEs. The matches are made based on firm-level bridges between the three
surveys and the AMNE data for 2011. The remaining trade that is not matched with an MNE is
assumed to be exported or imported by a non-MNE. Since the trade in services data for 2005
are estimated from a greater number of surveys for which there are no existing ID bridges with
the AMNE data, we apply the 2012 allocations by service type to the trade in services data for
2005.9
Trade in transport, travel, and government goods and services could not be matched
directly to firms in the AMNE data. Transport data could not be matched because there is not
currently an ID bridge between BEA’s transportation surveys and the AMNE surveys. Travel

9

In addition to the BEA surveys of selected services and intellectual property, insurance services, and
financial services, BEA also conducts surveys of trade in services covering air transport and ocean transport.

11

data could not be matched because the source data are classified based on the buyer not the
seller. Data for firms supplying goods and services to the government could not be matched
because they are based on data sources that are aggregated above the firm level. The
ownership type for these trade in services are based on the types of firms that we believe to be
primarily engaged in this type of trade and on data for gross output by ownership type from the
extended SUTs. Exports of travel services are allocated based on 2012 data from BEA’s Travel
and Tourism Satellite Account, 2013 data from the Survey of International Air Travelers, and
2012 data on gross output by ownership type from the extended SUTs. Since imports of travel
services and imports of passenger fares for personal travel are typically not made by firms, but
by individual consumers, we allocated these imports to “final demand” rather than to a firm
type.
3.3 U.S. Census Bureau Datasets
For experimental tables, we use BEA’s SUTs as a starting point. Construction of the SUTs
relies heavily on data from the quinquennial economic census as well as annual and quarterly
surveys administered by the Census Bureau. In addition, Census employment data at the
enterprise and establishment levels from the 2007 and 2012 Economic Censuses are used to
convert BEA’s multinational data from an enterprise to an establishment basis.
For the microdata linking project, we identify multinational enterprises by linking the
establishment level 2012 Census of Manufactures data with the 2012 BEA outward and inward
AMNE surveys (BE-11 and BE-12). We identify firm size class for the establishments in the
Census of Manufactures by linking that dataset with the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business
12

Database to estimate the number of employees in each firm. We identify export intensity from
export and sales data reported in the Economic Census.

4 Methodology
Our overall methodology is similar to that of Fetzer et al. (2016) and Fetzer and
Strassner (2015). Estimates of activity by industry for domestic and foreign-owned MNEs are
derived directly from BEA’s AMNE datasets as outlined below, and non-MNE activity is derived
residually as total activity less the MNE data. Previous work by Fetzer et al. (2016) and Fetzer
and Strassner (2015) relied on company-based IRS data to derive estimates of total activity. In
this paper, we make direct use of establishment-based data from BEA’s published SUTs as our
estimates of total activity. BEA’s AMNE data are collected on an enterprise-basis and were
adjusted to an establishment basis using an enterprise-to-establishment transformation matrix
based on Census employment data. Once all components were estimated, we constructed an
extended SUT by firm ownership and calculated TiVA statistics.
4.1 Enterprise-to-Establishment Adjustment
The Census employment data are taken from the 2007 and 2012 Economic Censuses.
Census provides total employment both by enterprise industry and by establishment industry
at the 4-digit NAICS level. Census employment data for 2012 were used to convert the AMNE
data for 2012 while Census data for 2007 were used to convert the AMNE data for 2005.
We first aggregated the data up to the 31 industries estimated for this paper. At the 31industry level, we created an enterprise-by-establishment matrix of employment levels, that
13

provided the weights for our conversion matrix. Because the matrix is based on employment
levels, a key assumption in creating and using this conversion matrix is that the relationship
between employees and the variable to be converted is the same by type of establishment
regardless of the industry of the parent enterprise. For example, we assume that employees
across all types of retail establishments are equally productive, whether those employees work
for a retail establishment that is part of a consumer electronics enterprise or a retail
establishment that is part of a furniture enterprise. It is important to note that no output is
created or lost in converting from an enterprise to an establishment basis, rather the
conversion process is simply one of redistribution.
4.2 Decomposing the Purchasers’ Price Use Table into Component Matrices
According to the international accounting standards, use table intermediate inputs are
valued at purchaser prices. However, a domestic basic price valuation is preferred for purposes
of calculating TiVA statistics because it ensures more homogenous valuation across different
products, more accurately reflects a country’s input-output relationships, and allows separate
identification of the effects of import tariffs, production taxes, and subsidies.
The purchaser price reflects the price paid by the buyer to take delivery of the good or
service and includes the value of the underlying product plus taxes, wholesale and retail
markups, and transportation costs. This is the value that matters for decision making by the
buyer. The basic price reflects the price ultimately received by the producer and includes the
price at which the underlying good or service is sold plus any subsidies received. In addition, the

14

total value of purchased inputs in a standard use table combines both domestically-produced
and imported goods and services.
Conceptually, the process of converting use table intermediate inputs from purchaser
prices to domestic basic prices involves removing taxes less subsidies, wholesale and retail
markups, and transportations costs from each cell and separating imported and domesticallyproduced inputs. Taxes less subsidies are moved to the value-added row while wholesale,
retail, and transportation costs are moved to rows that show their purchase explicitly in the
table rather than implicitly embedded in the value of goods purchases. Finally, the resulting
basic price values are separated into domestically-produced and imported components. This
process is often subdivided to provide additional information. For example, it is common to
show trade and transportation margins separately rather than grouped as distributive services.
Likewise, taxes are often identified separately from subsidies, and within taxes, tariffs and
duties are often shown separately from domestic taxes on production. This additional detail
can be useful for policy studies using computable general equilibrium models that are based on
SUTs. The number of ways in which to subdivide the transformation of purchaser to basic
prices ultimately depends on data availability and the needs of the project.
The adjustments to transform use table intermediates from purchasers’ prices to basic
prices are depicted as matrices. The taxes less subsidies matrix is constructed in such a way
that subtracting this matrix from the use table leaves total output by industry unchanged. This
matrix shifts taxes collected on purchased intermediate inputs out of intermediate inputs and
into value added. Similarly, the matrix shifts subsidies away from value added and into the
15

value of the intermediate inputs purchased. The purpose of this transformation is to have
intermediate inputs more accurately reflect production costs.
The distributive services matrix is similarly constructed such that subtracting it from
intermediate inputs leaves total intermediate inputs unchanged. The transformation alters the
composition of intermediate inputs to reflect lower values in merchandise purchases and larger
values in trade and transport purchases. The purpose of this transformation is to show margins
being purchased explicitly, as opposed to being purchased implicitly in purchasers’ prices.
Showing margins explicitly allows for better evaluation of each industry's input structure for
TiVA analysis.
The import matrix shows the purchase of imported inputs by industry and final use
category. The import matrix allows the partitioning of intermediate inputs between
domestically-sourced and imported inputs. Imports are estimated in two stages. First, in the
development of BEA’s conventional SUTs, they are allocated by industry using the import
proportionality assumption wherein industries are assumed to use imported intermediate
inputs in the proportion to the import share of total domestic supply. Samuels, Howells, Russell,
and Strassner (2015) provide a complete description of the BEA import use methodology.
Second, to account for firm heterogeneity in the use of imports, these first approximations are
adjusted using imports of goods reported on the AMNE surveys and microdata from BEA’s trade
in services surveys linked to the AMNE data. This technique, however, could bias downward
the import shares of MNEs because the AMNE surveys collect only direct imports by the firm
themselves, whereas the import proportionality assumption implicitly captures imports
16

purchased by the firm itself and those purchased through other domestic businesses, such as a
broker or a wholesaler.
We mitigated this bias by reallocating imports from MNEs in industries reporting
imports that were greater than the imports in our published SUTs. The reallocation was
particularly large for reported imports by MNEs in wholesale trade. We expect that the bulk of
imports by MNEs in wholesale trade are used as inputs by establishments in different
industries. Distinguishing between imported and domestically-sourced inputs is necessary for
the proper identification of input structures for TiVA analysis.
The use table for the United States is computed such that intermediate inputs can be
converted in a straightforward way between purchasers’ and basic prices. Most of the
components for preparing these two matrices and the transformation matrices that link them
are generated in the normal course of statistical production.
Providing trade and transportation matrices for TiVA analysis largely entails aggregating
this underlying data to an appropriate level of detail. The underlying U.S. data also include an
import use table which allows import-specific prices to be applied during the calculation of
inflation-adjusted industry estimates. This import matrix is used to differentiate between
changes in relative prices between domestic and foreign inputs. The import use table valuation
includes import tariffs and duties, which for multi-country TiVA analysis needs to be shown
separately from imports in basic prices. The data underlying the U.S. use tables also allow for
an explicit identification of product-related domestic taxes. Subsidies, however, are not easily

17

identified based on the underlying level of detail. Thus, the two main challenges in developing
domestic intermediate input estimates at basic prices for the United States are calculating the
tariff and duties matrix and the subsidies matrix.
Calculating the tariffs and duties matrix requires coupling the underlying use table
import data with customs data to determine appropriate estimates by product category. These
product estimates are then apportioned to purchasing industries proportionately and
aggregated to the desired level. Subsidies are first estimated by product based on the product
mix produced by the industry receiving the subsidies. These estimates of product subsidies are
then apportioned to intermediate inputs proportionately.
4.3 Estimating Firm Type Shares
Following the decomposition of the purchaser price use table, we break out the industry
columns in the resulting component matrices into foreign-owned MNEs, domestic-owned
MNEs, and non-MNEs. The MNE components are calculated using the AMNE data while the
non-MNE component is calculated as the residual of the total value less the MNE pieces. The
resulting distribution is used to generate firm type shares for each industry.
Shares are prepared by industry for gross output, intermediate inputs, employee
compensation, capital compensation (gross operating surplus plus taxes on products), exports,
imports, and employment. For each of these variables, an establishment-based industry
distribution is drawn from the supply-use framework. The establishment-based distributions
for foreign- and domestic-owned multinational enterprises created from the AMNE and Census

18

employment data are subtracted from the SUT-based totals to create a residual estimate of
non-multinational activity by industry.
In some instances, multinational activity is larger than total activity from the SUTs.
These discrepancies are likely the result of limitations in the enterprise-to-establishment
adjustment process. We adjusted the data to address these negatives and other implausible
values.
Firm type shares are applied to all industry columns of the SUT matrices. The shares are
estimated so that the resulting extended SUT remained fully balanced and consistent, so the
table does not need to be rebalanced.
4.4 Input-Output Tables
We use a similar methodology for estimating the TiVA statistics as Fetzer et al. (2016).
Once the extended SUTs are constructed, we derive a symmetric industry-by-industry extended
IOT from the extended SUTs. First, we generate a commodity-by-commodity IOT using the
industry technology assumption that each industry has its own specific method of production,
irrespective of its product mix. We derive an industry-by-industry IOT using the fixed product
sales structure approach from this table, in which each product has its own specific sales
structure, irrespective of the industry in which it is produced.10 Dietzenbacher, Los, Stehrer,
Timmer, and de Vries (2013) indicate that this approach is also used to construct the world IOTs
for the World Input-Output Database Project. They indicate that practitioners prefer the fixed

10

See Eurostat (2008) for a more detailed explanation of these approaches.

19

product sales structure approach to the fixed industry sales structure where each industry has
its own sales structure. This is because it is more plausible that products have the same sales
structure than industries having the same sales structure. It also does not yield negative values
in cells that were not negative in the original SUT.
In the extended SUT, export data appear only on a commodity basis; however, the IOT
resulting from the above process includes a distribution of exports by industry and firm type.
The shares for exports are applied at this stage of the process, and offsetting adjustments are
made to non-export activity to keep totals for each row unchanged. TiVA statistics can then be
calculated from this “export adjusted” IOT.
4.5 TiVA estimates
While TiVA estimates are most rigorously calculated using international IOTs that
account for the production of all countries in the world, TiVA statistics can be calculated using
single country IOTs. We follow the approach of Ma et al. (2015) and Tang et al. (2014) and
assume that domestic content in gross exports is the same as value added in gross exports.
Because part of domestic content in gross exports is re-imported goods, our measure of
domestic value added is overstated.
We calculate TiVA measures using a methodology that is typically used for international
IOTs. A key to calculating TiVA statistics is the Leontief inverse of the IOT. The matrix depends
on both the direct input requirements from the same industry and the indirect input
requirements from other industries. Domestic value added embodied in gross exports for an
industry depends on both these direct and indirect requirements. Following Ma et al. (2015)
20

and Tang et al. (2014), we calculate domestic value added as the product of the vector of the
domestic value added share of output for each industry, the Leontief inverse of the U.S. IOT
matrix, and the value of gross exports for each industry. Likewise, the direct domestic value
added content of gross exports is calculated as the vector of domestic value added shares of
output multiplied by the value of gross exports for each industry. Indirect domestic content of
gross exports is calculated as the difference between total and direct domestic value added.
Imported content of gross exports is calculated as the difference between gross exports and
domestic value added content of exports. We refer to this as “imported content” instead of the
more commonly used term “foreign value added” since it might also include domestic content
that had previously been exported.

5 Results
In this section we describe the TiVA indicators that measure the contribution of U.S.
production in both domestic and global value chains. In our experimental tables, we find that
the imported content of exports is concentrated in a few industries. We also find that the
majority of content of exports in goods producing industries is from MNEs and that the majority
of content of exports in services industries is from non-MNEs. 11 The indicators suggest that
domestic value added embodied in imports from upstream foreign affiliates makes a significant
contribution to the content of exports in several industries. For example, a U.S. car

11

The content of exports is measured by our TiVA indicators which mainly depend on the input
requirements (including imported inputs) from our extended IOTs and the level of exports from each industry by
firm type. The result that the majority of content of exports in service industries is from non-MNEs is consistent
with the relatively high share of value added contributed by non-MNEs in services industries and the relatively
large share that own industry inputs contribute to value added.

21

manufacturer might export components to a subsidiary in Mexico that assembles cars for its
parent and then ships the finished cars back to its parent for sale in the United States.
Estimates from the microdata linking project suggest that the three firm types each display firm
heterogeneity to some extent.
Powers (2012) points out that TiVA indicators typically focus on either a decomposition
of the value added content of goods where they are consumed or a decomposition of gross
trade. He shows that examining trade on a value added basis shows a different picture of
bilateral trade balances than gross trade flows. However, the total trade deficit of a country
summed across all partner countries is identical for both TiVA and gross trade flows. One core
measure of TiVA is decomposing the value added content of gross exports into domestic and
foreign components. Other things being equal, the higher the foreign value added share of
exports, the more the industry is integrated in global value chains. This could mean that the
current level of exports depends on foreign content. It is also possible that the foreign content is
substituting for potential additional domestic content.
According to the OECD TiVA database, foreign value added content as a share of exports
for the United States has been stable, fluctuating slightly between 11 and 15 percent between
2000 and 2011. The share gradually increased from 12 percent in 2000 to 15 percent in 2011.
Foreign value added is a relatively small share of exports for the United States compared with
other major economies. Foreign value added as a share of exports in 2011 for the United States
is similar to the share of foreign value added in exports for Australia, Japan, and Russia, but is
about 10 percentage points lower than the share for most major European countries and
22

Canada, about 17 percentage points lower than the share for China and Mexico, and about 27
percentage points lower than the share of foreign value in exports for Korea. 12
5.1 Imported Content of Exports as a Share of Gross Exports
Using our experimental extended IOT, we calculate the imported content of exports as a
share of exports for 2005 and 2012 (figure 1). Other things being equal, the higher the imported
content share of exports, the more the industry is integrated into global value chains. The
import content share across industries have a similar pattern to that observed in data from 2011
by Fetzer et al. (2016). Imported content as a share of exports is largest for petroleum
manufacturing, likely due to foreign crude oil and coal used to produce refined petroleum for
export. Imported content tends to be a small share of exports of services.
Imported content as a share of exports in 2012 is typically either higher or very similar to
the level in 2005 (Figure 1). This is consistent with the trends in the foreign value added share of
U.S. exports calculated by the OECD. One notable exception is computers and electronics where
imported content decreased from 15 to 10 percent of exports between 2005 and 2012. The
annual OECD estimates suggest that most of the decrease in computers occurred between 2008
and 2009 in the aftermath of the financial crisis. We will analyze this change more thoroughly
by decomposing domestic and imported content by firm types.
As noted earlier, our TiVA estimates of imported content might overstate the importance
of imported inputs since they may include domestic content that had previously been exported

12

OECD, Principal TiVA indicators, http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=TIVA_2016_C1,
downloaded January 2018.

23

from the United States. We may also understate imported inputs by MNEs because some
imports in the wholesale trade industry may be used as inputs in other industries. Our
estimates of imported content as a share of gross exports across all industries of 12.7 percent in
2005 and 14.4 percent in 2012 are smaller than the OECD’s estimates of foreign value added as
a share of gross exports of 13.0 percent in 2005 and the “nowcast” estimate of 15.5 percent in
2012. As seen in figure 2 for 2005, the OECD estimates are larger for most industries that are
comparable between the two data sets with the notable exceptions of petroleum
manufacturing, paper, and transportation.
As shown in figures 3, 4, and 5, imported content as a share of exports varies by type of
ownership for all industries and for individual industries in both 2005 and 2012. Imported
content tends to be a larger share of exports for foreign-owned MNEs during 2012, but nonMNEs have the highest share in several manufacturing industries in 2012 and most of
manufacturing industries in 2005. However, non-MNEs consistently have the smallest share of
imported content in services industries. As noted in section 4.2, however, at this stage, the
estimates of imports by MNEs may be understated.
Much of imports and exports by both U.S. and foreign MNEs is trade within the MNE.
Intrafirm trade in goods is more prevalent for foreign MNEs, comprising more than 80 percent
of their imports and more than 60 percent of their exports in 2005 and 2012, while intrafirm
trade in goods by U.S. MNEs accounted for close to one-half of their trade in the same

24

periods. 13 Intrafirm trade in services made up about 20 to 30 percent of imports and exports of
trade in services by all firm types in 2005 and 2012. Intrafirm trade by U.S. parents with their
affiliates made up about 80 percent of affiliated exports and about 60 percent of affiliated
imports in 2012. 14
Intrafirm trade in goods by foreign MNEs during 2005 and 2012 was most prevalent
among U.S. affiliates in wholesale trade and followed by U.S. affiliates in the transportation
equipment industry (mostly motor vehicle affiliates in 2005). More than one-half of U.S. MNE
imports from their foreign affiliates are by U.S. MNEs in the motor vehicle, computers and
electronics, chemicals, and petroleum manufacturing industries in 2005 and 2012. A slightly
smaller share of U.S. MNE exports to their foreign affiliates is by U.S. MNEs in these industries.
5.2 Decomposition of Value Added
We also used the experimental tables to decompose domestic value added embodied in
exports by ownership type to get a sense of the contribution of different firm types and
imported content in exports. As shown in figure 6, close to half of the content in exports by
goods-related industries is value added by U.S. MNEs and close to two-thirds of the content of
exports in service industries is value added by non-MNEs. The remainder of content in exports
in goods related industries is distributed similarly among foreign MNEs, non-MNEs, and

13

BEA, Activities of U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Multinational Enterprises, revised data for 2005 and 2012 and
BEA, Activities of U.S. Multinational Enterprises, revised data for 2005 and 2012.
14
BEA, U.S. Trade in Services, Table 2.3, U.S. Trade in Services, by Country or Affiliation and by Type of
Service, October 24, 2017 release.

25

imported content while the bulk of the remaining content in services-related industries is value
added by U.S. MNEs.
Value added by U.S. MNEs is larger than the other sources in most goods-producing
industries with about one-half of the content of exports concentrated in computers and
electronics, chemicals, and other transportation industries in 2005 and 2012 (figures 7 and 8).
Two of these industries, computers and electronics and chemicals, are also among industries
with the largest share of intrafirm trade in goods by U.S. MNEs. Value added by non-MNEs is by
far the largest source of the content of exports for service industries, making up more than onehalf of value added in all service industries except for telecommunications (figure 9). Most of
the rest of the content of exports in service industries is from U.S. MNEs.
Value added by foreign MNEs is no more than 10 percent of the content in exports in all
industries except wholesale trade, where it made up 20 percent of the content in exports in
2005 and 16 percent of content in 2012. Foreign-owned domestic value added was more
prevalent in the content of exports by goods- producing industries than service industries in
2005 and 2012. More than half of foreign-owned domestic value added content of exports was
in chemicals, motor vehicles, wholesale trade, and machinery. A majority of the intrafirm trade
in goods by U.S. affiliates is concentrated in wholesale trade and transportation equipment,
which includes motor vehicles.
While these numbers indicate that foreign-owned MNEs contribute significant amounts
of domestic value added content of exports for some industries, some foreign-owned MNEs

26

may not be very integrated into a domestic value chain. Estimating the indirect or upstream
contribution of foreign-owned MNEs and the other firm types to the domestic value added
content of exports helps us understand to what degree value added by foreign-owned MNEs is
an input in other U.S. industries. From figures 10 and 11, we can see that most contributions of
indirect domestic value added are significant. About three-fourths of the foreign-owned
domestic value added is upstream, although this varies widely by industry.
Non-MNEs are the largest source of value added in final demand for both goods and
service producing industries in 2012 (figure 12). Value added by non-MNEs made up threefourths of final demand for service industries in 2012 while it contributed slightly more to final
demand in goods producing industries than the one-third contribution by U.S. MNEs. The
difference between the contributions to final demand and exports is due to the composition of
industries contributing most to final demand compared to exports. Government services,
finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE), and health care are the largest components of final
demand and their value added primarily comes from non-MNEs. Therefore foreign-owned value
added only made up about 5 percent of final demand in 2012 compared to 13 percent of
exports. The five-percent share of final demand is slightly less than the share of value added
created by non-EU-owned enterprises in the median EU country Stapel-Weber et al. (2018).
We can also use this decomposition to better understand the decrease in the imported
content of exports as a share of exports for the computer and electronics industry. Figure 13
shows that we can now see the changes in content export for each firm type. There does not
appear to be a significant substitution of domestic value added for imported content within a
27

firm type between 2005 and 2012. The decline in imported content as a share of exports
between 2005 and 2012 is mostly due to an increase in direct domestic value added by nonMNEs with small decreases in imported content and indirect domestic value added. U.S. MNEs
used less imported content in their exports, but their domestic value added also decreases.
5.3 Labor Productivity
Our results also indicate that MNEs are more productive than non-MNEs overall and in
many key industries. This is consistent with Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012) who find
that U.S. and other multinationals in the UK were more productive than domestic firms from
1995 to 2003.
Consistent with the productivity sorting hypothesis of Melitz (2003) and Helpman et al.
(2004), we find that labor productivity measured by gross output per employee for both U.S.owned MNEs and foreign-owned MNEs is almost twice as large as that for non-MNEs in both
2005 and 2012 When measuring labor productivity by value added as a share of employment,
U.S.-owned MNEs and foreign-MNEs are almost 25 percent more productive than non-MNEs
across all industries. However, non-MNEs are more productive on a value added basis than
MNEs when the high productivity petroleum manufacturing industry is excluded. It is not
surprising that productivity is smaller for MNEs when based on value added rather than gross
output because value added doesn’t account for productivity associated with utilizing
intermediate inputs (Eldridge and Price (2016)). Consistent with the framework developed by
Bernard et al. (2018) on productivity of global firms, we expect that one source of high
productivity of MNEs is their ability to source inputs from domestic and foreign firms.
28

Compared to non-MNEs, labor productivity on a gross output basis was higher for
foreign-owned MNEs in most industries, and higher for U.S. MNEs in about one-half of our
industries. Labor productivity was higher for both foreign-owned and domestic-owned MNEs
during 2005 and 2012 in several industries with significant amounts of MNE gross output and
employment including food, beverage, and tobacco; machinery; transportation; and utilities
and construction.
5.4 Analysis of Value Added and Exports for the Semiconductor Industry Using
Linked Microdata
The quality of the estimates discussed so far is lessened by the necessity of
approximating establishment-level data for MNEs from enterprise-level AMNE data collected by
BEA combined with patterns in establishment-level data for all U.S. firms collected by the
Census Bureau. Ultimately, we hope to build more accurate extended SUTs using linked
enterprise-establishment microdata for all firms rather than converting the enterprise level BEA
MNE data to the establishment level and then imposing the MNE data on the published
establishment level SUTs. While the establishment level conversion is an accepted method of
converting the data, it is still necessary to reconcile remaining inconsistencies between the BEA
enterprise data and the establishment level Census data.
As an initial exercise working with the linked microdata, we constructed these data for
U.S. establishments in the semiconductor manufacturing industry. We cannot provide tabular
results at this stage due to data disclosure constraints. Using the linked Census and BEA AMNE
microdata, we measure the components of value added, gross output, and employment for the
29

semiconductor industry by type of ownership, firm size, and export intensity. On an ownership
basis, value added as a share of output is highest for U.S. MNEs and lowest for foreign MNEs.
The low share for foreign MNEs is consistent with Zeile (1998) who found that, in the electronic
components and accessories industry in 1989, foreign-owned U.S. businesses had a domestic
content of 72 percent, compared with 87 percent for domestic-owned businesses. On a firm
size class basis, value added as a share of output is highest for medium-sized enterprises and is
lowest for small enterprises. On an export intensity basis, value added as a share of gross
output is higher for exporting firms than for non-exporters.
All else equal, we would have expected value added as a share of gross output to be
smaller for large firms and exporters since they are more likely to be part of global value chains
than medium firms. This intuition is supported by Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2009). However,
it may be that the commodity mix of exports and imports differs among the different firm types
so that what we are interpreting as a quantity effect is really a price effect. We will be better
able to understand these patterns at a later stage when we have integrated product-level
goods trade data, including imported goods data, into our analysis. The ratio of exports to gross
output follows a more expected pattern with exports as a share of gross output highest for
MNEs and for larger firms.
The ownership criteria accounts for more heterogeneity in value added and its
components than firm size class and export intensity criteria. The range between the smallest
and largest value added shares of output is almost 10 percentage points based on ownership
compared with a range of less than seven percentage points for both firm size class and export
30

intensity (see figure 14). Also, there is greater variance in the three value added to gross output
shares based on ownership than in the three shares based on firm size class.
Firm size class accounts for more heterogeneity in exports as a share of gross output
than the ownership criteria with a range of 24 percentage points compared to range of 20
percentage points for the ownership criteria (see figure 15). This supports our expectation that
export intensity of the two types of MNEs are similar, and the difference between export
intensities of small and large firms capture a great degree of heterogeneity.
Direct comparisons between the experimental ESUT and the semiconductor estimates
are difficult for several reasons. First, we are unable to disaggregate the industries in our
experimental ESUT down to the 3344 NAICS semiconductor industry for a direct comparison.
Semiconductors are a subset of the computer and electronics industry, making up only about
one-fourth of the value added and less than one-third of sales in 2012 for the industry. Second,
due to the preliminary nature of the data linking work we are not able to disclose TiVA
measures such as the value added share of exports and final demand due to data needed from
other industries outside of the scope of our case study. We are limited to estimating metrics
that can be calculated using the establishment-level data for the semiconductor industry such
as the value added and export shares of output by firm type that used in work such as Fetzer
and Strassner (2015).
While these results are experimental and only for one industry, they suggest that the
three firm types (by ownership, size, and export intensity) account for some heterogeneity in

31

production patterns and that different types of heterogeneity may be more important for
different measures of economic activity. Some unexpected results suggest that more work is
needed at the microdata level to ensure that components of output and inputs are being
measured and classified properly.

6 Conclusion
In this paper we construct experimental extended SUTs and TiVA estimates for the
United States for 2005 and 2012. We find that the imported content of exports is concentrated
in a few industries such as petroleum and motor vehicle manufacturing. Most of the content of
exports by firms in goods-producing industries is from U.S. MNEs and most of the content of
exports in services industries is from non-MNEs. However, domestic value added embodied in
inputs from upstream foreign affiliates makes a significant contribution to the content of
exports in several industries. We also find that value added to the content by MNEs is
concentrated in several industries in which their intrafirm trade in goods is concentrated. More
refined estimates for the semiconductor industry based on the Census-BEA microdata linking
project suggest that while the ownership criteria most accounts for heterogeneity in the value
added share of output, firm size class accounts for more heterogeneity in export intensity.
Our results provide further evidence that accounting for firm heterogeneity matters in
measuring production. It allows us to better understand the role of global value chains in the
U.S. economy. Even though our analysis using a single country IOT doesn’t account for
imported content that was originally exported from the United States, we are able to show how

32

U.S. production relies on inputs from both domestic and global supply chains. Our results also
inform us about the degree to which foreign ownership contributes to U.S. production.
Looking ahead, BEA is participating in statistical initiatives with the OECD and with the
APEC where work continues to develop the framework for extended SUTs and APEC regional
SUTs and IOTs and associated TiVA estimates. The aim of this work is to incorporate the APEC
database into the OECD database in the next year. Additionally, BEA and the USITC are
collaborating with Statistics Canada and Mexico’s Instituto Nacional de Estadistíca y Geografía
to develop North American regional SUTs and TiVA statistics with a goal to complete the
regional SUT and TiVA statistics in the next year and extended tables and TiVA measures around
2020.
Lastly, much work remains to improve the statistical infrastructure to support efforts to
measure the role of global value chains in the U.S. economy. This work includes enhancing the
international comparability of BEA’s SUTs and continuing to expand the detail BEA publishes on
exports and imports by type of service and by country. In addition, a critical goal is to extend
the analysis done on semiconductors to produce official extended SUTs under the microdata
linking project with the Census Bureau. This project will link BEA’s AMNE and trade in services
data with data from Census Bureau economic surveys and Census data on trade in goods across
all industries. The output of this linking project, expected to be completed in 2021, will identify
firm-level heterogeneity tabulations that, ideally, will be made available for use on a recurring
basis to construct official statistics.

33

Bibliography
Ahmad, N. (2018). Accounting for Globalisation: Frameworks for Integrated International
Economic Accounts. Prepared for NBER CRIW Conference: The Challenges of Globalization in
the Measurement of National Accounts, March 2018.
Ahmad, N., Araujo, S., Lo Turco, A., & Maggioni, D. (2013). Using trade microdata to improve
trade in value added measures: proof of concept using Turkish data. Mattoo, A., Wang, Z. and
Wei, S. (Eds.), Trade in Value Added: Developing New Measures of Cross-Border Trade (pp. 187219.) Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Barefoot, K., Gilmore, T., & Nelson, C. (2017). The 2017 Annual Update of the Industry
Economic Accounts: Initial Statistics for the Second Quarter of 2017 and Revised Statistics for
2014-2016 and the First Quarter of 2017. Survey of Current Business, 97(12).
Bernard, A. B., Jensen, J. B., & Schott, P. K. (2009). Importers, exporters and multinationals: a
portrait of firms in the US that trade goods. In Producer dynamics: New evidence from micro
data (pp. 513-552). University of Chicago Press.
Bernard, A. B., Jensen, J. B., Redding, S.J. & Schott, P. K. (2018). Global Firms. Journal of
Economic Literature. 56(2), June 2018, pp. 565-619,
Bloom, N., Sadun, R., & Van Reenen. (2012). Americans Do IT Better: U.S. Multinationals and
the Productivity Miracle. American Economic Review, 102(1), pp. 167-201.
Cadestin C., De Backer, K., Desnoyers-James, I., Miroudot, S., Rigo, D. & Ye, M. (2017). An ICIO
Split According to Domestic and Foreign Ownership: The OECD TiVA-MNE Project. Paper
prepared for the 25th International Input-Output Conference, June 19-23, 2017, Atlantic City,
New Jersey, USA.
Dervis, K., Meltzer, J.P., Foda, K. (2013), “Value-Added Trade and Its Implications for
International Trade Policy, OP-ED, Brookings Institute.
https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/value-added-trade-and-its-implications-for-internationaltrade-policy/
Dietzenbacher ,E., Los, B., Stehrer, R., Timmer, M.P., & de Vries, G.J. (2013). The Construction of
World Input-Output Tables in the WIOD Project. Economic Systems Research, 25, 71-98.
Eldridge, L.P. & Price J. (2016). Measuring Quarterly Labor Productivity by Industry. Monthly
Labor Review, June 2016.

34

Eurostat (2008). Eurostat Manual of Supply, Use and Input-Output Tables. Eurostat
Methodologies and Working Papers. Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the
European Communities, 2008.
Fetzer, J.J., Howells III, T. F., Jones, L., Strassner, E.H., & Wang, Z. (2016). Estimating Extended
Supply-Use Tables in Basic Prices with Firm Heterogeneity for the United States: A Proof of
Concept, GTAP Conference Paper, GTAP resource 4907.
Fetzer, J.J. & Strassner, E.H. (2015). Identifying Heterogeneity in the Production Components of
Globally Engaged Business Enterprises in the United States, BEA Working Paper WP2015-13.
Helpman, E., Melitz, M. J., & Yeaple, S. R. (2004). Export versus FDI with heterogeneous firms.
American Economic Review, 94(1), 300-316.
Ito, K., Deseatnicov, I., & Fukao, K. (2017). Japanese Plants’ Heterogeneity in Sales, Factor
Inputs, and Participation in Global Value Chains, Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and
Industry, Discussion Paper Series 17-E-117.
Johnson, R.C. (2018). Measuring Global Value Chains, Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 10.
Johnson, R.C. & Noguera, G. (2012). Accounting for intermediates: production sharing and trade
in value added. Journal of International Economics, 86(2), 224-236.
Koopman, R., Wang, Z., & Wei, S. (2012). Tracing value-added and double counting in gross
exports. American Economic Review, 104(2), 459-494.
Los, B., Timmer, M.P. & de Vries, G.J. (2016). Tracing value-added and double counting in gross
exports: comment. American Economic Review, 106(7):1958-66.
Ma, H., Wang, Z., & Zhu, K. (2015). Domestic content in China’s exports and its distribution by
firm ownership. Journal of Comparative Economics, 43(1), 3-18.
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra‐industry reallocations and aggregate industry
productivity. Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.
Michel, B., Hambÿe C., & Hertveldt B. (2018). The Role of Exporters and Domestic Producers in
GVCs: Evidence for Belgium Based on Extended National Supply-and-Use Tables Integrated into
a Global Multiregional Input-Output Table. Prepared for NBER CRIW Conference: The
Challenges of Globalization in the Measurement of National Accounts, March 2018.
OECD, Principal TiVA indicators, http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=TIVA_2016_C1.

35

Piacentini, M. & Fortanier, F. (2015). Firm heterogeneity and trade in value added. OECD
Working Paper.
Peluso, A., Medeiros, G., Young, J., Hallren, R.J., Jones, L., Nugent, R., & Wickramarachi, H., An
Overview on the Construction of North American Regional Supply-Use and Input-Output Tables
and their Applications in Policy Analysis, USITC, Economics Working Paper Series, 2017-12-A.
Powers, W. (2012). The Value of Value Added: Measuring Global Engagement with Gross and
Value-added Trade, USITC Economics Working Paper Series, 2012-11A.
Samuels, J. D., Howells III, T. F., Russell, M., & Strassner, E. H. (2015). Import allocations across
industries, import prices across countries, and estimates of industry growth and productivity.
Saborío, G. & Torres-Mora, R. (2018). Costa Rica: Integrating Foreign Direct Investment Data
and Extended Supply and Use Tables into National Accounts. Prepared for NBER CRIW
Conference: The Challenges of Globalization in the Measurement of National Accounts, March
2018.
Stapel-Weber, S., Konijn, P., Verrinder, J., & Nijmeijer, H. (2018). Meaningful Information for
Domestic Economies in the Light of Globalization-Will Additional Macroeconomic Indicators and
Different Presentations Shed Light? Prepared for NBER CRIW Conference: The Challenges of
Globalization in the Measurement of National Accounts, March 2018.
Houseman, S. N., & Mandel, M., (Eds.), Measuring globalization: better trade statistics for
better policy (pp. 251-289.). Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Tang, H., Wang, F., & Wang Z. (2014). The Domestic Segment of Global Supply Chains in China
Under State Capitalism. World Bank Policy Research Paper 6960.
Young, J. A., Howells III, T. F., Strassner, E.H., & Wasshausen, D.B. (2015). BEA Briefing: SupplyUse Tables for the United States. Survey of Current Business 95:(9), 1-8.
Zeile, W. (1998). Imported Inputs and the Domestic Content of Production by Foreign-Owned
Manufacturing Affiliates in the United States. In Baldwin, R.E., Lipsey, R.E., & Richardson, J.D.,
(Eds.), Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, The University of Chicago
Press, 1998, pp. 205-232.

36

Figure 1 Imported content of exports as a share of gross exports, by industry, 2005 and 2012

2012

2005

50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

37

Figure 2 BEA import content compared with OECD foreign valued content as a share of gross exports, by industry, 2005

38

Figure 3 Imported content of exports as a share of gross exports, by industry type and firm type, 2005 and 2012

39

Figure 4 Imported content of exports as a share of gross exports, by industry and firm type, 2005
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

Non-MNE

U.S. MNE

40

Foreign MNE

Figure 5 Imported content of exports as a share of gross exports, by industry and firm type, 2012
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

Non-MNE

U.S. MNE

41

Foreign MNE

Figure 6 Source of content in exports by good producing and service industries, 2005 and 2012

42

Figure 7 Source of content in exports by goods industries, sorted by U.S. MNE domestic value added, 2012

43

Figure 8 Source of content in exports by industry, goods industries sorted by U.S. MNE value added and services sorted by non-MNE domestic value
added, 2005

44

Figure 9 Source of content in exports by services industries, sorted by non-MNE domestic value added, 2012

45

Figure 10 Source of indirect domestic content of exports by industry, sorted by foreign MNE domestic value added, 2005

46

Figure 11 Source of indirect domestic content of exports, sorted by foreign MNE domestic value added, 2012

47

Figure 12 Source of content in final demand by industry, sorted by non-MNE domestic value added, 2012

48

Figure 13 Source of content in exports for computers and electronics, 2005 and 2012

Computers and Electronics-2005 and 2012
120

100

Billions of $

80

60

40

20

0
2005

2012

Non-MNE
2005

Non-MNE
2012

U.S. MNE
2005

U.S. MNE
2012

By firm type

All firms
Domestic value added

Imported content

49

Foreign MNE Foreign MNE
2005
2012

Figure 14 Value added as a share of gross output, semiconductor industry, by firm type, 2012

50

Figure 15 Exports as a share of gross output, semiconductor industry, by firm type, 2012

51

Table 1 Components of value added as share of output by ownership, semiconductor industry, 2012
(share of total output)
U.S.
Foreign
Non-multinational enterprise
Total intermediate inputs
Value added
of which:
Compensation of employees
Gross operating surplus
of which:
Consumption of fixed capital
Taxes on production and imports
Total output

Nonmultinational
enterprise

Multinational enterprise
U.S.

Foreign

Multinational enterprise

50.2

60.1

57.3

49.8

39.9

42.8

22.6

22.6

31.2

26.6

16.7

11.2

9.7

8.7

4.9

0.6

0.6

0.4

100.0

100.0

100.0

52

Exports of
goods

Other uses

33.1

66.9

34.5

65.5

15.0

85.0

Table 2 Components of value added as share of output by firm size class, semiconductor industry, 2012
(share of total output)
Small enterprise
Medium enterprise
Large enterprise
Total intermediate inputs
Value added
of which:
Compensation of employees
Gross operating surplus
of which:
Consumption of fixed capital
Taxes on production and imports
Total output

Small
enterprise

Medium
Enterprise

Large
Enterprise

55.9

49.3

54.3

44.1

50.7

45.7

32.1

24.3

24.1

11.6

25.8

21.1

4.7

5.5

9.4

0.4

0.6

0.5

100.0

100.0

100.0

53

Exports of
goods

Other uses

9.5

90.5

18.9

81.1

33.3

66.7

Table 3 Components of value added as share of output by export orientation, semiconductor industry, 2012
(share of total output)
Enterprise exports
Enterprise doesn’t export
Total intermediate inputs
Value added
of which:
Compensation of employees
Gross operating surplus
of which:
Consumption of fixed capital
Taxes on production and imports
Total output

Enterprise
exports

Enterprise
doesn’t export

51.3

57.9

48.7

42.1

23.9

26.9

24.3

14.6

8.8

7.3

0.5

0.6

100.0

100.0

54

Exports of
goods

Other uses

43.8

56.2

0.0

100.0

