NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HETEROGENEOUS ENVIRONMENTAL AND GRID BENEFITS FROM ROOFTOP SOLAR
AND THE COSTS OF INEFFICIENT SITING DECISIONS
Steven E. Sexton
A. Justin Kirkpatrick
Robert Harris
Nicholas Z. Muller
Working Paper 25241
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25241

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

The authors are grateful to Severin Borenstein and James B. Bushnell for generously providing
electricity private marginal cost data used in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Steven E. Sexton, A. Justin Kirkpatrick, Robert Harris, and Nicholas Z. Muller. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneous Environmental and Grid Benefits from Rooftop Solar and the Costs of Inefficient
Siting Decisions
Steven E. Sexton, A. Justin Kirkpatrick, Robert Harris, and Nicholas Z. Muller
NBER Working Paper No. 25241
November 2018
JEL No. Q47,Q48,Q50,Q52
ABSTRACT
Federal and state policies in the U.S. subsidize electricity generation from 1.4 million rooftop
solar arrays because of pollution avoidance benefits and grid congestion relief. Yet because these
benefits vary across the U.S. according to solar irradiance, technologies of electricity generators,
and grid characteristics, the value of these benefits, and, consequently, the optimal subsidy, are
largely unknown. Policy, therefore, is unlikely to have induced efficient solar investments. This
paper (1) provides the first systematic, theoretically consistent, and empirically valid estimates of
pollution damages avoidable by solar capacity in each U.S. zip code, (2) relates these external
benefits to subsidy levels in each U.S. state, and (3) estimates the share of these benefits that
spillover to other states. It also measures the energy value of capacity across the U.S. and the
value of transmission congestion relief in California. Environmental benefits are shown to vary
considerably across the U.S., and to largely spillover to neighboring states. Subsidy levels are
essentially uncorrelated with environmental benefits contributing to installed capacity that
sacrifices approximately $1 billion per year in environmental benefits. Energy value is estimated
to vary less than environmental benefits, while California rooftop solar is shown to generate no
congestion relief.
Steven E. Sexton
Sanford School of Public Policy
201 Science Drive, 184 Rubinstein Hall
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
steven.sexton@duke.edu
A. Justin Kirkpatrick
Duke University
201 Science Drive
Durham, NC 27708
justin.kirkpatrick@duke.edu

Robert Harris
Duke University
201 Science Drive
Durham, NC 27708
bobby.harris@duke.edu
Nicholas Z. Muller
Department of Engineering, and Public Policy
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner 254C
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
nicholas.muller74@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Solar panels occupy more than one million rooftops across the United States and will soon
occupy a million more (Solar Energy Industry Association 2016). Rapid growth of rooftop
solar is impelled by a decade-long, exponential decline in technology costs and by generous
federal and state subsidies and binding state mandates. Solar policies are intended to increase
the supply of clean electricity that displaces polluting generation from fossil fuel plants.
Many policies intend also to lower electricity transmission costs by expressly favoring rooftop
solar over distant large-capacity solar farms. Such policies contribute to an ongoing and
profound transition of the electric grid that upends the traditional role of electric utilities in
coordinating investment.
Whether such policies appropriately value avoided pollution is largely unknown.
Likewise, it is not understood if they direct capacity investments to their highest value
locations along the electricity grid. A determination of public solar benefits and of optimal
solar siting is not straightforward because solar generation, displaced pollution emissions,
and marginal costs of electricity supply vary across space and time as a function of solar
resource availability and regional electricity grid characteristics. Solar generation that avoids
coal plant production, for instance, delivers more than twice the environmental benefits of
generation that displaces natural gas supply, ceteris paribus (Edenhofer, 2011; Caulton et
al., 2014; Jaramillo et al., 2007). Failure to account for heterogeneity in emissions resulting
from marginal power generation can yield perverse policy outcomes, as Holland et al. (2016)
observed in the context of electric vehicle subsidies. Similarly, the energy value of distributed
solar capacity and its contribution to transmission cost avoidance depend upon where the
capacity is sited. Though the energy value of solar capacity is appropriable by investors, state
subsidies obscure the social benefits of generation, potentially leading to capacity allocation
that foregoes energy value even within states.

2

This paper, therefore, investigates the efficiency of existing solar policy and
capacity investments.

It does so by building upon previous econometric modeling of

marginal emissions (e.g., Graff-Zivin et al. 2014; Holland et al. 2016) to derive the
first systematic, theoretically consistent, and empirically valid estimates of the spatially
varying environmental benefits of solar capacity. Unique, monetized estimates of avoided
environmental damages are generated for each of 30,105 zip codes across the U.S. These
avoided damages are compared to the combined value of state and federal solar subsidies
in order to provide the first comprehensive comparison of the streams of solar subsidies
and environmental benefits. Also uniquely estimated in this paper via high-resolution air
transport modeling are the magnitudes of local solar benefits—those appropriated within the
states that investments are made. The energy value of solar capacity is estimated using data
on electricity marginal costs at hundreds of grid management jurisdictions across the U.S.
The contribution of solar capacity to alleviation of transmission constraints is also measured
in California using local marginal prices that vary across hundreds of network nodes and
reflect grid congestion costs.
Results suggest the discounted stream of subsidies to a typical rooftop solar array
exceeds the discounted stream of environmental benefits by only a few hundred dollars,
though environmental benefits and subsidies are negatively correlated in the data. Some
panels are subsidized as much as $25,000 in excess of environmental benefits, while others are
under-subsidized by as much as $10,000. Annual environmental benefits vary by a factor of 20
across the U.S., from $61 in Maynard, Mass. to $1,224 in Bloxom, Virginia. They also vary
non-trivially within states. Yet virtually no solar policy accounts for heterogeneity in solar
capacity benefits. More than 85 percent of environmental benefits spillover to neighboring
states. This suggests that (1) free-riding may constrain efficient solar capacity investments
in the U.S. absent national coordination; (2) local air quality improvements may be forsaken
by state policies promoting only in-state capacity, and (3) state dollars for local air quality
3

improvement may be better directed to other technologies or interventions.
Total benefits of solar generation—inclusive of energy values—are estimated to be
greatest in the Midwest and Mid-Atlantic. They are least in the West, and particularly the
West Coast, where approximately two-thirds of systems are located. These differences are
primarily attributable to heterogeneity in marginal responding fossil generation. If installed
solar capacity could be costlessly reallocated across states, annual total capacity benefits
would increase by as much as $1.3 billion, reflecting predominantly gains in environmental
benefits. In California, we find no evidence that rooftop solar capacity systematically relieves
congestion. Approximately two-thirds of the 900,000 rooftop solar arrays is located upstream
from transmission bottlenecks, contributing to congestion rather than relieving it. If capacity
were efficiently allocated, congestion relief benefits in California would have been no more
than $15 million in 2017—approximately 7% of total energy value.
This paper is related to work by Cullen (2013) and Novan (2015), who use similar
econometric techniques to value wind energy. It is also related to Callaway et al. (2018),
who evaluate the carbon emissions displaced by alternative technologies, including energy
efficiency investments and solar panels. They estimate that solar is subsidized by $163-455
per MWh in excess of the value of carbon emissions avoidance. They do not consider
avoidance of local air pollution emissions. Siler-Evans et al. (2013) is most similar to this
paper in ambition. It estimates the value of carbon and criteria pollution emissions displaced
by solar capacity in each of 22 U.S. subregions. As Graff-Zivin et al. (2014) note, however,
their empirical approach is valid only under the assumptions that (1) all consumption in a
region is met by power plants in the same region; (2) marginal electricity is supplied only by
power plants whose generation is reported in a federal administrative record; (3) aggregate
fossil-fuel generation is exogenous; and (4) ad hoc corrections for line losses are constant
over location and time. The approach of Callaway et al. (2018) also relies on some of these
assumptions.
4

Each of the assumptions of Siler-Evans et al. (2013) is relaxed in this paper. First,
we estimate pollution responses as a function of electricity consumption, not potentially
endogenous generation.

Second, we condition on non-reported generation that may

correlate with consumption. Third, we flexibly accommodate grid structure by modeling
individual generator responses to consumption changes throughout interconnections that
define electricity trading. Furthermore, we account for seasonal and diurnal patterns in
solar generation and marginal emissions by estimating unique marginal effects for each plant
in each hour of the day and each month of the year. Siler-Evans et al. (2013) abstract
entirely from these known dynamics (Graff-Zivin et al. 2014). Finally, our generator-specific
estimates of pollution responses afford high-resolution and high-fidelity modeling of avoided
pollution damages. Siler-Evans et al. (2013) and Callaway et al. (2018), instead, generate
estimates of marginal emissions only for aggregate regions. This poses no difficulty for
valuing avoided emissions of globally mixing pollutants, like carbon, as in Callaway et
al. (2018). But it hinders valuation of avoided local pollutant emissions, damages from
which depend upon exposure of populations and economic production. Our high-resolution
modeling of avoided emissions uniquely equips us to estimate the magnitudes of appropriable
environmental benefits. This paper is also the first to empirically estimate grid benefits of
rooftop solar.
This paper proceeds by considering the theory of solar policy and efficient capacity
allocation in Section 2. Data and empirical methods are introduced in Section 3. Model
results and simulations are presented in Section 4. Section 5 considers the implications of
these results for solar policy, including the policy preference for distributed renewable energy
capacity. A final section concludes.

5

2

Policy Design for Optimal Solar Siting

Electricity generation by coal, oil, and natural gas plants is responsible for considerable
air pollution in the U.S. and other developed countries. In the U.S., it emits one-third
of anthropogenic greenhouse gases that contribute to global warming. It also produces 60
percent of sulfur dioxide and 13 percent of nitrous oxide emissions that harm human health
(U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2012). Solar electricity generation, in contrast, emits
no pollution. Were pollution costs borne by emitters, then solar generators would appropriate
the benefits of emissions avoidance by escaping pollution costs. However, the pollution taxes
or tradable permit programs that internalize pollution costs to emitters are rare in the U.S.
and the rest of the world. Instead, uniform technology standards and other command and
control regulations are the norm where pollution is regulated at all. Absent efficient prices
on pollution, solar is undervalued, and the pollution avoidance benefit is unappropriated
by the solar generator (e.g., Baker et al. 2013; Borenstein 2012; Pigou 1920). In such a
suboptimal regulatory setting, policy to support solar capacity or generation can correct an
under-provision problem.1,2
High fixed costs have made solar more costly than all other forms of power
generation except offshore wind (Energy Information Administration 2013; Borenstein 2012).
Consequently, solar’s small share of electricity generation has been induced by favorable
policy regimes that date to the oil embargo and energy crisis of the 1970s.

Though

solar accounted for 26 percent of U.S. electricity generating capacity additions in 2015,
it constituted less than 2 percent of total generating capacity and provided only 0.6 percent
of electricity generation (Energy Information Administration 2016a, Energy Information
1
Solar policy like subsidies can never a first-best pollution control policy because unpriced pollution leads
to under-priced dirty electricity generation, not over-priced clean generation. Solar policy lowers the cost of
the homogeneous product electricity, rather than raising it ( Borenstein 2012).
2
Because the marginal costs of solar generation are essentially nil—the feedstock is free—policy promoting
capacity is essentially analogous to policy promoting generation.

6

Administration 2016b). Of this, approximately 40 percent was provided by distributed
generation capacity (Energy Information Administration 2017).
Public policies that support solar generation are common in the U.S. and other
developed countries.3 The federal government alone has expended billions of dollars on
a 30 percent investment tax credit since 2010 (Borenstein and Davis 2016). Renewable
Portfolio Standards are in effect in 29 states. Twenty-eight states exempt renewable capacity
expenditures from sales taxes or allow deductions against income taxes. And net-metering
policies common to 41 states subsidize generation by requiring utilities to credit customers for
solar generation at rates that typically exceed wholesale electricity prices (North Carolina
Clean Energy Technology Center 2018). California utilities, for instance, must pay retail
rates in excess of $0.35 per kilowatt-hour for some distributed solar generation. Because
retail rates bundle a variety of charges beyond the marginal cost of electricity, including
transmission and distribution cost recovery charges and conservation incentives, the $0.19
per kilowatt-hour average retail rate is more than double prevailing wholesale prices for solar
generation.
It is unlikely any of these policies approximates the second-best Pigouvian subsidy to
solar generation. Virtually none varies policy support according to the avoided pollution
damages, which we show vary considerably across and within states according to solar
resource and electricity grid characteristics. All else equal, solar capacity is more valuable
where solar resource is more abundant and generation potential is greater.4 Even conditional
3
Potential learning spillovers provide an alternative justification (e.g., Gillingham and Sweeney 2012;
Nordhaus 2011). Such spillovers would constitute positive externalities in the technology market that weaken
incentives for innovation. Combined with the negative externalities from pollution, they can cause clean
technologies to be “doubly under-provided” in the absence of policy (Fischer 2008; Fischer and Newell 2008;
Jaffe et al. 2005).
4
For instance, the distribution of solar irradiance across the U.S. causes potential annual electricity
generation from 4-kw of solar capacity to vary from 4.3 megawatt-hours (MWh) in Arlington, Washington
to more than double that amount in parts of California’s central valley. Figure 1 shows for each U.S. zip code
the estimated annual electricity generation of a 4-kW capacity system. These estimates are produced using
the System Advisor Model of the National Renewable Energy Laboratory available at: https://sam.nrel.gov/.
Generation in MWh is alternating current.

7

on generation, however, capacity value varies according to the pollution intensities of
marginal responding plants that adjust production in response to solar generation. The
pollution intensities of marginal plants vary across hours of the day and across regions,
particularly the three U.S. grid interconnections within which electricity trade is common
but across which trade is rare. These marginal emissions may differ dramatically from
average grid emission intensities.5 Even conditional on marginal emissions, however, the
value of avoided pollution also varies according to air transport and emissions deposition
that govern the exposure of affected economic production and human populations. All else
equal, a unit of pollution avoidance is most valuable upwind from major population centers.
By ignoring heterogeneity in avoided pollution damages, existing policies deviate from
the second-best Pigouvian subsidy. But policy may not just fail to correctly value every
unit of solar generation, it may fail to correctly value any unit. If policy incorrectly values
pollution avoidance, it can obscure price signals that direct efficient investment, leading to
suboptimal allocations of solar capacity. Likewise, state subsidies and capacity mandates
may actually sacrifice local air quality improvements by failing to recognize local benefits
from investments located in other states.
Existing solar policy is likely also to incorrectly price the energy value of solar
generation.

The efficient price received by solar operators is equal to the second-best

pollution-avoidance subsidy plus the private marginal cost of electricity supply, i.e., the
wholesale price in a competitive market. Yet rooftop solar receives a price per unit of
generation that exceeds wholesale prices in 41 states with net-metering policies that typically
compensate solar generation at retail rates. These policies over-compensate for energy
value, but they also impose a homogeneity on generator compensation that does not reflect
5

Failure to distinguish between average emissions rates and emissions caused by marginal changes in
electricity load contributed to confusion about the environmental benefits of electric cars. Holland et al.
(2016) showed that marginal emissions in some parts of the U.S caused electric cars to contribute more to
pollution than conventional substitutes.

8

economic value. The marginal costs of electricity supply deviate within regional grids because
of transmission capacity constraints, but retail rates do not so vary. Consequently, the
incentives facing private investors do not reflect the underlying value to society of their
investments. Absent policy that reflected heterogeneity in electricity marginal costs, it would
be surprising if private investments in rooftop solar capacity yielded congestion relief benefits
as its advocates claim. The efficiency of existing capacity allocations is investigated in the
following sections.

3

Data and Methods

A determination of avoided damages from solar capacity proceeds by estimating spatially
heterogeneous emissions avoided per unit solar generation. These emissions changes are
input into an integrated assessment model that maps emissions into damages in order to
value emissions changes. Finally, these values are attributed to potential solar capacity in
each U.S. zip code by modeling potential generation as a function of solar irradiance and
weather characteristics. Potential generation is also used to value the energy production of
solar capacity using hourly, region-specific estimates of electricity marginal cost.

3.1

Marginal emissions

In order to estimate the emissions avoided by a unit of solar generation, it is necessary to
identify which power plants respond to the marginal reduction in net load.6 As described
above, the plant that operates on the margin will vary according to when and where the
6

We are assuming there is no rebound effect from solar adoption. Provided utility customers face
traditional net metering, then the opportunity cost of a unit of generation does not change with solar
generation (subject to settle-up limitations within some jurisdictions), so rebound should be minimal.
However, to the extent that solar generation shifts marginal consumption into a lower tier of an increasing
block-rate tariff or that solar generation serves to alleviate guilt from pollution caused by electricity
consumption, then solar may induce some rebound. In the event that rebound is positive, then the estimates
in this paper of avoided damages will overstate true damages.

9

unit of solar generation is produced. We determine these marginal emissions by adapting the
reduced-form regression equations implemented by Graff-Zivin et al. (2014) and Holland et
al. (2016) (HMMY). Hourly power plant emissions are regressed on hourly electricity demand
in each subregion of the power plant grid interconnection.7 We do this for each of the 1,486
power plants in the U.S. and for each CO2 , SO2 , NOX , and PM2.5 .
Specifically, we estimate:

yit =

j(i) 12
24 X
X
X

βijhm LOADtj × HOU Rh × eGRIDj × M OYm +

h=1 j=1 m=1

j(i)
X

sjt

j=1

+

24 X
36 X
2
X

αihmd HOU Rh × M OSm × DAYd + it , (1)

h=1 m=1 d=1

where yit is pollutant emissions at plant i at time t; LOADtj is a continuous variable
measuring demand in eGRID subregion j at time t, and HOU R, eGRID, and M OY are
indicator variables for each hour of the day, each eGRID subregion within the interconnection
of plant i, and each month of the year (MOY), respectively. This yields for each plant and
each pollutant a vector of marginal emissions coefficients, βijhm , equal to 24 × j(i) × 12.
Likewise, M OS and DAY are indicators for each month of the sample and weekdays,
respectively. To control for potentially correlated, non-reported generation, we condition
on an indicator of contemporaneous solar generation in each subregion, sjt . An idiosyncratic
error is denoted by it . Equation (1) is estimated by ordinary least squares.
Distinct from HMMY, this model permits the hourly-plant-specific marginal emission
responses to vary by each month of the year to account for seasonal patterns in the fossil-fuel
7

Subregions are defined as eGrid subregions, which are geographical aggregations of electricity generators
used by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and and the Energy Information Administration for
policy analysis, including assessment of carbon footprints and renewable portfolio standards. We further
aggregate some eGrid subregions with highly correlated loads. Specifically, NYCW, NYLI, and NYUP are
combined with the NEWE to form a single NY-New England subregion; MROE is combined with the MROW
to form a single MRO; RFCE and RFCM are combined with RFCW to form a single RFC; and SPNO is
combined with SPSO to form a single SPP.

10

generation mix and in solar generation. It also absorbs average load differentials across
weekends and weekdays via the DAY fixed effect. Like HMMY, it permits plant i’s emissions
to respond to increased demand anywhere within the interconnection via a distinct coefficient
for demand in each of the eGRID regions within the interconnection. LOADtj is treated as
exogenous because retail electricity prices do not vary with wholesale prices with very few
exceptions, and, hence, the derived demand is perfectly inelastic. Relative to the related
literature, we uniquely condition on solar irradiance, sjt , to control for potentially correlated
non-reported generation. We lack data on hydro generation, which may be correlated with
net load. However, like Callaway et al. (2018), we assume average temporal patterns of
hydro production will not change in response to marginal changes in net load. This is
because maximization of arbitrage opportunities tends to require that any displaced hydro
generation on a given day is replaced on a subsequent day during a similar hour with similar
marginal emissions. Thus, even if hydro generation is correlated with net load conditional on
month-specific hour fixed effects, our estimates of marginal emissions responses are unlikely
to be biased. Wind is assumed to be orthogonal to load conditional on the month-specific
hour fixed effects.
Data on hourly emissions of CO2 , NOX , and SO2 from 1,451 power plants are obtained
from the Continuous Emissions Monitoring System (CEMS) of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) for the years 2007-2015, yielding 114.4 million plant-level, hourly
observations for each pollutant.8 Hourly emissions of PM2.5 are not directly reported by the
CEMS. They are imputed by determining plant-specific PM2.5 emissions intensities per unit
generation and multiplying these intensities by hourly plant-level generation as reported in
the CEMS. Annual PM2.5 emissions used to compute plant emission intensities are obtained
from the EPA’s 2011 National Emissions Inventory.9 Hourly electricity consumption is
8
9

See https://ampd.epa.gov/ampd/.
See https://www.epa.gov/air-emissions-inventories/national-emissions-inventory-nei.

11

reported for each of 200 planning areas across the U.S. in Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC) Form 714 filings. Hourly planning area consumption is aggregated
to eGRID regions.10 Solar irradiance data comprising the index, sjt are obtained from the
National Solar Radiation Database. Hourly measures of zip-code-level solar irradiance are
obtained for the locations of all utility-scale solar capacity in the U.S. These irradiance
observations are aggregated to eGRID subregions using utility-scale solar capacity weights.
This yields weighted-average solar irradiance for each subregion and each hour.11

3.2

Solar generation

The marginal emission coefficients obtained from estimation of (1) for each plant are used
to estimate the changes in emissions from marginal changes in hourly demand within the
respective interconnection. These demand changes are estimated for the addition of a
typical 4-kw solar array in each of 30,105 zip codes in the U.S. using the California Energy
Commission module of the System Advisor Model, an open source program developed by the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory for estimating the performance of renewable energy
systems (Blair et al. 2013). For a typical meteorological year, SAM combines solar irradiance
measured at 4-square-kilometer resolution and weather data from more than 1,000 weather
stations to estimate system generation for solar panels installed in the continental U.S.12
Typical system parameters are assumed in modeling system generation. We assume system
tilt matches latitude and panel orientation is southward. These conditions are necessary to
maximize generation in North America.
Modeled annual solar generation at each zip code in the contiguous U.S. is summarized
in Figure 1. Summary statistics are reported in the top panel of Table 1. Mean annual
10

Observations of pollutant emissions greater than six standard deviations from the mean are omitted.
Variation in rooftop solar generation is reflected in load variation because it occurs behind-the-meter.
Hence, it does not bias our parameter estimates and is safely subsumed into load.
12
More information about the typical meteorological year data is available at http://www.nrel.gov/docs/
fy08osti/43156.pdf.
11

12

generation for a 4-kW system is 6,357 kWh. It varies by a factor of 2 from 4,344 kWh in
Arlington, Washington to 8,647.4 kWh in Lone Pine, California. The within-state standard
deviation varies from 55.7 kWh to 636.6 kWh. The mean within-state standard deviation is
239 kWh.

3.3

Exposure and damages

Equipped with (a) modeled solar generation by zip code that yields reductions in net
load within respective eGRID subregions; and (b) estimated emissions responses from
each plant to marginal load changes within interconnections, we can estimate the annual
change in pollutant emissions from each plant in the U.S. as a function of a unit solar
capacity addition in a given zip code. To monetize emissions changes, we use AP3, an
integrated air pollution model that translates (1) emissions into concentrations as a function
of atmospheric transport and chemical processes, (2) concentrations into exposure as a
function of population and economic production, and (3) exposure into harms as a function
of dose-response relationships. AP3 is the successor to the AP2 model employed by Holland
et al., (2016), Siler-Evans et al. (2013), and others.13 AP3 uses the EPA’s National Emissions
Inventory together with a reduced complexity air quality model to estimate annual average
pollution concentrations by county. AP3 reports the incremental contribution of emissions
produced by each source to ambient concentrations in each county. This facilitates an
analysis of which localities benefit from reduced emissions. Detailed population and vital
statistics data are used to estimate exposures. Among the plethora of adverse health impacts
associated with exposure to air pollution, the vast majority of damages are attributable to
mortality effects. Increased mortality risk is valued using an EPA-recommended Value of a
Statistical Life of $7.4 million in 2006 dollars adjusted for inflation using the consumer price
index to 2014 dollars. Carbon dioxide emissions, not tracked by AP3, are valued at $41 per
13

For further description of the AP3 model, see Clay et al. (Forthcoming)

13

ton, the Social Cost of Carbon calculated by the U.S. Interagency Working Group on Social
Cost of Carbon as updated in 2016 and reflected in 2014 dollars (Interagency Working Group
on the Social Cost of Carbon 2016).
The spatial heterogeneity of pollution damages is depicted in Figure 2, which shows
the estimated damages from one ton of SO2 emissions in each county of the contiguous U.S.
Avoidance of SO2 is the most valuable environmental benefit of solar capacity. Damages
from SO2 are estimated to be greatest in Los Angeles County, California ($130,280 per ton)
and Bergen County, New Jersey ($93,905), where geographic conditions preclude pollution
dissipation across space, and where population density is high, increasing exposure. Damages
are least in Whatcom County, Washington ($2,005).

3.4

Subsidies

We seek to compare estimated damages avoided by solar generation to federal and state-level
solar subsidies. In addition to the federal investment tax credit (ITC) for renewables, state
incentives include sales and property tax exemptions, capacity subsidies, and solar renewable
energy certificate (SREC) programs. We obtain information on the solar incentives offered
by each state from the Database of Solar Incentives for Renewables and Efficiency (DSIRE)
(North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, 2018) and from the Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory’s “Tracking the Sun” project (Barbose et al. 2017 and Barbose et al.
2012). The value of subsidy programs for each state is calculated as the sum of federal
and state incentives discounted at a 5% annual rate over a 20-year lifetime. State subsidies
exclusive of the federal ITC are also computed.
We assume solar array costs in each year from 2000 to 2016 are those reported by
Barbose et al. (2017) and Barbose et al. (2012). These costs are used to calculate the value of
the ITC, property tax excemptions, and other state incentives based upon system costs. For
property tax exemptions, we assume the increase in property value subject to the property
14

tax is equal to the system cost. Then we use state-level real-estate tax estimates calculated
as the median real-estate tax payment divided by the median home value using data obtained
from the 2017 American Community Survey (U.S. Census Bureau 2017). Similarly, sales tax
exemptions are calculated based on the system cost using sales tax approximations equal
to the sum of the state sales tax and the average local sales tax (Walczak and Drenkard
2017). We obtain SREC price data by digitizing the daily average prices from February
2017 to February 2018 reported by SREC Trade.14 In our subsidy calculations, we use the
mean price over the entire period. Net energy metering subsidies are valued as state-specific
differences between average retail price and average marginal cost. The former are obtained
from EIA (Energy Information Administration 2018). The latter were generously provided
by Borenstein and Bushnell (2018) and are further discussed in Section 4.2. SREC and NEM
subsidies generate benefit streams according to generation that is evaluated as state averages
of zip-code specific generation estimates. The stream of subsidies is discounted to present
value at 5 percent.

3.5

Electricity marginal costs

Energy value of solar generation is determined by location and hour-specific electricity
marginal costs. Electricity marginal costs are measured in one of two ways for each region of
the U.S. Where Independent System Operators (ISOs) manage the electricity grid, marginal
costs are measured as local marginal prices (LMPs) published by the ISOs for each hour and
each node of the network. Where LMPs are not reported, marginal costs are measured as
the hourly “system lambda” reported to the FERC by grid operators.15 Both data sets were
generously provided by Borenstein and Bushnell (2018), who assembled them to measure
14

https://www.srectrade.com/app/markets/dashboard/33891; Delaware and Illinois prices are reported
separately:
https://www.srecdelaware.com/documentation/;
https://www.srectrade.com/blog/srec/
srec-markets/illinois.
15
Information is reported on FERC Form 714 surveys.

15

retail price deviation from the sum of private marginal costs and marginal external costs.
We map these local marginal prices and system lambdas to zip codes in order to estimate
the value of solar generation in each zip code.
LMPs reflect the sum of two shadow values from the constrained optimization
performed by grid operator to dispatch generation. The first is the value common to all
LMPs that reflects the marginal cost of serving load. The second is the shadow value on
transmission constraints between nodes of the network. These constraints abide by laws of
physics and ensure line capacity is not exceeded. These shadow values vary for each node
of the ISO grids, reflecting congestion costs. For those hours in which an ISO network is
free of congestion, LMPs converge to the common shadow value on the load constraint.
Amid congestion, prices at nodes upstream of constraints fall, reflecting negative shadow
values, and prices at nodes downstream of constraints rise, reflecting positive shadow values
attributable to the dispatch of out-of-merit-order generation necessary to reach congested
nodes.
The system lambda is an engineering calculation of the shadow cost of a marginal
change in production. As Borenstein and Bushnell (2018) note, FERC Form 714 surveys
are not of uniformly high quality, so they incorporate data that are deemed most reliable,
as described in their paper. System lambdas also likely do not reflect scarcity rents or
full congestion costs and transmission losses. Neither LMPs nor system lambdas reflect
distribution losses, which Borenstein and Bushnell (2018) estimate as a time-varying hourly
rate from EIA Form 861 data. These losses are used to scale marginal cost calculations and
are estimated to average 6.2%.
Congestion relief benefits of solar capacity are evaluated using hourly LMPs and
congestion prices reported by the California Independent System Operator for 2017.
Congestion prices are equal to the shadow value on transmission constraints for each network
node.
16

4

Results

Estimation of equation 1 yields 13,724,160 parameter estimates of interest—a unique
coefficient for each of 1,452 reporting fossil generators in each hour of the day and month
of the year for each pollutant (and plant generation) and for each regional load within the
plant interconnection.16 The empirical model is validated by summing the point estimates
of plant emissions across all plants in the interconnection. On average, a one MW change in
hourly load across the interconnection should induce an offsetting and approximately equal
response in fossil generation to the extent fossil generators operate on the margin.17 Figures
3 and 4 depict the summation of hour and month-specific marginal responses across plants
in the Electricity Reliability Council of Texas, the interconnection that delivers electricity to
Texas. These are reported for generation and each pollutant. Point estimates are depicted
in blue and 95-percent confidence intervals generated by block-bootstrap are bounded by
the series shown in black. Each gray series represents a sum of coefficients from a unique
bootstrap sample. As shown in Figure 3a, the sum of generation responses across the Texas
interconnection is typically bounded between 0.6 and 1.2. During daylight hours (5am to
9pm), the average response across Texas averages 0.97, with a mean 95-percent confidence
interval of 0.69 to 1.18. Figures 3b and 4 depict the sum of pollution emissions across the
Texas interconnection. These are expected to equal the emissions intensities of marginal
responding plants. Across interconnections, the average generation response is 0.85. We
return to a discussion of uncertainty in section 4.3.
The second panel of Table 1 reports summary statistics for estimated annual total
damages avoided and estimated annual avoided damages from each modeled pollutant for
a 4-kW capacity system in each zip code. Mean damages avoided across the country are
16

Parameter estimates and standard errors are available from the authors upon request.
Coefficients may exceed unity due to self-generation necessary to power plant operations. It may be less
than the marginal change in load due to imports from other interconnections or responses from non-reporting
generation. Plant sums may also differ from load changes due to sampling uncertainty.
17

17

estimated at $569 per system per year, or $7,091 in present value terms over the lifetime of
a typical 4kW system.18 A majority (57%) of these avoided damages is a consequence of
reduced SO2 emissions. Twenty-nine percent of avoided damages are due to reduced CO2 .
Reduced NOX is responsible for 10% of avoided damages, while 4% are due to reduced PM2.5 .
These total avoided damages from rooftop solar PV are presented for each zip code in
Figure 5. It shows the annual environmental damages avoided per 4-kW capacity of solar
in each zip code in the U.S. These avoided damages are greatest for systems installed in
the Midwest and Mid-Atlantic states, including Delaware, Maryland, Missouri, New Jersey,
and Virginia, where the average annual avoided damages per 4-kW system are equal to
about $1,100. Avoided damages are least in the West and Northeast and equal to about $80
per year in states such as Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Washington. In
California, where two-thirds of rooftop solar capacity is sited, annual avoided environmental
damages range from $91 in Klamath along the Northern coast to $279 in Desert Hot Springs,
located 100 miles east of Los Angeles.
Figure 5 demonstrates that environmental benefits of solar capacity are far more
sensitive to grid characteristics and pollution exposure than to solar resource. Solar resource
is greatest in the Southwest, as figure 1 shows. Yet avoided damages are least in the West,
as shown in figure 5. Avoided damages are greatest in the Midwest and the Mid-Atlantic,
where the generation fleet is considerably dirtier than the West. Coal accounted for only 27
percent of 2014 electricity generation in the Western Interconnection (WECC) that serves
the Mountain West and West Coast; 30 percent of generation was supplied by natural
gas units.

In the Midwest Reliability Organization that manages the Midwest grid of

the Eastern Interconnection, coal comprised 60 percent of generation, while natural gas
units supplied just 5 percent (National Renewable Energy Laboratory 2017). The relative
dependence upon coal in the eastern interconnection makes it relatively likely that marginal
18

Present value calculation assumes a 20-year lifetime and a 5% discount rate.

18

responding plants are coal plants. Moreover, avoided pollution emissions in the Eastern
Interconnection reduce exposure of large populations in the greater Washington, D.C. area,
Boston, Philadelphia, and New York, making emissions reductions valuable.

Figure 2

demonstrates the heterogeneity across the U.S. in damages per unit pollution. It depicts
the variation across the U.S. in damages from emission of one-ton of SO2 .
The second-best Pigouvian subsidy to solar generation and solar capacity is equal to
the external environmental benefits. Yet we find environmental benefits and subsidies are
negatively correlated in our data (ρ = −0.15). The most generous subsidies have accrued
to adopters in Massachusetts, where the average subsidy is valued at $0.35 per kWh and
avoided environmental damages are estimated at barely $0.01. For a 4-kW system, the
subsidy received by the typical installed system exceeds avoided damages by $1913 per year,
or $25,000 over the system lifetime. The least generous subsidy was received by investors
in South Dakota, where the average $0.04 per kWh subsidy is less than half as large as
environmental benefits. Solar generation receives a subsidy that is $0.08-0.12 less than
avoided damages in Indiana, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West
Virginia, where avoided damages are estimated to be greatest at around $0.18 per kWh.
A 4-kW system in these states optimally receives an additional $500 subsidy per year. In
California, a typical subsidy of $0.11/kWh exceeds damages by nearly 600 percent. The
mean subsidy across U.S. zip codes is $0.10/kWh. On average, subsidies are approximately
equal to damages across states, but more than 25 percent of states provide subsidies that
are at least $0.05 per kWh less than avoided damages. Another 25 percent provide subsidies
that are too generous by at least $0.05 per kWh. These results are summarized in table 2,
which reports by state estimated mean damages and subsidies per kWh of installed capacity,
as well as annual net subsidies.
Given the estimated environmental benefits from a typical 4-kW solar array in each zip
code, the total annual environmental benefits of the installed capacity in the U.S. is equal to
19

$353.3 million per year. Installed capacity locations are shown in figure 6. In order to assess
the degree to which capacity is misallocated, we simulate environmental benefits under four
alternative reallocations of existing systems in the U.S. First, we imagine that all systems
are relocated within states to areas in which they yield greatest environmental benefits
subject only to the restriction that each panel be located on a residential rooftop. Counts of
residential rooftops are obtained from U.S. Census counts of detached, single-family houses
by zip code (U.S. Census Bureau 2017). Second, we restrict this intrastate reallocation by
limiting to 30 percent the share of rooftops in any zip code containing solar panels. This
accounts in a stylistic fashion for concerns about grid stability that some contend practically
limit the penetration of renewables in any part of the grid (Coddington et al. 2012).19 A
third simulation considers a national reallocation of solar capacity. And finally, the national
reallocation is restricted in a fourth simulatiomn to no more than 30 percent of rooftops in
any zip code.
Reallocation of solar capacity within states is unlikely to fundamentally change grid
dispatch of generating units. These are considered marginal changes due to the relatively
small share of renewable capacity in most states. A national reallocation of capacity results
in changes in load that are less defensibly marginal, potentially biasing our estimates of
changes in environmental benefits. However, Holland et al. (2018) provide evidence that
marginal emissions are relatively invariant over much larger ranges of load than those we
consider here. They use local polynomial regressions of hourly environmental damages on
hourly load to show that damage functions are approximately linear, particularly over 50-100
gigawatt (GW) ranges of hourly load. Our unconstrained national load reallocation displaces
only about 4-5 GW of hourly load.
19

Grid stability concerns were prevalent a decade ago. They figure less prominently in grid planning today,
as evidenced by renewable portfolio standards in California, Hawaii, New Jersey, New York, and Vermont
that mandate 50 percent or more renewable generation (North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center,
2018).

20

Results from these simulations are reported in Table 3.

The most conservative

simulation we consider reallocates solar capacity within states to 30 percent of rooftops in zip
codes that yield the greatest environmental benefits. This reallocation generates a 13 percent
gain in environmental benefits equal to $45 million per year. The locations of reallocated
solar capacity are depicted (in blue) relative to the installed solar capacity (in red) in Figure
9. Of the 12,840 zip codes across the U.S. in which rooftop capacity is currently installed,
97 percent—all but 386—would lose all capacity under a constrained intrastate reallocation.
Of the 1.45 million rooftop arrays installed across the U.S., 90 percent would be sited in
different zip codes in order to maximize environmental benefits (subject to grid stability
concerns). Cities in California’s Inland Empire and Desert regions east of Los Angeles gain
the most systems, whereas locations in Northern California lose the most.
An unconstrained reallocation of solar capacity within states generates 18 percent
greater environmental benefits, yielding a $63 million gain each year over existing capacity.
Reallocating capacity across state lines yields nearly a five-fold gain in environmental
benefits, increasing annual benefits by $1.3 billion regardless of grid stability constraints. If
solar were limited to 30 percent of zip code rooftops, it would optimally be allocated to only
2,312 zip codes in nine states—Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maryland, Missouri, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. This is depicted in figure 10. Environmental benefits
from solar capacity would be maximized subject to grid concerns by adding 394,000 arrays to
Missouri rooftops, only about 10,000 of which currently have solar panels. Maryland would
also gain more than 300,000 systems, where currently only 11,000 are located. Substantial
gains from national reallocation of solar capacity reflect the misallocation of capacity in
California, where nearly two-thirds of all rooftop solar is located. It generates only $0.02 in
environmental benefits per kWh compared to benefits as large as $0.18 on the East Coast.

21

4.1

Appropriated environmental benefits

Because solar capacity investments affect pollution concentrations as a function of (1)
emissions changes at marginal (responding) generators potentially located across vast
electricity grids, and (2) the transport and mixing of emissions in the atmosphere, avoided
exposures may not occur local to solar capacity investments. The inability of an investor to
appropriate the benefits of avoided emissions is precisely the motivation for solar subsidies.
Like individual agents, however, states are likely only to appropriate a fraction of the
environmental benefits of capacity investments they subsidize.

This suggests states or

regional governments generally may also under-invest in solar generation.

In order to

assess the return to state investments in solar subsidies and the magnitude of the state-level
externality problem, we compute the shares of environmental benefits from local pollution
mitigation that are appropriated by the states in which solar capacity investments are made.
These are determined as averages of in-state capacity benefits across zip codes.
The appropriated shares of damages avoided by reduced NOX , SO2 , and PM2.5
emissions are depicted for each state in figure 8 and reported in table 4. Across states, the
mean share of environmental benefits appropriated in the state that generates the benefits
is 15 percent. Appropriated benefit shares are less than 1 percent in Arkansas, Delaware,
Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, and Wyoming, where annually appropriated avoided
damages range from $0.20 to $8 per 4-kW system. In contrast, solar capacity installed in
the average zip code in New York generates virtually all benefits in the state.20 California
and Massachusetts capture 77 percent and 72 percent of benefits, respectively, while North
Carolina and Florida each capture greater than half of all benefits from capacity investments.
Massachusetts captures a large share of benefits despite the relatively small size of the
state because it has a large population that benefits from reduced power plant emissions in
20

Our estimates suggest the typical New York array generates harms out-of-state, an affect that is
theoretically possible because a relatively clean generator may adjust supply in a non-continuous fashion
due to load changes, allowing a relatively dirty generator to increase supply.

22

surrounding states. Florida captures an estimateed $200 in annual environmental benefits per
4-kW capacity, the greatest magnitude of in-state benefits of any state, reflecting marginal
plant responses in Florida that deliver few benefits to other states. Pennsylvania appropriates
$151 in annual benefits—19 percent of total benefits. A typical 4-kw system in California
generates $24 in avoided pollution benefits annually for the state.
California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, New York, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania
each captures a greater share of its solar generation benefits than any other individual state.
Elsewhere, the single greatest beneficiary of solar generation is not the state in which solar
capacity is located. For 34 states, the largest, single out-of-state beneficiary receives more
than twice the benefits of the local state in which capacity is sited. For more than half, the
ratio of benefits is four to one. Table 5 reports for solar capacity in each state the single
other state that benefits most from the capacity investment. It also reports the magnitude
of annual benefits to the largest single out-of-state beneficiary, as well as the ratio of those
benefits to in-state benefits. A typical 4-kW system in Maryland and Delaware generates
annual benefits to residents of Pennsylvania in excess of $170 per year. Pennsylvania is also
estimated to be the single largest beneficiary of solar capacity in Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana,
Michigan, New Jersey, Ohio, and West Virginia. A typical system in each of those states
generates more than $100 annually for Pennsylvania.

4.2

Energy value

Though policy is justified by non-appropriated environmental benefits, the value of solar
capacity depends also upon the energy value of generated electricity. This varies within and
across states according to characteristics of generators and the electricity grid. As previously
discussed, solar policy in many states causes prices received by rooftop solar generators to
deviate from energy value and to be invariant to local variation imposed by transmission
constraints. To estimate locations in which solar capacity is of greatest total value, we sum
23

estimates of marginal avoided damages and estimates of the marginal costs of electricity
generation.
Table 6 reports the average annual energy value of solar capacity by state. It is greatest
in Rhode Island, Maryland, Connecticut, and Delaware, where it is equal to $321 to $348
for a 4-kW system. Energy value is least in Washington, North Dakota and Minnesota
where it is estimated to be less than $200. The average value of annual generation from a
4-kW system in California is estimated to be $261. The sum of energy value and avoided
pollution damages is greatest in Maryland, Delaware, and New Jersey, where annual total
benefits are estimated to range from $1408 to $1483. Annual benefits of capacity in Maryland
are estimated to exceed those of capacity in Montana, Oregon, and Washington by about
$1,200 per year. Total benefits are least in Oregon at $282 per year. Annual energy and
environmental benefits of California capacity are an estimated average $452. A 4-kw system
is worth $15,000 more in present value located in Maryland than Oregon. Energy value and
environmental benefits are modestly negatively correlated in the data (ρ = −0.14).
Because the energy value of solar capacity depends partly upon whether it contributes
to or alleviates transmission congestion, and because congestion relief is deemed one of
the benefits of distributed solar capacity, we assess whether installed capacity in California
avoids transmission costs using hourly LMPs and congestion prices in 2017. If the more than
900,000 rooftop solar arrays in California contributed to congestion relief, then the mean,
generation-weighted congestion price would be positive, indicating that the typical rooftop
system generates electricity downstream from a bottleneck, where it is particularly valuable.
It thus contributes to congestion relief. If mean congestion prices are negative, then the
typical array is sited upstream from a bottleneck, generating electricity where it is relatively
abundant and contributing to congestion.
Valuing hourly rooftop solar congestion benefits in each zip code in a typical year at
the congestion price of the most proximate network node realized in 2017, we estimate the
24

average rooftop solar array in California does not generate congestion relief benefits. The
annual value of congestion relief benefits is $-1.09, indicating the system is installed at a
node typically upstream of a transmission bottleneck, where generation is relatively cheap
when transmission constraints bind. Across zip codes, congestion relief benefits of a 4-kW
system vary from $-66.27 to $85.17 for 2017. The greatest misallocation of solar capacity
occurs in the San Diego metropolitan area. In Chula Vista, a city east of San Diego, 7,800
rooftop systems generated an estimated $374,000 less value in 2017 than they would have
generated if the grid were not congested. Installed panels in some San Diego zip codes also
generated negative congestion benefits. Yet installed capacity in other zip codes in San
Diego are estimated to have generated the greatest congestion relief in the state, valued at
as much as $286,500 in 2017. Figure 7 depicts the spatial distribution of energy value per
kW capacity in 2017. The figure shows that the most congested parts of the grid are located
in the Los Angeles and San Diego areas, but that the least congested nodes of the network
are nearby.
Only one-third of California rooftop systems (318,455) generate positive congestion
value. The sum of these values was $4.87 million in 2017, or 7 percent of total energy value
generated by those systems. It is 2.7 percent of the approximately $181 million in total energy
value generated by the entire installed rooftop capacity in the state. These congestion relief
benefits, however, were more than offset by 591,000 systems that contributed to congestion
by generating upstream from bottlenecks, foregoing $5.85 million in energy value that would
have been realized in the absence of congestion at those nodes.
Reallocation of a 4-kW system from an area of low congestion value to one of high
congestion value increases the annual energy value by as much as $150 per year, or $1,870
in present value dollars over the 20-year lifetime of the system.21 Any sizable reallocation of
rooftop solar capacity to high value network nodes causes prices to converge, lowering the
21

Assumes a 5-percent discount rate.

25

gains from a marginal reallocation. The potential gains from such a reallocation, then, are
bounded from above by the difference in current energy value and the product of current
local marginal prices and optimized solar capacity. We estimate these gains assuming solar
is reallocated to highest local marginal price zip codes subject to the constraint that solar
occupies no more than 30-percent of zip code rooftops in order to mitigate grid stability
concerns. Energy value of installed capacity is estimated to increase by $15 million per year
or 8.5 percent of current energy value.

4.3

Uncertainty and sensitivity

The results reported in this section are estimated with uncertainty for several reasons. First,
the SAM model used to estimate zip-code-specific solar generation predicts generation with
some error. Freeman et al. (2014) validate popular solar models against observational
records at select solar sites. The SAM model exhibits an annual error of +/−5 percent,
considerably less than the annual error of the PVWatts model, a version of which is employed
by Siler-Evans et al. (2013) and Callaway et al. (2018) and by many solar installers to predict
generation for residential customers. The hourly root mean squared error of the SAM model
is 4 percent.
Second, the 13,724,160 marginal emissions parameters are also estimated with
uncertainty. This uncertainty is depicted in figures 3 and 4 for the sum across Texas
generators of plant-specific emissions and generation responses.

Each marginal plant

response is estimated 750 times from bootstrap samples blocked by day.

For each

block-bootstrap sample, all plant emission responses are estimated. The sum of marginal
emissions responses is depicted in gray for each bootstrap sample.

The mean across

these estimates is depicted in blue, and a 95-percent confidence interval is defined by the
series plotted in black. The average coefficient of variation ranges from 0.373 for SO2
to 0.0506 for CO2 . Uncertainty in zip code avoided emissions given solar generation is
26

characterized by sampling from the bootstrapped distribution of plant emissions coefficients.
The 95-percent confidence intervals of these 30,105 avoided emissions estimates is available
from the authors upon request. In Texas, for example, the average across-zip code standard
deviation in total damages per 4kW installation is $3.75, less than 2% of average total
damages across Texas ($200.84). Though these parameters are estimated fairly precisely, the
effect of this uncertainty is to render the marginal emissions of some zip codes statistically
indistinguishable. This, in turn, implies some uncertainty in gains from reallocation of
capacity within Texas.
Finally, uncertainty characterizes the translation of emissions changes to monetized
damages. Holland et al. (2016) consider sensitivity of damages to key parameters of the
AP2 model, the predecessor of the AP3 model we employ. Model results are sensitive
to assumptions about the value of a statistical life, the social cost of carbon, and
the dose-response function relating particulate matter concentrations to mortality. The
cumulative uncertainty causes uncertainty in the environmental benefits of solar capacity,
the gains from reallocations of solar capacity, and the transfers across states implicit in solar
capacity investments.
Also, to the extent that pollution emissions are restricted by binding emissions caps,
as intended by some EPA programs and state carbon policies, then our estimates of avoided
damages are too high (Holland et al. (2016). As Holland et al. (2016) note, however, it is
likely that caps in some of these pollution markets were not binding during the study period,
diminishing concern about this source of bias in our estimates.
Our empirical estimates of marginal emissions coefficients for each plant allows flexible
modeling of pollution responses across the grid without imposing assumptions about the
technologies of generators or the capacities of transmission lines connecting them. This
flexibility comes at the cost of being backward looking. Our analysis is based upon historical
data from January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2015. Changes to the electricity grid may
27

change these marginal emissions rates and marginal damages, affecting the benefits of solar
capacity investments. We do not attempt to model the future electricity grid. There are
reasons, however, to expect marginal emissions and damages will be relatively stable for the
foreseeable future. Even as renewable capacity grows, lowering average emissions, renewables
are typically not marginal, so marginal emissions will be governed by coal and natural gas
plant emission intensities, not those of renewables. Indeed, Holland et al. (2018) show
marginal damages are relatively constant over substantial ranges of load, demonstrating that
even large changes in net load do not imply large changes in marginal emissions. Though
they also show that marginal damages have not changed dramatically in the eastern and
western interconnections for large ranges of load over the periods 2010-2012 and 2014-2016,
marginal damages are estimated to have statistically significant trends. Marginal damages
in the Eastern interconnection are decreasing overtime, whereas they are increasing in the
Western interconnection. A convergence of marginal damages across the U.S. diminishes the
gains from efficient capacity siting across interconnections.

5

Discussion

Advocating for a statewide goal of 12 GW of clean, local electricity generating capacity
in 2011, California’s Governor, Jerry Brown, remarked,“This is tens of thousands of little
decisions.

The distribution is its strength and also its challenge.”22 This paper shows

distributed decisions nationwide have produced an installed capacity of more than 1.4
million rooftop solar arrays that neither maximizes energy value of solar generation nor
avoided damages from fossil-fuel generation. The misallocation of solar capacity chiefly
sacrifices environmental benefits that vary across the U.S. mostly due to heterogeneity
in the technologies of marginal responding fossil generators and their locations relative to
22

http://articles.latimes.com/2011/jul/26/business/la-fi-small-renewables-20110726

28

population centers.
The misallocation of solar capacity may partly reflect heterogeneity in solar demand
among investors, but federal, state, and local policies distort the prices private investors
receive.

No solar policy accounts for heterogeneity in environmental benefits.

Thus,

none provides the second-best Pigouvian subsidy to solar generation or solar capacity. A
second-best Pigouvian subsidy would provide correct price signals to direct efficient allocation
of solar capacity within or across states.

Absent subsidies that reflect heterogeneous

environmental benefits, it is unsurprising private investments fail to maximize these benefits.
Policy also distorts prices private investors receive for the energy value of their
generation. Net metering policies common to 41 states pay solar generators at rates exceeding
wholesale prices or electricity marginal costs. These prices are also invariant to congestion
benefits. Unsurprisingly, therefore, there is no evidence that California’s more than 900,000
rooftop solar arrays help to alleviate congestion, even though congestion relief is a purported
benefit of distributed solar capacity.
The foregone energy and environmental benefits of rooftop solar capacity constitute a
cost of policies that favor investments in distributed generation capacity over utility-scale
capacity investments that are governed by price signals that appropriately value energy,
if not avoided pollution.

Policy can be better targeted to achieve efficient capacity

allocations. Subsidies can vary with site-specific environmental benefits and compensation
for energy value can vary with local marginal costs. Still, incentive programs will invariably
be plagued by free riding among inframarginal solar adopters who take advantage of
incentives even though they would make capacity investments absent policy. Hughes and
Podolefsky (2015), for instance, estimate a rebate elasticity of solar adoption in California of
about 0.5, suggesting considerable program cost per additional kW of installed capacity.23
23

In similar analysis, Rogers and Sexton (2015) estimate a public cost per additional kW capacity under
the California Solar Initiative in excess of $3,000, equal to at least half the total cost per unit of capacity
installed under the program.

29

Inframarginal adopters not only limit additionality of public expenditures, but also diminish
the likelihood that capacity is installed in highest-benefit areas. The cost-effectiveness of
solar policy is, thus, diminished relative to direct public investments in capacity like those
made by regulated utilities or utility-contracted independent generators.
The historic role of utilities in directing grid investments is threatened by generous
subsidies in many states to rooftop solar capacity relative to central-plant solar.

The

persistence of utilities is also threatened by net-metering policies in many states that
allow solar adopters to avoid paying for fixed costs of the grid that are apportioned
in volumetric energy charges. This fixed-cost avoidance raises the burdens on non-solar
adopters, potentially inducing further solar adoptions—or grid defections—and still higher
burdens on non-adopters. Such an unraveling of the market for grid electricity is termed the
“utility death spiral,” and it could yield autarchic markets like those that existed a century
ago. If rooftop solar capacity yields no congestion relief, as we show in California, then the
persistence of a policy preference for distributed generation solar must reflect other policy
maker objectives.
These results also highlight a cost of policy preferences that favor within border
renewable energy generation over renewable electricity imports. Twenty-nine states have
renewable portfolio standards that are intended to reduce emissions of globally mixing
greenhouse gases and improve local air pollution. For many states, the greatest carbon
mitigation and improvement in local air quality may be achieved by capacity investments in
other jurisdictions. We have shown that the greatest single beneficiaries of state investments
in solar capacity tend not to be the states in which the investments are made, but rather
other states that are linked via physical processes of the electric grid and air transport.
Coasian transactions among states could achieve greater efficiency in solar siting decisions.
This analysis also shows that states capture only 15 percent of the local pollution

30

benefits generated by solar capacity investments.24 Therefore, these are prone to free-riding
even among local and state jurisdictions that subsidize it, warranting intervention at the
national level where benefits are more fully appropriated. Despite the risk of free-riding by
states and local jurisdictions, we find that state subsidies are essentially uncorrelated with
in-state benefits or benefit shares, though the states capturing least benefits do subsidize at
the lowest rates.
Substantial spillovers of solar capacity benefits also suggest the EPA’s Cross State
Air Pollution Rule that caps pollution emissions of regulated states could incentivize solar
adoption by crediting states for the share of their solar capacity investments that avoid
pollution in downwind states. It also implies states intending to improve air quality for their
respective residents may optimally employ policy instruments other than solar generation
subsidies. Holland et al. (2016), for instance, estimate that only 19 percent of damages from
in-state vehicle tailpipe emissions are exported out of state through air transport. States can
also subsidize pollution abatement at in-state sources, thereby limiting subsidies to emissions
changes at out-of-state, downwind generators.

6

Conclusion

This paper provides the first systematic, theoretically consistent and empirically valid
estimates of the heterogeneous environmental benefits of rooftop solar capacity investments
across the U.S. The average environmental benefits are equal to $569 per year, though
these would increase if capacity were allocated across states—or even within them—in
order to maximize these benefits. These benefits are estimated to be greatest in the U.S.
Midwest and Mid-Atlantic regions and least in the West, including California, where nearly
two-thirds of rooftop systems are located. The average rooftop investment is subsidized
24

The share of CO2 mitigation benefits appropriated by states is arbitrarily small if these are apportioned
worldwide according to population.

31

at a rate approximately equal to its external benefits, yet subsidies are uncorrelated
with environmental benefits, so systems generating the greatest external benefits are
under-subsidized.

On average, only 15 percent of external benefits are appropriated

within states where capacity investments are made; the rest spillover to other states with
implications for state and federal air pollution control policy.
Though distributed generation capacity like rooftop solar is intended to alleviate grid
congestion, we find no evidence that the 900,000 systems installed in California provide
congestion relief. This result and evidence of rooftop capacity misallocation are indicative
of policies that obscure efficient prices from private investors. They also suggest persistence
of a wide-spread policy preference for rooftop over utility-scale solar reflects objectives other
than least-cost pollution avoidance.

References
Baker, Erin, Meredith Fowlie, Derek Lemoine, and Stanley S Reynolds, “The
economics of solar electricity,” Annual Review of Resource Economics, 2013, 5 (1),
387–426.
Barbose, Galen, Naim Darghouth, Samantha Weaver, and Ryan Wiser, “Tracking
the Sun V: An Historical Summary of the Installed Price of Photovoltaics in the
United States from 1998-2011,” July 2012.

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

Online at https://emp.lbl.gov/publications/tracking-sun-v-historical-summary. Last
visited 2018-10-08.
,

,

,

and

, “Tracking the Sun X: The Installed Price of Residential

and Non-Residential Photovoltaic Systems in the United States,”

32

July 2017.

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Online at https://emp.lbl.gov/publications/
tracking-sun-x-installed-price. Last visited 2018-10-08.
Blair, Nate J., Aron P. Dobos, and Paul Gilman, “Comparison of photovoltaic models
in the System Advisor Model,” 2013. NREL Conference Paper NREL-CP-6A20-58057.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Online at https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy13osti/
58057.pdf. Last visited 2018-10-08.
Borenstein, Severin, “The Private and Public Economics of Renewable Electricity
Generation,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (1), 67–92.
and James Bushnell, “Do two electricity pricing wrongs make a right? Cost recovery,
externalities, and efficiency,” 2018. Working Paper 24756. National Bureau of Economic
Research. Online at https://www.nber.org/papers/w24756. Last visited 2018-10-08.
and Lucas W Davis, “The distributional effects of US clean energy tax credits,” Tax
Policy and the Economy, 2016, 30 (1), 191–234.
Callaway, Duncan S, Meredith Fowlie, and Gavin McCormick, “Location, location,
location: The variable value of renewable energy and demand-side efficiency resources,”
Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2018, 5 (1), 39–75.
Caulton, Dana R, Paul B Shepson, Renee L Santoro, Jed P Sparks, Robert W
Howarth, Anthony R Ingraffea, Maria OL Cambaliza, Colm Sweeney, Anna
Karion, and Kenneth J Davis, “Toward a better understanding and quantification of
methane emissions from shale gas development,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 2014, 111 (17), 6237–6242.
Clay, Karen, Akshaya Jha, Nicholas Z. Muller, and Randy Walsh, “The external
costs of shipping petroleum products by pipeline and rail: Evi- dence of shipments of
crude oil from North Dakota,” The Energy Journal, Forthcoming.
33

Coddington, M., B. Mather, B. Kroposki, K. Lynn, A. Razon, A. Ellis, R. Hill,
T. Key, K. Nicole, and J. Smith, “Updating Interconnection Screens for PV System
Integration,” February 2012. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Online at http:
//www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1036038/. Last visited 2018-10-08.
Cullen, Joseph, “Measuring the environmental benefits of wind-generated electricity,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5 (4), 107–33.
Energy Information Administration, “Levelized Cost of New Generation Resources in
the Annual Energy Outlook 2013,” May 2013. Energy Information Administration. Online
at http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/aeo/electricity generation.cfm. Last visited 2018-10-08.
, “Today in Energy: California Has Nearly Half of the Nation’s Solar Electricity Generating
Capacity,” February 2016. Energy Information Administration. Online at http://www.eia.
gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=24852. Last visited 2018-10-08.
, “Today in Energy: Wind Adds the Most Electric Generation Capacity in 2015, Followed
by Natural Gas and Solar,” February 2016. Energy Information Administration. Online
at https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=25492. Last visited 2018-10-08.
, “Today in Energy: More than half of small-scale photovoltaic generation comes from
residential rooftops,” June 2017. Energy Information Administration. Online at http:
//www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=24852. Last visited 2018-10-08.
, “State electricity profiles,” January 2018. Energy Information Administration. Online at
https://www.eia.gov/electricity/state/. Last visited 2018-10-08.
Fischer, Carolyn, “Emissions pricing, spillovers, and public investment in environmentally
friendly technologies,” Energy Economics, 2008, 30 (2), 487–502.

34

and Richard G Newell, “Environmental and technology policies for climate
mitigation,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2008, 55 (2),
142–162.
Freeman, Janine, Jonathan Whitmore, Nate Blair, and Aron P Dobos, “Validation
of multiple tools for flat plate photovoltaic modeling against measured data,” October
2014. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Online at https://www.nrel.gov/docs/
fy14osti/61497.pdf. Last visited 2018-10-08.
Gillingham, Kenneth and James Sweeney, “Barriers To Implementing Low-Carbon
Technologies,” Climate Change Economics, 2012, 3 (04), 1–21.
Graff-Zivin, Joshua S, Matthew J Kotchen, and Erin T Mansur, “Spatial and
temporal heterogeneity of marginal emissions: Implications for electric cars and other
electricity-shifting policies,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2014, 107,
248–268.
Holland, Stephen P, Erin T Mansur, Nicholas Z Muller, and Andrew J Yates,
“Are there environmental benefits from driving electric vehicles? The importance of local
factors,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3700–3729.
Holland, Stephen P., Erin T. Mansur, Nicholas Z. Muller, and Andrew J Yates,
“The remarkable decline in air pollution from the U.S. electricity sector over 2010-2017,”
in “in” Presented at Triangle Resource and Environmental Economics Seminar, October
2018.
Hughes, Jonathan E and Molly Podolefsky, “Getting green with solar subsidies:
evidence from the California solar initiative,” Journal of the Association of Environmental
and Resource Economists, 2015, 2 (2), 235–275.

35

Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon, “Technical update of the
Social Cost of Carbon for regulatory impact analysis,” 2016. Online at https://www.epa.
gov/sites/production/files/2016-12/documents/sc co2 tsd august 2016.pdf. Last visited
2018-10-08.
Jaffe, Adam B, Richard G Newell, and Robert N Stavins, “A tale of two market
failures: Technology and environmental policy,” Ecological Economics, 2005, 54 (2),
164–174.
Jaramillo, Paulina, W Michael Griffin, and H Scott Matthews, “Comparative
life-cycle air emissions of coal, domestic natural gas, LNG, and SNG for electricity
generation,” Environmental Science & Technology, 2007, 41 (17), 6290–6296.
National
Report,”

Renewable
2017.

Energy
National

Laboratory,
Renewable

“Electricity
Energy

Generation

Laboratroy.

Baseline

Online

at

https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy17osti/67645.pdf. Last visited 2018-10-08.
Nordhaus, William, “Designing a friendly space for technological change to slow global
warming,” Energy Economics, 2011, 33 (4), 665–673.
North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, “Database of state incentives for
renewable energy,” 2018. Online at http://www.dsireusa.org/. Last visited 2018-10-08.
Novan, Kevin, “Valuing the wind: renewable energy policies and air pollution avoided,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015, 7 (3), 291–326.
Pigou, AC, The Economics Of Welfare, Macmillan and Co., London, 1920.
Siler-Evans, Kyle, Inês Lima Azevedo, M Granger Morgan, and Jay Apt,
“Regional variations in the health, environmental, and climate benefits of wind and

36

solar generation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013, 110 (29),
11768–11773.
Solar Energy Industry Association, “Million Solar Milestone,” 2016.

Online at

https://www.seia.org. Last visited 2018-10-08.
U.S.

Census

Bureau,

“American Community Survey 2017,”

2017.

Online

at https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data-releases/2017/release.html.
Last visited 2018-10-08.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Cleaner Power Plants,” April 2012. Online
at http://epa.gov/airquality/powerplanttoxics/powerplants.html. Last visited 2018-10-08.
von Stechow C. Edenhofer O, Pichs-Madruga R. Sokona Y. Seyboth K.
Matschoss P. Kadner S. Zwickel T. Eickemeier P. Hansen G. Schlomer S.,
Annex II: Methodology. In IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate
Change Mitigation, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Walczak, Jared and Scott Drenkard, “State and local sales tax rates in 2017,” January
2017.

Tax Foundation. Online at https://files.taxfoundation.org/20170131121743/

TaxFoundation-FF539.pdf. Last visited 2018-10-08.

37

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Mean

St. Dev.

Min

Max

Solar Generation
Annual kWh

6357.4

656.1

4344.7

8647.3

Avoided Pollution Damages
Total Annual Dollars
CO2
NOx
PM25
SO2

568.9
166.2
55.4
22.7
324.6

373.0
71.6
38.1
18.0
285.5

60.7
24.2
4.6
−3.5
1.1

1224.7
396.0
126.9
57.9
885.3

Subsidies
Annual Subsidy
Subsidy Less Damages

599.9
31.0

269.2
492.9

218.8
−800.7

2,843.8
2,089.5

Energy Value
Total Annual Dollars

247.0

35.9

138.6

371.1

Notes: Annual kWh in first panel is estimated annual solar generation in kWh. The second
panel reports the total and pollution-specific dollar values of avoided pollution emissions (in
dollars). The third panel reports Annual Subsidy calculated as the net present value per kWh
of all solar subsidies multiplied by annual generation. “Subsidy less damages” reports the
difference between subsidy and damages. Positive values indicate over-subsidization. Mean
“Annual Subsidy” and “Subsidy less damages” are weighted by installed capacity. The bottom
panel reports the mean annual energy value of generation measured as the product of hourly
average marginal cost of electricity supply and hourly generation.

38

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.18
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.08

1913
844
778
764
627
599
537
479
445
429
416
391
378
361
356
338
320
279
277
275
272
193
171
119

Virginia
Florida
Kentucky
Mississippi
Kansas
Minnesota
Georgia
Wisconsin
Nebraska
N. Dakota
Oklahoma
Lousiana
Iowa
Illinois
Arkansas
S. Dakota
Delaware
Michigan
Maryland
Missouri
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Indiana
West Virginia

Net Ann.
Subsidy

0.33
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.11
0.12
0.11
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.24
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.11
0.07
0.06
0.08
0.06
0.07
0.10

Avoided
Damages

State

Subsidy

Net Ann.
Subsidy

Mass.
Rhode Island
Connecticut
New York
California
N. Hampshire
Vermont
Arizona
Utah
Maine
Oregon
S. Carolina
New Jersey
Idaho
Washington
Montana
New Mexico
Tennessee
Nevada
Wyoming
Colorado
Texas
N. Carolina
Alabama

Avoided
Damages

State

Subsidy

Table 2: State Average Subsidies and Damages

0.06
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.07
0.11
0.08
0.08
0.06
0.11
0.10
0.12
0.07
0.04
0.11
0.08
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.06

0.05
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.12
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.15
0.14
0.18
0.13
0.10
0.18
0.17
0.18
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.18
0.18

80
70
24
-32
-47
-54
-69
-77
-107
-153
-171
-215
-292
-341
-380
-415
-469
-482
-506
-540
-561
-600
-626
-678

Notes: Subsidy and average Avoided Damages are reported per kWh. Subsidy streams are discounted to present value at a 5
percent annual rate. Net Annual Subsidy is annual subsidy less total annual damages avoided. States are ordered by Net Annual
Subsidy.

Table 3: Simulated Allocations of Installed Solar Capacity

Installed

U.S

U.S. 30%

State

State 30%

Total Avoided Damages

353.3

1,693.0

1,659.0

416.7

398.7

Number of zips

12840

745

2312

513

1370

Mean Avoided Damages

243.9

1168.7

1145.2

287.6

275.2

Notes: Total Avoided Damages reported in millions of U.S. dollars. Mean avoided damages per 4-kW system
are reported in dollars.

39

60.37
18.50
22.16
10.10
50.66
125.89
9.42
5.54
12.42
4.70
47.02
13.40
16.35
24.84
4.48
72.05
3.18
4.06
77.63
2.66
7.42
16.12
5.12
32.42

Percent
In-state

140.93
666.19
324.52
731.61
69.10
-12.17
806.82
878.24
327.37
868.02
97.40
346.17
330.51
103.52
738.91
12.74
827.21
821.87
8.13
796.49
253.54
90.11
259.31
28.83

Out-of-State
Ann. Benefits

200.53
151.33
94.94
82.21
67.03
64.94
60.83
51.48
51.48
42.19
40.12
38.07
34.20
34.16
33.39
31.33
27.21
27.10
24.15
22.16
19.57
17.20
13.90
13.59

State

In-state Ann.
Benefits

Percent
In-state

Florida
Pennsylvania
Georgia
Ohio
N. Carolina
New York
New Jersey
Maryland
Alaska
Illinois
Texas
Kentucky
Virginia
S. Carolina
Michigan
Massachusetts
Indiana
Missouri
California
West Virginia
Tennessee
Colorado
Oklahoma
Connecticut

Out-of-State
Ann. Benefits

State

In-state Ann.
Benefits

Table 4: In-state vs. Out-of-state Environmental Benefits

Wisconsin
Louisiana
Mississippi
Kansas
Delaware
Minnesota
Arizona
N. Hampshire
Iowa
Rhode Island
Maine
Arkansas
Washington
New Mexico
Nevada
Nebraska
Vermont
Utah
Oregon
Wyoming
Idaho
South Dakota
Montana
North Dakota

13.46
11.54
10.09
8.41
8.36
7.62
6.50
4.93
4.73
4.62
3.68
3.40
2.23
1.78
1.69
1.33
1.28
0.96
0.84
0.48
0.42
0.35
0.27
0.20

499.84
647.88
429.20
265.24
929.52
402.70
74.76
45.11
446.67
40.38
50.72
696.81
25.36
126.82
63.88
416.32
55.78
35.51
29.08
72.57
31.46
414.54
64.92
414.88

3.04
2.13
2.26
3.08
0.89
1.86
7.91
9.97
1.05
10.37
6.82
0.74
8.12
2.03
2.52
0.41
2.27
2.66
2.82
0.70
1.32
0.11
0.82
0.05

Notes: Reported are annual average avoided damages that accrue in-state versus those that accrue out of state. “Percent In-State”
indicates the percentage of total benefits accruing in the local, adopting state. States are ordered by magnitudes of in-state benefits.

40

Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania
New York
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Ohio
Ohio
Ohio
Ohio
Ohio
Ohio
Georgia
N. Carolina
New York
New York
New York
New York

173.24
171.86
159.93
159.35
151.71
151.68
141.56
118.70
103.23
100.57
92.69
89.13
81.07
78.47
77.70
77.03
76.70
76.50
73.08
70.21
68.63
68.38
67.83
67.10

20.73
3.34
2.63
5.86
6.85
1.84
4.24
2.81
30.39
0.66
3.42
7.73
17.14
5.83
58.24
217.16
389.84
10.04
1.42
2.06
14.85
18.59
2.16
13.62

Beneficiary

Connecticut
Kansas
Oklahoma
Georgia
Kentucky
Vermont
Tennessee
Virginia
Mississippi
N. Carolina
New York
Florida
New Mexico
Texas
Arizona
Colorado
Nevada
Wyoming
Montana
Utah
Idaho
Oregon
Washington
California

New York
Illinois
Illinois
Alabama
Ohio
New York
Ohio
N. Carolina
Pennsylvania
S. Carolina
Mass.
Georgia
Illinois
Illinois
California
Texas
California
Colorado
Ohio
California
California
California
California
Arizona

Ratio to
In-state Benefits

Delaware
Maryland
New Jersey
Indiana
W. Virginia
Ohio
Michigan
Illinois
Arkansas
Pennsylvania
Missouri
Louisiana
Iowa
Wisconsin
Nebraska
S. Dakota
N. Dakota
Minnesota
Alabama
S. Carolina
Rhode Island
Maine
Mass.
N.Hampshire

State

Ann. Benefits

Beneficiary

Ratio to
In-state Benefits

State

Ann. Benefits

Table 5: Benefits to Largest Out-of-State Beneficiary

66.90
66.55
66.18
65.29
64.50
64.38
61.25
58.03
47.28
32.53
29.57
22.06
13.98
12.84
11.64
11.42
9.74
9.55
7.48
4.95
4.12
3.78
3.52
1.36

4.92
7.91
4.76
0.69
1.69
50.13
3.13
1.70
4.68
0.49
0.46
0.11
7.86
0.32
1.79
0.66
5.78
19.72
28.09
5.13
9.78
4.49
1.58
0.06

Notes: Reported for each state is the different state in which maximum environmental benefits accrue, the magnitudes of those
benefits, and the ratio of those benefits to the benefits that accrue in-state. States are ordered by the magnitudes of benefits accruing
to a different state.

41

1483
1479
1408
1345
1328
1326
1303
1259
1251
1220
1207
1113
1013
978
853
845
837
818
816
800
769
726
708
690

340
322
298
288
236
272
237
249
222
244
239
223
219
231
206
201
248
233
198
192
224
221
218
218

Kentucky
Virgnia
Tennessee
Colorado
New Mexico
N. Carolina
S. Carolina
Nevada
Texas
Arizona
California
Rhode Island
Maine
N. Hampshire
Wyoming
Connecticut
Mass.
New York
Vermont
Utah
Idaho
Montana
Washington
Oregon

Ann. Energy
Value

Ann. Energy
Value

Maryland
Delaware
New Jersey
West Virginia
Illinois
Pennsylvania
Indiana
Ohio
Missouri
Lousiana
Michigan
Iowa
Arkansas
Wisconsin
S. Dakota
Nebraska
Oklahoma
Kansas
Minnesota
N. Dakota
Geogria
Florida
Alabama
Mississippi

State

Ann. Total
Benefits

State

Ann. Total
Benefits

Table 6: Energy Value and Total Benefits by State

643
624
593
546
545
529
521
506
500
478
452
427
409
404
400
400
398
387
369
360
341
321
289
282

236
312
216
218
277
250
244
258
258
218
262
348
325
322
237
324
322
301
278
254
243
227
204
196

Notes: Reported in dollars for each state is the estimated total annual benefit of 4-kW solar
capacity determined as the sum of energy value and avoided damages. Also reported are
energy values (in dollars). States are ordered by the magnitudes of total benefits.

42

Figure 1: Total Annual A/C Electricity Generation per 4kw Solar Capacity

Total Annual MWh Generated
per 4kW capacity
8
7.5
7
6.5
6
5.5
5
4.5

Depicted is modeled annual alternating-current (A/C) electricity generation (in MWh) per 4-kW solar capacity for each U.S.
zip code. Generation is greatest in the Southwest.

Figure 2: Damages Per Ton SO2 Emissions by County

Damages per ton
SO2 emitted
$125,000
$100,000
$75,000
$50,000
$25,000

Damages per ton of SO2 are shown by county of pollution source. Damages are estimated by the AP3 model. Darker blue
regions reflect relatively low damages. Green to yellow regions are those in which a ton of emissions is costlier.

43

Figure 3: Marginal Emissions by Month and Daylight Hour and 95% CI

(a) Generation (and PM2.5 )

(b) NOX

Depicted in blue for each daylight hour and each month of the year are the mean sum of plant generation and emissions responses
to a 1MW change in load. These are shown for the Texas interconnection. Each grey series shows the sum of plant-specific
coefficients for one of 750 block-bootstrap samples. A 95-percent confidence interval is bounded by the series shown in black.

44

Figure 4: Marginal Emissions by Month and Daylight Hour and 95% CI

(a) CO2

(b) SO2

Depicted in blue for each daylight hour and each month of the year are the mean sum of plant generation and emissions responses
to a 1MW change in load. These are shown for the Texas interconnection. Each grey series shows the sum of plant-specific
coefficients for one of 750 block-bootstrap samples. A 95-percent confidence interval is bounded by the series shown in black.

45

Figure 5: Total Annual Avoided Environmental Damages per 4kw Solar Capacity

Zip-code specific annual avoided pollution damages from 4kW capacity in dollars. Darker shades of blue indicate lower annual
damages. Brighter green to yellow regions indicate greatest pollution damage avoidance.

Figure 6: Installed Rooftop Solar Arrays

Depicted in red are locations of installed solar capacity. Each dot represents 10 rooftop arrays. Dots are depicted in diminished
opacity so that darker colors indicate greater density of arrays.

46

Figure 7: Annual Value of Electricity Generation per kW

Shown by zip code is the annual value in dollars of electricity generated per kW solar capacity in 2017 as determined by local
marginal prices at the most proximate network node.

47

Figure 8: In-State Shares of Avoided Local Pollution Benefits

Share of avoided pollution damages appropriated by the state in which a unit solar capacity is installed.

Figure 9: Intrastate Reallocation of Solar Capacity subject to Grid Stability Concerns

Depicted in blue are solar capacity locations following intrastate reallocation subject to grid stability concerns limiting solar to
30 percent of rooftops in any zip code. Shown in red are locations of installed solar capacity. Each dot represents 10 rooftop
arrays. Dots are depicted in diminished opacity so that darker colors indicate greater density of arrays.

48

Figure 10: Interstate Reallocation of Solar Capacity subject to Grid Stability Concerns

Depicted in blue are solar capacity locations following interstate reallocation subject to grid stability concerns limiting solar to
30 percent of rooftops in any zip code. Shown in red are locations of installed solar capacity. Each dot represents 10 rooftop
arrays. Dots are depicted in diminished opacity so that darker colors indicate greater density of arrays.

49

