                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHO PROFITS FROM PATENTS? RENT-SHARING AT INNOVATIVE FIRMS

                                            Patrick Kline
                                           Neviana Petkova
                                           Heidi Williams
                                             Owen Zidar

                                        Working Paper 25245
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25245


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           November 2018
We are very grateful to Joey Anderson, Ivan Badinski, Jeremy Brown, Alex Fahey, Sam Grondahl,
Stephanie Kestelman, Tamri Matiashvili, Mahnum Shahzad, Karthik Srinivasan, and John Wieselthier
for excellent research assistance, and to Daron Acemoglu, Lawrence Katz, Bentley MacLeod, John
Van Reenen, four anonymous referees and seminar participants at Brown, Dartmouth, the LSE/IFS/STICERD
seminar, Michigan, Michigan State, MIT, NBER Labor Studies, NBER Productivity, Northwestern,
NYU, Princeton, Stanford, Stanford GSB, the Toulouse Network for Information Technology, UC-Berkeley,
UC-Irvine, UIUC, Chicago Booth, and the Washington Center for Equitable Growth for helpful comments.
The construction of some of the data analyzed in this publication was supported by the National Institute
on Aging and the NIH Common Fund, Office of the NIH Director, through Grant U01-AG046708
to the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER); the content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. This work/research was also
funded by the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. Financial support from the Sloan Foundation,
NSF Grant Numbers 1151497 and 1752431, the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, the Kathryn
and Grant Swick Faculty Research Fund, and the Booth School of Business are gratefully acknowledged.
Opinions expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent the views and policies of the US Department
of the Treasury or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Patrick Kline, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams, and Owen Zidar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Profits from Patents? Rent-Sharing at Innovative Firms
Patrick Kline, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams, and Owen Zidar
NBER Working Paper No. 25245
November 2018, Revised March 2019
JEL No. J01,O3,O34

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes how patent-induced shocks to labor productivity propagate into worker compensation
using a new linkage of US patent applications to US business and worker tax records. We infer the
causal effects of patent allowances by comparing firms whose patent applications were initially allowed
to those whose patent applications were initially rejected. To identify patents that are ex-ante valuable,
we extrapolate the excess stock return estimates of Kogan et al. (2017) to the full set of accepted and
rejected patent applications based on predetermined firm and patent application characteristics. An
initial allowance of an ex-ante valuable patent generates substantial increases in firm productivity
and worker compensation. By contrast, initial allowances of lower ex-ante value patents yield no detectable
effects on firm outcomes. Patent allowances lead firms to increase employment, but entry wages and
workforce composition are insensitive to patent decisions. On average, workers capture roughly 30
cents of every dollar of patent-induced surplus in higher earnings. This share is roughly twice as high
among workers present since the year of application. These earnings effects are concentrated among
men and workers in the top half of the earnings distribution, and are paired with corresponding improvements
in worker retention among these groups. We interpret these earnings responses as reflecting the capture
of economic rents by senior workers, who are most costly for innovative firms to replace.


Patrick Kline                                        Heidi Williams
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics, E52-440
University of California, Berkeley                   MIT
530 Evans Hall #3880                                 50 Memorial Drive
Berkeley, CA 94720                                   Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                                             and NBER
pkline@econ.berkeley.edu                             heidiw@mit.edu

Neviana Petkova                                      Owen Zidar
US Treasury                                          Department of Economics & Woodrow Wilson School
1500 Pennsylvania Ave                                Princeton University
Washington, DC 20220                                 237 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
neviana.petkova@treasury.gov                         Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                     and NBER
                                                     ozidar@princeton.edu
1    Introduction

    Competitive models of labor markets are predicated on the notion that firms have no power to set wages. How-
ever, there is mounting empirical evidence that firms contribute substantially to wage inequality among identically
skilled workers (Card, Heining, and Kline 2013; Card, Cardoso, and Kline 2016; Barth et al. 2016; Jäger 2016;
Goldschmidt and Schmieder 2017; Helpman et al. 2017; Abowd, McKinney, and Zhao 2018; Sorkin 2018; Song
et al. forthcoming). This emerging evidence has renewed interest in mechanisms through which variation in firm
productivity can influence worker pay (see Lentz and Mortensen 2010; Manning 2011 for reviews).
    While a sizable empirical literature has documented that fluctuations in firm performance and worker com-
pensation are strongly related (Card et al., 2018), these correlations are open to widely varying interpretations.
Early studies (e.g., Christofides and Oswald 1992; Blanchflower, Oswald, and Sanfey 1996) estimated industry-
level relationships that could simply reflect competitive market dynamics. A second generation of studies (Van
Reenen 1996; Hildreth 1998; Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis 1999) used firm-level data to study how shocks to
firm performance translate into worker pay, but was unable to adjust for potential changes in worker composition.
More recent work (Guiso, Pistaferri, and Schivardi 2005; Card, Devicienti, and Maida 2014; Friedrich et al. 2014;
Card, Cardoso, and Kline 2016; Carlsson, Messina, and Skans 2016; Lamadon 2016; Mogstad et al. 2017) adjusts
for composition biases by examining the comovement between changes in firm productivity and the wage growth
of incumbent workers. However, observational fluctuations in standard labor productivity measures are likely
to reflect a number of factors (e.g., market-wide fluctuations in product demand, changes in non-pecuniary firm
amenities, or drift in labor market institutions) that can influence wages without necessarily signaling a violation
of price-taking behavior by firms.
    In this paper, we analyze how patent-induced shocks to firm performance propagate into worker compensation.
Patent allowances offer a useful source of variation because they provide firms with well-defined monopoly rights
that can yield a prolonged stream of potentially substantial economic rents. Standard models of frictional labor
markets (e.g., Pissarides 2000; Hall and Milgrom 2008; Pissarides 2009) suggest that these product market rents
will be shared with workers whenever the employment relationship is (re-)negotiated, yet surprisingly little is
known about how broadly patent-generated rents are shared in practice.
    Our analysis relies on a new linkage of two datasets: (i) the census of published patent applications submitted
to the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) between roughly 2001 and 2011 and (ii) the universe of US
Treasury business tax filings and worker earnings histories drawn from W2 and 1099 tax filings. The business tax
filings data offers a high-quality set of firm-level variables, from which we are able to construct multiple measures
of firm performance. Likewise, the business and worker tax filings provide a window into compensation outcomes
for many different types of workers, including firm officers and owners, who prevail at the top of the income


                                                         1
distribution (Smith et al., 2019).
    We infer the causal effect of patent allowances by comparing firms whose applications were initially allowed
to those whose applications were initially rejected. Within so-called “art units” (technological areas designated by
the USPTO), firms with initially allowed and initially rejected applications submitted in the same year are found
to exhibit similar levels and trends in outcomes prior to their initial patent decision. We also document that initial
patent decisions are difficult to predict based on firm characteristics or geography, corroborating the view that these
decisions constitute truly idiosyncratic — as opposed to market level — shocks.
    It is well-known that most patents generate little ex-post value to the firm (Pakes 1986; Hall, Jaffe, and Trajten-
berg 2001). We build on insights from two recent studies to identify a subsample of valuable patents that induce
meaningful shifts in firm outcomes at the time the patents are allowed. First, following the work of Farre-Mensa,
Hegde, and Ljungqvist (2017), we restrict our analysis to firms applying for a patent for the first time, for which
patent decisions are likely to be more consequential. Second, among this sample of first-time applicants, we build
on the analysis of Kogan et al. (2017) who use event studies to estimate the excess stock market return realized
on the grant date of US patents assigned to publicly traded firms. Specifically, we develop a methodology for
extrapolating Kogan et al.’s patent value estimates to the non-publicly traded firms in our sample, and to firms
whose patent applications are never granted. We use characteristics of firms and their patent applications that are
fixed at the time of application as the basis for extrapolating patent values, and show that these value estimates
are strong predictors of treatment effect heterogeneity in our sample. These value estimates also provide us with
an additional validation of our research design: patents with low predicted value are found to have economically
small and statistically insignificant effects on firm performance and worker compensation.
    Using these data, we then investigate the consequences of obtaining an ex-ante valuable patent allowance for
firm performance and worker compensation, and relate our findings to different explanations for the propagation
of firm-specific shocks into worker wages. Corroborating recent research based on US Census data (Balasubrama-
nian and Sivadasan 2011), we find that firm size and average labor productivity rise rapidly in response to initial
allowances of ex-ante valuable patents. The average wage and salary income of workers at these firms rises in
tandem with measures of average labor productivity. An allowance of a patent application in the top quintile of
ex-ante predicted value raises firm-level surplus — defined as the sum of W2 earnings and business earnings before
interest, taxes, and depreciation — by roughly $12,400 per W2 employee per year, while W2 earnings at the firm
rise by approximately $3,700 per worker per year.
    Patent allowances not only raise average earnings at assignee firms, but also exacerbate within-firm inequality
on a variety of margins. Earnings impacts are heavily concentrated among employees in the top quartile of the
within-firm earnings distribution and among employees listed on firm tax returns as “firm officers.” Likewise, we
find that the earnings of owner-operators rise more than those of other employees. Earnings of male employees rise

                                                          2
strongly in response to a patent allowance, while the earnings of female employees are less responsive to patent
decisions.
    A handful of previous studies have investigated how inventor wages change in response to patent applications
or patent grants (Toivanen and Väänänen 2012; Depalo and Di Addario 2014; Bell et al. 2019; Aghion et al.
2018). Consistent with these results, we find that the earnings of “inventors” — defined as employees ever listed
as inventors on a patent application as in Bell et al. (2019) — respond to patent allowance decisions. Inventor
earnings are more responsive to patent allowance decisions than are the earnings of non-inventors, similar to the
findings presented in contemporaneous work by Aghion et al. (2018), which analyzes how inventor and non-
inventor earnings in Finnish firms evolve before and after patent applications are filed.
    While these impacts on firm aggregates could, in principle, be confounded by compositional changes, we find
no evidence that innovative firms upgrade the quality of their workforce in response to patent allowances. Although
patent allowances lead firms to expand by hiring slightly younger workers, the average prior earnings of both new
hires and firm separators is unaffected by patent decisions, suggesting that there are no major changes in the skill
composition of worker inflows to or outflows from the firm on a year-to-year basis.
    Different theoretical frameworks offer divergent predictions about how firm-specific shocks will affect the
wages of new and incumbent workers. Empirically, the earnings of workers who were employed by the firm in the
year of application respond very strongly to patent decisions. Having a valuable patent allowed raises the average
earnings of these “firm stayers” by roughly $7,800 — or approximately 11% — per year. These gains appear to be
concentrated among firm stayers who, in the year of application, were located in the top half of the firm’s earnings
distribution. We also find that the earnings of male firm stayers respond more strongly to patent allowances than
those of female firm stayers, which are estimated to be positive, albeit somewhat imprecise. By contrast, we are
unable to detect any response of entry wages to patent allowances, which is inconsistent with the predictions of
both static wage posting models and traditional bargaining models involving Nash-style surplus splitting at the time
of hiring (Pissarides 2000; Hall and Milgrom 2008; Pissarides 2009). While some dynamic wage posting models
(e.g., Postel-Vinay and Robin 2002) can generate drops in entry wages in response to a productivity increase, these
models predict greater wage growth for new hires, a phenomenon for which we also find no evidence. A candidate
explanation for such “insider/outsider” distinctions in earnings impacts is that the wage fluctuations of incumbent
workers represent changes in market perceptions of a worker’s underlying ability (Gibbons and Murphy 1992;
Holmström 1999). However, we find much smaller and statistically insignificant earnings effects for workers who
leave the firm, suggesting that our results are unlikely to be driven by public learning about worker quality.
    To interpret our findings, we sketch a simple model in which incumbent workers are imperfectly substitutable
with new hires. As in Becker (1964), Stevens (1994), and Manning (2006), this mechanism provides an avenue for
incumbents to extract rents from the firm in the form of wage premia. Motivated by this framework, we fit a series of

                                                          3
“rent-sharing” specifications analogous to standard cost-price pass-through specifications used to study imperfect
competition in product markets (Goldberg and Hellerstein, 2013; Weyl and Fabinger, 2013; Gorodnichenko and
Talavera, 2017). Using patent decisions as an instrument for firm surplus, we find that worker earnings rise by
roughly 29 cents of every dollar of patent allowance-induced surplus, with an approximate elasticity of 0.35,
which is comparable to the earlier estimates of Abowd and Lemieux (1993) and Van Reenen (1996) that were
based on firm-level aggregates. Importantly, failing to instrument for surplus yields smaller elasticities, closer
to those in the recent studies reviewed by Card et al. (2018) that assume statistical innovations to average labor
productivity constitute structural productivity shocks. Consistent with our model, rent-sharing with firm stayers is
more pronounced than it is with average workers: stayers capture roughly 61 cents of every dollar of surplus for an
approximate elasticity of 0.56. When we exclude employees ever listed as inventors on a patent, pass-through to
firm stayers falls to roughly 48 cents with a corresponding elasticity of 0.5. Though this elasticity estimate is larger
than what has been found by most previous studies, its 90% confidence interval encompasses many estimates in
the literature.
    In our model, firms share rents with incumbent workers to increase the odds of retaining them. We provide
event study evidence that retention rises in response to patent allowances, with larger responses among workers in
the top half of the earnings distribution. The fact that groups experiencing the largest earnings responses exhibit
the largest retention responses strongly suggests that the earnings fluctuations we measure constitute rents, rather
than, say, risk-sharing arrangements that hold workers to a participation constraint (Holmström 1979, 1989). Using
the patent decision as an instrument for wages, we estimate a retention-wage elasticity of roughly 1.2, with a 90%
confidence interval ranging from 0.46 to 3.08. When converted to a separation-wage elasticity, our point estimate
lies near the middle of the range of quasi-experimental estimates reviewed in Manning (2011).
    Viewed through the lens of our model, our point estimates imply that incumbent workers capture roughly 73%
of their replacement costs in wage premia. We also estimate that the marginal replacement cost of an incumbent
worker at a firm receiving a patent allowance is roughly equal to a new hire’s annual earnings. These findings
suggest that separations of key personnel can be extremely costly to innovative firms, even when these employees
are not themselves inventors. More broadly, our results suggest that the influence of firm conditions on worker
wages depends critically on their degree of replaceability, which may be influenced both by the duration of the
relationship between the worker and firm and by a worker’s position within the firm hierarchy, issues emphasized
in recent empirical studies of wage setting at European firms by Buhai et al. (2014), Jäger (2016), and Garin and
Silverio (2017). In contrast with European settings, however, the legal barriers to hiring and firing workers are
comparatively minimal for the set of newly innovative US firms which are the focus of our analysis. The fact
that seniority appears to mediate the propagation of firm shocks into worker earnings even in this sample of firms
strongly suggests an important role for relationship-specific investments in the generation of labor market rents.

                                                           4
2      Interpreting Wage Fluctuations

      In this section, we sketch a simple model of wage determination designed to interpret the propagation of firm-
specific productivity shocks into wages. Our model is tailored to the newly-innovative firms that are the focus of
our empirical analysis. For the purposes of motivating our model, two features of these firms are notable. First,
these firms are relatively small: the median firm in our estimation sample employs 17 workers in the year of
its first patent application.1 Such firms seem unlikely to possess significant market power over new hires or to
have reputations that allow them to credibly commit to backloaded compensation schemes. Second, the innovative
work conducted at these firms is necessarily specialized and proprietary in nature, likely making it costly to replace
incumbent employees with new hires. As in Becker (1964), Stevens (1994), and Manning (2006), the imperfect
substitutability of incumbent workers with new hires provides an avenue for incumbent workers to extract rents
from the firm in the form of wage premia.
      Our model yields a linear wage-setting rule similar to those found in many search models with multi-lateral
bargaining (Pissarides 2000; Cahuc and Wasmer 2001; Acemoglu and Hawkins 2014), as well as in much of
the classic literature on union wage bargaining (Brown and Ashenfelter 1986). We use this framework to motivate
standard empirical “rent-sharing” specifications and to clarify the endogeneity problems that arise when estimating
the transmission of firm-specific shocks to wages. We then discuss the assumptions under which patent allowance
decisions can facilitate the identification of economic parameters of interest.


2.1     Preliminaries

      We work with a one period model. Each firm j ∈ {1, ..., J} begins the period with I j incumbent workers and
a non-wage amenity value A j capturing factors such as geographic location and work environment. The firm can
hire as many new workers as desired at competitive market wage wmj = wm (A j ). As in classic hedonic models
(e.g., Rosen, 1986), the wage demanded by new hires will tend to be decreasing in the value of these amenities
                          
  i.e., ∂∂A j wm (A j ) ≤ 0 , which leads entry wages to vary by firm despite the perfectly competitive nature of this
market.
      Hiring N j new workers requires paying a training and recruiting cost c (N j , I j ). The function c (., .) exhibits
constant returns to scale, which implies
                                                      c (N j , I j ) = c (N j /I j ) I j .

We assume c (.) is twice differentiable and convex.
    1 While  the firms in our sample are small relative to, e.g., firms included in the Compustat data, they should not be thought of as
anomalously small in size. Axtell (2001) finds using Economic Census data that the modal US firm size is 1 employee, and the median is 3
(4 if size 0 firms are not counted).



                                                                       5
      The firm chooses a wage wIj ≥ wmj for incumbent workers at the beginning of the period. After the wage is
posted, incumbent workers receive outside job offers. These offers are non-verifiable, in part because they may
involve non-wage amenities, and therefore cannot be matched. However, the firm knows the offers have wage-
equivalent values drawn from the following translated Beta distribution
                                                                     !η
                                                        ω − wmj
                                                                           for ω ∈ wmj , w̄ j ,
                                                                                            
                                        G j (ω) =
                                                        w̄ j − wmj

where w̄ j > wmj is the maximum value of an outside offer. As η grows, offers become concentrated around w̄ j ,
while, as η tends towards zero, offers become concentrated around wmj .
   Workers receiving outside offers with value greater than the incumbent wage separate from the firm. Conse-
             
quently, G j wIj I j incumbent workers are retained for production activities. Note that η can therefore be inter-
preted as the elasticity of worker retention with respect to the incumbent wage premium wIj − wmj .
                                                                                                    
    At the end of the period, the firm produces Q j = T j L j units of output where L j = N j + G j wIj I j gives the
number of retained workers and T j gives the firm’s “physical” productivity. Output is sold on a monopolistically
                                                                                            −1/ε
competitive product market with inverse product demand Pj (Q j ) = Pj0 Q j                         where Pj0 > 0 is a firm-specific con-
stant capturing the firm’s product market power and ε > 1 gives the elasticity of demand. After selling its output
and paying the retained workers, the firm shuts down.


2.2     The firm’s problem

      The firm chooses the number of new hires N j and an incumbent wage wIj to maximize profits. Formally, its
problem is to:
                                                      1−1/ε
                        max Pj0 T j G j wIj I j + N j         − c (N j /I j ) I j − wmj N j − wIj G wIj I j .
                                                                                                     
                       {wIj ,N j } |       {z               } | {z } |                        {z         }
                                              revenue                     training cost             wage bill

      At an optimum, the firm equates the marginal cost of a new hire to her marginal revenue product (MRPj ):

                                                                           P (Q j ) Q j
                                       wmj + c0 (N j /I j ) = (1 − 1/ε)                 ≡ MRPj .                                     (1)
                                                                              Lj

Note that the marginal cost of a hire exceeds the market wage by the amount of the training/recruiting cost
c0 (N j /I j ), which is increasing in the gross hiring rate N j /I j .
      For incumbent wages, the first order condition can be written:


                                                MRPj = wIj +           wIj − wmj /η .
                                                                                
                                                                                                                                     (2)
                                                                     |      {z    }
                                                                  inframarginal wage cost




                                                                     6
As in monopsony models, the firm equates the marginal revenue product of an incumbent worker to her marginal
factor cost, which consists of her wage wIj plus a term capturing the costs of raising wages for inframarginal
incumbents. As the retention elasticity η approaches infinity, this term collapses to the standard neoclassical
requirement that the marginal revenue product of an incumbent worker equal her wage.


2.3     Rent Sharing

      Subtracting equations (1) and (2), we arrive the following expression for the incumbent wage premium:

                                                                   η 0
                                                    wIj − wmj =       c (N j /I j ) .                                                  (3)
                                                                  1+η

      Incumbents are paid a premium over new hires in proportion to their marginal training/recruiting costs c0 (N j /I j ).
When c0 (N j /I j ) = 0, incumbent workers are replaceable. In this case, the firm views new hires and incumbents as
                                                                          η
perfect substitutes and pays them equivalently. The fraction             1+η   ∈ [0, 1] plays the role of the exploitation index in
classic monopsony models (Manning, 2011) where η would correspond to a firm-specific labor supply elasticity.
As the retention elasticity η approaches infinity, incumbents capture their full (marginal) replacement cost in the
form of elevated wages. As η tends towards zero, the outside options of incumbents deteriorate, allowing the firm
to retain them at the market wage wmj and capture the rents in the employment relationship.
      Plugging (3) into (1) yields an expression for the incumbent wage that is useful for motivating our empirical
rent-sharing specifications:

                                                            1            η
                                                 wIj =         wmj +        MRPj                                                       (4)
                                                         1+η           1+η
                                                       = (1 − θ ) wmj + θ MRPj


where θ =      η
              1+η .   Workers are paid a θ -weighted average of their marginal productivity and the market wage wmj .
                    wIj −wmj
Rewriting θ =      MRPj −wmj   illustrates the link to models with Nash wage bargaining in which θ gives the fraction
of marginal match surplus paid out in wage premia.2 As the retention elasticity η increases, θ rises and workers
capture more of the surplus.
      The parameter θ has a clear causal interpretation: a dollar increase in marginal productivity yields a θ -cent pay
increase for incumbents. It is useful to review briefly why marginal products can vary in this model. In the special
case where incumbents are replaceable (c0 (N j /I j ) = 0), (1) implies the marginal revenue product would be pinned
   2 Stoleand Zwiebel (1996) propose a multilateral bargaining framework where workers and firms also bargain over infra-marginal
products. This bargaining concept is embedded in a search and matching framework by Acemoglu and Hawkins (2014). Given our
assumption of a constant product demand elasticity, the wage rule that results from the Stole-Zwiebel approach is analogous to equation (4)
with the modification that the weights on the reservation wage and marginal revenue product need not sum to 1.




                                                                    7
to the market wage wmj . Hence, there would be no scope for fluctuations in MRPj other than due to shifts in the
amenity vector A j . But when incumbents are not replaceable, MRPj will also respond to fluctuations in “revenue
productivity” Pj0 T j . As described below, our empirical approach uses variation in patent allowances to isolate the
variation in MRPj that arises due to exogenous fluctuations in revenue productivity.


2.4     Estimating pass-through

      We can operationalize equation (4) by plugging in the definition of MRPj to get:
                                                                       
                                                                      1 Pj Q j
                                       wIj   =   (1 − θ ) wmj + θ  1−
                                                                      ε   Lj
                                                         m
                                             = (1 − θ ) w j + πS j .                                              (5)


The last line of this expression is a standard empirical rent-sharing specification relating incumbent wages at the
                                                        PQ
firm to a measure of average labor productivity S j = Lj j j , which we refer to as gross surplus per worker.
    The parameter π = θ 1 − ε1 governs pass-through of gross surplus to wages and can be thought of as the labor
                                

market analog of cost-price pass-through coefficients often used to study imperfect competition in product markets
(Goldberg and Hellerstein 2013; Weyl and Fabinger 2013; Gorodnichenko and Talavera 2017). The term 1 − ε1
                                                                                                                 

is an adjustment factor that converts average labor productivity to marginal labor productivity. While π is our
primary parameter of interest, we also explore calibrations of ε and consider the implied values of the structural
rent-sharing coefficient θ .
      Card et al. (2018) review several studies that use panel methods to assess the relation between the wage growth
of incumbent workers and fluctuations in various measures of firm surplus. Equation (5) suggests such specifi-
cations will suffer from omitted variables bias whenever surplus fluctuations are correlated with changes in the
market wage wmj . For example, shocks to firm productivity may contain a market-wide component. If all firms
in a market become more productive, market wages will rise. This possibility would lead to a misattribution of
market-level wage adjustments to rent-sharing and a corresponding upward bias in OLS estimates of π.
      A different class of potential biases arises from unobserved shocks to the amenity value of a firm. Suppose the
work environment at a firm improves and leads to a decrease in wmj . This improvement will lead, ceteris paribus,
to an increase in firm scale, which will tend to depress average labor productivity through drops in the product
                                                                                                         1−1/ε −1/ε
price Pj (Q j ). Consequently, such shocks will induce a positive covariance between wmj and S j = P0 T j     Lj
and hence lead to an overstatement of the degree of rent-sharing. However, unobserved amenity shocks could also
exert a direct effect on productivity. For example, a recent empirical literature finds that variation in management
practices affects both worker morale and productivity (Bloom and Van Reenen 2007; Bender et al. 2018). A
new manager who motivates workers could plausibly raise total factor productivity T j while lowering the market

                                                             8
wage wmj via increases in the amenity value A j of the firm. This possibility would lead to an under-estimate of
rent-sharing as the productivity shock is accompanied by an unobserved amenity shock.


2.5     Instrumenting with Patent Decisions

      To circumvent these endogeneity problems, we use the initial decision of the US Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO) on a firm’s first patent application as an instrument for the firm’s surplus.3 Patents could influence
average labor productivity through two channels, both of which provide valid identifying variation. First, a patent
grant could raise a firm’s product price intercept Pj0 by creating a barrier to competition by rival firms.4 Second, a
patent grant could raise a firm’s TFP T j by making it profitable for the firm to implement the patented technology.
      We document below that within observable strata, the USPTO’s initial decision on a given patent application
is unrelated to trends in firm performance, implying that initial patent decisions are as good as randomly assigned
with respect to counterfactual changes in firm outcomes. Consistent with this evidence, we also document below
that it is hard to predict initial decisions using firm characteristics in the year of application. Finally, we assume
that patent decisions are uncorrelated with fluctuations in the market wage wmj . In the model above, this condition
is sufficient to ensure that instrumenting S j with the patent allowance isolates exogenous variation in revenue
productivity Pj0 T j and identifies the pass-through parameter π.
      The assumption that patent decisions are uncorrelated with fluctuations in wmj merits further discussion in our
setting as several violations of this condition are conceivable, most of which are not explicitly modeled in the above
framework. A first concern is that patent allowances might lead the firm to demand more hours from workers, in
which case wmj would rise. However, we would expect this to be a short-run phenomenon that dissipates as the
firm expands towards its new target size, and we find no evidence of such wage dynamics in the data. A different
sort of violation would occur if patents shift expectations about firm growth and therefore about the future earnings
growth of workers. This sort of mechanism arises in dynamic wage posting models with offer matching (Postel-
Vinay and Robin 2002) and would imply that wmj falls in response to an allowance. However, such a violation
would also imply that initial allowances should raise the wage growth of new hires, an assertion for which we find
no empirical support.
      A second concern is that initial allowance decisions might be geographically correlated, in which case in-
strumenting with initial allowances might pick up market-wide fluctuations in wmj . We show below however that
   3 Van  Reenen (1996) also investigated patents as a source of variation, but found them to be a relatively weak predictor of firm profits
in his sample of firms (see his footnote 11). This finding is in keeping with the notion that most patents generate little ex-post value to the
firm (Pakes 1986), motivating our focus on ex-ante valuable patent applications as described in Section 5. A natural alternative empirical
strategy in our setting would be to use the leniency of the patent examiner assigned to review the patent application as an instrument, as in
Sampat and Williams (forthcoming). Unfortunately, this strategy reduces the precision of our estimates to the point of being uninformative.
    4 Perhaps the classic example is patents on branded small molecule pharmaceuticals. In the absence of patents, many branded pharma-

ceuticals would experience near-immediate entry of generic versions which compete with branded pharmaceuticals at close to marginal
cost prices.


                                                                      9
the intra-class correlation of initial patent allowances within geography and sector is indistinguishable from zero,
which suggests that allowances are best thought of as truly firm-specific shocks. We also find no impact of patent
allowances on the earnings of workers in their first year of employment with a firm, which should provide a
reasonable proxy of the market wage wmj . Since all of the above concerns involve correlations between patent
allowances and fluctuations in the market wage wmj , this provides a strong corroboration of the exogeneity of the
patent allowance instrument.
      A final concern is that firms may respond to patent decisions by changing the composition of their workforce.
By leveraging the panel structure of our data, we can directly investigate whether firms change their composition
of new hires (or separations) in response to patent allowances. We also address this concern by analyzing the wage
growth of incumbent workers, which by construction differences out any selection on time invariant characteristics.
In practice, we find that such adjustments have little effect on our estimates of the pass-through parameter π.



3      Data and Descriptive Statistics

      To conduct our empirical analysis, we construct a novel linkage of several administrative databases, which
provides us with panel data on the patent filings, patent allowance decisions, and outcomes of US firms and
workers.


3.1     USPTO Patent Applications

      We begin with public-use administrative data on the universe of patent applications submitted to the US Patent
and Trademark Office (USPTO) since late 2000.5 We link these published US patent applications with several
USPTO administrative datasets. Because published patent applications are not required to list the assignee (owner)
of the patent, approximately 50% of published patent applications were originally missing assignee names. We
worked with the USPTO to gain access to a separate public-use administrative data file that allows us to fill in
assignee names for most of these applications. The public-use USPTO PAIR (Patent Application Information
Retrieval) administrative data records the full correspondence between the applicant and the USPTO, allowing us
to infer the timing and content of the USPTO’s initial decision on each patent application as well as other measures
of USPTO and applicant behavior. Details on these and the other patent-related data files that we use are included
in Appendix A.6
    5 The start date of our sample is determined by the American Inventors Protection Act of 1999, which required publication of nearly the

full set of US patent applications filed on or after 29 November 2000. We say “nearly” because our sample misses patent applications that
opt out of publication; Graham and Hegde (2014) use internal USPTO records to estimate that around eight percent of USPTO applications
opt out of publication.
    6 Please refer to the Online Appendix for all appendix materials.




                                                                   10
      Panel A of Table 1 describes the construction of our patent application sample. Our full sample consists of
the roughly 3.6 million USPTO patent applications filed on or after 29 November 2000 that were published by
31 December 2013; we restrict attention to applications filed on or before 31 December 2010 in order to limit the
impact of censoring. We drop around 400,000 applications that are missing assignee names and therefore cannot
be matched to business tax records. We also limit our sample to standard (so-called “utility”) patents.7
      To focus on a subset of firms for which patent allowances are most likely to induce a meaningful shift in firm
outcomes, we make several restrictions that aim to limit our sample to first-time patent applicants. First, we drop
so-called “child” applications that are derived from previous patent applications. Second, we retain the earliest
published patent application observed for each assignee in our sample.8 Finally, we exclude assignees which we
observe to have had patent grants prior to the start of our published patent application sample.9 Ideally, we would
exclude assignees that had patent applications (not just patent grants) prior to the start of our published patent
application sample, but unsuccessful patent applications filed before 29 November 2000 are not publicly available.
These restrictions leave a sample of around 96,000 patent applications, which we then attempt to match to our US
Treasury business tax files.


3.2     Treasury Tax Files

      We link US Treasury business tax filings with worker-level filings. Annual business tax returns record firm
outcomes from Form 1120 (C-Corporations), 1120S (S-Corporations), and 1065 (Partnership) forms, and cover
the years 1997-2014. The key variables that we draw from the business tax return filings are revenue, value added,
EBITD (earnings before interest, taxes, and deductions), and labor compensation; each of these is defined in more
detail in Appendix A.
      We link these business tax returns to worker-level W2 and 1099 filings in order to measure employment and
compensation for employees (e.g., wage bill) and independent contractors, respectively, at the firm-year level. The
relevant variables are defined in more detail in Appendix A. We winsorize all monetary values in the tax files from
above and below at the five percent level, which is standard when working with the population of US Treasury
business tax files (see, for example, DeBacker et al. 2016; Yagan 2015). Since our analysis focuses on per-worker
outcomes, we winsorize outcomes on a per-worker basis.
      To distinguish employment and compensation for inventors and non-inventors, we use Bell et al.’s (2019)
    7 Utility patents, also known as “patents for invention,” comprise approximately 90% of USPTO-issued patent documents in recent years;

see https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/patdesc.htm for details.
    8 Because USPTO procedure assigns application numbers sequentially, we break ties in the cases in which a given assignee submits

multiple applications on the same day by taking the smallest application number.
    9 We search for such patent grants going back to 1976, the date with electronic patent grant records are most easily available. Given the

firms in our sample, the likelihood that a firm had a patent granted prior to 1976 seemed sufficiently small not to warrant a more extensive
attempt to match to earlier patent grants.



                                                                    11
merge of inventors listed in patent applications to W2 filings. Inventors are defined as individuals ever appearing
in the Bell et al. (2019) patent application-W2 linkage, rather than individuals listed as inventors on the specific
patent application relevant to a given firm in our sample.


3.3     Linkage Procedure

      We build on the name standardization routine used by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)’s
Patent Data Project (https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/) to implement a novel firm
name-based merge of patent assignees to firm names in the US Treasury business tax files. Specifically, we
standardize the firm names in both the patent data and (separately) the US Treasury business tax files in order
to infer that, e.g., “ALCATEL-LUCENT U.S.A., INC.,” “ALCATEL-LUCENT USA, INCORPORATED,” and
“ALCATEL-LUCENT USA INC” are all in fact the same firm. We then conduct a fuzzy merge of standardized
assignee names to standardized firm names in the business tax files using the SoftTFIDF algorithm based on a
Jaro-Winkler distance measure. This merge is described in more detail in Appendix A.
      To assess the quality of our merge, we conduct two quality checks: first, we validate against a hand-coded
sample; and second, we validate against the inventor-based linkage of Bell et al. (2019). As described in Appendix
A, the results of these validation exercises suggest that our merge is of relatively high quality, with type I and II
error rates on the order of five percent.
      Panel B of Table 1 describes our linkage between the USPTO patent applications data and the US Treasury
business tax files. Of the around 96,000 patent applications we attempt to match to the US Treasury business tax
files, we match around 40,000 patent applications. The USPTO estimates that in 2015 approximately 49.6% of
USPTO patent grants were filed by US-based assignees, which implies our match rate to US-tax-paying entities is
on the order of 83%.10 These 40,000 patent applications are matched to around 40,000 standardized firm names in
the US Treasury business tax files, which correspond to 82,000 firms (employer identification numbers, or EINs).
      We build the analysis sample from these 82,000 EINs in four steps. Our goal here is to construct a unique and
well-defined match between patent applications and firms in a subset of firms for which patent allowances are most
likely to induce a meaningful shift in firm outcomes.11 First, we attempt to restrict our post-merge tax analysis
sample to first-time patent applicants by retaining the earliest-published patent application observed for each EIN,
and by excluding EINs which we observe to have had patent grants prior to the start of our published patent
application sample. Second, in cases in which there are multiple EINs for a standardized name in the tax files, we
keep the EIN with largest revenue in the year that the patent application was filed. Third, we restrict attention to
  10 These USPTO estimates, which are based on the reported location of patent assignees, are available here:   https://www.uspto.gov/
web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/own_cst_utl.htm.
  11 In Appendix B, we describe these sample restrictions in more detail.




                                                                   12
“active” firms, defined as EINs that have a positive number of employees in the year of application and non-zero,
non-missing total income or total deductions in the year the patent application was filed and in the three previous
years. This restriction allows us to investigate pre-trends in our outcome variables among economically relevant
firms. Fourth, we limit attention to EINs with less than 100 million in revenue in 2014 USD in the year of patent
application. This step, which eliminates firms in the top centile of the firm size distribution, allows us to avoid
complexities related to the largest multinational companies and focus on firms for whom patent allowance decisions
are more likely to be consequential.12 These restrictions leave us with a sample of 9,732 patent applications, each
uniquely matched to one EIN in the US Treasury business tax files. It is worth noting that focusing on such a small
subset of firms is common in analyses such as ours. For example, Kogan et al. (2017) start with data on 7.8 million
granted patents, which they winnow down to a final sample of 5,801 firms with at least one patent.


3.4     Measuring Surplus

      As described in Card et al. (2018), empirical rent-sharing estimates are often sensitive to a number of measure-
ment issues, the most prominent of which is the choice of rent measure. In keeping with equation (5), we rely on a
gross surplus measure of rent that differs from “match surplus” due to the absence of data on workers’ reservation
wages. Letting Π j denote the firm’s economic profits, the model of Section 2 implies the firm’s total gross surplus
can be written:
                                    S j L j = wmj N j + wIj G wIj I j + Π j +
                                                                 
                                                                                        c (N j /I j ) I j       .
                                              |         {z         } |{z}               | {z }
                                                      wage bill           profits   training/recruiting costs

      To measure this theoretical concept in the tax data, we use the sum of the firm’s W2 earnings in a year and
its earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation (EBITD). Though firms sometimes report negative EBITD, this
surplus measure is usually positive and provides a plausible upper bound on the flow of resources capable of being
captured by workers. Note that this measure is theoretically justified by the presumption that firms do not claim
deductions on training costs; i.e., that EBITD captures the sum Π j + c (N j /I j ) I j .13
      For comparison with past work, we also report results that use a value added measure of surplus. Our approx-
imation to value added comes from line 3 of Form 1120, which deducts from gross sales, returns and allowances,
and the cost of goods sold. This measure suffers from the disadvantage that it may include a number of additional
unobserved firm costs including rents, advertising, and financing fees that that are likely unavailable for capture by
workers.
  12 Statisticsfor firm size distribution are from Smith et al. (2019). Specifically, in the full population of C-corporations, S-corporations,
and Partnerships with positive sales and positive W2 wage bills, $100 million in revenue in 2014 USD falls in the top one percent of firms.
  13 Unlike some other capital expenses and costs related to intangibles, which can be amortized, firms typically can not amortize and deduct

costs related to training. Specifically, section 197 on intangibles includes workforce in place (e.g., “experience, education, or training’”)
and business books and records (e.g., “intangible value of technical manuals, training manuals or programs”) in the list of assets that cannot
be amortized for most firms. See https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p535.pdf for additional details.


                                                                     13
3.5     Summary Statistics

      Table 2 tabulates summary statistics on our firm and worker outcomes in each of two samples: our analysis
sample of matched patent applications/firms (N=9,732), and our sub-sample of matched patent applications/firms
for which the patent applications are in the top quintile of predicted value (N=1,946), which will be defined in the
next section. All summary statistics are as of the year the patent application was filed.
      Panel A documents summary statistics on firm-level outcomes. In our analysis sample, the median firm gen-
erated around three million dollars in revenue, employed 17 workers, and reported roughly $7,000 in EBITD per
worker. Approximately 8% of patent applications were initially allowed. Panel B documents summary statistics
on worker-level outcomes. The median firm in our analysis sample paid $48,000 in annual earnings per W2 em-
ployee, employed a workforce that was approximately 75% male, and issued 2.5% of its W2s to individuals listed
as inventors on at least one patent application. Contract work turns out to be relatively uncommon in this sample,
with 1099s constituting only about 10% of the sum of W2 and 1099 employment for the median firm.


4      Institutional Context: Initial Patent Decisions

      The US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) is responsible for determining which — if any — inventions
claimed in patent applications should be granted a patent. Patentable inventions must be patent-eligible (35 U.S.C.
§101), novel (35 U.S.C. §102), non-obvious (35 U.S.C. §103), useful (35 U.S.C. §101), and the text of the appli-
cation must satisfy the disclosure requirement (35 U.S.C. §112). When patent applications are submitted to the
USPTO, they are routed to a central office which directs the application to an appropriate “art unit” that special-
izes in the technological area of that application. For example, art unit 1671 reviews applications related to the
chemistry of carbon compounds, whereas art unit 3744 reviews applications related to refrigeration. The manager
of the relevant art unit then assigns the application to a patent examiner for review. If the examiner issues an initial
allowance, the inventor can be granted a patent. If the examiner issues an initial rejection, the applicant has the op-
portunity to “revise and resubmit” the application, and the applicant and examiner may engage in many subsequent
rounds of revision (see Williams 2017 for more details).
      Our empirical strategy focuses on contrasting firms that receive an initial allowance to other firms that applied
for a patent but received an initial rejection. Empirically, most patent applications receive an initial decision within
three years of being filed (see Appendix Figure D.1). While some applications that are initially rejected receive
a patent grant relatively quickly, the modal application that is initially rejected is never granted a patent (see
Appendix Figure D.2).
      Because our empirical strategy will contrast firms whose applications are initially allowed to those whose
applications are initially rejected, having some sense of what predicts initial allowance decisions is useful. Table

                                                           14
3 reports least squares estimates of the probability of an initial allowance as a function of firm characteristics in
the year of application. Column (1a) shows that predicting initial allowances is surprisingly difficult. Applications
from firms with more W2 employees are somewhat less likely to be initially allowed, as are those from firms with
higher value added per worker. Jointly, the covariates are statistically significant. Column (1b) adds art unit by
application year fixed effects that control for technology-specific changes over time. This simple addition renders
all baseline covariates statistically insignificant both individually and jointly, which provides some assurance that
initial patent decisions are not strongly dependent on baseline firm performance. Given this empirical evidence,
we proceed by assuming that any remaining selection is on time-invariant firm characteristics that can be captured
by firm fixed effects.
    A separate concern has to do with whether initial allowances are best thought of as idiosyncratic or market-level
shocks. Seminal work by Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson (1993) demonstrated that patent citations are highly
localized geographically. To test whether initial allowances are also geographically clustered, we fit linear random
effects models to the initial allowance decision. Appendix Table D.1 reports intraclass correlations at various levels
of geography before and after subtracting off art unit by application year mean allowance rates. In either case, the
within-state correlation is estimated to be zero, while the correlation within five-digit ZIP codes is quite low (0.06-
0.07) and statistically indistinguishable from zero. These findings indicate that initial allowances are best thought
of as truly idiosyncratic firm-specific shocks that are unlikely to elicit market-wide wage responses.



5    Detecting Valuable Patents

    The value distribution of granted patents is heavily skewed (Pakes 1986), which suggests that low-value patent
applications — if granted — are unlikely to generate meaningful shifts in firm outcomes. Constructing a measure
of the ex-ante value of patent applications enables us to focus our analysis on patent applications that are likely to
induce changes in firm behavior.
    A variety of metrics have been proposed as measures of the value of granted patents, including forward patent
citations (Trajtenberg 1990), patent renewal behavior (Pakes 1986; Schankerman and Pakes 1986; Bessen 2008),
patent ownership reassignments (Serrano 2010), patent litigation (Harhoff, Scherer, and Vopel 2003), and excess
stock market returns (Kogan et al. 2017). These value measures encounter three challenges in our empirical context.
First, these measures are only defined for granted patents, whereas we would like to take advantage of data on patent
applications, including those that are ultimately unsuccessful. Second, most of these measures arguably correspond
to a measure of social value — or social spillovers, in the sense of social value minus private value — whereas
we are more interested in measuring firms’ private value of a patent. This issue arises most sharply with forward
patent citations, which are typically used as a measure of spillovers (e.g., Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen


                                                          15
2013). Third, all of these measures are defined ex-post: citations, renewals, reassignments, and litigation are often
measured many years after the initial patent award. But in our context — as in Kogan et al. (2017) — what is
arguably more relevant is the expected private value of the patent at the time of the patent application or patent
grant.
    To this end, we build on the recent analysis of Kogan et al. (2017) (henceforth, KPSS), who measure the
high-frequency response of stock prices around the date of patent grant announcements to estimate the value of
patent grants that are awarded to publicly traded companies. We estimate a simple statistical model designed to
extrapolate their estimates to non-publicly traded companies and to non-granted patent applications in our analysis
sample.
    We model the KPSS patent value ξ j for each firm-patent application j in our data as obeying the following
conditional mean restriction:
                                                 E [ξ j |X j , A j ] = exp X j0 δ + νA j ,
                                                                                        


where X j denotes a vector of baseline firm and patent application covariates and A j denotes the art unit to
which the application was assigned. The exponential functional form underlying this specification is designed
to accommodate the fact that the KPSS values are non-negative and heavily skewed. Because we have, on av-
erage, only 2.3 applications with non-missing ξ j per art unit, some penalization is required to avoid overfit-
ting. Accordingly, we treat the art unit effects {νa } as i.i.d. draws from a normal distribution with unknown
variance σν2 rather than fixed parameters to be estimated. The model is fit via a random effects Poisson maxi-
mum likelihood procedure. As described in Appendix C, this procedure exploits the conditional mean restriction
E [ξa |Xa ] = exp (Xa0 δ + ν) ωa (ν) dν where ξa is the vector of KPSS values in an art unit a, Xa is the corresponding
              R

vector of baseline application and firm predictors, and ωa (ν) is the posterior distribution of νa given the observed
data (ξa , Xa ).
    To maximize statistical power, we relax the sample restriction which focused our main analysis on “active”
firms, defined as EINs that have a positive number of employees in the year of application and non-zero, non-
missing total income or total deductions in the year the patent application was filed and in the three previous years.
In our main analysis, that restriction allowed us to investigate pre-trends in our outcome variables. By relaxing
that restriction here and including those firms in our Poisson estimation, we both gain precision and we reduce the
potential overfitting problem over and above the random effects procedure described above. In practice, the full
sample size for our Poisson estimation is 596, of which 159 observations satisfy the active firm sample restriction.14
    Table 4 reports the Poisson parameter estimates. Applications submitted to more countries (“patent family
size”) tend to be of higher value, as do applications with more claims and applications submitted by firms with
  14 Recall that active firms are defined as EINs with non-zero/non-missing total income or total deductions in the application year and in

the three previous years, a positive number of employees in the application year, and revenue less than 100 million in 2014 USD.


                                                                   16
larger revenues.15 We also document substantial variability of patent value across art units: a standard deviation
increase in the art unit random effect is estimated to raise mean patent values by e0.24 = 127 log points. This
variability finding is of interest in its own right as it suggests that patent decisions involve much higher stakes in
some USPTO art units than others.
    We use our estimates of the parameters (δ , σν ) to compute Empirical Bayes predictions ξˆ j of ξ j for every
patent application in our analysis sample, including those that lack a KPSS value either because the application
is assigned to a privately held firm, or because the application is never granted a patent.16 Empirically, these
predictions are highly accurate: a least squares fit of ξ j to ξˆ j yields a slope of 1.12 and an R2 of 68%. Figure 1
shows that binned average KPSS values track the Empirical Bayes predictions very closely. Appendix Table D.2
lists mean predicted values by subject matter area.
    The ultimate test of ξˆ j is whether it predicts treatment effect heterogeneity: that is, do allowances of patent
applications of higher predicted value result in larger shifts in firm outcomes? To investigate this question, we fit a
series of interacted difference-in-differences models of the following form:
                                                                 "                              #
                                                                     5 
                                                                       ˆ
                                Y jt = α j + κt,k( j) + Post jt · ∑ sb ξ j · (ψ̃b + τ̃b · IA j ) + r jt                                   (6)
                                                                   b=1


where Y jt is an outcome for firm (EIN) j in year t, α j are firm fixed effects, and κt,k( j) are calendar year fixed
effects that vary by art-unit/application year cell k ( j). The variable Post jt is an indicator for having received an
initial patent decision, IA j is an indicator for whether the patent application is initially allowed, and {sb (.)}5b=1 is
a set of basis functions defining a natural cubic spline with five knots.17 Intuitively, this specification compares
initially allowed and initially rejected applications in the same art unit by application year cell, before and after the
date of the initial decision. The spline interactions allow the effects of an initial allowance to vary flexibly with the
predicted patent value ξˆ j .
    Of primary interest is the “dose-response” function d (x; τ̃) ≡ ∑5b=1 sb (x) τ̃b , which gives the effect of an initial
allowance for a patent with predicted value x. Figure 2 plots our estimates of this function for a grid of values
x when Y jt is either surplus per worker or wage bill per worker. In both cases, we find evidence of an S-shaped
  15 The   number of countries to which an application was submitted, often referred to as patent “family size,” is defined as a set of patent
applications filed with different patenting authorities (e.g., the US, Europe, Japan) that refer to the same invention; work starting with
Putnam (1996) has argued that firms should be willing to file more privately valuable patents in a larger number of countries. Patents list
“claims” over specific pieces of intellectual property, and work starting with Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001) has argued that patents with
a larger number of claims may be more privately valuable. See Appendix A for details on both these measures.
   16 In cases where no valid KPSS values are present in the entire art unit, we form our prediction by imputing an art unit random effect of

zero.
   17 The natural cubic spline is a cubic b-spline that imposes continuous second derivatives everywhere but allows the third derivative to

jump at the knots (see Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2016 for discussion). Following Harrell (2001), we space knots equally at the 5th ,
27.5th , 50th , 72.5th , and 95th percentiles of the distribution of patent values, which correspond to dollar values of roughly $0.1M, $0.7M,
$1.7M, $4.1M, and $19.0M 1982 USD respectively. The spline is constrained to be linear below the 5th and above the 95th percentiles.



                                                                     17
response: impacts of initial allowances on both wages and surplus are small and statistically insignificant at low
predicted value levels, corroborating both the exclusion and random assignment assumptions underlying our re-
search design. Patents with ex-ante predicted patent values above $5 million in 1982 USD — roughly the 80th
percentile of the predicted value distribution — have larger, statistically significant treatment effects that increase
rapidly before stabilizing at values near $12 million in 1982 USD.18
      Given the S-shaped pattern of treatment effect heterogeneity documented in Figure 2, our empirical analysis
pools the bottom four quintiles together and focuses on estimating the impacts of patents in the top quintile of
ex-ante predicted patent value. Reassuringly, Columns (2a) and (2b) of Table 3 show that initial allowances are
equally difficult to predict with baseline characteristics within the top quintile of predicted value, especially after
art unit by application year fixed effects have been included. Likewise, Columns (3a)-(4b) of Appendix Table D.1
show that among top-quintile applications, initial allowances continue not to exhibit spatial correlation.



6      Reduced Form Estimates

      The treatment effect heterogeneity documented in Figure 2 demonstrates that firms experience economically
and statistically significant increases in profitability and wages when valuable patent applications are allowed.
However, a natural concern is that these findings could reflect pre-existing trends rather than causal effects of the
patent decisions themselves. To investigate this concern, we estimate a series of “event study” specifications of the
following form:
                                                                   "                                     #
                              Y jt   = α j + κt,k( j) + Q5 j ·         ∑   Dmjt   · (ψ5,m + τ5,m · IA j )                         (7)
                                                                   m∈M
                                                           "                                         #
                                         + (1 − Q5 j ) ·       ∑   Dmjt   · (ψ<5,m + τ<5,m · IA j ) + r jt
                                                           m∈M


where Q5 j is an indicator for the firm’s patent application being in the top quintile of predicted ex-ante value, Dmjt
is an indicator for firm j’s decision having occurred m years ago, and the set M = {−5, −4, −3, −2, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
defines the five-year horizon over which we study dynamics.19 The coefficients {ψ̂5,m , ψ̂<5,m }m∈M summarize
trends in mean outcomes relative to the date of an initial decision, which may differ by the firm’s ex-ante patent
value quintile. Of primary interest are the coefficients {τ̂5,m , τ̂<5,m }m∈M , which summarize the differential trajec-
tory of mean outcomes for initially allowed and initially rejected firms by time relative to the initial decision for
top-quintile and lower-quintile value observations, respectively.
    18 We
        reference 1982 dollars because those are the units used by KPSS.
    19 We“bin” the endpoint dummies so that D5jt is an indicator for the decision having occurred five or more years ago and D−5
                                                                                                                              jt is an
indicator for the decision being five or more years in the future.



                                                                   18
    Figure 3 plots the coefficients {τ̂5,m , τ̂<5,m }m∈M from equation (7) for our main firm outcome variable, surplus.
The estimated coefficients illustrate that, among firms with patent applications in the top quintile of the predicted
value distribution, firms whose applications are initially allowed exhibit similar trends in surplus per worker to
those whose applications are initially rejected in the years prior to the initial decision. However, surplus per
worker rises differentially for allowed firms in the wake of an initial allowance, and remains elevated afterwards.20
Firms with lower predicted value applications, by contrast, exhibit no detectable response of surplus per worker
to an initial allowance. Figure 4 documents similar patterns in our main worker outcome variable, wage bill per
worker. As expected, the wage response to an initial allowance is muted relative to the surplus response; the ratio
of these two impacts provides a crude estimate of the pass-through coefficient π of roughly one-third.
    While wages and surplus respond rather immediately to top-quintile initial allowances, Figure 5 reveals that
firm size (as measured by the log number of employees) responds more slowly, taking roughly three years to scale
to its new level. The fact that earnings impacts remain stable over this horizon casts doubt on the possibility that
the impacts in Figure 3 are driven primarily by an increase in hours worked (which we cannot observe in tax data)
rather than an increase in hourly wages. The nearly immediate response of surplus and wages to initial allowances
may signal that our panel of relatively small innovative firms was initially credit constrained. Evidence from
Farre-Mensa, Hegde, and Ljungqvist (2017), who document that patent grants are strongly predictive of access
to venture capital financing, corroborates this view. Access to venture capital and other forms of financing is a
plausible additional channel through which patent decisions could quickly affect the marginal revenue product of
labor and consequently worker wages.21
    As background for interpreting the magnitude of these results, Figure 6 documents that an initial allowance
raises the probability of having the patent application granted by roughly 50% in the year after the decision, with
gradual declines afterwards. The probability of receiving a patent grant jumps by less than 100% for two reasons.
First, some initially allowed applications are not pursued by applicants, possibly because the assignee went out of
business while awaiting the initial decision, or because the applicant learned new information since filing which led
them to believe that the patent was not commercially valuable. Second, as described in Section 4, many initially
denied applications reapply and eventually have their applications allowed. Our estimates in Figure 6 suggest that
the impact of initial allowances on patent grants is somewhat smaller for higher-value patents, perhaps because they
are more likely to be approved shortly after a rejection; a pooled difference-in-difference estimate of the impact
  20 In the presence of employee turnover, the total number of W2 and 1099 filings over the course of a year is likely to overstate employment

at any point in time. This could lead to a (small) downward bias in our estimates of employment impacts of patent allowances since retention
rates increase (separation rates decline), thus also impacting “per W2 worker” outcomes. These effects are likely quite small, so in practice
we are not concerned about this as a source of bias.
   21 As a robustness check we fit a version of (7) allowing linear interactions of D0 and IA · D0 with the week of the patent decision. We
                                                                                     jt      j   jt
find that the contemporaneous surplus impacts we observe are increasing in the number of days that have elapsed since the initial decision.
We find no contemporaneous effect of initial patent allowances decided in late December on either surplus or wages, which reassures us
that the effect is not abnormally immediate.


                                                                     19
on the grant probability of high-value patents is approximately one third. Hence, the impact of high-value patent
grants on firm outcomes is likely to be roughly three times the impact of an initial allowance on firm outcomes,
though it is possible that allowances influence firm outcomes independent of grant status if allowances relieve
credit constraints before a patent has actually been granted. In what follows, we continue to report the reduced
form impacts of allowances as our ultimate goal is to instrument for surplus rather than for patent grants.


6.1     Impacts on Firm Averages

      Table 5 pools pre- and post-application years and quantifies the average effects displayed in the event study
figures by fitting simplified difference-in-differences models of the following form:


                                  Y jt   = α j + κt,k( j) + Q5 j · Post jt · (ψ5 + τ5 · IA j )                               (8)

                                              + (1 − Q5 j ) · Post jt · (ψ<5 + τ<5 · IA j ) + r jt .


The parameters reported in Table 5 are τ5 and τ<5 , which respectively govern the effects of top-quintile and lower-
quintile value patents being initially allowed.
      Column 1 of Table 5 documents that initial allowances have no effect on the probability of firm survival, as
proxied by the presence of at least one W2 employee. Given this result, the remainder of the columns in this table
focus on outcomes conditional on firm survival as measured by the presence of at least one W2 employee (hence
the smaller sample sizes in subsequent columns). Column 2 of Table 5 reports the impact of an initial allowance
on the log of firm size, as measured by the number of W2 employees at the firm.22 Having a top-quintile patent
allowed leads the firm to expand by roughly 22%. Notably, initial allowances of patents with lower predicted value
have no detectable impact on firm survival, firm size, or any other outcome that we examine; these results suggest
that differential trends for initially allowed and initially rejected patents are unlikely to confound our analysis.
      An allowance of a high-value patent application is associated with roughly $37,000 in additional revenue per
worker (Column 3 of Table 5) and roughly $16,000 in value added per worker (Column 4 of Table 5). EBITD
per worker rises by roughly $9,100 (Column 5 of Table 5), which we interpret as income to firm owners, while
wage bill per employee rises by roughly $3,700 (Column 6 of Table 5). Our surplus measure, which sums EBITD
and wage bill, rises by $12,400 per worker (Column 7 of Table 5).23 As described in Section 3, we interpret our
estimated effects on surplus as the impact on total operating cash flow at the firm. In this paper, our central interest
is in estimating how this surplus measure is divided between workers and firm owners.
      Table 5 also reports impacts on various measures of labor compensation. A successful top-quintile patent
  22 We work with logarithms for firm size because this variable is not winsorized and is very heavily skewed.
  23 The sum of the per-worker impacts on EBITD and wage bill does not exactly match the impact on surplus per worker because the
variables are winsorized separately.


                                                                 20
application is associated with an increase in firm-level deductions for labor-related expenses of around $3,900
(Column 8 of Table 5), which is roughly comparable to what we found for wage and salary compensation based
on W2 wage bills. On the other hand, pooling W2 earnings with 1099 earnings yields an impact of only $2,800
per worker (Column 9 of Table 5). In percentage terms, these impacts are fairly close: labor compensation per W2
rises by roughly 7.1%, while W2 + 1099 earnings per W2 rise by 5.6%. However, these results suggest that 1099
compensation is, if anything, less responsive to shocks than W2 wages and salaries.
      Finally, the last column of Table 5 reports impacts on a measure of the average individual income tax burden
per worker.24 An initial allowance of a high-value patent is estimated to yield $770 of additional tax revenue per
worker. Although this figure is statistically indistinguishable from zero, the point estimate implies an effective
marginal tax rate of 21% on the $3,700 of extra W2 earnings reported in Column 6 of Table 5, which is roughly
the average US marginal tax rate found in TAXSIM (see Feenberg and Coutts 1993) over our sample period.25
In percentage terms, an initial allowance of a high-value patent raises tax revenue per worker by 4.3% — slightly
below the proportional impact on W2 earnings per worker. This finding suggests the presence of an important
fiscal externality between corporate tax treatment of innovation and income tax revenue.26
      Appendix Table D.3 repeats the above impact analysis on the subset of “closely held” firms registered as
partnerships or S-corporations. Because these businesses rarely offer stock compensation, wage responses are
likely to provide a more comprehensive measure of rent sharing in this subsample (see Smith et al. 2019). Among
closely-held firms we find somewhat larger impacts on revenue, value added, and EBITD per worker accompanied
by commensurately large impacts on average wages and labor compensation. In our pooled sample the ratio of the
impact on wage bill per worker to the impact on surplus per worker is 29 cents, whereas the ratio at closely-held
firms is 27 cents; the close similarity of these two estimates suggests that the inability to offer stock options does
not dramatically alter the pass-through from firm-specific shocks to worker wages. Appendix Table D.4 shows that
patent allowances also have similar effects on firms in the top and bottom half of the distribution of initial firm
sizes.


6.2      Impacts on Workforce Composition

      A difficulty with interpreting impacts on firm-level aggregates is that firms may alter the skill mix of their
employees in response to shocks, in which case changes in wages could simply reflect compositional changes
  24 Our  measure, which is the main tax variable in the databank (the main panel dataset used by researchers using the US Treasury tax
files), captures “tentative” tax burden before accounting for the Alternative Minimum Tax. It is not available in a small number of cases,
which is why Column 10 has slightly fewer observations than the per W2 worker columns.
   25 See http://users.nber.org/~taxsim/allyup/ally.html for annual estimates.
   26 One specific implication of this finding is that patents influence the revenue raised from both business and individual income taxes.

Consequently, so-called “patent box” proposals, which are designed to exempt the rents associated with patent grants from business taxes,
are likely also to impact the revenue collected from individual income taxes.



                                                                   21
rather than changes in the compensation of similar employees. Van Reenen (1996, pp. 216-217) provided a
back-of-the-envelope calculation suggesting that compositional changes were unlikely to be a major concern in his
sample. In Table 6 we directly investigate the possibility of such compositional changes using our link of W2’s to
EINs.
      Columns 1 and 2 of Table 6 reveal that neither the share of employees who are women nor the share of
employees who are inventors changes appreciably in response to an allowance. We also find little evidence that
the quality of new hires (“entrants”), as proxied by their earnings in the year prior to hiring (Column 3 of Table
6), rises in response to an initial patent allowance. Likewise, the earnings of those workers who choose to separate
from the firm appear to be unaffected by the allowance (Column 4 of Table 6).
      Examining “firm stayers” who were present in the year of application and continued to be employed by the
firm provides a different window into potential changes in workforce composition. We find no appreciable effect
on the application year earnings of stayers (Column 5 of Table 6), suggesting little change in the quality of retained
workers. Finally, the average age of W2 employees drops by roughly a year in response to a valuable patent
allowance (Column 6 of Table 6), which is in keeping with our finding that firms grow in response to valuable
allowances and the fact that job mobility declines with age (Farber 1994).
      Columns 7 and 8 report impacts on a pair of indices of worker “quality.” Each index gives the firm’s average
in that year of the predicted log earnings of its employees. The first index forms predictions from a regression
of individual log W2 earnings on a quartic in age fully interacted with gender and inventor status plus controls
for tax year fixed effects (which are not used to form the prediction). The second index adds a polynomial in
workers’ earnings on the previous job as a predictor along with an indicator for whether this is the worker’s first
job. Impacts on both quality measures are statistically indistinguishable from zero. Taken together, these results
provide no evidence of skill upgrading responses and hint that mild skill downgrading (primarily through age
declines) is a more likely possibility.


6.3     Impacts on Within-Firm Inequality

      Figure 7 analyzes the impact of initial allowances on various measures of within-firm inequality. The under-
lying estimates used to construct these figures are reported in Appendix Tables D.5 and D.6. Consistent with the
literature on gender differences in rent-sharing (e.g., Black and Strahan 2001; Card, Cardoso, and Kline 2016), we
find that initial allowances exacerbate the gender earnings gap. While male earnings rise by roughly $5,900 (or
roughly 9%; Column 1 of Appendix Table D.5) in response to a valuable patent allowance, female earnings appear
unresponsive to initial allowances (Column 2 of Appendix Table D.5). Among firms that employ both genders,
the gender earnings gap increases by roughly $6,900 in response to a valuable initial allowance, or roughly 25%



                                                         22
(Column 3 of Appendix Table D.5).
      The earnings gap between inventors and non-inventors also widens in response to an initial allowance. Column
4 of Appendix Table D.5 shows that the earnings of inventors rise by roughly $16,900 in response to an initial
allowance. The earnings of non-inventors rise by only around $2,200. Focusing on firms that employ both inventors
and non-inventors, we find that the inventor-non inventor earnings gap increases by roughly $14,900 in response to
a valuable initial allowance, or roughly 17% (Column 6 of Appendix Table D.5). The gender and inventor gaps are
overlapping, but not identical phenomena. Figure 7 shows that the earnings of non-inventor males rise by roughly
$4,000 — less than all males, but more than all non-inventors.
      Another important within-firm contrast is between firm officers and other workers. All US businesses are
required to list officer pay separately from the pay of non-officers when filing taxes. Officers are employees
who have the authority to delegate tasks and to hire employees for the jobs that need performing, and typically
correspond to high-level management executives. We find that an initial allowance raises average officer earnings
per W2 by roughly $3,700, enough to explain the entire W2 earnings response reported in Table 5. By contrast, non-
officer earnings exhibit no appreciable response to initial allowances, though we cannot rule out small increases.
As shown in Appendix Table D.8, the components of labor compensation other than officer earnings also fail to
respond to patent allowances, suggesting that profit-sharing and employee benefit programs do not respond strongly
to patents.
      Finally, to provide a composite measure of within-firm earnings inequality, we break workers in each firm-year
with at least four W2s into quartiles based on their annual earnings. We find no effect of an initial allowance on the
average earnings of workers in the bottom three quartiles of the firm-specific earnings distribution, but the mean
earnings of top-quartile workers rises by roughly $8,100 per worker. The pay gap between top and bottom quartile
workers rises by roughly the same amount (Column 9 of Appendix Table D.5).


6.4     Impacts on Earnings by Timing of Worker Entry and Exit

      Our results in Section 6.2 suggested that initial allowances are not associated with major changes in workforce
composition. However, an alternative way to hold constant the quality of the workforce is to study the impact of a
patent allowance on the earnings of a fixed cohort of workers.
      Column 1 of Table 7 documents that the average earnings of the cohort of workers present in the year of the
patent application rise by roughly $4,000 or about 7% in response to an initial allowance. These effects are con-
centrated in the subset of the cohort that remains with the applicant firm (“stayers”), whose earnings are estimated
to rise by $7,800 (around 11%) per year in response to an initial allowance (Column 2 of Table 7). Members of the
application cohort who leave the firm, by contrast, have earnings that fall statistically insignificantly in response to



                                                          23
an initial allowance (Column 3 of Table 7). The concentration of earnings effects on stayers casts some doubt on
reputational (or “career concerns”) explanations for firm-specific wage fluctuations (Harris and Holmström 1982;
Gibbons and Murphy 1992; Holmström 1999), as firm leavers appear to be unable to transport their patent-induced
wage gains to new employers.
    The model of Section 2 interpreted wage fluctuations as rent sharing with incumbent workers. Consistent with
that model, we find an economically small and statistically insignificant effect of initial allowances on the average
earnings of entrants (Column 4 of Table 7). Given our finding in Section 6.2 that the composition of entrants
does not seem to have changed in response to initial allowances, the discrepancy between our measured impacts of
initial allowances on the earnings of entrants and on the earnings of firm stayers suggests that the order in which
workers are hired plays an independent role in the transmission of firm shocks to wages.27 Column 10 of Appendix
Table D.4 shows that the differential earnings response of firm stayers to patent allowances is not confined to small
firms.
    As mentioned in Section 2, some dynamic models (e.g., Postel-Vinay and Robin 2002) can generate a drop
in entry wages in response to a firm productivity increase because wage growth rates increase. Such an elevation
of wage growth rates should eventually impact earnings levels. However, Column 5 of Table 7 reveals a negative
(“wrong-signed”) and statistically insignificant impact of initial allowances on the earnings of workers hired within
the last three years. A shift in growth rates, in conjunction with stable entry wages, should also lead to an escalating
pattern of pooled wage impacts. However, we saw in Figure 4 that wage impacts are roughly stable after the initial
decision. Hence, we conclude there is no evidence of a permanent impact on earnings growth rates.28
    Columns 6 through 8 of Table 7 adjust for possible compositional changes by subtracting from the various
earnings measures an average earnings level of the same group of workers in the year of application, which adjusts
for any time-invariant heterogeneity in worker quality. Column 6 (which can be compared to Column 2) shows that
subtracting the average application year earnings of the firm stayers has little effect on the estimates. The estimates
in Columns 7 and 8 (analogous to Columns 3 and 4) remain statistically equal to zero, suggesting that these other
groups’ earnings are relatively insensitive to the patent decision.
    Finally, Figure 8 reports impacts of high-value initial allowances on the average earnings of various groups of
firm stayers. Initial allowances exacerbate the gender earnings gap among stayers, but the impacts on the earnings
of female stayers are now estimated to be positive at around $2,700. Appendix Table D.7 shows that the impact of
an initial allowance on the earnings gap between male and female firm stayers is roughly $8,900 (around 24%) and
  27 Related work by Buhai et al. (2014) shows that worker seniority exerts an independent effect on wages even after netting out firm-wide

shocks.
  28 We have also directly computed impacts on earnings growth rates for workers hired within the last three years, but this led to highly

imprecise estimates. Specifically, we estimate an impact of negative one percentage point on the three-year growth rate of the earnings of
new hires, with a standard error of seven percentage points.




                                                                   24
statistically distinguishable from zero. As one point of comparison, we find that the earnings of male firm stayers
respond roughly 2.9 times as much as their female colleagues, which is slightly below the corresponding ratio of 4
found by Black and Strahan (2001) in their study of banking deregulation using firm aggregates. Likewise, earnings
of inventor-stayers are estimated to increase by far more than those of non-inventors. However, the estimated
impacts on non-inventor stayers are clearly distinguishable from zero and amount to a roughly 9% increase. This
responsiveness of non-inventor earnings but larger response of inventor earnings echoes the findings presented in
contemporaneous work by Aghion et al. (2018), which estimates that in Finnish firms inventor earnings are around
twice as responsive to patent application filings as are non-inventor earnings.
    The bottom of Figure 8 reports impacts on average earnings by the worker’s position in the firm’s earnings
distribution at the time of the patent application. Large earnings gains, amounting to roughly 6-8% increases, are
present for firm stayers initially in the top half of the firm-specific earnings distribution. In our estimation sample,
firms with high value patents have, in an average year, roughly ten stayers in the top initial earnings quartile and
nine in the third quartile. Because earnings impacts are clearly present among third quartile workers, our pooled
impacts on stayer earnings are unlikely to solely represent the capture of rents by CEOs or other top executives.
By contrast, the earnings response of firm-stayers initially in the bottom half of the distribution exhibit relatively
muted responses, that are statistically indistinguishable from zero.



7    Pass-Through Estimates

    Table 8 reports rent-sharing specifications based on equation (5) that relate earnings outcomes to surplus per
worker. As discussed in Section 3.4, our preferred approach uses the sum of wages and EBITD to measure surplus.
However, for comparison with past literature, we also report in Panel B specifications proxying surplus with our
measure of value added.
    Column 1a of Panel A shows that regressing average wage bill per worker on our preferred measure of surplus
per worker, together with our standard set of (firm and art-unit by application year by calendar year) fixed effects
yields an estimated pass-through coefficient π̂ of 0.16. Instrumenting surplus with the interaction of a post-decision
indicator and an indicator for the application being initially allowed increases the estimated coefficient to 0.29,
implying that workers capture 29 cents of each additional dollar of surplus. Because our first stage F statistic is
near the benchmark of 10, we also provide a weak-identification robust confidence interval, which reveals that we
can reject values of π below 0.1 or above 0.57 at the 10% level.29 For comparison with the prior literature, we also
  29 These confidence intervals, which are two-way clustered on art unit and application year by decision year, employ the minimum

distance variant of the Anderson-Rubin test statistic (Anderson and Rubin, 1949) described in Section 5.1 of Andrews, Stock, and Sun
(2018). The endpoints of the confidence interval are defined by quadratic inequalities, which we solved analytically. We thank Liyang Sun
for suggesting this approach.



                                                                  25
convert our estimates of π to elasticities using the means of surplus and wages among firms with top quintile patent
applications. While OLS estimation yields a pass-through elasticity of 0.19, IV yields an estimated elasticity of
0.35. A plausible candidate explanation for the larger IV estimates is that wages respond more strongly to lower
frequency fluctuations in surplus (Guiso, Pistaferri, and Schivardi 2005); however, in Appendix Table D.9 we
document that using three-year averages of surplus yields only modest increases in OLS estimates of π, which
continue to rise dramatically when instrumented.
    Columns 1a and 1b of Panel B show the corresponding results when value added per worker is treated as the
endogenous variable. This yields lower pass-through coefficients, which is in keeping with the notion that value
added includes a number of extraneous cost components that cannot be captured by workers. In elasticity terms,
however, using value added yields larger elasticities because value added has a greater mean than our preferred
surplus measure. A useful point of comparison comes from Van Reenen (1996) who reports an elasticity of
average wages with respect to quasi-rents of 0.29 (Table III, Row 2). Card et al. (2018) suggest doubling quasi-
rent elasticities to make them roughly comparable to a value added elasticity. Applying this rule of thumb to Van
Reenen’s study yields a value added equivalent elasticity of 0.58, which is slightly above our instrumented value
added elasticity estimate of 0.47. On the other hand, our value added pass-through coefficient of 0.23 is directly
comparable to the firm-level pass-through estimates of Abowd and Lemieux (1993) who report an identical pass-
through coefficient of 0.23 (Table III, Col 8).
    Columns 2 and 3 of Panel A change the dependent variable to be the earnings of various subgroups of workers
employed by most firms.30 OLS estimates indicate that the earnings of men are slightly more sensitive to surplus
fluctuations than are the earnings of workers in general. However, instrumenting surplus with initial allowances
dramatically raises this point estimate, indicating that men capture 53 cents of every dollar of surplus per worker,
roughly 80% higher than was found for the pooled estimate. By contrast, non-inventor earnings responses are
relatively muted, indicating such workers capture only 19 cents of every dollar of surplus per worker.
    Column 4 of Panel A restricts attention to firm stayers, who were present in the year of application. OLS
estimates indicate that stayer earnings are more sensitive to surplus fluctuations in levels (relative to the sample of
all workers), but the elasticity is the same as was found for the average earnings of all workers (0.19). Instrumenting
the surplus changes this conclusion dramatically: stayers are estimated to capture 61 cents of every dollar of
surplus, with a corresponding elasticity of 0.56. Remarkably, the 90% confidence interval for π in this subgroup
ranges from 0.21 to 1, indicating we cannot reject that firm stayers capture the entirety of their replacement costs in
higher earnings. Column 5 adjusts stayer earnings for potential changes in workforce composition by subtracting
off their earnings in the application year, which should difference out any selection on time invariant worker skills.
As expected given our results in Section 6.2, this adjustment has minor effects on the results — lowering, for
  30 Table   8 omits estimates for subgroups (e.g., female inventors) that have sample sizes too small to produce reliable estimates.


                                                                       26
instance, the instrumented pass-through of surplus to earnings from 61 cents to 51 cents on the dollar.
    Finally, Column 6 shows that our pass-through results are not driven exclusively by workers listed as inventors
on patent applications: the instrumented value of π among non-inventor stayers is 0.48. Though the standard errors
for Column 6b are somewhat smaller than the estimates in Column 4b, the first stage is somewhat weaker, which
leads the lower limit of the 90% confidence interval for π among non-inventor stayers to be nearly identical to
that of all stayers. Because most previous studies of rent-sharing do not focus on innovative firms, this estimate is
arguably most comparable to the work reviewed in Card et al. (2018).
    In sum, we find that the earnings of workers, particularly those who were present in the year of application,
are quite sensitive to fluctuations in surplus. On average, a dollar increase in surplus is estimated to yield a 29 cent
increase in worker earnings and a 61 cent increase in the earnings of firm stayers. Using value added instead of our
preferred surplus measure yields uniformly lower pass-through estimates but tends to raise elasticities substantially.
In elasticity terms, our pooled estimates are larger than the bulk of recent studies reviewed by Card et al. (2018),
but align closely with the estimates of Abowd and Lemieux (1993) and Van Reenen (1996) which exploit firm
aggregates.
    Our finding of larger elasticities may, in part, be attributable to our use of external instruments. Abowd and
Lemieux (1993), Van Reenen (1996), and Garin and Silverio (2017) all find that instrumenting value added yields
large increases in rent-sharing estimates. Garin and Silverio (2017) estimate a pooled elasticity of 0.15 (Table 6,
Column 4) in Portuguese data using exposure to exchange rate shocks as an instrument, and find a much larger
elasticity of 0.28 (Table 9, Column 2) in industries with low separation rates. Because measuring the level of
surplus is particularly difficult at small firms, we are somewhat less confident in our elasticity estimates than we
are in the more theoretically motivated pass-through coefficients, which are robust to mismeasurement of the level
of surplus. Nevertheless, our 90% confidence interval for π permits corresponding surplus elasticities as low as
0.19 for firm stayers.31
    Another plausible explanation for our finding of strong earnings sensitivity to surplus shocks is our focus on
innovative firms, which are likely to rely heavily on the specific human capital of their workforce. This interpreta-
tion is consistent with the findings of Van Reenen (1996), who also studied innovative firms. Our finding of very
large wage pass-through to early cohorts of workers is consistent with the notion that early employees, some of
whom may be “founders,” are particularly difficult for firms to replace.
  31 This figure comes from multiplying the lower limit of the confidence interval for π, which is 0.21, by the ratio of elasticity to the
                                                                                                         0.56
pass-through coefficient for mean stayer wages among firms with high value patent applications, which is 0.61 ≈ .92 (see Table 8 Column
4b).




                                                                   27
8    Retention Estimates

    The wage posting model of Section 2 interpreted earnings responses to firm-specific shocks as attempts to
retain incumbent workers. Figure 9 provides event study estimates of the impact of patent allowances on the
logarithm of the fraction of the application cohort working at the firm, split by whether the worker was in the
top or bottom half of the firm-specific earnings distribution in the year of application. Recall from Figure 8 that
the earnings responses to initial allowances were concentrated in the top half of the distribution of firm stayers.
Consistent with the notion that these earnings movements capture rent sharing, the retention of “above median”
firm stayers (right-hand side panel of Figure 9) responds strongly to initial allowances while the retention of “below
median” stayers (left-hand side panel of Figure 9) exhibits a very weak and statistically insignificant response to
allowances. Interestingly, the retention response stabilizes by three years after the initial decision date. This pattern
suggests the earnings response, which from Figure 4 manifests rather quickly, serves to retain incumbent workers
who would have otherwise separated over the first three years after an initial rejection.
    Table 9 scales the retention responses of various groups of workers present in the application year by the
impact on their log earnings to obtain IV estimates of the incumbent retention-wage elasticity. Instrumenting stayer
wages with the initial allowance decision yields an estimated retention-wage elasticity of 1.2, or equivalently, a
separation-wage elasticity of -1.6. This estimate is well within the range of separation elasticities reported in
Manning (2011)’s review of quasi-experimental studies but is somewhat larger in magnitude than the short run
elasticities reported in Dube, Giuliano, and Leonard (2018). However, Dube, Giuliano, and Leonard (2018) report
nine month elasticities, while we interpret our estimates as representing three year elasticities, which we would
expect to be a bit larger. Despite a first stage F statistic below the benchmark of 10, our weak-identification robust
confidence interval indicates that we can reject retention elasticities below 0.46 at the 10% level.
    We find little evidence of heterogeneity in the retention elasticity, though our analysis is hampered by a weak
first stage for some subgroups. Among “above median” stayers, the retention elasticity rises slightly to 1.4, but
we cannot reject that the elasticity is the same as in the pooled sample, which is in keeping with the notion that
the pooled results are driven primarily by the above median stayers. We do not report estimates for below median
stayers because the first stage is extremely weak, which leads to erratic estimates. Male retention elasticities are
estimated to be somewhat below female elasticities, but the female estimates are imprecise to the point of being
indistinguishable from zero. Finally, non-inventors are estimated to have a retention elasticity of 1.3, nearly iden-
tical to what we found in our pooled analysis. The finding of a stable retention elasticity across groups reinforces
the evidence in Figure 9 that the groups experiencing the largest earnings responses also exhibit the largest reten-
tion responses. This corroborates our model-based interpretation of the earnings impacts we measure as reflecting
economic rents, a view we consider in more quantitative detail in Section 9.


                                                           28
9       Model-based interpretation

      In the model of Section 2, the retention wage elasticity can be written:
                                             
                                      d ln G wIj            wIj             wIj /wmj
                                                    =η               =η                  .
                                         d ln wIj        wIj − wmj        wIj /wmj − 1

Hence, we require a calibration of wIj /wmj to recover η from the estimates in Table 9. From Table 2, workers hired
within the three years prior to the year of application earn roughly $43,500, which we take as a measure of the
entry wage wmj . By contrast, workers who have been at the firm for four or more years earn roughly $79,000, which
we take as a measure of wIj . Hence, we calibrate wIj /wmj = 79/43.5 ≈ 1.8.
      In Table 9, we found a pooled retention elasticity of approximately 1.2. Hence, our estimate of η is 1.2 ×
1.8                                                                                                       η
0.8   ≈2.7. Recall from equation (3) that in the model of section 2 workers are offered a fraction θ =   1+η   of their
marginal replacement costs as a wage premium. Our retention elasticity estimate therefore implies that incumbent
workers capture roughly 73% of their replacement costs in wage premia.
      We can also use our estimates to quantify these marginal replacement costs. Rearranging equation 3, we have
c0 (N j /I j )
            h           i
    wmj   = wIj /wmj − 1 /θ = .8/.73 ≈ 1.1. Hence, our calibration suggests that the marginal replacement cost
of an incumbent worker is roughly equal to the annual earnings of a new hire. This replacement cost estimate is
higher than is usually found in simple linear-quadratic models of employment adjustment (Hamermesh and Pfann
1996; Bloom 2009; Cooper and Willis 2009) . However, we study fairly large shocks to small firms which, with
convexity in hiring / training costs, should lead to correspondingly large replacement costs on the margin.
    We can also use our estimates to compute an implied elasticity of product demand ε. In Table 8 we found
                                                                                                         
that incumbent workers captured 61 cents of every dollar of patent induced surplus. Taking π = .61 = ε−1
                                                                                                       ε   θ
and using our estimate of θ = .73 implies that ε ≈ 6.0, which corresponds to a 20% markup of product price over
marginal cost. This finding is in line with recent work that has used values of ε ranging from 4.5 (Suárez Serrato
and Zidar 2016) to 7 (Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Wieland 2012).
      Appendix Table D.10 reports some alternative calibrations of model inputs that set the pass-through and reten-
tion elasticities to different values along with the incumbent wage premium. Interestingly, some calibrations yield
invalid values of the structural parameters, suggesting our model can be used to rule out some configurations of
parameters falling within our confidence intervals. The general theme of this sensitivity exercise is that, across a
wide range of potential rationalizations of the data, workers capture a large fraction of their marginal replacement
costs in wage premia and that those costs are substantial.
      It is worth remarking briefly on how our model rationalizes the gender differences in earnings pass-through
reported in Figure 8. The model suggests two possible explanations for these differences. A first potential explana-


                                                            29
tion is that men and women might face different distributions of outside offers, which would manifest in different
retention elasticities and consequently different pass-through coefficients. However, the results of Table 9 provide
little support for this conjecture. If anything, women exhibit slightly higher retention elasticities than men, which
should yield greater earnings pass-through for them.
     A second potential explanation for gender differences in earnings pass-through is that the marginal replacement
costs of men could — on average — exceed those of women. Concentration of women in occupations involving
smaller training and recruiting costs, for example, could plausibly generate such differences. Recall that earnings
impacts are concentrated among firm “officers” who are likely difficult to replace because of the specific capital
embedded in their relationships with subordinate workers. Unfortunately, because of the way in which officer
earnings are reported (as aggregates in the firm-level data, rather than as a variable in our worker micro-data) we
do not know what fraction of officers are women. However, for the average firm in our sample, the fraction of
women in the top quartile of earnings distribution in the year of initial patent application is only 11.5%, a fact
that is consistent with a broad range of evidence suggesting that US women tend to be employed in lower paying
occupations than men (Goldin 2014).



10     Conclusion

     This paper analyzes how patent-induced shocks to labor productivity propagate into worker earnings using a
new linkage of US patent applications to US business and worker tax records. Our baseline estimates suggest
that on average every patent-induced dollar of surplus yields roughly 30 cents of additional earnings; this share is
roughly twice as high for incumbent workers present since the year of application. Among non-inventors present
since the year of application, who are arguably the group most comparable to the recent studies reviewed by
Card et al. (2018), we find a both a pass-through rate and elasticity of roughly a half. These estimates provide
some of the first evidence, along with Jäger (2016), that truly idiosyncratic variability in firm performance is an
important causal determinant of worker pay. Given that firm productivity is highly variable and persistent (Luttmer
2007; Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson 2008), it is plausible that firm-specific shocks contribute substantially to
permanent earnings inequality among identically skilled workers.
     We document several sources of heterogeneity in the pass-through of patent-induced shocks to workers. First,
patent allowances have no effect on the earnings of new hires. This finding may be specific to the small firms
we study, which are unlikely to exhibit market power over new hires. Nevertheless, this finding implies that
patent shocks “stretch” the firm’s pay scale by increasing inequality between new hires and incumbent workers.
Second, among incumbent workers, patent allowances exacerbate the within-firm gender earnings gap. The gender
differences in earnings pass-through found here are larger than those estimated by Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016)


                                                         30
and Garin and Silverio (2017) in Portuguese data, but smaller than those reported by Black and Strahan (2001) in
US data. Third, while the earnings of both inventors and non-inventors respond to patent decisions, the earnings of
inventors are substantially more responsive, which is notable because previous studies of pass-through to inventors
have studied settings where inventor compensation is mandated by law.32 Finally, earnings impacts are strongly
concentrated among employees in the top quartile of the within-firm earnings distribution, among firm “officers,”
and among firm stayers initially in the top half of the earnings distribution.
    Two aspects of these heterogeneous earnings estimates are worth emphasizing. First, these impacts appear
to mirror heterogeneity in the costs of replacing different types of workers. Substituting new hires for high-
skilled incumbents is particularly difficult. Our retention results corroborate this view: worker retention rises
most strongly among groups of workers with the largest earnings increases. This pattern suggests, via revealed
preference, that these earnings fluctuations constitute economic rents. A quantification of our model finds that
incumbent workers capture the majority of their replacement costs in wage premia. The pairing of incumbent rents
of this magnitude with stable new hire earnings highlights the importance of seniority and specific investments in
wage determination — themes emphasized by, among others, Becker (1964), Stevens (1994), and Manning (2006).
Second, our findings strongly suggest that firm shocks play an important role in generating earnings inequality not
only across but also within workplaces. Understanding the extent to which heterogeneity in pass-through across
workers contributes to overall earnings inequality is an important topic for future research.




  32 For example, Aghion et al. (2018) analyze how inventor and non-inventor earnings change before and after patent applications among
Finnish firms, but Finland — like many other European countries — has a law that requires firms to pay inventors for inventions produced
while they are employed. See the discussion in Toivanen and Väänänen (2012).


                                                                  31
References
Abowd, John and Thomas Lemieux, “The Effects of Product Market Competition on Collective Bargaining
 Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108 (4),
 983–1014.

  , Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis, “High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms,” Econometrica, 1999,
  67 (2), 251–333.

  , Kevin McKinney, and Nellie Zhao, “Earnings Inequality and Mobility Trends in the United States: Nationally
  Representative Estimates from Longitudinally Linked Employer-Employee Data,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  2018, 26 (S1), S183–S300.

Acemoglu, Daron and William Hawkins, “Search with Multi-Worker Firms,” Theoretical Economics, 2014, 9
  (3), 583–628.

Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Ari Hyytinen, and Otto Toivanen, “On the returns to invention within firms:
  Evidence from Finland,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2018, 108, 208–12.

Anderson, Theodore W and Herman Rubin, “Estimation of the parameters of a single equation in a complete
 system of stochastic equations,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1949, 20 (1), 46–63.

Andrews, Isaiah, James Stock, and Liyang Sun, “Weak Instruments in IV Regression: Theory and Practice,”
 Technical Report 2018. MIT Working Paper.

Axtell, Robert L, “Zipf distribution of US firm sizes,” Science, 2001, 293 (5536), 1818–1820.

Balasubramanian, Natarajan and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, “What Happens When Firms Patent? New Evidence
  from U.S. Economic Census Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (1), 126–146.

Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James Davis, and Richard Freeman, “It’s Where You Work: Increases in Earnings
  Dispersion across Establishments and Individuals in the U.S.,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (S2),
  S67–S97.

Becker, Gary S, Human Capital Theory, New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1964.

Bell, Alex, Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova, and John Van Reenen, “Who Becomes an Inventor
  in America? The Importance of Exposure to Innovation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019.

Bender, Stefan, Nicholas Bloom, David Card, John Van Reenen, and Stefanie Wolter, “Management Practices,
  Workforce Selection and Productivity,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2018, 36 (S1), S371–S409.

Bessen, James, “The Value of U.S. Patents by Owner and Patent Characteristics,” Research Policy, 2008, 37 (5),
  932–945.

Black, Sandra and Philip Strahan, “The Division of the Spoils: Rent-Sharing and Discrimination in a Regulated
  Industry,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4), 814–831.

Blanchflower, David, Andrew Oswald, and Peter Sanfey, “Wages, Profits, and Rent-Sharing,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 1996, 111 (1), 227–251.

Bloom, Nicholas, “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (3), 623–685.

   and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and Countries,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1351–1408.

                                                      32
  , Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen, “Identifying Technology Spillovers and Product Market Ri-
  valry,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (4), 1347–1393.

Brown, James and Orley Ashenfelter, “Testing the Efficiency of Employment Contracts,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 1986, 94 (3), S40–S87.

Buhai, I. Sebastian, Miguel A. Portela, Coen N. Teulings, and Aico van Vuuren, “Returns to Tenure or Senior-
  ity,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (2), 705–30.

Cahuc, Pierre and Etienne Wasmer, “Does Intrafirm Bargaining Matter in the Large Firm’s Matching Model?,”
  Macroeconomic Dynamics, 2001, 5 (5), 742–747.

Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline, “Bargaining, Sorting, and the Gender Wage Gap: Quan-
  tifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (2),
  633–686.

  , , Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline, “Firms and Labor Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2018, 36 (S1), S13–S70.

  , Francesco Devicienti, and Agata Maida, “Rent-Sharing, Holdup, and Wages: Evidence from Matched Panel
  Data,” Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (1), 84–111.

  , Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline, “Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German Wage Inequality,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (3), 967–1015.

Carlsson, Mikael, Julián Messina, and Oskar Nordstrom Skans, “Wage Adjustment and Productivity Shocks,”
  Economic Journal, 2016, 126 (595), 1739–1773.

Christofides, Louis and Andrew Oswald, “Real Wage Determination and Rent-Sharing in Collective Bargaining
 Agreements,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (3), 985–1002.

Cohen, William, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Stephen Fienburg, “A Comparison of String Distance Metrics for
  Name-Matching Tasks,” in “IIWeb” 2003, pp. 73–78.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland, “The Optimal Inflation Rate in New Keynesian
  Models: Should Central Banks Raise Their Inflation Targets in Light of the Zero Lower Bound?,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (4), 1371–1406.

Cooper, Russell and Jonathan L Willis, “The Cost of Labor Adjustment: Inferences from the Gap,” Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 2009, 12 (4), 632–647.

DeBacker, Jason Matthew, Bradley Heim, Shanthi Ramnath, and Justin Ross, “The Impact of State Taxes on
  Pass-Through Businesses: Evidence from the 2012 Kansas Income Tax Reform,” 2016. Working paper.

Depalo, Domenico and Sabrina Di Addario, “Shedding light on inventors’ returns to patents,” Technical Report
  2014. IRLE Working Paper #115-14.

Dube, Arindrajit, Laura Giuliano, and Jonathan Leonard, “Fairness and frictions: The impact of unequal
 raises on quit behavior,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Farber, Henry, “The Analysis of Interfirm Worker Mobility,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1994, 12 (4), 554–593.

Farre-Mensa, Joan, Deepak Hegde, and Alexander Ljungqvist, “What Is a Patent Worth? Evidence from the
  U.S. Patent ‘Lottery’,” 2017. NBER working paper no. 23268.


                                                     33
Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts, “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model,” Journal of Policy Analysis
  and Management, 1993, 12 (1), 189–194.

Feigenbaum, James, “Automated Census Record Linking: A Machine Learning Approach,” 2016. Working paper.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection
  on Productivity or Profitability?,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (1), 394–425.

Frakes, Michael and Melissa Wasserman, “Is the Time Allocated to Review Patent Applications Inducing Ex-
  aminers to Grant Invalid Patents? Evidence from Micro-Level Application Data,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2017, 99 (3), 550–563.

Friedrich, Benjamin, Lisa Laun, Costas Meghir, and Luigi Pistaferri, “Earnings dynamics and firm-level
  shocks,” 2014.

Garin, Andrew and Filipe Silverio, “How Does Firm Performance Affect Wages? Evidence from Idiosyncratic
 Export Shocks,” 2017. Working Paper.

Gibbons, Robert and Kevin J. Murphy, “Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence of Career Concerns: The-
  ory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100 (3), 468–505.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Rebecca Hellerstein, “A Structural Approach to Identifying the Sources of
 Local Currency Price Stability,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (1), 175–210.

Goldin, Claudia, “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (4),
 1091–1119.

Goldschmidt, Deborah and Johannes Schmieder, “The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing and the Evolution of the
 German Wage Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (3), 1165–1217.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Oleksandr Talavera, “Price Setting in Online Markets: Basic Facts, International
 Comparisons, and Cross-Border Integration,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (1), 249–282.

Graham, Stuart and Deepak Hegde, “Do Inventors Value Secrecy in Patenting? Evidence from the American
 Inventor’s Protection Act of 1999,” 2014. Unpublished USPTO mimeo.

Guiso, Luigi, Luigi Pistaferri, and Fabiano Schivardi, “Insurance Within the Firm,” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 2005, 113 (5), 1054–1087.

Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “The NBER U.S. Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
 Insights, and Methodological Tools,” 2001. NBER working paper no. 8498.

Hall, Robert and Paul Milgrom, “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage Bargain,” American
 Economic Review, 2008, 98 (4), 1653–1674.

Hamermesh, Daniel S and Gerard A Pfann, “Adjustment costs in factor demand,” Journal of Economic Litera-
 ture, 1996, 34 (3), 1264–1292.

Harhoff, Dietmar, Frederic Scherer, and Katrin Vopel, “Citations, Family Size, Opposition, and the Value of
 Patent Rights,” Research Policy, 2003, 32 (8), 1343–1363.

Harrell, Frank, Regression Modeling Strategies: With Applications to Linear Models, Logistic Regression, and
 Survival Analysis, corrected ed., New York, NY: Springer, 2001.

Harris, Milton and Bengt Holmström, “A Theory of Wage Dynamics,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1982,
 49 (3), 315–333.

                                                     34
Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman, The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining,
 Inference, and Prediction, 2nd ed., New York, NY: Springer, 2016.

Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and Stephen Redding, “Trade and Inequality:
 From Theory to Estimation,” Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 84 (1), 357–405.

Hildreth, Andrew, “Rent-Sharing and Wages: Product Demand or Technology Driven Premia,” Economics of
  Innovation and New Technology, 1998, 5 (2-4), 199–226.

Holmström, Bengt, “Moral Hazard and Observability,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 1979, 10 (1), 74–91.

  , “Agency Costs and Innovation,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 1989, 12 (3), 305–327.

  , “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1999, 66 (1),
  169–182.

Jaffe, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, “Geographic Localization of Knowledge
  Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108 (3), 577–598.

Jäger, Simon, “How Substitutable Are Workers? Evidence from Worker Deaths,” Technical Report 2016.

Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman, “Technological Innovation, Resource
 Allocation, and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2), 665–712.

Lamadon, Thibaut, “Productivity Shocks, Long-Term Contracts and Earnings Dynamics,” 2016. Working paper.

Lanjouw, Jean and Mark Schankerman, “Characteristics of Patent Litigation: A Window on Competition,”
  RAND Journal of Economics, 2001, 32 (1), 129–151.

Lemley, Mark and Bhaven Sampat, “Is the Patent Office a Rubber Stamp?,” Emory Law Journal, 2008, 58,
  181–203.

  and    , “Examining Patent Examination,” Stanford Technology Law Review, 2010, (4), 1–11.

Lentz, Rasmus and Dale Mortensen, “Labor Market Models of Worker and Firm Heterogeneity,” Annual Review
  of Economics, 2010, 2, 577–602.

Luttmer, Erzo, “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007,
  122 (3), 1103–1144.

Manning, Alan, “A Generalised Model of Monopsony,” Economic Journal, 2006, 116 (508), 84–100.

  , “Imperfect Competition in the Labor Market,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor
  Economics, Vol. 4B, North Holland, 2011, pp. 973–1041.

Mogstad, Magne, Bradley Setzler, Thibaut Lamadon et al., “Earnings Dynamics, Mobility Costs, and Trans-
 mission of Market-Level Shocks,” 2017.

Pakes, Ariel, “Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European Patent Stocks,” Economet-
  rica, 1986, 54 (4), 755–784.

Pissarides, Christopher, Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, 2nd ed., Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press, 2000.

  , “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the Answer?,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1339–
  1369.


                                                     35
Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Jean-Marc Robin, “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and Employer Hetero-
  geneity,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (6), 2295–2350.
Putnam, Jonathan, “The Value of International Patent Rights,” 1996. Yale PhD dissertation.
Rosen, Sherwin, “The Theory of Equalizing Differences,” in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds., Hand-
  book of Labor Economics, Vol. 1, North Holland, 1986, pp. 641–692.
Sampat, Bhaven and Heidi Williams, “How Do Patents Affect Follow-on Innovation? Evidence from the Human
  Genome,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Schankerman, Mark and Ariel Pakes, “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in European Countries During
  the Post-1950 Period,” Economic Journal, 1986, 96 (384), 1052–1076.
Serrano, Carlos, “The Dynamics of the Transfer and Renewal of Patents,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2010, 41
  (4), 686–708.
Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick, “Capitalists in the Twenty-First Century,” 2019.
  NBER Working Paper No. 25442.
Song, Jae, David Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till von Wachter, “Firming Up Inequality,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Sorkin, Isaac, “Ranking firms using revealed preference,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (3), 1331–
  1393.
Stevens, Margaret, “A theoretical model of on-the-job training with imperfect competition,” Oxford Economic
  Papers, 1994, pp. 537–562.
Stole, Lars and Jeffrey Zwiebel, “Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding Contracts,” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 1996, 63 (3), 375–410.
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Owen Zidar, “Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local Labor
  Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (9), 2582–2624.
Toivanen, Otto and Lotta Väänänen, “Returns to Inventors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (4),
  1173–1190.
Trajtenberg, Manuel, Economic Analysis of Product Innovation: The Case of CT Scanners, Cambridge, MA:
  Harvard University Press, 1990.
US Bureau of Economic Analysis, “National Income and Product Accounts Table 1.1.4: Price Indexes for Gross
 Domestic Product,” 2014.
Van Reenen, John, “The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a Panel of U.K. Companies,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (1), 195–226.
Weyl, Glen and Michal Fabinger, “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of Incidence under Imperfect
 Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (3), 528–583.
Williams, Heidi, “How Do Patents Affect Research Investments?,” Annual Review of Economics, 2017, 9, 441–
 469.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, 2nd ed., Cambridge, MA: MIT
 Press, 2010.
Yagan, Danny, “Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut,” American
  Economic Review, 2015, 105 (12), 3531–3563.

                                                     36
                                   Figure 1: KPSS Value (ξ ): Predicted Versus Actual




                    120
                    100   80
              True ξ values
                   60




                                                                         β: 1.03
                                                                         se: .12
             40     20
                    0




                               0     20          40          60           80            100        120
                                                       Fitted ξ values

                                             Line of best fit            45 degree line


Notes: This figure is a binned scatterplot of actual versus predicted values of the KPSS measure of patent value ξ
in millions of 1982 dollars. The sample is the subset of patent applications with non-missing values for the KPSS
measure of patent value ξ . Predictions are formed based on estimates from the random effects Poisson model
described in Section 5. The data in this figure have been grouped into twenty equal-sized bins. In the microdata,
the slope is 1.12, as reported in the text. Here, the coefficient β instead reports the two-stage least squares slope
using twenty bin dummies as instruments for predicted values and “se” reports the associated standard error.




                                                          37
                                                         Figure 2: Impacts by Predicted Patent Value: Surplus and Wage Bill




                                                40
               Thousands of 2014 USD per worker
              -20         0         20




                                                     0               4           8             12           16                20
                                                                   Predicted patent value (millions of 1982 USD)

                                                                       Surplus per worker              Wage bill per worker


Notes: This figure shows the impact of an initial patent allowance on surplus per worker and wage bill per worker
as a function of predicted patent value in our analysis sample. The vertical, red line is the cut-off value for the
top-quintile predicted patent value subsample, and is equal to 5.3 million in 1982 USD. Values along the x-axis
for the surplus series are offset from their integer value to improve readability. Surplus is EBITD (earnings before
interest, tax, and depreciation) + W2 wage bill. 95% confidence intervals shown based upon standard errors two-
way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year.




                                                                                        38
                                                    Figure 3: Event Study Estimates: Surplus (EBITD+Wage Bill) per Worker




                                               30
              Thousands of 2014 USD per worker
                 -10      0      10
                               -20      20




                                                    ≤-5     -4     -3     -2     -1     0       1      2     3      4       ≥5
                                                                            Years since initial decision

                                                                        High value (Q5)            Lower value (<Q5)


Notes: This figure plots the response of surplus per worker following an initial patent allowance, separately for high
and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our analysis sample. Regressions include art unit by application
year by calendar year fixed effects and firm fixed effects, as in equation (7). Standard errors are two-way clustered
by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. The horizontal short-dashed, red line is the pooled
differences-in-differences estimate of the impact of winning a valuable patent on surplus per worker from Table
5. Surplus is EBITD (earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation) + wage bill. Q5 is quintile five of predicted
patent value. < Q5 are the remaining four quintiles. 95% confidence intervals shown. Q5 coefficients are offset
from their integer x-axis value to improve readability.




                                                                                     39
                                                          Figure 4: Event Study Estimates: Wage Bill per Worker




                                               15
              Thousands of 2014 USD per worker
              -5      0        5      10




                                                    ≤-5   -4    -3     -2     -1     0       1      2      3      4   ≥5
                                                                         Years since initial decision

                                                                     High value (Q5)             Lower value (<Q5)


Notes: This figure plots the response of wage bill per worker following an initial patent allowance, separately
for high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our analysis sample. Regressions include art unit by
application year by calendar year fixed effects and firm fixed effects, as in equation (7). Standard errors are two-
way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. The horizontal short-dashed, red line is
the pooled differences-in-differences estimate of the impact of winning a valuable patent on wage bill per worker
from Table 5. Q5 is quintile five of predicted patent value. < Q5 are the remaining four quintiles. Q5 coefficients
are offset from their integer x-axis value to improve readability. 95% confidence intervals shown.




                                                                                   40
                                                          Figure 5: Event Study Estimates: log(employees)




                                          .6
              log(thousands of employees)
               -.2    0      .2
                            -.4     .4




                                               ≤-5   -4      -3     -2     -1     0       1      2      3   4     ≥5
                                                                      Years since initial decision

                                                                  High value (Q5)             Lower value (<Q5)


Notes: This figure plots the response of the logarithm of employees per worker following an initial patent al-
lowance, separately for high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our analysis sample. Regressions
include art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects and firm fixed effects, as in equation (7). Standard
errors are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. The horizontal short-dashed,
red line is the pooled differences-in-differences estimate of the impact of winning a valuable patent on the loga-
rithm of the number of employees at the firm in thousands of people. Q5 is quintile five of predicted patent value.
< Q5 are the remaining four quintiles. 95% confidence intervals shown. Values along the x-axis for the difference
in Q5 are offset from their integer value to improve readability.




                                                                                41
                                                  Figure 6: Event Study Estimates: Probability of Patent Grant




                           .6
              Probability of patent grant
                     .2    0      .4




                                            ≤-5    -4      -3     -2     -1     0       1      2        3        4   ≥5
                                                                    Years since initial decision

                                                                High value (Q5)              Lower value (<Q5)


Notes: This figure plots the response of the probability of patent grant following an initial patent allowance,
separately for high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our analysis sample. Regressions include art
unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects and firm fixed effects, as in equation (7). Standard errors are
two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. The horizontal short-dashed, red line
is the pooled difference-in-differences estimate of the impact of winning a valuable patent on the probability of
the patent having been granted. Values along the x-axis for the difference in Q5 are offset from their integer value
to improve readability. Q5 is quintile five of predicted patent value. < Q5 are the remaining four quintiles. 95%
confidence intervals shown.




                                                                              42
                                         Figure 7: Within-Firm Inequality


                   Gender:
                        Male earnings

                         Female earnings


                   Inventors:
                       Inventor earnings

                   Non-inventor earnings


                  Non-inventors:
                         Male earnings

                         Female earnings


                   Officers:
                        Officer earnings

                     Non-officer earnings


                    Quartiles:
                            Q1 earnings

                              Q2 earnings

                              Q3 earnings

                              Q4 earnings


                                              -5      0        5      10      15      20       25

                                        Coefficient (1K 2014 USD per worker)
                                        Percent Impact


Notes: This figure reports difference-in-differences coefficient and percent impact estimates of the effect of initial
patent allowances on within-firm inequality measures, for high ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our analysis
sample. Point estimates in the "Coefficients" panel correspond to coefficients on interactions of the designated
value category with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application being initially allowed. Controls
include main effect of value category interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed effects, and art unit by
application year by calendar year fixed effects, as in equation (8). 95% confidence intervals were constructed from
standard errors two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. "Percent Impacts" point
estimates correspond to the percent change in the outcome variable at the outcome variable’s mean for winning a
patent allowance for a high ex-ante valuable patent application.Some confidence intervals were truncated to ease
visualization. Officers earnings are derived from each firm’s tax filings, where firms are required to list officer and
non-officer pay. Quartiles refer to within-firm wage quartiles (e.g., "Q1 earnings" measures the average wage bill
in within-firm wage quartile one). Earnings are measured in thousands of 2014 USD.


                                                          43
                                 Figure 8: Within-Firm Inequality Among Stayers


                     Gender:
                              Male earnings


                           Female earnings



                    Inventors:
                          Inventor earnings


                     Non-inventor earnings



                      Quartiles:
                                Q1 earnings


                                Q2 earnings


                                Q3 earnings


                                Q4 earnings




                                               -5      0        5     10     15      20      25

                                        Coefficient (1K 2014 USD per worker)
                                        Percent Impact


Notes: This figure reports difference-in-differences coefficient and percent impact estimates of the effect of initial
patent allowances on within-firm stayer inequality measures, for high ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our
analysis sample. Stayers are defined as those who were employed by the same firm in the year of application. Point
estimates in the "Coefficients" panel correspond to coefficients on interactions of the designated value category
with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application being initially allowed. Controls include main
effect of value category interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed effects, and art unit by application
year by calendar year fixed effects, as in equation (8). 95% confidence intervals were constructed from standard
errors two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. Some confidence intervals were
truncated to ease visualization. Officers earnings are derived from each firm’s tax filings, where firms are required
to list officer and non-officer pay. Quartiles refer to within-firm wage quartiles (e.g., "Q1 earnings" measures the
average wage bill in within-firm wage quartile one). Earnings are measured in thousands of 2014 USD.




                                                           44
                                                           Figure 9: Event Study Estimates: Employee Retention Rate by Application Year Earnings

                                                                 Below median earnings workers                       Above median earnings workers




                                               .4
                                               .2
                                               0
                         log(retention rate)
                                               -.2




45
                                               -.4
                                                     ≤-5    -4    -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   ≥5   ≤-5   -4    -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   ≥5
                                                                                         Years since initial decision
                                                                                     High value (Q5)                 Lower value (<Q5)



     Notes: This figure plots the response of log retention rate following an initial allowance, separately for high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications,
     in our analysis sample. Regressions include art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects and firm fixed effects, as in equation (7). Standard
     errors are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. “Below median wage workers” and “Above median wage workers”
     respectively refer to members of the application cohort who earned below and above that firm’s median in the application year. Values along the x-axis
     for the difference in Q5 are offset from their integer value to improve readability. Q5 is quintile five of predicted patent value. < Q5 are the remaining
     four quintiles. 95% confidence intervals shown.
                                         Table 1: Sample Construction

                                        Application-
                                         assignee
                                           pairs            Applications      Assignees           EINs

    Panel A: USPTO sample
      Full sample                        3,737,351           3,601,913         317,370             —
      Filed between 2000 and 2010        3,063,980           2,954,507         279,936             —
      Non-missing assignees              2,708,829           2,599,373         279,935             —
      Non-child applications             1,341,843           1,295,649         130,619             —
      Utility applications               1,339,146           1,293,054         130,113             —
      First application by assignee       130,113             125,018          130,113             —
      No prior grant to assignee          99,871              95,767           99,871              —

    Panel B: USPTO-tax merge                 —                39,452           39,814            81,934
      First application by EIN               —                37,714             —               81,877
      No prior grant to EIN                  —                35,643             —               78,291
      EIN with largest revenue               —                35,643             —               35,643
      Active firms                           —                9,732              —                9,732

Notes: This table describes the construction of our analysis sample. When selecting the first application by each
assignee by date of filing (“First application by assignee”), ties are broken by taking the smallest application
number. When selecting the first application for each EIN (“First application by EIN”), we drop EINs with more
than one first application. When removing assignees (“No prior grant to assignee”) and EINs (“No prior grant by
EIN”) with prior grants, we do so by checking against the assignees and EINs for the census of patents granted
since 1976 and filed before 29 November 2000. When selecting the EIN with the largest revenue (“EIN with largest
revenue”), we compare based on the revenue in the year of the application. Active firms are defined as EINs with
non-zero/non-missing total income or total deductions in the application year and in the three previous years, a
positive number of employees in the application year, and revenue less than 100 million in 2014 USD.




                                                       46
                                                                   Table 2: Summary Statistics


                                                                     1. Analysis sample                               2. Top quintile dosage sample

                                                        Mean          p10            p50       p90            Mean          p10           p50          p90

       Panel A: firm outcomes

                                         Revenue         9,841      226.35           3,232    29,082         12,945        353.01       4,891         39,614
                                     Value added        3,952       117.63           1,300    10,456         5,289         173.36      1,955          14,430
                                          EBITD         104.05      -916.47          87.27     1,979         12.88         -1,837      110.46          2,741
                                    Employment          45.65          2             17.07    117.17         61.49           2.9       25.26          152.37
                        Value added per worker          116.39       15.66           84.72    287.36         120.16         14.46       86.87          315.3
                             EBITD per worker            0.82        -70.88          6.85     69.53           0.72         -75.86       6.93          77.64
                          Predicted patent value        4,921         219            1,749    10,942         18,104         6,089      10,502         36,651
                      % Patents initially allowed         8.4           .               .         .            7.7             .           .              .


       Panel B: worker outcomes

                         Labor compensation             2,132        67.88       703.44        5,410          3,088         106.7         1,111        8,310




47
                                    Wage bill           2,412        71.4        840.86        6,487          3,375        116.08         1,361        9,425
               Labor compensation per worker            57.22        10.6        43.12        136.34          60.74        12.02          47.46       148.32
                         Wage bill per worker           54.98        17.94        47.94       109.33          58.42         22.35         51.55       115.04
          Average W2 earnings (<4 yrs at firm)          43.55        12.39        35.11        94.44          46.46         14.41         37.48       101.09
          Average W2 earnings (4+ yrs at firm)          78.98        29.66        63.81       147.87          82.16         35.14         66.22       150.94
                       % Female employment               30.2          0           25.6         66.1           29.8           0            26.3         62.6
                               % Contractors             18.4          0          10.5         53.0            17.8           0            11.0        50.3
                                   % Entrants            28.8          0          24.6          62.9           29.9           0            25.3         62.9
                                 % Inventors             11.4          0           2.5         36.4            10.5           0            3.3         32.3


                               firm observations                             9,732                                                1,946

     Notes: This table tabulates summary statistics on firm (Panel A) and worker (Panel B) outcomes for each of two samples: our analysis sample of matched
     patent application-firm pairs, and our sub-sample of patent application-firm pairs in the analysis sample for which the patent applications are in the top
     quintile of predicted value (“dosage”). All summary statistics are measured in the year in which the patent application was filed. For each variable in
     each panel for each sample, we tabulate the mean, 10th percentile, 50th percentile (median), and 90th percentile; to protect taxpayer anonymity, p10, p50,
     and p90 refer to centile means. Entrants are defined as those employees who were not employed at the firm in the previous year. EBITD is earnings
     before interest, taxes, and deductions. Revenue, value added, EBITD, labor compensation, wage bill, entrant wages and incumbent wages are reported
     in thousands of 2014 USD. Predicted patent value is reported in thousands of 1982 USD. All percent or “per worker” outcomes in Panel B are per W2
     employee except for “% Contractors” which is per W2 employee + 1099 independent contractor. For all other variable definitions, please see the text of
     the paper and Appendix A.
Table 3: Balance of Assignee Characteristics Across Initially Allowed and Initially Rejected Patent Applications


                                                                 Initially allowed

                                                       Analysis sample        Top quintile
                                                        (1a)     (1b)         (2a)    (2b)

                                 log(employees)        -3.71     -2.06       -0.16     1.97
                                                       (1.85)    (2.18)      (4.70)   (4.76)

                            Revenue per worker          0.03      0.02        0.01     0.01
                                                       (0.01)    (0.02)      (0.02)   (0.03)

                        Value added per worker         -0.14      -0.07      -0.07     0.00
                                                       (0.05)    (0.06)      (0.08)   (0.12)

                           Wage bill per worker         0.14      0.14        0.08    -0.11
                                                       (0.10)    (0.13)      (0.21)   (0.24)

                             EBITD per worker           0.11      0.06        0.17     0.12
                                                       (0.05)    (0.07)      (0.10)   (0.14)


                                   Observations        9,732     8,647        1,946    1,666
                                    AU-AY FEs
                                        p-value        0.005     0.494        0.518    0.830

Notes: This table reports covariate balance tests for initial patent allowances. Specifically, the coefficients report
linear probability model estimates of the marginal effect of the included covariate on the probability that a patent
application receives an initial allowance; all coefficients have been multiplied by 1,000 for ease of interpretation.
AU-AY FEs denotes the inclusion of art unit (AU) by application year (AY) fixed effects. Covariates are measured
as of the year of application. Columns (1a) and (1b) report the results for observations in the analysis sample.
Columns (2a) and (2b) report the results for observations in the top-quintile predicted patent value. Singleton
observations are dropped in the fixed effects specifications, which accounts for the smaller number of observations
in Column (1b) relative to Column (1a) and in Column (2b) relative to Column (2a). Standard errors (reported in
parentheses) are two-way clustered by art unit and application year by decision year except in Column (2b) which
clusters by art unit (because the estimated two-way variance covariance matrix was singular). The p-value reports
the probability that the covariates measured in the year of application do not influence the probability of an initial
allowance. EBITD is earnings before interest, taxes, and deductions. Revenue, value added, wage bill, and EBITD
are measured in thousands of 2014 USD.




                                                         48
       Table 4: Prediction of KPSS Patent Value Based on Patent Application and Assignee Characteristics


                                                                   KPSS value (ξ )

                               1(patent family size = 1)          0.28         (0.06)

                                  log(patent family size)         0.23         (0.04)

                                1(number of claims = 1)           0.68         (0.19)

                                  log(number of claims)           0.30         (0.03)

                                          1(revenue = 0)          1.42         (0.14)

                                            log(revenue)          0.14         (0.02)

                                       1(employees = 0)           0.45         (0.07)

                                         log(employees)           -0.01        (0.02)

                                        Application year          -0.03        (0.05)

                                     (Application year)2          -0.01        (0.01)

                                           Decision year          0.30         (0.06)

                                        (Decision year)2          -0.03        (0.01)

                                                Constant          -1.40        (0.21)

                                                  log(σ )         0.24         (0.05)


                                            Observations                   596
                                               Art units                   260
                                                      χ2                  10,353

Notes: This table reports the relationship between KPSS ξ patent value, and patent application and firm level co-
variates. Coefficient estimates are from a Poisson model with art unit random effects. The sample is the subsample
of granted patents for which the Kogan et al. (2017) measure of patent value is available in our analysis sample,
except we retain firms with more than 100 million in 2014 revenue (unlike in our analysis sample) in order to
maximize sample size (N=596). The dependent variable is the KPSS measure of patent value ξ in millions of
1982 dollars. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Patent family size measures the number of countries in
which the patent application was submitted. Number of claims measures the number of claims in the published US
patent application. Revenue (in thousands of 2014 dollars) and number of employees are measured as of the year
the US patent application was filed. log(σ ) reports the log of the estimated variance of the art unit random effects.
χ 2 reports the results of a likelihood ratio test statistic against a restricted Poisson model without art unit random
effects; this test has one degree of freedom.
                                                           49
                                                                Table 5: Impacts on Firm Aggregates


                                      (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
                                    Positive                  Revenue       Value       EBITD      Wage bill     Surplus      Labor        W2 +        Income
                                    employ-      Log firm       per       added per      per         per           per       comp per     1099 per     tax per
                                     ment          size       worker       worker       worker      worker       worker       worker       worker      worker



             High value (Q5)          0.00          0.22        36.75       15.74         9.10        3.65        12.41        3.94         2.80        0.77
                                     (0.04)        (0.09)      (14.92)      (5.25)       (3.83)      (1.55)       (3.56)      (2.79)       (1.53)      (0.68)
       Mean of outcome (Q5)           0.70          3.14       300.50       116.20        9.07       57.00        67.00       55.27        49.89       17.85
              % Impact (Q5)           -0.6                      12.2         13.5        100.4        6.4          18.5         7.1         5.6          4.3




50
         Lower value (< Q5)           0.00          0.03        -9.68        0.84         -1.42       0.80         -0.26       1.32         0.52        0.74
                                     (0.01)        (0.04)      (8.40)       (3.82)       (1.77)      (0.90)       (2.05)      (1.65)       (0.86)      (0.56)

                Observations        155,646       103,437     103,437      103,437      103,437     103,437      103,437     103,437      107,789     103,159

     Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of initial patent allowances on firm and worker outcomes, separately for high
     and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our analysis sample. Estimates correspond to coefficients on interactions of the designated value category
     with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application being initially allowed. Controls include main effect of value category interacted with
     a post-decision indicator, firm fixed effects, and art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects, as in equation (8). Standard errors (reported
     in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. EBITD is earnings before interest, taxes, and deductions.
     Surplus is EBITD + wage bill. Labor compensation measures total deductions for labor expenses claimed by the firm. “W2 + 1099” measures to the
     sum of W2 and 1099 earnings divided by the sum of the number of W2’s and 1099’s filed. “Income tax per worker” is the average worker’s individual
     income tax liability. Revenue, value added, EBITD, wage bill, surplus, labor compensation, and W2 + 1099 pay are reported in thousands of 2014 USD.
                                                                    Table 6: Workforce Composition


                                               (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                                                            Avg
                                                                         Avg entrant                   Avg stayer
                                              Share          Share                       separator                                 Log       Log quality
                                                                          earnings                      earnings     Avg age
                                             female        inventors                      earnings                                quality    (expanded)
                                                                         (yr bef ent)                  (in app yr)
                                                                                        (yr bef sep)

                    High value (Q5)           -0.01          -0.01           -0.84         0.72           1.29         -1.10       -0.02         -0.01
                                             (0.01)         (0.01)          (2.05)        (1.11)         (1.58)       (0.56)      (0.03)        (0.03)
             Mean of outcome (Q5)             0.31           0.09           27.32         31.45          71.38        41.72        10.43        10.56
                    % Impact (Q5)              -1.8          -13.1            -3.1          2.3            1.8          -2.6

                Lower value (< Q5)            -0.01          -0.01           0.49          0.00           1.01         0.08        0.00          -0.01




51
                                             (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.70)        (0.53)         (1.19)       (0.22)      (0.01)        (0.01)

                       Observations         103,437        103,437         70,079         75,524        99,558       103,434     103,437       97,786

     Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of initial patent allowances on within-firm workforce composition measures,
     separately for high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our analysis sample. Estimates correspond to coefficients on interactions of the
     designated value category with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application initially allowed. Controls include main effect of value
     category interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed effects, and art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects, as in equation (8).
     Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. “Avg entrant earnings (yr bef
     ent)” measures the earnings of entrants in the year before they joined the firm. “Avg separator earnings (yr bef sep)” measures the earnings of separators
     in the year before they leave the firm. Stayers are defined as those who were employed by the same firm in the year of application. Entrants are defined
     as those employees who were not employed at the firm in the previous year. “Avg age” measures the average age of all employees at the firm. Earnings
     are measured in thousands of 2014 USD. “Log quality” gives predicted log wage based on worker demographics and inventor status. “Log quality
     (expanded)” includes wage on previous job in predictive model. See text for details.
                                                          Table 7: Earnings Impacts by Year of Entry/Exit

                                                                                                                   Change since application year

                                                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)
                                                                                                     Avg
                                                 Avg          Avg          Avg          Avg         recent         Avg          Avg          Avg
                                                cohort       stayer       leaver       entrant      entrant       stayer       leaver       entrant
                                               earnings     earnings     earnings     earnings     earnings      earnings     earnings     earnings

                       High value (Q5)           3.96         7.78        -1.54         0.11         -2.71         6.50         2.77         0.95
                                                (2.29)       (2.93)       (1.94)       (1.64)        (1.81)       (3.10)       (5.65)       (1.80)
                 Mean of outcome (Q5)           57.39        72.56        50.57        33.01         41.59        72.56        50.57        33.01
                        % Impact (Q5)             6.9         10.7         -3.0          0.3          -6.5          9.0          5.5          2.9

                   Lower value (< Q5)            0.34         2.48         0.90         0.31          0.78         1.48         -3.87       -0.18




52
                                                (1.18)       (1.59)       (1.39)       (0.79)        (1.01)       (1.63)       (2.40)       (0.70)

                           Observations        151,892       99,558      109,169       70,079       68,691       99,558       109,169       70,079

     Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of initial patent allowances on worker outcomes for employees who stay, enter,
     and exit ξˆ , separately for high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications. Estimates correspond to coefficients on interactions of the designated
     value category with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application being initially allowed. Controls include main effect of value category
     interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed effects, and art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects, as in equation (8). Standard
     errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. “Avg cohort earnings” measures the
     W2 earnings of workers employed by the firm in the year of application. “Avg stayer earnings” measures the W2 earnings of workers employed by the
     firm in the year of application who are also employed in the present year. “Avg leaver earnings” measures the W2 earnings of workers employed by the
     firm in the year of application who are not employed in the present year. “Avg entrant earnings” measures the W2 earnings of employees who were not
     employed by the firm in the previous year. “Avg recent entrant earnings” tracks the average earnings of employees hired by the firm within the past three
     years. “Change since application year” columns are earnings in the current year (Columns 6 and 7), and year of entry (Column 8) minus the respective
     values in the application year. Stayers are defined as those who were employed by the same firm in the year of application. Entrants are defined as those
     employees who were not employed at the firm in the previous year. Earnings are measured in thousands of 2014 USD.
                                                                      Table 8: Pass-Through Estimates


                                                                                                                                 Avg stayer            Avg
                                                                                             Avg                               earnings minus      non-inventor
                                               Wage bill per            Avg male         non-inventor         Avg stayer       earnings in app        stayer
                                                 worker                 earnings           earnings            earnings              yr              earnings

                                                (1a)         (1b)      (2a)      (2b)     (3a)      (3b)     (4a)      (4b)     (5a)      (5b)     (6a)      (6b)
                                                OLS           IV       OLS        IV      OLS        IV      OLS        IV      OLS        IV      OLS        IV

      Panel A: Surplus / worker

                                  Impact        0.16         0.29       0.18     0.53     0.13      0.19      0.20     0.61      0.19     0.51      0.16     0.48
                                               (0.01)       (0.12)     (0.01)   (0.18)   (0.00)    (0.11)    (0.01)   (0.30)    (0.01)   (0.27)    (0.00)   (0.22)
                                Elasticity      0.19         0.35       0.19     0.54     0.17      0.25      0.19     0.56      0.18     0.47      0.17     0.50

                           Observations       103,437      103,437    95,004    95,004   100,901   100,901   99,558   99,558   99,558    99,558   94,909    94,909
                             1st stage F                    12.12               10.60               9.34              13.38              13.38               8.93
                            Exogeneity                      0.29                 0.08               0.60               0.14               0.22               0.08
                 Anderson-Rubin 90% CI                  (0.10,0.57)        (0.27,0.98)        (-0.01,0.43)       (0.21,1.36)        (0.11,1.14)        (0.21,1.18)




53
      Panel B: Value added / worker

                                  Impact        0.07         0.23       0.08     0.38     0.06      0.15      0.08     0.49      0.06     0.41      0.06     0.41
                                               (0.00)       (0.13)     (0.00)   (0.19)   (0.00)    (0.10)    (0.00)   (0.28)    (0.00)   (0.25)    (0.00)   (0.20)
                                Elasticity      0.15         0.47       0.14     0.67     0.13      0.33      0.13     0.78      0.10     0.65      0.11     0.72

                           Observations       103,437      103,437    95,004    95,004   100,901   100,901   99,558   99,558   99,558    99,558   94,909    94,909
                             1st stage F                    8.99                 8.27               8.79               9.39               9.39               6.86
                            Exogeneity                      0.17                 0.08               0.35               0.08               0.11               0.03
                 Anderson-Rubin 90% CI                  (0.07,0.61)        (0.15,1.03)        (-0.01,0.38)       (0.15,1.39)        (0.08,1.15)        (0.18,1.17)

     Notes: This table reports OLS and IV estimates of the effect of a dollar increase in surplus per worker on selected earnings outcomes. The excluded
     instrument is the interaction of top quintile of ex-ante value ξˆ category with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application being initially
     allowed. Controls include main effect of value category interacted with post-decision indicator and interaction of lower quintile value category with a
     post-decision indicator interacted with an indicator for initially allowed, firm fixed effects, and art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects.
     Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. “Exogeneity” reports the
     p-value from a test of the null hypothesis that IV and OLS estimators have same probability limit. Stayers are defined as those who were employed by
     the same firm in the year of application. Surplus is EBITD (earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation) + wage bill. Earnings, wage bill, and surplus
     are measured in thousands of 2014 USD. Elasticity estimates in columns (5a)-(5b) are evaluated at mean unadjusted earnings of firm stayers with high
     ex-ante value patents. For example, the elasticity reported in column (5b) multiplies the pass-through coefficient of 0.51 by 0.56/0.61, which is the ratio
     of the elasticity to impact estimate for unadjusted earnings in column (4b).
                                                                 Table 9: Retention of application cohort


                                                 (1)                      (2)                         (3)                       (4)                      (5)
                                                 All                  Above median                    Men                      Women                Non-inventors

              Retention elasticity               1.22                       1.41                      0.80                       1.17                    1.31
                                                (0.58)                     (0.65)                    (0.35)                     (0.80)                  (0.68)
             Separation elasticity              -1.62                      -2.76                     -1.14                      -1.73                   -1.66



                  Observations                  99,558                     81,728                    88,100                     71,591                  94,909
                    1st stage F                  7.81                       5.80                     31.13                       3.61                    6.74




54
                   Exogeneity                   0.034                      0.029                     0.041                      0.060                   0.047
        Anderson-Rubin 90% CI               (0.459, 3.080)             (0.597, 4.091)            (0.283, 1.524)             (0.233, 8.687)          (0.422, 3.655)

     Notes: This table reports IV estimates of the effect of increases in selected earnings measures on the retention of employees. The excluded instrument
     is the interaction of top quintile of ex-ante value ξˆ category with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application being initially allowed.
     Controls include main effect of value category interacted with post-decision indicator and interaction of lower quintile value category with a post-decision
     indicator interacted with an indicator for initially allowed, firm fixed effects, and art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects. Standard
     errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. “Separation Elasticity” is computed from
     the retention elasticity via a Taylor approximation. Specifically, the separation elasticity estimate is − 1−R̄R̄ ê, where ê is the IV estimate of the elasticity
     of retentions with respect to the wage and R̄ is the mean retention rate among firms with high ex-ante value patents. “Exogeneity” reports p-value for
     test of null hypothesis that IV and OLS estimators have same probability limit. “Above median” refers to members of the application cohort who earned
     above that firm’s median in the application year. Stayers are defined as those who were employed by the same firm in the year of application. Earnings
     are measured in thousands of 2014 USD.
A      Appendix: Data

A.1         Description of patent data
     Our patent data build draws on several sources. Three identification numbers are relevant when using these
datasets. First, publication numbers are unique identifiers assigned to published patent applications. Second,
application numbers are unique identifiers assigned to patent applications that in practice are quite similar to
publication numbers, but sometimes one application number is associated with multiple publication numbers.
Finally, patent grant numbers are unique identifiers assigned to granted patents. Note that one patent application
number can be associated with more than one granted patent.
     Traditionally, unsuccessful patent applications were not published by the USPTO. However, as part of the
American Inventors Protection Act of 1999, the vast majority of patent applications filed in the US on or after 29
November 2000 are published eighteen months after the filing date. There are two exceptions. First, applications
granted or abandoned before eighteen months do not appear in this sample unless the applicant chooses to ask
for early publication. Lemley and Sampat (2008) estimate that about 17 percent of patents are granted before
eighteen months, of which about half (46 percent) are published pre-patent grant. Second, applications pending
more than eighteen months can “opt out" of publication if they do not have corresponding foreign applications, or
if they have corresponding foreign applications but also have priority dates predating the effective date of the law
requiring publication (Lemley, and Sampat 2008).1

    1. Census of published USPTO patent applications. We observe the census of published (accepted and rejected)
       patent applications published by the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). Our source for this data is a
       set of bulk XML files hosted by Google.2 The underlying XML file formats were often inconsistent across
       years, so in the process of parsing these XML files to flat files we attempted to validate the data against other
       USPTO administrative data wherever possible. These records are at the publication number level.

    2. Census of granted USPTO patents. For the published USPTO patent applications in our data, we wish to
       observe which of those applications were granted patents. Our source for this data is a set of bulk XML files
       hosted by Google.3 As with the published USPTO patent applications data, the underlying XML file formats
       were often inconsistent across years, so in the process of parsing these XML files to flat files we attempted to
       validate the data against other USPTO administrative data wherever possible. As one specific example, even
       though patent numbers uniquely identify patent grants, there are twenty-one patent numbers in this data that
       appear in the data twice with different grant dates. Checking these patent numbers on the USPTO’s online
       Patent Full Text (PatFT) database reveals that in each of these cases, the duplicated patent number with the
       earlier grant date is correct.4 Accordingly, we drop the twenty-one observations with the later grant dates.

    3. USPTO patent assignment records. Some of our published patent applications are missing assignee informa-
       tion. (Applicants are not required to submit assignee information to the USPTO at the time of application.)
       Based on informal conversations with individuals at the USPTO, we fill in missing assignee names to the
       extent possible using the USPTO Patent Assignment data. The USPTO Patent Assignment data records
       assignment transactions, which are legal transfers of all or part of the right, title, and interest in a patent
       or application from one or more existing owner to one or more recipient. The dataset is hosted on the
       USPTO website.5 Each transaction is associated with a patent number, application number, and/or publica-
    1 Formore details, see http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/s1120.html and the discussion in Lemley and Sampat
(2010). Most applications not published eighteen months after filing are instead published sixty months after filing.
   2 See http://www.google.com/googlebooks/uspto-patents-applications-biblio.html.
   3 See http://www.google.com/googlebooks/uspto-patents-grants-text.html.
   4 PatFT can be accessed at http://patft.uspto.gov/.
   5 Available          at:                  https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/electronic-data-products/
patent-assignment-dataset.


                                                           55
      tion number (wherever each is applicable). The patent assignment records include both initial assignments
      and re-assignments, but only the former is conceptually appropriate for our analysis since we want to mea-
      sure invention ownership at the time of application. We isolate initial assignments by taking the assignment
      from this database with the earliest execution date. If a given assignment has more than one execution date
      (e.g., if the patent application is assigned to more than one entity), we use the latest execution date within
      that assignment as the transaction execution date. Using these initial assignments, we fill in assignee organi-
      zation name as well as assignee address information where possible when these variables are missing from
      our published patent applications data.

   4. USPTO patent document pre-grant authority files. A very small number (1,025 total) of published USPTO
      patent applications are “withdrawn,” and these observations tend to be inconsistently reported across the
      various datasets we analyze. The USPTO patent document pre-grant authority files — an administrative
      data file hosted on the USPTO website — allows us to exclude all withdrawn applications for consistency.6
      Our versions of these files were downloaded on 24 March 2014 and are up to date as of February 2014.
      These records are at the publication number level.

   5. USPTO PAIR records. We analyze several variables, such as the date of initial decisions, from the USPTO
      Patent Application Information Retrieval (PAIR) data, which we draw from an administrative dataset called
      the Patent Examination Research Dataset (PatEx).7 With the exception of 264 published patent applications,
      these data are available for our full sample of published USPTO patent applications. These records are at the
      application number level.

   6. Examiner art unit and pay scale data. Frakes and Wasserman (2017) generously provided us with examiner
      art unit and General Schedule (GS) pay scale data they received through FOIA requests. These data allow
      us to identify which examiners were active in each art unit in each year.

   7. Thomson Innovation database. All of the databases listed above record information obtained directly from
      the USPTO. One measure of patent value that cannot be constructed based on the USPTO records alone is
      a measure of patent family size, as developed in Jonathan Putnam’s dissertation (Putnam 1996). Generally
      stated, a patent “family” is defined as a set of patent applications filed with different patenting authorities
      (e.g., the US, Europe, Japan) that refer to the same invention. The key idea is that if there is a per-country
      cost of filing for a patent, firms will be more likely to file a patent application in multiple countries if
      they perceive the patent to have higher private value. Past work — starting with Putnam (1996) — has
      documented evidence that patent family size is correlated with other measures of patent value. The Thomson
      Reuters Innovation database collects non-US patent records, and hence allows for the construction of such a
      family size measure.8 We purchased a subscription to the Thomson Innovation database, and exported data
      from the web interface on all available variables for all published USPTO patent applications. To construct
      our family size measure, we take the DWPI family variable available in the Thomson Innovation database
      (which lists family members), separate the country code from the beginning of each number (e.g., “US” in
      “US20010003111”), and then count the number of unique country codes in the family. These records are at
      the publication number level.

   8. Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001) NBER data. Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001) constructed a match
      between US patents granted between January 1963 and December 1999 with the Compustat data. As part
      of that work, the authors constructed technology categories to describe the broad content area of different
      patents, based on categorizations of the patent technology class and subclass variables.9 We match on these
  6 See   http://www.uspto.gov/patents/process/search/authority/.
  7 See http://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/electronic-data-products/patent-examination-research-dataset-public

for the underlying PAIR data, see: http://portal.uspto.gov/pair/PublicPair.
    8 See http://info.thomsoninnovation.com/.
    9 See http://www.nber.org/patents/.



                                                          56
        technology categories, and hand-fill the small number of cases in which classes or subclasses appear in our
        data but not in the crosswalk constructed by Hall and co-authors. These records are at the patent class level.

   9. Kogan et al. (2017) patent value data. Kogan et al. (2017) provide their final estimates of patent value for
      their sample of granted patents at https://iu.app.box.com/v/patents/. In particular we downloaded
      the “patents.zip” file, which contains a linkage between USPTO patent grant numbers and the estimate of
      the patent value ξ . These data were downloaded on — and are accurate as of — 7 August 2016. To develop
      a measure of patent value at the application number level, we associate each application with its potentially
      numerous patent numbers. We then sum the values of ξ by application number to obtain a measure of the
      ex-post value of granted applications.

  10. USPTO technology center data. Technology centers are groupings of examiner art units. The USPTO
      hosts a listing of all technology centers and associated examiner art units at http://www.uspto.gov/
      patent/contact-patents/patent-technology-centers-management. We use these groupings to ex-
      amine heterogeneity in predicted patent value by area of invention in Appendix Table D.2.

A.2     Construction of patent application sample
    We restrict the sample to USPTO patent applications filed on or after 29 November 2000 (the date when
“rejected” applications started to be published), and ends with applications published on 31 December 2013. We
impose a few additional sample restrictions:
      • We exclude a very small number of “withdrawn” patent applications (1,025 total) given that these observa-
        tions tend to be inconsistently reported across datasets. As noted above, the withdrawn applications were
        identified using the USPTO patent document pre-grant authority files.

      • Six publication numbers are listed in the USPTO patent document pre-grant authority files but are not avail-
        able in any of our other datasets;10 we exclude these observations from our sample.

      • Four publication numbers are missing from the Thomson Innovation database.11 We include these observa-
        tions in the sample, but they are missing data for all variables drawn from the Thomson Innovation data.

      • Based on the kind code variable listed on the USPTO published patent applications,12 we exclude a small
        number of patent applications that are corrections of previously published applications: corrections of pub-
        lished utility/plant patent applications (kind codes A9/P9; 3,156 total), and second or subsequent publica-
        tions of the same patent application (kind codes A2/P4; 1,182 total). These kind codes more generally allow
        us to confirm that our sample does not include various types of documents: statutory invention registration
        documents (kind code H1), reexamination certificates (kind codes Bn/Cn/Fn for n=1-9), post grant review
        certificates (kind codes Jn for n=1-9), inter parties review certificates (kind codes Kn for n=1-9), or deriva-
        tion certificates (kind codes On for n=1-9). Our final sample includes only utility patent applications (kind
        code A1; 3,597,787 total) and plant patent applications (kind code P1; 4,196 total).
Finally, there are two data inconsistencies that we have resolved as follows:
      • Seven observations appear to be missing from Google’s XML files of the published patent applications.13 We
        were able to hand-code the required variables for these observations based on the published patent applica-
        tions posted at http://patft.uspto.gov for all but three of these observations (specifically, publication
  10 Specifically, these publication numbers are: US20010003111; US20020011585; US20020054271; US20020084413; US20020084764;

and US20020103782.
  11 Specifically, these publication numbers are: US20010020331; US20010020666; US20010021099; and US20010021102.
  12 For a summary of USPTO kind codes, see: http://www.uspto.gov/patents/process/search/authority/kindcode.jsp.
  13 Specifically, the missing publication numbers are: US20010020331; US20010020666; US20010021099; US20010021102;

US20020020603; US20020022313; US20020085735.


                                                            57
        numbers US20020020603; US20020022313; US20020085735). For those three observations, we hand-
        coded the required variables based on the information available at http://portal.uspto.gov/pair/
        PublicPair/; for these, we assumed that the appropriate correspondent addresses were those listed in
        the “Address and Attorney/Agent” field under Correspondence Address.
      • The applications data contain 67 applications that were approved SIR (statutory invention registration) status
        but have the kind code “A1,” instead of “H1” (as we would expect). We changed the kind code to “H1” for
        these applications, and they are therefore dropped from our sample.

A.3       Description of US Treasury tax files
    All firm-level variables are constructed from annual business tax returns over the years 1997-2014: C-Corporations
(Form 1120), S-Corporations (Form 1120S), and Partnerships (Form 1065). Worker-level variables are constructed
from annual tax returns over the years 1999–2014: Employees (form W2) and contractors (form 1099).14

Variable Definitions
    To define firm-level variables using the US Treasury files, we use the following line items from the 2010
business tax forms: 1120 for C-corporations, 1120S for S-corporations, and 1065 for partnerships. Note that the
tax form line numbers can sometimes change slightly if, for example, a line is added for a new deduction.
      • Revenue

            – Line 1c of Form 1120 for C-Corporations, Form 1120S for S-Corporations, and Form 1065 for part-
              nerships. When 1c is not available, we use 1a, which is gross receipts. We replace negative revenue
              entries, which are very rare, with missing values.

      • Total Income

            – For C-Corporations, line 11 on Form 1120. Note that this subtracts COGS from revenues and includes
              income from a variety of sources (e.g., dividends, royalties, capital gains, etc). For S-Corporations,
              line 6 on Form 1120S. For partnerships, line 8 on Form 1065.

      • Total Deductions

            – For C-corporations, line 27 on Form 1120. For S-corporations, line 20 on Form 1120S. For partner-
              ships, line 21 on Form 1065.

      • Labor Compensation

            – For C-Corporations, sum of lines 12, 13, 24, and 25 on Form 1120.15 For S-Corporations, sum of
              lines 7, 8, 17, and 18 for Form 1120S. For partnerships, sum of lines 9, 10, 18, and 19 on Form 1065.
              These lines are compensation to officers, salaries and wages, retirement plans, and employment benefit
              programs, respectively.16




  14 W2  data are not available in 1997–1999.
  15 Ideally,we could also add Schedule A line 3, which is the cost of labor on the COGS Form 1125-A, but these data are not available.
However, the W2-based measure of compensation avoids this issue.
  16 For partnerships, the compensation to officers term is called “Guaranteed payments to partners.”



                                                                  58
  • Value Added

           – Gross receipts minus the difference between cost of goods sold and cost of labor.
           – For C-Corporations, line 3 on Form 1120. For S-corporations, line 3 on Form 1120S. For partnerships,
             line 3 on Form 1065.17

  • Profits

           – Yagan (2015) defines operating profits as revenues less Costs of Goods Sold and deductions where
             deductions are total deductions other than compensation to officers, interest expenses, depreciation,
             and domestic production activities deduction. We do not add back compensation to officers.
           – For C-Corporations, we define operating profits as the sum of lines 1c, 18, and 20, less the sum of 2
             and 27 on Form 1120. We set profits to missing if 1c, 18, 20,2, and 27 are all equal to zero.
           – For S-Corporations, operating profits are the sum of lines 1c, 13, and 14 less the sum of 2 and 20 on
             Form 1120S.
           – For partnerships, operating profits are the sum of lines 1c, 15, and 16c less the sum of 2 and 21 on
             Form 1065.

  • EBITD

           – EBITD is total income less total deductions (other than interest and depreciation).
           – For C-Corporations, it is the sum of lines 11, 18, and 20, less 27 on Form 1120.
           – For S-Corporations, it is the sum of lines 1c, 13, and 14 less 20 on Form 1120S.
           – For partnerships, it is the sum of lines 1c, 15, and 16c less 21 on Form 1065.

  • Employment

           – Number of W2s associated with an Employer Identification Number (EIN).

  • Wage bill per worker

           – Sum of W2 box 1 payments divided by number of W2s for a given EIN.

  • Surplus

           – Sum of EBITD and Wage bill, which is the sum of W2 box 1 payments for a given EIN.

  • Inventor earnings per inventor

           – Wage bill per worker for workers who are identified as inventors by Bell et al. (2019).

  • Cohort earnings per worker

           – Wage bill per worker for workers who were employed at the firm in the year of application regardless
             of whether or not they stay at the firm.




17 Line   3 is calculated as line 1c minus line 2.


                                                          59
• Stayer earnings per worker

     – Stayers are cohort earning per worker for the set of workers who are still at the firm.

• Leaver earnings per worker

     – Leavers are cohort earning per worker for the set of workers in the initial cohort who are no longer at
       the firm, i.e., are no longer receiving a W2 associated with the original firm that applied for a patent.

• Earnings Gap Q4-Q1

     – Average earnings within quartile four and quartile one of a firm’s wage distribution.

• Separators

     – The number of workers who left the EIN in the previous year.

• Entrants

     – The number of workers who joined the EIN relative to the previous year.

• State

     – Uses the state from the business’s filing address.

• Entity Type

     – Indicator based on tax-form filing type.

• Industry

     – NAICS codes are line 21 on Schedule K of Form 1120 for C-Corporations, line 2a Schedule B of Form
       1120S for S-Corporations, and Box A of Form 1065 for partnerships.

• Active Firm

     – An active firms has non-zero and non-missing total income and non-missing total deductions.




                                                    60
A.3.1    Deflator to convert to 2014 USD


                                        Table A.1: Deflator to convert to 2014 USD


                                        Year     1 / 2014 CPI         Year   1 / 2014 CPI

                                        1993     1.503062988          2004   1.219663817
                                        1994      1.47180133          2005   1.181649182
                                        1995     1.441698831          2006   1.146416065
                                        1996     1.415894851          2007   1.116642696
                                        1997     1.391942424          2008   1.095506864
                                        1998     1.377006398          2009     1.08694
                                        1999     1.357571973          2010   1.073775512
                                        2000     1.327317133          2011   1.052064076
                                        2001     1.297761328          2012   1.033016537
                                        2002     1.278151458          2013   1.016449245
                                        2003     1.253173459          2014        1

Notes: This table shows the deflators used to convert our dollar amounts from current dollars into 2014 USD.
Deflators were calculated using price data from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), National Income and
Product Accounts (NIPA) Table 1.1.4: ‘Price Indexes for Gross Domestic Product.’ See US Bureau of Economic
Analysis (2014).

A.4     Description of merge between patent applications data and US Treasury tax files
    Our analysis relies on a new merge between published patent applications submitted to the US Patent and
Trademark Office (USPTO) and US Treasury tax files. Below we describe the details of this merge, which relies
on a fuzzy matching algorithm to link USPTO assignee names with US Treasury firm names.

A.4.1    Creating standardized names within the patent data
    Published patent applications list an assignee name, which reflects ownership of the patent application. Due
to, e.g., spelling differences, multiple assignee names in the USPTO published patent applications data can cor-
respond to a single firm. For example, “ALCATEL-LUCENT U.S.A., INC.”, “ALCATEL-LUCENT USA, IN-
CORPORATED,” and “ALCATEL-LUCENT USA INC” are all assigned the standardized name “alcatel lucent
usa corp”.
    We employed a name standardization routine as follows. Starting with names in unicode format, we transform
the text into Roman alphabet analogs using the “unidecode” library to map any foreign characters into their appli-
cable English phonemes, and then shift all characters to lowercase.18 We then standardize common terms that take
multiple forms, such as “corp.” and “corporation”; these recodings were built on the name standardization routine
used by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)’s Patent Data Project, with modifications as we saw
opportunities to improve that routine.19 We additionally eliminate any English articles (such as “a” or “an”), since
these appeared to be uninformative in our attempts to uniquely identify entities. We then tokenize standardized
names by splitting on natural delimiters (e.g., spaces and commas), after which we remove any non-alphanumeric
  18 The unidecode library is available at https://github/com/iki/unidecode,  and is a direct Python port of the Text::Unidecode Perl
module by Sean M. Burke.
  19 The NBER Patent Data Project standardization code is available at https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/

Home/posts/namestandardizationroutinesuploaded.


                                                                 61
punctuation. Finally, sequences of single-character tokens are merged into a combined token (e.g., “3 m corp”
would become “3m corp”). The resultant ordered list of tokens constitutes our standardized entity name. We refer
to the USPTO standardized firm name as SNAMEUSPT O .

A.4.2     Creating standardized names within the US Treasury tax files
     In the US Treasury tax files, firms are indexed by their Employer Identification Number (EIN). Each EIN is
required to file a tax return for each year that it is in operation. Specifically, we restrict our analysis to firms with
valid 1120, 1120S, or 1065 filings over the years 1997–2014. We apply the same name standardization algorithm
to the Treasury firm names that was applied to the USPTO names. We refer to the Treasury standardized firm name
as SNAMETreasury .

A.4.3     Merging standardized names across the USPTO data and the US Treasury tax files
    We then conduct a fuzzy merge of SNAMEUSPT O to SNAMETreasury using the SoftTFIDF algorithm, which is
described below. We use this algorithm to allocate each SNAMEUSPT O to a single SNAMETreasury , provided that
match quality lies within a specified tolerance. To choose the tolerance we used a hand coded match of applications
to Compustat firms as a validation dataset (see Section A.4.4). The tolerance (and other tuning parameters) were
chosen to minimize the sum of Type I and II error rates associated with matches to Compustat firms. The resulting
firm-level dataset has one observation per SNAMETreasury in each year. However, there are some cases in which
multiple EINs are associated with a given SNAMETreasury . In those cases, we chose the EIN with the largest
total income in the year of application in order to select the most economically active entity associated with that
standardized name.20

SoftTFIDF algorithm Our firm name matching procedure of name a ∈ SNAMEUSPT O to name b ∈ SNAMETreasury
works as follows. Among all the words in all the firm names in SNAMEUSPT O that are close to a given word in b,
we pick the word with the highest SoftTFIDF index value, which is a word-frequency weighted measure of simi-
larity among words. We do this for each word in the firm’s name. For instance, American Airlines Inc would have
three words. We then take a weighted-sum of the index value for each word in the firm name where the weights
are smaller for frequent words like "Inc." This weighted sum is the SoftTFIDF value at the level of firm-names
(as opposed to words in firm names). We assign a to the firm name b with the highest SoftTFIDF value above
a threshold; otherwise, the name a is unmatched. Because of computational limitations, we limit comparisons to
cases in which both a and b start with the same letter. Therefore we will miss any matches that do not share the
same first letter. This subsection provides details on this procedure and example matches.

SoftTFIDF of firm names                    A score between groups of words X,Y is given by

                                              SoftTFIDF(X,Y ) :=   ∑ weight(w, X) · α(w,Y )
                                                                   w∈X

where weight(w, X) is a word frequency-based importance weight and α(w,Y ) is a word match score that uses a
word similarity index. Specifically, the importance weight for the word w in the set of words Z is: weight(w, Z) :=
√ tfidf(w,Z) 0 2 , where
  ∑w0 ∈Z tfidf(w ,Z)

    • tfidf(w, Z) := tf(w, Z) × idf(w, Z ),
                           n(w,Z)
    • tf(w, Z) :=      ∑w0 ∈Z n(w0 ,Z)
                                       ,
  20 For example, if two EINs shared the same standardized name SNAME
                                                                           Treasury but one EIN made 50 million in total income and the
other showed three million in total income, we chose the EIN that earns 50 million.



                                                                    62
                                             
                                   |Z |
    • idf(w, Z ) := log       |{Z∈Z | w∈Z}|    ,

    • n(w, Z) is the number of occurrences of word w in a set of words Z,
    • Z is the set of all words in either SNAMEUSPT O or SNAMEIRS .
We compute the word match score α(w,Y ) for words that are close to those in SNAMEUSPT O . To determine which
names are close, we use a Jaro-Winkler distance metric to measure the distance between two strings.

Jaro-Winkler metric of distance between strings We use this metric since it has been shown to perform better
at name-matching tasks (Cohen, Ravikumar, and Fienburg 2003) than other metrics such as Levenshtein distance,
which assigns unit cost to every edit operation (insertion, deletion, or substitution). A key component of the
Jaro-Winkler metric is the Jaro metric. The Jaro metric depends on the length of SNAMEUSPT O , the length of
SNAMETreasury , the number of shared letters, and the number of needed transpositions of shared letters.
    Specifically, consider strings s = s1 . . . sK and t = t1 . . .tL and define H = min{|s|,|t|}
                                                                                            2     , which is half the smaller of
K and L. We say a character si is in common with t if ∃ j ∈ [i − H, i + H] s.t. si = t j . Let s0 ,t 0 be the ordered sets
of in-common characters (hence we will re-index). Then define Ts0 ,t 0 := 21 |{i | s0i 6= ti0 }|. The similarity metric is
given by

                                                           |s | |t 0 | |s0 | − Ts0 ,t 0
                                                          0                            
                                                      1
                                     Jaro(s,t) := ·              +       +                .
                                                      3     |s|      |t|      |s0 |
The Jaro-Winkler metric is given by

                                                                       P0
                                    Jaro-Winkler(s,t) := Jaro(s,t) +      · (1 − Jaro(s,t)),
                                                                       10
where P as the longest common prefix of t and s and then P0 = max{P, 4}, which is the normalization used in
Cohen, Ravikumar, and Fienburg (2003).

Word match score α(w, Z) We define the word match score as follows:
                   
                   0                                                                   if closest(θ , w, Z) = 0/
         α(w, Z) =
                    0 max        weight(w0 , Z) · Jaro-Winkler(w, w0 )                 otherwise
                              w ∈closest(θ ,w,Z)

where

  closest(θ , w, Z) := v ∈ Z | ∀v0 ∈ Z, (Jaro-Winkler(w, v) ≥ Jaro-Winkler(w, v0 )) ∧ Jaro-Winkler(w, v) > θ .
                      


In words, we select the word w that is the closest importance-weighted match among words that are close to the
word w in Z given closeness threshold θ . The accuracy of this matching procedure, which has also recently been
used by Feigenbaum (2016), will likely become clearer after reviewing the following examples and discussing how
we selected the tuning parameters (such as the closeness threshold θ ).




                                                              63
Example


               USPTO Assignee Name                         Compustat Firm Name (best match)             Match Score
               angiotech pharmaceuticals corp              angiotech pharmaceuticals                    .9982
               assg brooks justin                          brooks resources corp                        .5857
               hewlett packard development corp            hewlett packard corp                         .8482
               huawei device corp                          huatue electronics corp                      .0013
               matsushita electric works corp              matson corp                                  .0012
               olympus corp                                olympus capital corp                         .9109
               safety crafted solutions corp               safety first corp                            .3862
               sc johnson home storage corp                sc holdings corp                             .5144


    This table provides a small sample of candidate matches from a USPTO to Compustat match.21

A.4.4       Validation: Compustat-USPTO match
   This section describes the hand matching process we used to determine the true mapping of USPTO names to
Compustat names for a random sample of USPTO names. We describe the hand coding task and how we use the
hand coded linkages to select the tuning parameters.

Hand coding tasks We hired several workers on Upwork (formerly Odesk) as well as University of Chicago
undergraduates to hand match two lists of names. The goal for these workers was to match every name in a source
file (a list of 100 randomly selected USPTO names) to a target file of Compustat names or to conclude that there is
no matching name in the target file. To increase accuracy, we informed these workers that (1) we had hand-coded
several of these names ourselves, (2) every name in the source file would be assigned to multiple workers, and (3)
we would only accept reasonably accurate work. We also instructed them to use Google to confirm that matches
were true matches. For example, “infinity bio ltd” may seem like a match with “infinity pharmaceuticals inc,” but
Googling the first reveals that the former is a small Brazilian energy company while the latter is a pharmaceutical
company headquartered in the US. If one worker found a match but another did not, we considered the non-empty
match to be correct. Overall, we ended up assigning 2,196 assignee names to workers, of which 286 (13%) had
matches in the Compustat data.22

Using hand coding tasks to select tuning parameters We use these hand-coded linkages to establish the “true
mapping” from USPTO names to Compustat names, which enables us to select tuning parameters that minimize
the sum of type I and type II errors (relative to these “true linkages”).
    We constructed a grid and for each set of parameters on the grid executed a match. We then compared these
fuzzy matchings to the “true mapping.” Type I errors occur when SoftTFIDF returns a match but either (a) the
match is inconsistent with the hand-coded match or (b)the hand coded linkage shows no match at all. Type II
errors occur when SoftTFIDF does not return a match but the hand-code process had a match.
    The parameters that minimize the sum of these false positive and false negatives are: θ = .95, token type of
standardized names (instead of raw names), P = 0, and a threshold match score of .91. We remind the reader
that the parameter θ governs the threshold similarity for two words to be considered “close.” Only “close” words
contribute to a match score, hence θ = .95 sets a relatively high cutoff below which two similar words do not
increase the match score between two fill names. The prefix P = 0 suggests that not boosting scores by a common
  21 We  present results using Compustat names instead of Treasury names for disclosure reasons.
  22 This match rate is sensible: the number of Compustat names is roughly 20% the number of assignee names, so this rate is consistent
with a reasonable proportion of Compustat firms applying for a patent.



                                                                  64
prefix doesn’t improve performance, which makes sense given that we block by the first letter already.23 Finally,
the threshold match score of .91 shows that we should only consider names a match if they are very close by our
similarity metric. With these parameters, Type I and II errors are each below six percent.

A.4.5     Validation: Individual-inventor match
    The Bell et al. (2019) inventor-level merge between patent applications and W2 reports in theory can — via the
EINs provided on W2 reports — provide a linkage between patent applications and firms, but ex-ante we expect
this inventor-based match to measure something conceptually different from a firm-based match. For example,
many inventors work at firms that are not the assignee of their patents, in which case we would not expect our
assignee-based merge to match to the same EIN as the Bell et al. (2019) inventor-based merge. However, the
Bell et al. (2019) merge nonetheless provides a very valuable benchmark for assessing the quality of our assignee-
based merge. Bell et al. generously agreed to share their inventor-based merge with us, and our preliminary
results comparing the two linkages provide a second set of evidence supporting the quality of our assignee-based
linkage. In the simplest comparison, around 70% of patent applications are associated with the same EIN in the
two linkages. The characteristics of this match also look sensible, e.g., the match rates are higher if we limit the
sample to patent applications that Bell et al. (2019) match to inventors who all work at the same firm. Given that
we do not expect a match rate of 100% for the reasons detailed above, we view the results of this second validation
exercise as quite promising.




  23 It is computationally infeasible to compare every single entity against every other, so we utilized first-letter blocking in order to reduce
the sizes of sets being compared against one another. In particular, the target names (either Compustat or Treasury names) are chunked by
the first letter of their standardized names and grouped with the source (USPTO) names with the same first letter. Hence, we will miss any
matches that differ on the first letter.


                                                                      65
B    Appendix: Further Details on Sample Restrictions
    This section describes the way we implement the sample restrictions in more detail.
    The last row of Table 1 Panel B shows a decline from 35,643 firms (EINs) to 9,732. As mentioned in Section 5,
we estimate the Poisson model of patent value described before making the restriction to active firms. Specifically,
the set of firms in the Poisson analysis are the 35,643 firms that (1) successfully matched an application in the
USPTO-tax merge, (2) corresponded to the first application by that EIN, (3) did not have a prior grant, and (4)
were the EIN with the largest revenue in the application year. As noted in Section 5, the 596 of these 35,643 firms
with a valid KPSS value are used to estimate the Poisson model for patent values ξ j reported in Table 4. Due
to missing covariates, we were unable to form predicted patent values ξˆ j from the Poisson model for 805 firms,
reducing the sample to 34,838 firms.
    After forming the Poisson predictions, we make the final restriction to focus on active firms, which are EINs
with non-zero/non-missing total income or total deductions in the application year and in the three previous years,
a positive number of employees in the application year, and revenue less than 100 million in 2014 USD. When we
restrict to EINs with non-zero/non-missing total income or total deductions in the application year and in the three
previous years and a positive number of employees in the application year, we drop of 24,633 of 34,838 EINS.
When we further restrict that sample to EINs with revenue less than 100 million in 2014 USD in the application
year, we drop another 473 firms and end up with our main estimation sample of 9,732 firms. As noted in Section
5, imposing these restrictions leaves only 159 firms with valid raw KPSS values ξ j , however all 9,732 firms have
valid predicted values ξˆ j from the Poisson model.




                                                        66
C     Appendix: Poisson model of patent value
    Recall that the probability mass function for a Poisson distributed outcome Y with mean λ can be written:

                                            p (Y |λ ) = exp (Y λ − exp (λ )) /Y !

    Let Ya = (Y1 , ...,Yma ) and Xa = (X
                                        1 , ..., Xma ) 
                                                       denote the vectors of outcomes and covariates respectively in an
                             iid
art unit a. Supposing Y j |Xa ∼ Poisson X j0 δ + νa where νa is a scalar art unit effect, we can write:

                                                   ma
                                                              Y j |X j0 δ + νa
                                                                                 
                          ln p (Ya |Xa , νa ) =    ∑ ln p
                                                   j=1
                                                   ma
                                                            X j0 δ + νa − exp X j0 δ + νa − ln (Y j !)
                                                                                        
                                              =    ∑ Yj
                                                   j=1

The random effects Poisson likelihood of an art unit a can be written:
                                                                           1 ν2
                                                                                
                                              1
                                                   Z
                              L (Ya |Xa ) = √         exp ln p (Ya |Xa ) −         dν
                                             2πση                          2 σν2

By independence across art units, the full log likelihood can be written ∑a ln L (Ya |Xa ).
   The first order condition for the coefficient vector δ is:
                                      R  ma h            
                                                              0δ + ν
                                                                     i         n
                                                                                                       1 ν2
                                                                                                            o
           d                              ∑ j=1 jY −  exp  X  j        X j   exp   ln  p  (Y |X
                                                                                            a a , ν) − 2 σν2 dν
                 ln L (Y |X ) =
          dδ ∑                     ∑
                        a a                                     n
                                                                                        2
                                                                                          o
                                                          exp ln p (Ya |Xa , ν) − 12 σν 2 dν
                                                        R
               a                    a
                                                                                       ν
                                      ma       Z                             
                              = ∑ ∑ Y j − exp X j0 δ + ν ωa (ν) dν X j = 0
                                                                  
                                      a j=1
                                                                         
                                                                       2
                                              exp ln p(Ya |Xa ,z)− 21 z 2
                                                                      σν
where the weighting function ωa (z) =           
                                                                       2
                                                                             is the posterior density of ν given the observables
                                             exp ln p(Ya |Xa ,ν)− 21 ν 2 dν
                                           R
                                                                   σν
in art unit a. Note that this is a shrunken version of the usual Poisson orthogonality condition that is robust to
misspecification of features of the conditional distribution other than the mean (Wooldridge 2010). The weights,
however, rely on the exponential nature of the Poisson density function which, if misspecified, will yield inconsis-
tency in small art units. In large art units, however, the posterior will spike around the “fixed effect” estimate of ν,
which is again robust to misspecification of higher moments of the conditional distribution.
    The first order condition for the variance σν is:
                                                             R η2      n                            o 
                                                                                               1 ν2
                                                  
                        d                              1        3
                                                                ση
                                                                   exp    ln p (Y a |Xa , ν) − 2 σν dν
                                                                                                  2    
                   ∑ dσν    ln L (Ya |Xa ) =  ∑ a   −      +         n
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                  o
                                                   ση           exp ln p (Ya |Xa , ν) − 12 σν 2 dν 
                                                               R
                    a
                                                                                                ν
                                                          Z                        
                                                   1                   2          2
                                             =        ∑      ω a (ν) ν   dν  −  σν = 0.
                                                  ση3 a

    This simply says that the posterior variance of ν in each art unit should average across art units to σν2 .




                                                                 67
D    Appendix: Additional figures and tables


                                                 Figure D.1: Years Until Initial Decision




                              .4
                              .3
                         Proportion
                            .2.1
                              0




                                                   0            1         2         3         4                   5+
                                                           Decision year minus application year


Notes: This figure plots a histogram of the years until the initial patent application decision for the sample of patent
assignees by application pairs in the bottom row of Panel A of Table 1 (N=99,871).



                  Figure D.2: Years Until Patent Grant for Initially Rejected Patent Applications
                              .5
                              .4
                          Proportion
                         .2   .1
                              0  .3

                                        ro

                                             ne


                                                       o

                                                             e

                                                                   ur

                                                                        ve


                                                                              x

                                                                                        n

                                                                                             t

                                                                                                     e

                                                                                                               +

                                                                                                                d
                                                                                            gh
                                                                              Si
                                                   Tw


                                                            re




                                                                                                 in
                                                                                    ve




                                                                                                             re
                                       Ze




                                                                 Fo




                                                                                                         n
                                                                        Fi
                                             O




                                                                                                 N
                                                        Th




                                                                                            Ei




                                                                                                           so
                                                                                                      Te
                                                                                   Se




                                                                                                             en
                                                                                                         /c
                                                                                                         er
                                                                                                      ev
                                                                                                     N




Notes: This figure plots a histogram of the years until a patent grant for the subsample of patent assignee by
application pairs in the bottom row of Panel A of Table 1 (N=99,871) which receive an initial rejection (N=88,298).




                                                                         68
                                       Figure D.3: Industry Composition of Firms


                                     Manufacturing                                                                                         30.1

      Professional Scientific and Technical Services                                                                         23.3

                                  Wholesale Trade                                                            16.7

                                       Retail Trade                                   6.6

                                       Construction                             4.5

                                        Information                       3.2

                                              Other                      2.9

                Accommodation and Food Services                     2.2

         Admin, Support, Waste Mgmt, Remediation                   1.7

                    Real Estate Rental and Leasing                1.5

                            Finance and Insurance                 1.4

                 Health Care and Social Assistance                1.3

                   Transportation and Warehousing             0.9

          Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting         0.8

        Management of Companies and Enterprises              0.6

               Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation           0.6

                                             Mining          0.6

                              Educational Services          0.2

                                            Utilities       0.2


                                                        0                                   10                      20                30
                                                                                Industry Share of All Firms in Application Year (%)


Notes: This figure plots the distribution of firms in our sample by industry. The distribution of firms whose patent
application is initially granted is similar.




                                                                           69
                                             Table D.1: Testing for Spatial Correlation in Initial Allowance Decisions


                                                                                           Initially allowed

                                                        State                       Zip                    4-D NAICS                4-D NAICS × State
                                                 (1a)           (1b)         (2a)         (2b)           (3a)      (3b)               (4a)     (4b)

           Panel A: analysis sample

              Intra-class correlation (ρ)       0.000           0.000       0.068         0.058         0.000        0.000           0.000       0.000
                                  p-value       1.000           1.000       0.297         0.465         1.000        1.000           1.000       1.000

                        Observations            9,732           8,647       9,732         8,647         9,732        8,647           9,732       8,647
                  Number of categories           51              51         4,501         4,231          355          347            3,376       3,185




70
                          AU-AY FEs


           Panel B: top quintile

              Intra-class correlation (ρ)       0.113           0.132       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.000           0.000       0.046
                                  p-value       0.165           0.184       1.000         1.000         1.000        1.000           1.000       0.416

                        Observations            1,946           1,666       1,946         1,666         1,946        1,666           1,946       1,666
                  Number of categories           49              49         1,252         1,113          250          242            1,119       1,013
                          AU-AY FEs

     Notes: This table reports the results of tests for whether initial patent allowances are geographically clustered, separately for the analysis sample and
     for the top-quintile predicted patent value sample. “Intra-class correlation (ρ)” reports the ratio of a random effects estimate of the geographic variance
     component to the sum of the geographic and idiosyncratic variance components. The p-value reports a Breusch-Pagan Lagrange multiplier test of the
     null hypothesis that ρ=0. AU-AY FEs denotes the inclusion of Art Unit (AU) by application year (AY) fixed effects.
                                   Table D.2: Mean ξˆ by Technology Center

    Technology center                        ξˆ      N        Technology center                     ξˆ     N

    Business Methods - Finance            15.079    152       Telecomms: Analog Radio              3.080   43
    Electronic Commerce                   10.237    365       Mining, Roads, & Petroleum           2.991   518
    Databases & File Mgmt                  9.726    261       Microbiology                         2.983    83
    Tires, Adhesives, Glass, & Plastics    8.035    134       Semiconductors, Circuits, & Optics   2.903   237
    2180: Computer Architecture            8.029     68       Molec Bio & Bioinformatics           2.891    68
    Combust & Fluid Power Systems          7.803    111       Amusement & Education Devices        2.780   236
    Aero, Agriculture, & Weaponry          7.129    224       Static Structures & Furniture        2.627   560
    Selective Visual Display Systems       6.387    200       Fuel Cells & Batteries               2.437   177
    Computer Graphic Processing            6.012    299       Business Methods                     2.416   193
    Optics                                 5.650    341       2110: Computer Architecture          2.163    50
    Organic Chemistry & Polymers           5.622    116       Software Development                 2.141    76
    Organic Compounds                      5.316    115       Medical Instruments                  2.110   132
    Organic Chemistry                      4.913     62       Multiplex & VoIP                     1.990    72
    Manufact Devices & Processes           4.870    443       Metallurgy & Inorganic Chemistry     1.980   102
    Memory Access & Control                4.865     49       Chemical Apparatus                   1.947   171
    Selective Communication                4.674    294       Semiconductors & Memory              1.936   185
    Surface Transportation                 4.428    294       Cryptography & Security              1.898    76
    Electrical Circuits & Systems          4.090    266       Medical & Surgical Instruments       1.823   118
    Coating, Etching, & Cleaning           3.615     83       Computer Networks                    1.733   145
    Misc. Computer Applications            3.459    129       Radio, Robotics, & Nucl Systems      1.597    85
    Material & Article Handling            3.248    255       Receptacles, Shoes, & Apparel        1.444   470
    Graphical User Interface               3.217    152       Kinestherapy & Exercising            1.330   138
    Refrigeration & Combustion             3.084    265       Fluid Handling                       0.706   188

Notes: This table reports the mean predictions of ex-ante value ξˆ by USPTO technology center of the application;
technology centers are administrative groupings of art units designated by the USPTO. The sample is observations
from our analysis sample whose application belongs to a technology center with more than 20 observations in the
analysis sample (N=6,402). ξˆ is measured in millions of 1982 USD.




                                                         71
                                                          Table D.3: Impacts on Closely Held Firm Aggregates


                                      (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
                                    Positive                    Revenue      Value      EBITD      Wage bill     Surplus      Labor        W2 +        Income
                                    employ-      Log firm         per      added per     per         per           per       comp per     1099 per     tax per
                                     ment          size         worker      worker      worker      worker       worker       worker       worker      worker

             High value (Q5)          -0.04         0.33         79.75      32.72        21.84        8.49        31.11        7.13         5.17        2.21
                                     (0.08)        (0.14)       (24.60)     (8.24)       (6.08)      (3.42)       (7.44)      (1.38)       (1.98)      (1.64)
       Mean of outcome (Q5)           0.71          3.00        305.20      119.30       20.11       49.40        70.60       46.82        43.62       18.21
              % Impact (Q5)            -5.2                      26.1        27.4        108.6        17.2         44.1        15.2         11.9        12.2




72
         Lower value (< Q5)           -0.02         0.02         -3.29      -0.70         0.71        0.30         0.53        0.34         -0.11       1.23
                                     (0.02)        (0.05)       (13.95)     (6.19)       (3.19)      (1.51)       (4.03)      (2.55)       (1.41)      (1.07)

                Observations         75,132       49,943        49,943      49,943      49,943       49,943      49,943       49,943      51,998       49,808

     Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of initial patent allowances on firm and worker outcomes, separately for high
     and low ex-ante valuable patent applications. It restricts the analysis in Table 5 to S-corporations and partnerships (“closely held” firms). Estimates
     correspond to coefficients on interactions of the designated value category with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application being
     initially allowed. Controls include main effect of value category interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed effects, and art unit by application
     year by calendar year fixed effects, as in equation (8). Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application
     year by decision year. EBITD is earnings before interest, taxes, and deductions. Surplus is EBITD + wage bill. Labor compensation measures total
     deductions for labor expenses claimed by the firm. “W2 + 1099” measures to the sum of W2 and 1099 earnings divided by the sum of the number
     of W2’s and 1099’s filed. “Income tax per worker” is the average worker’s individual income tax liability. Revenue, value added, EBITD, wage bill,
     surplus, labor compensation, and W2 + 1099 pay are reported in thousands of 2014 USD.
                                                      Table D.4: Heterogeneity across larger and smaller firms


                                            (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)          (9)         (10)
                                          Positive               Revenue      Value      EBITD        Wage      Surplus     Labor        W2 +       Average
                                          employ-    log(Firm      per      added per     per        bill per     per      comp per     1099 per     stayer
                                           ment        size)     worker      worker      worker      worker     worker      worker       worker     earnings

           Panel A: large firms

                    High value (Q5)         0.05        0.20      39.36       14.04        8.89       2.16       10.67        1.69         1.98        6.81
                                           (0.03)      (0.07)    (17.51)      (6.95)      (5.38)     (2.73)      (6.26)      (3.74)       (2.10)      (3.13)
              Mean of outcome (Q5)          0.72        4.02     278.10       103.90       7.10      57.91       65.28       52.21        52.61       73.47
                     % Impact (Q5)           7.5         5.0       14.2        13.5       125.2        3.7        16.3         3.2          3.8         9.3

                 Lower value (< Q5)         0.01       -0.07       1.71        4.78        -0.03      -0.18       0.25        2.10         -0.46      -1.48
                                           (0.02)      (0.05)    (11.48)      (5.13)      (2.64)     (1.15)      (3.08)      (1.79)       (1.32)      (2.32)



           Panel B: small firms

                    High value (Q5)         -0.10       0.28      19.59       16.56        8.82       5.15       13.28        7.37         2.99        7.52




73
                                           (0.08)      (0.15)    (25.06)      (7.68)      (4.03)     (3.08)      (5.18)      (4.41)       (3.69)      (6.68)
              Mean of outcome (Q5)          0.66        1.77     335.00       135.10      12.12      55.58       69.66       59.99        45.74       71.08
                     % Impact (Q5)          -15.4       15.6       5.9         12.3        72.8        9.3        19.1        12.3          6.6        10.6

                 Lower value (< Q5)         -0.02       0.13      -22.21       -3.57       -2.93      1.81       -0.89        0.49         1.48        6.88
                                           (0.02)      (0.06)    (14.07)      (5.57)      (1.95)     (1.26)      (2.36)      (2.35)       (0.98)      (2.23)



                        Observations      155,646     103,437    103,437     103,437     103,437    103,437     103,437     103,437      107,789     99,558

     Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of initial patent allowances interacted with large and small firm size on firm and
     worker outcomes, separately for high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our analysis sample. Large firms are those above median baseline
     employment, and small firms are those below median baseline employment. Estimates correspond to coefficients on interactions of the designated value
     category with a post-decision indicator, an indicator for the application being initially allowed, and whether the employment of the firm was above or
     below median baseline employment. Controls include main effect of value category interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed effects, and art
     unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application
     year by decision year. Panel A reports the estimates for the large firm indicator interacted with a post-decision indicator and an initial allowance indicator.
     Panel B reports the estimates for the small firm interacted with a post-decision indicator and an initial allowance indicator. EBITD is earnings before
     interest, taxes, and deductions. Surplus is EBITD + wage bill. Stayers are defined as those who were employed by the same firm in the year of application.
     Labor compensation measures total deductions for labor expenses claimed by the firm. “W2 + 1099” measures to the sum of W2 and 1099 earnings
     divided by the sum of the number of W2’s and 1099’s filed. “% Impact” reports the percent change in the outcome at the mean for winning an initial
     allowance. Revenue, value added, EBITD, wage bill, surplus, earnings, labor compensation, and W2 + 1099 pay are reported in thousands of 2014 USD.
                                                                 Table D.5: Within-Firm Inequality


                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
                                                                                                Avg                   Wage bill    Wage bill
                                                        Avg         Gender        Avg         earnings    Inventor       per          per       Wage bill
                                         Avg male      female      earnings     inventor       of non-    earnings     worker       worker     per worker
                                         earnings     earnings       gap        earnings     inventors      gap         (Q1 )        (Q4 )     (Q4 − Q1 )

                  High value (Q5)           5.88        0.15         6.90         16.87        2.24        14.92        -0.04        8.06         8.12
                                           (1.97)      (1.51)       (1.97)       (8.47)       (1.43)       (7.75)       (1.01)      (2.85)       (2.56)
           Mean of outcome (Q5)            66.43       39.53        27.68        139.00       51.72        85.98        18.22       120.50       102.30
                  % Impact (Q5)              8.9         0.4         24.9         12.1          4.3         17.4         -0.2        6.7           7.9

              Lower value (< Q5)            0.35        -0.49       -0.06        -1.24         0.47        -1.72         0.05        2.82         2.77




74
                                           (1.16)      (0.51)       (1.06)       (4.60)       (0.81)       (4.70)       (0.32)      (2.42)       (2.34)

                      Observations        95,004       84,562       80,222       52,471      100,901      50,045       82,750       81,536       81,536

     Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of initial patent allowances on within-firm inequality measures, separately
     for high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in our analysis sample. Estimates correspond to coefficients on interactions of the designated
     value category with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application being initially allowed. Controls include main effect of value category
     interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed effects, and art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects, as in equation (8). Standard
     errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. “Gender earnings gap” measures the
     difference between average male and female earnings at firms where both genders are present. “Inventor earnings gap” measures the difference between
     average inventor and non-inventor earnings at firms where both inventors and non-inventors are present. “Wage bill per worker (Q1 )” measures the
     average wage bill in within-firm wage quartile one. “Wage bill per worker (Q4 )” measures the average wage bill in within-firm wage quartile four.
     “Wage bill per worker (Q4 − Q1 )” measures the difference between average Q4 and Q1 earnings. Stayers are defined as those who were employed by
     the same firm in the year of application. Entrants are defined as those employees who were not employed at the firm in the previous year. Earnings and
     wage bill are measured in thousands of 2014 USD.
                                                    Table D.6: Within-Firm Inequality (Using a Balanced Sample)


                                            (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)
                                                                                               Avg                    Wage bill    Wage bill   Wage bill
                                                         Avg        Gender        Avg        earnings     Inventor       per          per         per
                                         Avg male       female     earnings     inventor      of non-     earnings     worker       worker      worker
                                         earnings      earnings      gap        earnings    inventors       gap         (Q1 )        (Q4 )     (Q4 −Q1 )

                  High value (Q5)           7.11         0.21        6.90        14.44        -0.48        14.92        -0.06        8.06         8.12
                                           (1.79)       (1.54)      (1.97)       (7.59)       (1.86)       (7.75)       (1.01)      (2.85)       (2.56)
            Mean of outcome (Q5)           67.53        39.85       27.68        140.40       54.38        85.98        18.16       120.50       102.30
                   % Impact (Q5)            10.5          0.5        24.9         10.3         -0.9         17.4         -0.3         6.7          7.9

              Lower value (< Q5)           -0.23        -0.18       -0.06        -1.35         0.37        -1.72         0.05         2.82        2.77




75
                                           (1.12)       (0.45)      (1.06)       (4.91)       (1.18)       (4.70)       (0.32)       (2.42)      (2.34)

                      Observations        80,222        80,222      80,222       50,045       50,045      50,045       81,536       81,536       81,536

     Notes: This table replicates Table D.5 using a common sample for each comparison group. Each column reports difference-in-differences estimates of the
     effect of initial patent allowances on within-firm inequality measures, separately for high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in a subsample
     of our analysis sample where the composition of firms is held constant across the related outcome columns. Estimates correspond to coefficients
     on interactions of the designated value category with a post-decision indicator and an indicator for the application being initially allowed. Controls
     include main effect of value category interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed effects, and art unit by application year by calendar year fixed
     effects. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year by decision year. “Gender earnings
     gap” measures the difference between average male and female earnings at firms where both genders are present. “Inventor earnings gap” measures
     the difference between average inventor and non-inventor earnings at firms where both inventors and non-inventors are present. “Wage bill per worker
     (Q1 )” measures the average wage bill in within-firm wage quartile one. “Wage bill per worker (Q4 )” measures the average wage bill in within-firm wage
     quartile four. “Wage bill per worker (Q4 − Q1 )” measures the difference between average Q4 and Q1 earnings. “% Impact” reports the percent change in
     the outcome at the mean for winning an initial allowance. Earnings and wage bill are measured in thousands of 2014 USD.
                                                        Table D.7: Earnings Impacts by Stayer Subgroups


                                               (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                (6)
                                                                                                                           Avg
                                        Avg male stayer       Avg female        Stayer gender       Avg inventor       non-inventor      Stayer inventor
                                           earnings         stayer earnings     earnings gap       stayer earnings    stayer earnings     earnings gap

                  High value (Q5)            13.83               2.73                8.89              17.41                5.75               9.27
                                             (2.74)             (1.95)              (3.51)            (11.21)              (1.72)             (8.35)
           Mean of outcome (Q5)              85.03              48.35               37.77             156.00               64.37              91.85
                  % Impact (Q5)               16.3                5.7                23.5               11.2                 8.9               10.1

             Lower value (< Q5)               2.17               0.70               -0.83               0.58                2.03              -2.78




76
                                             (1.96)             (0.83)              (1.80)             (6.31)              (1.26)             (6.91)

                     Observations            88,100             71,591             66,270              47,063             94,909             42,640

     Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of initial patent allowances on within-firm inequality measures, separately for
     high and low ex-ante valuable patent applications, in a subsample of our analysis sample where the composition of firms is held constant across the
     related outcome columns. Estimates correspond to coefficients on interactions of the designated value category with a post-decision indicator and an
     indicator for the application being initially allowed. Controls include main effect of value category interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed
     effects, and art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit,
     and (2) application year by decision year. “Stayer gender earnings gap” measures the difference between average male stayer and female stayer earnings
     at firms where both genders are present. “Stayer inventor earnings gap” measures the difference between average inventor stayer and non-inventor stayer
     earnings at firms where both inventors and non-inventors are present. “% Impact” reports the percent change in the outcome at the mean for winning an
     initial allowance. Stayers are defined as those who were employed by the same firm in the year of application. Earnings are measured in thousands of
     2014 USD.
                                                              Table D.8: Earnings of Officers / Owners


                                               All firms                                                   Pass-through entities

                                      (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)            (9)
                                                Wages         Non-                                                                                    Avg W2
                                    Officer       and        officer       Officer     Wages and                      Avg earnings    Avg pay of     earnings of
                                   earnings     salaries    comp per      earnings     salaries per    Non-officer     of owner-       owner-        non-owner-
                                   per W2       per W2        W2          per W2           W2         comp per W2      employees      employees      employees

             High value (Q5)         3.81         0.13        -0.05         7.17          -1.43          -1.67            42.87          84.08           5.99
                                    (1.31)       (1.89)       (2.10)       (3.27)         (1.66)         (1.56)          (17.01)        (41.36)         (2.41)
      Mean of outcome (Q5)          15.89        35.07        38.91        14.86          27.85          31.25           149.70         246.60          41.76
             % Impact (Q5)           24.0          0.4         -0.1         48.3           -5.1           -5.4            28.6           34.1            14.4

         Lower value (< Q5)         -0.83         1.46         1.97         -1.28          0.46           1.22             -0.28         -3.71           0.66
                                    (0.94)       (1.01)       (1.02)       (1.38)         (1.31)         (1.49)           (5.45)        (18.72)         (0.84)

                Observations       103,437      103,437      103,437       49,943        49,943         49,943           31,962         45,318          43,531




77
     Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of initial patent allowances on officer and non-officer earnings measures for
     all firms and pass-through entities. Estimates correspond to coefficients on interactions of the designated value category with a post-decision indicator
     and an indicator for the application initially allowed. Controls include main effect of value category interacted with a post-decision indicator, firm fixed
     effects, and art unit by application year by calendar year fixed effects. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and
     (2) application year by decision year. “% Impact” reports the percent change in the outcome at the mean for winning an initial allowance. Earnings are
     measured in thousands of 2014 USD. The outcome variables are defined as follows. (1) Officer earnings per W2 is the officer compensation component
     of labor compensation that we define in A.3. Specifically, the numerator of (1) is Line 12 on C-corporation form 1120, line 7 on S-corporation form
     1120S, and line 10 on Partnership form 1065. Each of these line numbers corresponds to the 2010 IRS forms. Similarly, the numerator of Column
     (2) is the salaries and wages component of labor compensation, which is line 13, 8, and 9 on the C-corporation, S-corporation, and partnership forms,
     respectively. The numerator of Column (3) is labor compensation less officer compensation, so it includes the other components of labor compensation
     (i.e., it includes salaries and wages, pension profit-sharing plans, and employee benefit programs). On form 1120, for example, these are lines 13, 23,
     and 24. Columns (4)-(6) restrict the sample to only S-corporations and Partnerships, but have the same definitions, respectively, as Columns (1)-(3).
     Column (7) is the average W2 wage earnings that go to firm owners, which was constructed using matched firm-owner data from Smith et al. (2019).
     Specifically, for each S-corporation and partnership, we calculate the sum of W2 wages that accrue to its owners and divide this sum by the number of
     owners who also get positive W2 income from the firm. Column (8) is average owner pay, which is the sum of W2 wage earnings that accrue to owners
     plus their business income divided by the number of owners. Each owners’ business income comes from Smith et al. (2019)’s linkage between firms and
     owners, which was constructed using Schedule K1 of form 1120S for S-corporations and form 1065 for Partnerships. Being able to identify business
     owners directly is only possible for S-corporations and partnerships, so only aggregate firm-level business income is available for C-corporations (on
     line 28 of form 1120). Finally, Column (9) is the total W2 earnings for non-owners divided by the number of non-owner W2s.
                                         Table D.9: Pass-Through Estimates: Three-Year Average of Surplus per Worker


                                                                                                                     Avg earnings          Avg
                                                                                   Avg                                of stayers       non-inventor
                                         Wage bill per        Avg male         non-inventor        Avg stayer       minus earnings        stayer
                                           worker             earnings           earnings           earnings          in app yr          earnings

                                          (1a)      (1b)     (2a)      (2b)     (3a)     (3b)     (4a)      (4b)     (5a)      (5b)     (6a)     (6b)
                                          OLS        IV      OLS        IV      OLS       IV      OLS        IV      OLS        IV      OLS       IV

                    Surplus / worker       0.20     0.35     0.23      0.70     0.16     0.31      0.26     0.66     0.25      0.61     0.21      0.60
                                          (0.01)   (0.15)   (0.01)    (0.25)   (0.01)   (0.14)    (0.01)   (0.34)   (0.01)    (0.32)   (0.01)    (0.28)
                           Elasticity      0.24     0.42     0.24      0.72     0.21     0.41      0.25     0.63     0.24      0.58     0.22      0.63




78
                      Observations       83,212    83,212   77,066   77,066    81,632   81,632   81,075    81,075   81,075   81,075    77,939   77,939
                        1st stage F                 8.00              6.21               6.38               8.58              8.58               5.97
                       Exogeneity                   0.28              0.04               0.26               0.18              0.22               0.07
            Anderson-Rubin 90% CI             (0.14,0.78)        (0.40,1.66)       (0.11,0.75)        (0.23,1.72)        (0.17,1.53)       (0.29,1.83)

     Notes: This table reports OLS and IV estimates of the effect of a dollar increase in surplus per worker on selected earnings outcomes using three-year
     averages of surplus per worker. The excluded instrument is the interaction of top quintile of ex-ante value ξˆ category with a post-decision indicator
     and an indicator for the application being initially allowed. Controls include main effect of value category interacted with post-decision indicator and
     interaction of lower quintile value category with a post-decision indicator times an indicator for initially allowed, firm fixed effects, and art unit by
     application year by calendar year fixed effects. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are two-way clustered by (1) art unit, and (2) application year
     by decision year. “Exogeneity” reports p-value for test of null hypothesis that IV and OLS estimators have same probability limit. Stayers are defined
     as those who were employed by the same firm in the year of application. Surplus is EBITD (earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation) + wage bill.
     Earnings, wage bill, and surplus are measured in thousands of 2014 USD. Elasticity estimates in columns (5a)-(5b) are evaluated at mean unadjusted
     earnings of firm stayers with high ex-ante value patents. For example, the elasticity reported in column (5b) multiplies the pass-through coefficient of
     0.61 by 0.63/0.66, which is the ratio of the elasticity to impact estimate for unadjusted earnings in column (4b).
                                          Table D.10: Sensitivity analysis of retention estimates and model based interpretation


                                                       (1)           (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)
                                                                Low incumbent       High retention     Low retention        High pass-       Low pass-
                                                     Baseline
                                                                  premium             elasticity         elasticity        through rate     through rate

         Panel A. Calibrated wage premium
                 Calibrated inputs
                            wIj/wmj                  1.8            1.2                 1.8                1.8                   1.8           1.8
                          d ln G   wIj   /d ln wIj     1.2            1.2                 1.8                0.6                   1.2           1.2
                                   π                   0.61           0.61               0.61               0.61               0.91             0.31

                 Model-based outputs
                                η                       2.7            7.3                4.0                1.4                2.7              2.7
                         0
                        c (N j /I j )/wmj               1.1            0.2                1.0                1.4                1.1              1.1
                                θ                      0.73           0.88               0.80               0.59               0.73             0.73
                                ε                       6.0            3.3                4.2                 -                  -               1.7



         Panel B. Calibrated elasticity of product demand




79
                 Calibrated inputs
                               ε                                                        6.0                6.0                   6.0           6.0
                          d ln G   wIj   /d ln wIj                                        1.8                0.6                   1.2           1.2
                                   π                                                     0.61               0.61               0.91             0.31

                 Model-based outputs
                            wIj /wmj                                                     2.9                1.3                     -             -
                                 η                                                       2.7                2.7                     -           0.6
                        c0 (N j /I j )/wmj                                               2.6                0.4                     -             -
                                 θ                                                       0.73               0.73                    -           0.37

     Notes: This table reports estimates of model-based parameters under different calibrations of the retention elasticity and pass-through rate. Panel A
     allows for different calibrations of the incumbent wage premium wIj /wmj . Column (1) reports our baseline calibration, where the wage premium is the
     ratio of
             the average earnings of incumbent workers to average earnings of recent entrants in the year of application. The baseline retention elasticity
     d ln G wIj /d ln wIj is estimated in Table D.1and the pass-through rate is estimated in Table 8. Column (2) recalibrates all model-based parameters
     assuming a lower wage premium of 1.2. Columns (3) and (4) recalibrate assuming the retention elasticity is one standard deviation above and below
     the baseline, respectively. Columns (5) and (6) re-estimate the model-based parameters assuming the pass-through rate is one standard deviation above
     and below the baseline, respectively. Panel B holds the baseline elasticity of product demand ε constant and allows the wage premium to vary. Column
     (1) in Panel B would replicate the baseline results, so it was excluded from this table. Column (2) is not reported in Panel B as it reports the results of
     calibrating the incumbent wage premium. Dashes denote cases in which the parameter value lies outside a feasible range. See Section 2 for how the
     parameters are calculated.
