                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        COLLATERAL DAMAGE:
THE IMPACT OF FORECLOSURES ON NEW HOME MORTGAGE LENDING IN THE 1930S

                                       Price Fishback
                                      Sebastián Fleitas
                                       Jonathan Rose
                                      Kenneth Snowden

                                      Working Paper 25246
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25246


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2018




We are using some data that was collected and digitized under prior projects. With that in mind,
we appreciate support from National Science Foundation Grants SES-135744, SES-1061927,
SES-0921732, SES 0617972, SES 0214483, SES-0080324, and SBR-9708098. Fishback has
received funds from the Koch Foundation to provide support for research on state governments’
responses to the Great Depression and the New Deal and to bring prominent economic historians
to campus to give talks and interact with students. He was also the Executive Director of the
Economic History Association from 2012 to 2017 and received in-kind support to provide him
with a course off and/or graduate support for his duties and for research. To the best of his
knowledge, no one with whom he has worked or from whom he has received funding has a
financial, ideological, or political stake in the research. The views presented in this paper are
solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve System,
its staff, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the CEPR.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Price Fishback, Sebastián Fleitas, Jonathan Rose, and Kenneth Snowden. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Collateral Damage: The Impact of Foreclosures on New Home Mortgage Lending in the 1930s
Price Fishback, Sebastián Fleitas, Jonathan Rose, and Kenneth Snowden
NBER Working Paper No. 25246
November 2018
JEL No. E32,E44,G23,N12,N22,R31

                                         ABSTRACT

Foreclosures led to severe disruptions in home mortgage lending during the recent Great
Recession and the Great Depression of the 1930s. It is difficult to measure these impacts in the
modern market where origination, funding and servicing are separated within complex lending
structures, but during the 1930s local building & loans (B&Ls) combined all three functions. We
measure the impact of foreclosures on new mortgage lending using a panel of all B&Ls in 4
states. The foreclosure overhang explains about 30 percent of the drop in new mortgage lending
by B&Ls as the housing crisis intensified between 1930 and 1935.


Price Fishback                                 Jonathan Rose
Department of Economics                        Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
University of Arizona                          230 South LaSalle St
Tucson, AZ 85721                               Chicago, Illi 60604
and NBER                                       United States
and also TIAA-CREF Institute                   jonathan.rose@chi.frb.org
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu
                                               Kenneth Snowden
Sebastián Fleitas                              Bryan School of Business and Economics
Department of Economics                        P.O. Box 26165
University of Leuven                           University of North Carolina at Greensboro
3000 Leuven                                    Greensboro, NC 27402
Belgium                                        and NBER
sebastian.fleitas@kuleuven.be                  snowden@uncg.edu
1. INTRODUCTION
        The large literature on the Great Depression over the past several decades has paid
relatively little attention to the housing sector and mortgage finance. Many scholars have
written about business credit and the commercial banking system during the Depression, but
the residential mortgage sector was largely financed by non-banks in this period.2 In the
wake of the 2007-2009 financial crisis and the central role of mortgage finance in that crisis,
a rapidly growing literature has placed a new lens on the Depression to examine the causes,
severity, and impact of the collapse of the housing sector. As a result, scholars have recently
discovered a great deal about the interwar mortgage finance system, house prices, home
ownership, residential construction, and government policies designed to address all of these
concerns.3 Indeed, the Depression featured a severe, nationwide housing crisis. Housing
construction fell catastrophically, far more than the general economy, and recovered more
slowly as well. The joint collapse of housing prices and employment led to widespread
foreclosures, caused a decline in home ownership, and revealed the fragility of the patchwork
1920s mortgage finance sector—the subject of this paper. We describe how the housing
crisis created substantial restrictions in the provision of credit by the leading residential
mortgage lender in the nation on the eve of the great Depression, building and loan
associations (B&Ls).
        Beyond its historical significance, the paper also contributes to the extensive recent
literature on financial frictions. In their survey of that literature Gertler and Gilchrist (2018)
note that these frictions take many forms during credit crises and work through the balance
sheets of households, businesses and intermediaries, such as B&Ls. Our focus is on how
frictions caused by the acquisition of foreclosed real estate by B&Ls impaired the flow of
credit. Foreclosures contribute to housing crises through several different channels, of
course, including through household balance sheets and the downward pressure they exert on
general housing prices (Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi 2015; Annenberg and Kang 2014). Variations
in the costs and delays associated with foreclosure across states generate longer-run
differences in the cost and availability of mortgage credit even after the crisis has passed
(Pence 2006; Ghent and Kuykendall 2011).


2
  White (1984); Wicker (1996); Calomiris and Mason (1997); Mitchener (2005); Richardson and Troost (2009);
Carlson and Mitchener (2009); Carlson, Mitchener, and Richardson (2011).
3
  Courtemanche and Snowden (2011), Fishback, Flores-Lagunes, Horrace, Kantor, and Treber (2011), Rose
(2011), and Fishback, Rose, and Snowden (2013) examine the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation. See also Field
(2014), Fishback and Kollman (2014), White (2014), Brocker and Hanes (2014), Gjerstad and Smith (2014),
Postel-Vinay (2016), and Cortes and Wiedenmier (2018).

                                                                                                         2
         We focus more narrowly here on a direct and immediate mechanism—the short-run
decrease in new mortgage lending by an intermediary during a crisis as revenue-generating
mortgage loans are replaced on its balance sheet with costly and low-earning foreclosed real
estate. This channel is at work during every foreclosure crisis and is likely to be important.
We know, to begin with, that the direct costs to lenders of liquidating foreclosed real estate in
the modern market are substantial—about 12 percent of the original loan balance in normal
times and rising to 20 percent and higher during a crisis when foreclosure rates also increase
dramatically (Cordell et al 2015)4. Given that ex ante expected deadweight losses from
default and foreclosure are central to our understanding and explanation of optimal
contracting and renegotiation within the mortgage market, it is reasonable to conjecture that a
spike in the actual level of these costs during a crisis can generate significant and immediate
disruptions to the supply of credit.
         During the 2007-2009 financial crisis, for example, foreclosures led to a large excess
supply of vacant homes, and the supply of credit tightened considerably (Federal Reserve,
2012). It is difficult to study the direct link between these two developments, however,
because loan origination, servicing and funding have been separated in the modern market
within complex institutional structures. As a result, the costs and delays generated by
foreclosures are shared, and often contested, by a variety of participants with different
incentives and contractual obligations. Underscoring the difficulties and potential importance
of understanding these complexities, a literature has developed examining whether and how
the institutional fragmentation associated with securitization may have been responsible for
increases in foreclosure rates during the latest crisis.5
         The setting for 1930s B&Ls was much simpler. Foreclosures led to real estate owned
(REO) on the balance sheet. To examine the link between REO and mortgage lending, we
collected annual balance sheet data for every state-chartered building and loan association
operating in four states between 1928 and 1940: Iowa, New York, North Carolina, and
Wisconsin. These four states capture important regional variation in housing crisis and
recovery, and the evolution of the thrift industry, during the 1930s. But the selection of these
states was primarily driven by the availability of data on the volume of new mortgage lending


4
  Cordell et al focus on variations in the direct costs of foreclosure across states. Their measure of direct costs to
the lender includes the fixed legal costs and the variable costs associated with foregone principal and interest,
property taxes, hazard insurance, and excess depreciation. Not included, therefore, are external costs of
foreclosures such as losses to the homeowner due to the disruption or the loss in value of neighboring
properties.
5
  Piskorsi and Seru (2010); Adelino, Gerardi and Willen (2014); Kruger (2018)

                                                                                                                     3
each year. Having information about the flow of new lending is unusual and particularly
valuable because in its absence we would be forced to rely on annual changes in the stock of
mortgage loans reported on the balance sheet to measure the volume of new loans. This
proxy is frequently employed in examination of new lending by banks, but it is a noisy and
potentially biased measure for institutions that hold portfolios dominated by mortgages of
different vintages and durations when they are dealing with unusually high levels of
terminations due to foreclosures. We show that the reduction in measurement error from
using the actual value of new loans leads to materially different coefficients and more
precisely estimated results.
       Our empirical strategy leverages yearly shocks to the value of the REO at each B&L
to analyse how REO affected the annual flow of new loans. These changes in REO are
generated by repayment failures at the B&L level, which typically were driven by job loss,
house price declines, health failures, and other negative shocks to households. After
conditioning on the structure of each B&L’s assets and liabilities, market-by-year fixed
effects that control for local shocks to the economy and housing markets, and fixed effects to
control for time-invariant features of each B&L, our identification is based on an absence of
correlation between the unmeasured annual variation in the correlates of new loans and the
failures in repayment that contributed to increased REO. In addition, we show that the results
are robust to potential threats to identification coming from changing the definition of
markets, changes in the identity of B&L managers, differences in long run firm survival,
differential access to liquidity through government programs, and decisions by state-
chartered B&Ls to transition to the new federal savings and loan model.
       We find that an increase in foreclosed real estate on a B&L’s balance sheet had a
powerful and negative effect on new mortgage lending during the 1930s. A one-standard-
deviation rise in REO as a share of assets was associated with a 5 percentage point drop in
new loans as a percentage relative to assets. Such a drop was nearly one-third of the mean
value of the ratio of new loans to assets among B&Ls. The impact of REO was felt
throughout the crisis, but changed in character during the decade Between 1929 and 1935,
the increase in the mean REO share was associated with 30 percent of the drop in the mean
new loan share. In contrast, the REO mean share of B&L assets remained elevated
throughout the last half of the decade with only a small reduction that accounted for 5 percent
of the total increase in new loans




                                                                                                4
2. LITERATURE
       This paper contributes to a well-established literature on the impact of financial
factors during the Great Depression and especially to a recent resurgence of interest in the
role that housing finance played during that crisis. The importance and centrality of the
home mortgage market was certainly not lost on President Hoover who by August 1930
convened his own conference on housing and homeownership that examined, among other
issues, weaknesses and potential improvements in home mortgage finance. Over the next
four years the federal government put in place a far-reaching program of emergency and
permanent interventions specifically designed to reduce frictions that were thought to have
caused the 1930s housing crisis and impeded its recovery. The FHLB Act of 1932
established a discount lending facility to improve the liquidity of home mortgage lenders, the
Home Owners Loan Act of 1933 set up a temporary agency that refinanced distressed home
mortgages on 10 percent the nation’s owner-occupied homes and set up a system of federal
charters for home mortgage lenders and the National Housing Act of 1934 set up federal
insurance programs for federal savings and loan associations (the FSLIC) and individual
home mortgages (the FHA). The 1930s housing crisis was the pivotal episode in the
institutional development of the modern US housing finance, and those policies were directly
linked to policy-makers assessment at that time of the financial frictions in mortgage finance
that were at work (Snowden, 2010).
       By the late 1930s economists began to assess the real impacts of the housing finance
crisis. This literature embedded the issue in a broader approach to the role of a general
“building cycle” as a contributor to recessions and “long-swings” in building cycles as
important contributors to the severe crises in the 1870s, 1890s and the 1930s (Abramovitz,
1964; Hansen, 1964). The interest in construction and building as integral to severe
macroeconomic events waned after the building cycle was declared to have “passed” in the
1960s (Hickman, 1973), although apparent “overbuilding” and “unplanned development”
have been examined by economic historians since then (Bolch et al, 1971; Field, 1992).
       Interest in the developments in housing finance during the 1930s also began to wane
in the 1960s, in part because the National Bureau of Economic Research sponsored and
produced a comprehensive and authoritative series during the 1950s of developments in
home mortgage lending during the Depression and the immediate postwar era (Snowden,
2014). Just as important was the renewed attention paid to the banking sector as a result of
Friedman and Schwartz (1963). Bernanke (1983), in particular, turned the voluminous
literature on banking towards financial frictions and since then a large number of papers have
                                                                                                 5
yield many insights into sources and consequences of commercial bank fragility during the
Depression.6
        The literature on banking during the Depression has generally touched little on
housing finance, as commercial banks were a relatively small part of that market. Indeed,
before 2010, scholars devoted relatively little attention to the housing crisis of the 1930s. Of
course, there are exceptions. Most notably, Mishkin (1978) studies the household balance
sheet during the Depression. Eichengreen and Mitchener (2003) describe the multifaceted
nature of the 1920s credit expansion, including in housing finance. Calomiris and Mason
(2003) examine how commercial bank balance sheets affected their new lending, with a focus
on real effects in the housing sector.
        Since 2010, scholars have come to view the Depression as featuring a severe and
prolonged crisis in the housing and housing finance sectors that had been largely overlooked
by previous research. Housing starts dropped 85 percent between 1929 and 1933, compared
to a 30 percent drop in real GDP. Starts also failed to recover to their 1929 level until 1940,
while real GDP had recovered to its 1929 level by 1936. Median nominal home values fell
by 18% to 32% between 1930 and 1940 for the nation, and by at least 25% in 80 percent of
the nation’s counties. More to the point of this paper, 10 to 20 percent of mortgaged
homeowners experienced a foreclosure between 1926 and 1936, while new lending volumes
throughout the 1930s—the subject of this paper—remained at most half of the level of the
late 1920s. Finally, residential mortgage debt as a share of total mortgage debt fell from 34%
to 24% between 1934 and 1940, while the nonfarm homeownership rate fell from 45 to 40
percent between 1930 and 1940.7
        The central role of housing finance in the 2007-2009 financial has generated a surge
of recent interest in the 1930s housing crisis.8 A key feature of that crisis is its drawn-out
resolution, especially relative to the disruptions in the commercial banking sector, as
described by Fleitas, Fishback, and Snowden (2018) and Rose (2014). These studies have
not yet attempted to estimate how foreclosure shocks limited new mortgage lending.




6
  White (1984); Wicker (1996); Calomiris and Mason (1997); Mitchener (2005); Richardson and Troost (2009);
Carlson and Mitchener (2009); Carlson, Mitchener, and Richardson (2011).
7
  Housing starts: Carter, et. al. 2006, series Dc24; Housing prices: Fishback and Kollman (2011), U.S. Census;
Residential mortgage debt: Grebler, Blank, and Winnick 1956, Table L-6; Carter, et. al. 2006, series Dc1257.
8
  Courtemanche and Snowden (2011), Fishback, Flores-Lagunes, Horrace, Kantor, and Treber (2011), Rose
(2011), and Fishback, Rose, and Snowden (2013) examine the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation. See also Field
(2014), Fishback and Kollman (2014), White (2014), Brocker and Hanes (2014), Gjerstad and Smith (2014),
Postel-Vinay (2016), and Cortes and Wiedenmier (2018).

                                                                                                             6
         The literature on the recovery from the Great Depression has also grown in recent
years. Fishback (2017) provides a survey of the growing literature in this area. Several
papers have focused narrowly on the sharp turnaround during the spring of 1933, including
Hausman, Rhode, and Wieland (2017), Taylor and Neumann (2016), Jalil and Rua (2015),
and Eggertson (2008). Other papers examine the longer period of recovery that lasted up to
World War II, including Fishback, Horrace and Kantor (2005) and Fishback and
Kachanovskaya (2015). For the most part, these papers focus on inflationary expectations and
nonfinancial microeconomic variables. In contrast, this paper looks at the role of continued
financing frictions within the residential mortgage sector.




3. NEW LOANS AND REO IN BUILDING AND LOAN COMPANIES
         There were three fundamental features about B&Ls to keep in mind when analyzing
the impact of foreclosures on new loans in the 1930s. First, B&Ls were the key actors in the
shortage of housing credit during the Great Depression. Second, the business model of B&Ls
created a strong credit channel through which B&Ls had to reduce new loans after they
foreclosed on loans. Third, institutional changes, like the creation of the Home Owners’ Loan
Corporation (HOLC) and Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB) and the shift toward
federal saving and loans, did not alter the damaging effect of foreclosures and the holding of
REO on B&L balance sheets. This section elaborates on each of these features, in turn.


B&Ls in the Housing Crisis of the 1930s
         Building and loans were the primary institutional source of mortgage funds in the
interwar US, and therefore played a central role in the housing boom of the 1920s and the
housing crisis of the Depression. By 1929 more than 12,000 of these lenders, which specialized
in local residential loans, were operating in every state and region and in cities of all sizes.9 At
that point B&Ls claimed 12 million members, had financed 4.2 million of the 7 million homes
built during the 1920s and accounted for 48 percent of the mortgage debt held by institutional
lenders on the nation’s 1 to 4 family homes.10 All the success came to a halt in the 1930s.

9
 See Bodfish (1931, 136). More than 5,000 B&Ls were established and began operation during the urban building
boom of the 1880s. During the housing boom of the 1920s, more than 3,000 new B&Ls appeared. In both periods
B&Ls grew in number and importance in all regions and states, and in cities of all sizes (Snowden, 2003).
10
   Housing Statistics Handbook, 1948, p. 114. Individuals held 40 percent of home mortgage debt as late as 1930.
See also Carter, et.al. (2006, 4-540). In 1929, individuals were still a major non-institutional source of credit,
accounting for about 26 percent of new housing mortgages. The data for B&Ls are reported under the listing for
savings and loan associations, the nomenclature to which B&Ls widely switched during the 1930s

                                                                                                                7
Between 1929 and 1939 the number of B&Ls and their total assets decreased by one-third,
while the industry’s loan portfolio shrank by nearly one-half. Two features of this experience
are noteworthy. First, the decline in the B&L industry was more severe than for other
intermediaries serving the residential market, as their market share fell by 10 percentage points
over the decade of the 1930s. Second, the disruption in the industry varied across space. As
shown in Table 1, all regions suffered reversals during the decade, but the damage was most
severe and the recovery weakest in the Mid-Atlantic and East North Central regions that had
been B&L strongholds before 1930. In contrast, the assets and loans of B&Ls in the South
Atlantic region fully recovered and actually increased between 1929 and 1939 despite a one-
third decrease in number of associations.


New Lending and Real Estate Owned
        B&Ls primarily existed to make housing loans. Their ability to make those loans was
reduced when they had to foreclose on borrowers and hold real estate on their balance sheets
until it could be resold. Between 1930 and 1933 B&L real estate owned increased from nearly
3 percent to 17 percent of total assets. Yet, even worse lay ahead. The industry's REO peaked
at an enormous 20 percent of assets, and then began a slow protracted decline for the rest of
the decade. By 1939 B&L real estate holdings still represented 12 percent of assets for the
industry as a whole; a high of 22 percent in the Mid-Atlantic region, and between 9 and 12
percent in New England and the East North and South Central regions. Even more sobering,
these figures apply only to B&Ls that were still operating in 1939; an unknown amount of real
estate was owned by closed B&Ls who were in the process of liquidating. Throughout the
1930s the overhang of foreclosed real estate on the B&L industry's balance sheet was
substantial, severe, and persistent.
       The difficulties associated with large amounts of foreclosed real estate on B&L balance
sheets were well understood at the time. Articles that appeared in the 1930s in the Federal
Home Loan Bank Review, a residential mortgage periodical published by the Federal Home
Loan Bank Board, repeatedly described how the large amounts of foreclosed real estate were
inhibiting B&Ls from operating as well-functioning mortgage lenders (Federal Home Loan
Bank Board 1934, 1936, and 1938). To explain how, it is necessary to briefly characterize the
contractual structure and balance sheet of a building and loan.
       B&Ls used a contractual structure designed for cooperative residential mortgage
lending. The members of these cooperative associations were owners and not depositors. Non-
borrowing members saved by purchasing shares in the B&L on the instalment plan. For a
                                                                                               8
maturity value of $100, for example, they paid one dollar each month until the amount paid in
plus dividends accumulated to $100. At that point the member could withdraw from the
association or continue to own “fully paid” shares. Borrowing members of the B&L were also
required to purchase shares on the same instalment plan, which served as a form of
amortization. Borrowing members pledged to purchase shares with a combined maturity value
equal to the principal on their loans, and then made monthly purchases of those shares while
also paying interest on their full loan amounts. When the value of a sinking fund reached the
principal value of a loan, the borrower could repay the loan and exit the B&L.
       Recent research has improved understanding of how the contractual structure of the
B&L shaped the pace and character of its recovery from the 1930s crisis. Members of B&Ls
were owners of the institution and did not have rights to withdraw their funds if withdrawal
compromised the value of the shares held by the remaining members. Thus, many members
were stuck with an illiquid investment. Rose (2014) shows that a number of members sold
their shares, often at a substantial loss, in the secondary markets for B&L shares. Meanwhile,
B&L managers avoided losses by exchanging foreclosed real estate for purchased second-hand
shares. Rose shows that the market for shares remained active until 1938, after which resolution
began to take the form of voluntary liquidations and reorganizations. Fleitas, Fishback and
Snowden (2017) show that B&Ls were slow to liquidate and reorganize because their bylaws
and case law required support of two-thirds of the members in a vote before the institution
could be liquidated. Borrowing members had strong incentives to vote against liquidation
because they could avoid significant losses if they could repay their loans before the B&L
liquidated. Consequently, liquidation was delayed significantly until the share of borrowing
members fell below one-third.
       The question in this paper arises naturally from these insights. How did substantial real
estate holdings affect the lending behavior of a B&L industry that operated throughout the
1930s in a relatively illiquid condition? To understand the impact, consider the relatively
simple structure of the B&L balance sheet. Mortgage loans generally represented 90 percent
of assets, and the members’ ownership shares—both non-borrowers and borrowers—
represented more than 90 percent of liabilities. Under non-distressed conditions, the B&L
lending channel involved the decision of how to allocate the pool of current resources generated
each year to its asset categories: primarily mortgage loans, stock (personal) loans, securities,
or cash. The size of this pool was determined by the volume of net earnings: the difference
between inflows (loan repayments plus members’ contributions of dues) and gross outflows


                                                                                               9
(operating and legal expenses plus members’ withdrawals). In normal times net earnings were
generally positive as payments of interest and principal exceeded withdrawal requests.
       During the crisis of the 1930s, when borrowers stopped repaying their loans, B&Ls
foreclosed on these loans, converting them into real estate on their balance sheets. The
foreclosure process often took 6 to 12 months and the eventual sales price of the real estate was
30 to 50 percent lower than the original purchase prices. The situation worsened because dues
paid into the association by non-borrowers dropped precipitously because of concerns about
investing in B&Ls saddled with low earning REO. The combination of these forces reduced
current earnings and the total pool of resources available to invest in all assets, of which roughly
90 percent typically went to new mortgages.

       Additional forces decreased the volume of new mortgage lending by B&Ls. The
Depression generated high unemployment and reduced incomes, which reduced new
household formation and the demand for housing. Field (1992) suggests that uncontrolled land
development during the 1920s made home construction more difficult in the 1930s by creating
lots and land use configurations that did not fit the new economic environment. The drops in
housing prices might have changed households’ assessments of the security of a home as a
household investment.

       Our focus here is on disruption in the new loan supply that came from the shocks from
mortgage repayment failures that led to foreclosures. In the large literature on financing
frictions, Bernanke (1983) famously explored these ideas in the Great Depression primarily in
the context of commercial banking suspensions and failures. Financial accelerator models by
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1996) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), in general rely, on
economics effects stemming from changes in the value of the collateral underlying loans. Our
goal is to examine how the unprecedented volume of foreclosed residential real estate on the
balance sheet of B&Ls in the 1930s reduced their capacity to make new mortgage loans.



Institutional Changes
        New Deal policymakers were aware of and responsive to the distress created by the
housing crisis of the 1930s. These interventions reshaped the character and structure of the
nation’s mortgage market for decades but had only limited or indirect impact on the REO
problem faced by the B&L industry. The most aggressive federal program was the HOLC,
which was created in 1933 to purchase distressed home mortgages from private lenders and


                                                                                                 10
refinance those loans on more liberal terms (Harriss 1951; Fishback, Rose, and Snowden,
2013). Between 1934 and 1936 the agency purchased and refinanced one million home loans
with a nominal value of $2.75 billion and 30 percent of these were originally held by B&Ls.
These purchases clearly reduced the volume of real estate that B&Ls carried on their balance
sheet because applicants for HOLC loans were approved only if they could demonstrate they
were likely to default on their loan. But the HOLC also rejected 1 million applications, often
because the borrower’s distress appeared to be “too severe” to be ameliorated by a loan
modification. HOLC refusals, therefore, left substantial amounts of foreclosed real estate on
the balance sheets of B&Ls and other intermediaries. The consensus of recent evidence
suggests that the HOLC ameliorated but did not reverse the negative impact of the crisis on
home values, ownership and construction (Fishback et al. 2011; Courtemanche and Snowden
2011). The goal of this paper is to examine whether the real estate that remained on the B&Ls
balance sheet curtailed their mortgage lending.
         A second New Deal policy that had limited impact in the 1930s on the foreclosure
problems of the B&Ls was the establishment of the Federal Housing Administration (FHA)
mortgage loan insurance program in 1934 (Snowden, 2013, 78-82). The FHA focused on
insuring amortized direct reduction mortgages that ran for 15 or more years. As lenders shifted
their lending to take advantage of the insurance, this created more competition for B&Ls, which
had up to that point dominated nonfarm mortgage lending by offering the sort of fully
amortized medium or long-term loans that the FHA now encouraged all lenders to write.11 In
fact, to avoid such competition, the United States Building & Loan League strenuously
opposed the creation of FHA, then insisted it remain a separate agency outside of the FHLB
system, and then used the FHA program less than any other major lending group during the
1930s and for decades after that (Ewald 1962, 134–45).
          Federal policymakers also enacted three policies specifically addressed to the B&L
sector. First was the creation in 1932 of the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) system that
was designed to alleviate distress by providing liquidity to B&Ls through short-term loans.
But membership in the FHLB was restricted, and B&Ls with high amounts of REO had trouble


11
  The B&L loan contracts combined an interest-only loan with a balloon payment of the principal with monthly
purchases of membership shares that went into the sinking fund. The membership shares in the sinking fund also
paid dividends to the sinking fund. The typical monthly payment stayed the same until the borrower had
accumulated enough in the sinking fund to repay the full principal on the loan. During the repayment period, the
amount of principal remained the same. Depending on the dividend rate, accumulating enough to repay the
principal typically took about 11 to 13 years. This contrasted with the amortized direct reduction loans, which set
a specific repayment period and for which each payment reduced the amount of principal. During the 1930s B&Ls
lso began offering the direct reduction loans (Rose and Snowden 2012).

                                                                                                                11
attaining membership.        Second, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) operated a
loan program for B&Ls in 1932 and to a much lesser extent through 1935. As they did with
commercial banks, the RFC provided loans to B&Ls to provide access to liquidity and reduce
the probability of closure. Calomiris, Mason and Bobroff (2013) found that the lending did
not provide much help to commercial banks, although Vossmeyer (2016) found that a
combination of loans and direct investments had more positive effects.
        Third was the creation in 1933 of the Federal Savings & Loan (FSL) system. The new
federal charter was taken up both by brand new associations and by existing state-chartered
B&Ls. By the end of the 1930s the rebranded “S&L” industry, which moved away from
traditional share-based B&L contracts, had largely displaced the traditional B&L industry
(Snowden, 2003). While the FHA, FHLB, and FSL programs reshaped the structure of the
mortgage lending sector and contractual structure of building and loans, they did little to reduce
REO within the B&L and S&L industries, or to reduce its impact on new loan activity.12


4. DATA AND DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS


        The data analyzed here include annual balance sheet data and new real estate loan
volume for every state-chartered building and loan association that operated in Iowa, New
York, and North Carolina between 1928 and 1940 and in Wisconsin between 1935 and 1940.
These were the only states that reported both the volume of new loans and balance sheet data
in these years.
        It is common in the banking literature to use annual changes in the stock of loans as a
measure of new lending, but this approach is inappropriate for mortgage specialists like the
B&Ls. New mortgage lending would be understated, for example, when early repayments or
defaults and foreclosures reduced the stock of mortgage loans. Both possibilities were likely
to have been at work for B&Ls during the 1930s. The sinking fund mortgage loan contract
used by these intermediaries provided strong incentives for borrowers with sufficient resources
to repay early—by doing so they avoided sharing in the losses earned by their associations
(Fleitas et al 2018). The increase in foreclosures of interest here, moreover, depressed the stock
of loans held by B&Ls throughout the 1930s. So too did purchases of distressed loans by the
HOLC. For all of these reasons we presumed that changes in the stock of loans would be a


12
   Of particular relevance was the discount facility that was created to improve the liquidity of FHLB members.
The loans from FHLB to members, called advances, required collateral in the form of mortgage loans in good
standing. Real estate or related assets were not eligible.

                                                                                                            12
poor and noisy proxy for new lending by B&Ls in the 1930s and chose to focus only on
institutions in states for which new lending each year was reported in regulatory reports. We
show below, in fact, that our central empirical results cannot be precisely or consistently
estimated using annual changes in the stock of loans.
         Although Wisconsin did not start to report annual lending until 1935, we included it in
the sample to incorporate information from a state in the East North Central region along with
information from the Mid-Atlantic (New York), the West North Central (Iowa) and the south
Atlantic (North Carolina). As shown in Table 1, these four regions (out of nine) claimed 87
percent of the Nation’s B&Ls in 1930 and 76 percent of the industry’s assets. These four areas
also capture the marked regional variation in disruption experienced within the B&L industry
during the 1930s. Finally, all four states in our sample claimed substantial B&L sectors and
large and diverse economies.13
         Table 2 provides an overview of the composition of the B&L panel across states and
over time. All four states saw the number of state-chartered B&Ls decrease during the 1930s,
and the spatial pattern mirroring the regional trends with a low percentage of exits in Iowa
relative to the other three states. Most of these exits resulted from voluntary liquidations, but
one-sixth of them (53) occurred when an operating B&L was granted a Federal S&L charter.
Most of these charter conversions (39) were in New York. Although 262 of the 859 B&Ls in
the sample exited at some point, 597 (70%) remained in operation in 1940 including the 53 that
had converted to federal S&L charters.
         The number of active B&Ls each year that made no new mortgage loans had risen to
118 by 1933 before slowly declining over the rest of the decade. Even when the Depression
hit its trough in 1933, however, 459 of 577 operating B&Ls made at least some new loans.
Descriptive histories of B&Ls during the crisis emphasize the existence of “frozen”
associations that were so severely distressed that they ceased making loans and operated for
years only to manage foreclosures, to service existing loans, and to pay off withdrawing non-
borrowers (Ewalt 1962 (pp. 16-18).. In fact, relatively few B&Ls in the four states examined
here were frozen in this way—of the 118 B&Ls in our sample that made no loans in 1933, 39
exited the industry within the next two years and only 13 of the rest exited the industry without
having made new loans. The other 66 B&Ls that suspended lending in 1933 restarted new


13
  In 1930 the occupation listings across all states show that New York had the most manufacturing workers, while
North Carolina, Wisconsin, and Iowa ranked 11 th, 13th, and 27th. In construction the ordering was New York 1 st,
North Carolina 13th, Wisconsin 17th, and Iowa 21st. Each state also had significant numbers of agricultural workers
with rankings of North Carolina 4th, Iowa 8 th, Wisconsin 13th, and New York 21st.

                                                                                                                13
lending sometime later in decade. The last two columns of Table 2 report the number of B&Ls
that were members of the new FHLB system after 1932 or either FHLB or the similar New
York state system that was established in the mid-1920s.
       To provide comparability across states and times in the empirical work presented here,
we organized all reported balance sheet variables into six categories each of assets and
liabilities shown in Table 3. Each of these are heterogeneous aggregates. Mortgage loans, for
example, include the traditional sinking fund B&L loans and the modern, fully-amortized loan
that became popular late in the decade. Ownership shares, on the other hand, include traditional
B&L installment shares as well as varieties of prepaid shares that gained popularity in the
1920s. The real estate owned aggregate includes not only foreclosed real estate, but also real
estate deeded to a B&L in lieu of foreclosure, judgments for real estate not yet foreclosed upon,
and real estate contracts for foreclosed properties sold on credit. The B&Ls in our sample, as
was generally the case in the industry, entered the 1930 with mortgage loans representing 90
percent of assets and member shares representing a similar share of liabilities.
       In bad times, like the 1930s, loans were foreclosed upon and replaced on the balance
sheet with real estate owned (REO). Figure 1 shows that REO accounted for only one percent
of B&Ls’ assets in the 1920s but reached roughly 20 percent of assets by the mid-1930s. Figure
2 shows how REO displaced mortgages as a share of total assets. Over the period new loans
as a share of assets fell from around 23 percent in 1928 to 5 percent in 1933 before rising to 17
percent at the end of the decade.


5. EMPIRICAL APPROACH
       Our empirical approach estimates how the annual flow of new loans from B&Ls was
influenced by the holding of foreclosed real estate between 1928 and 1940. The mechanism
was relatively simple. Relative to the mortgage loans that generally dominated the assets of a
healthy B&L, foreclosed real estate earned lower average returns, often represented unrealized
losses, and were generally illiquid even if a B&L was willing to recognize the loss. As a result,
foreclosed real estate directly decreased the pool of loanable funds generated by a B&L’s
existing mortgage portfolio, and made new and additional investments in the association less
attractive to non-borrowing savers. Our focus is on estimating the relationship between the
B&L’s new lending and the share of assets soaked up by foreclosed real estate.
       To assess the magnitude of this disruption to B&L mortgage lending we estimate the
following regression equation:


                                                                                              14
        NewLoansijt = δi + α1 REOijt-1 + lnSijt-1 β0 + Aijt-1 β1 + Lijt-1 β2 + μj * θt + εijt (1)


where NewLoansijt is the value of new loans as a percentage of the value of assets in firm i in
county j in year t. REOijt-1 is real estate owned as a share of assets in the prior year. Additional
controls for each B&L include firm size (the log of total assets (lnSijt-1)), and the shares of all
the other assets and liabilities on the B&Ls balance sheet (Aijt-1 and Lijt-1: miscellaneous assets
and miscellaneous liabilities are the omitted categories throughout). To avoid simultaneity, the
balance sheet information is lagged one year. A firm fixed effect (δi) controls for unchanging
features of the B&L, including location within the city, by-laws, and other structural features.
We control for local changes in economic activity, housing markets, and government policies
at the county level with a full set of county-by-year fixed effects μj * θt. We chose counties
because the vast majority of the B&Ls loaned only within the county where they were located.
We also report an alternate specification with city-by-year fixed effects. The model is
completed with a stochastic error term εijt. Because of the use of lags and the loss of firms
with only one observation year due to firm and county-by-year fixed effects, we lose 545 B&L-
year observations. Descriptive statistics for our final sample of 7,315 observations are shown
in Table 4.
       The coefficient α1 of REO share shows the correlation between the new loan share and
the shift toward real estate holdings in the assets after controlling for the other correlates. It
can be given a causal interpretation if there are no unmeasured factors that are correlated with
both the REO share and new loans share. The control variables eliminate a long list of such
factors. The compositions of assets and liabilities are the primary factors that determine the
ability of the B&L to make loans because they describe the solvency, liquidity and risk
exposure of the B&L. The total asset measure controls for size-related brand recognition or
preferential access that might have drawn borrowers and investors as well as the burden of
higher overhead costs associated with large building. The B&L fixed effects control for
unobserved characteristics that did not very over time. These might include locations near
prime neighborhoods or the quality of long-term managers who could influence the cost of
foreclosing loans, selling property, making new loans, or attracting investors and borrowers.
       Conditional on the balance sheet controls, the market-by-year fixed effects, and the firm
fixed effects, our identification assumption is that the changes in REO in the previous period
are uncorrelated with the unmeasured shocks to new loans below the county level and within


                                                                                                    15
B&Ls over time. After presenting our results, we subject them to several robustness tests that
indicate support for our identification strategy.




6. RESULTS
        Table 5 presents estimates of the relationship between lagged share of REO and the
share of new loans for a variety of specifications with and without the full set of controls in
equation 1. Specification 1 presents the relationship while controlling only for the size of the
B&L.14 The coefficient is -0.23 and statistically significant at the 1 percent confidence level.
When we add controls for individual B&L fixed effects to control for unchanging features of
each B&L and year fixed effects to control for national shocks, the coefficient increases
sharply to -0.38. Adding the composition of the balance sheets in specifications 3 through 5
leads to coefficients that range between -0.40 and -0.36. In the final step in specification 6
we add the county-by year fixed effects to control for the substantial variation in local
economic and housing activity during the period (Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2015) and
Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor 2005). The coefficient becomes only slightly less negative
with a value of -0.33.
        To understand the magnitude of the coefficient, recall that the mean and the standard
deviation of the REO share in Table 4 are 0.08 and 0.14, respectively. Therefore, the estimate
from the full specification in column 6 implies that a one standard deviation increase in the
REO share is associated with a 4.6 percentage point decrease (0.140 * -0.329 = -0.046) in the
new loans share of total assets in the next period. This is a considerable effect of roughly one-
third of the mean of the new loans share in Table 4.
        There were abnormally large changes in economic activity during the 1930s along with
a number of changes in government housing policies that might have altered the relationships
between REO and new loans from year to year. Therefore, we re-estimate the model while
allowing the effect of the lagged REO share on the new loans to be different each year. The
point estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals of the year dummies interacted with the
lagged REO share in a regression including all the variables in full specification 6 in Table 5
are presented in Figure 3. The negative effects of holding REO in the balance sheet begin in
1930 and are negative and statistically different from zero after 1933. The point estimates after


14
  The REO share coefficient changes very little when excluding the size variable. In the most complete
specification 6 the coefficient in Table 5 is -0.3299, compared with -0.3319 when the size variable is excluded
(Column 2 in Table 6).

                                                                                                            16
1933 range from -0.25 to -0.44, compared with the statistically insignificant estimates of -0.39
and -0.33 in 1931 and 1932. The fact that the effect becomes most negative after 1935 fits well
with other evidence about B&L activity during the same time frame. After 1935 a number of
associations were in trouble, while a significant number began liquidating as the share of
borrowing members fell below the one-third threshold around that time (Fleitas, Fishback,
Snowden, 2018).
       To approximate the impact that the effect of lagged REO share had on the new loans
share, we can analyze how much of the change in mean new loans share is explained by the
change in mean REO share times the REO coefficient. We do this over two time frames, 1929
to 1935 and 1935 to 1940. The rise of REO between 1929 and 1935 accounts for a larger share
of the change in new loans than it does between 1935 and 1940. For the 1929-1935 period, we
compute this effect by multiplying the 5.5 percentage point increase in the mean REO share
between 1929 and 1935 by the coefficient estimate (-0.33) and then dividing by the 6.5
percentage point drop in the new loan share between 1929 and 1935. Thus, the REO channel
was associated with approximately 30% of the total drop in new loans during the period.
Between 1935 and 1940, the new loan share at the B&Ls increased by 6.6 percentage points
while the mean REO share decreased by 1 percentage point. After multiplying by the REO
coefficient, the reduction in the mean REO share accounted for only 5% of the total increase
in new loans because the change in the mean REO share was so small.
       Our outcome variable is the value of new lending. As noted above, a common
alternative measure of lending in the banking literature is the change in the value of
outstanding loans. We examine the differences that arise from using changes in loans as the
outcome variable, rather than gross new lending. The correlation between new loans and the
change in the loan stock in the sample is a moderate 0.34. Estimating the model with the
dependent variable as the change in the loan stock as a percent of assets, instead of the new
lending yields a coefficient on lagged REO changes of -1.8, overestimating the effect of
REO by a factor of six compared to the gross lending variable. This result stems from the
fact that increases in foreclosures causes the change in loans to be substantially more
negative than the actual number of new loans. These results underscore the importance of
using new loans as the outcome variable.




Robustness Checks


                                                                                                17
       We have explored several robustness checks related to challenges to identification
arising from factors not absorbed by the control variables or fixed effects, i.e. time-varying
factors within counties or within B&Ls. In turn, this section discusses controlling for the
impact of economic activity at the city rather than county level; changes in B&L management;
interaction effects between REO and other balance sheet factors; unmeasured factors related to
B&Ls that failed in the second half of the decade; the results from using changes in the stocks
of loans rather than gross lending; and finally other possible unobserved factors.       We then
explore additional results related to changes in government policies during the 1930s, and
heterogeneity across cities and states.
       First, we consider city-level factors. Although we control for county-by-time fixed
effects, there is a possibility that differential unmeasured shocks at the city level within the
same county might have threatened identification. When we control for city-by-year fixed
effects in Column 3 of Table 6, the coefficient is -0.3591, which is similar to the coefficient of
-0.3299 using county-by-year fixed effects in our preferred specification (repeated for the sake
of convenience in Column 1 of Table 6). We prefer the specification with county-by-year fixed
effects because a number of cities in multi-city counties only had one building and loan;
therefore, we have to drop those cities because the effect of the REO share in those cities is
collinear with the city-by-year fixed effects.
       Second, we address changes in B&L management. By incorporating fixed effects for
individual B&Ls, the main specification controls for the unmeasured factors in the B&L that
did not change with time. In many B&Ls this essentially controls for the quality of the
managers because the leaders did not change. However, in 46% percent of the B&Ls during
the 1930s, the leaders changed and such changes in leadership potentially were correlated with
both the REO and loan shares. Thus, in specification 4 of Table 6 we estimate the effect of the
lagged REO share while allowing the coefficient to be different for B&Ls in which the
secretary changed. We focus on the secretary because he or she was the official who directly
managed the activities of the association. The REO coefficient for firms with no secretary
change is -0.35, similar to the -0.33 for the main specification (Column 1 in Table 6). After
changing management, the B&L still had a strong negative and statistically significant REO
effect of -0.27 (=-0.3537+0.0824).
       Third, we examine the many B&Ls that failed towards the end of the period. When
compared with the surviving B&Ls, it is possible that the firms that failed experienced negative
shocks that we have not observed. To the extent that the unknown factors were positively
correlated with the REO share and negatively correlated with the share of new loans, the
                                                                                               18
coefficient for failed firms might have been more negative than for surviving firms. When we
estimate the preferred specification for only firms that survived through 1940 in specification
5 of Table 6, the coefficient is -0.29 compared with -0.33 for the results with all firms.
Therefore, the unknown factors for failing firms seems to have had only a small effect on the
negative relationship between REO share and new loans.
       Fourth, we have run a specification that interacts the REO measure with the cash asset
share and the securities asset share to see if access to other liquid assets changes the
relationship. When lagged REO share is interacted with the lagged cash share, the REO effect
when lagged cash share is zero is -0.30, still very close to the coefficient of -0.33 in the
preferred specification. The interaction coefficient of -1.31 seems large, but the mean lagged
cash share is -0.03, so that the full effect of REO when the lagged cash share is at the mean is
-0.34, similar to the -0.33 in the preferred specification. The coefficient for the interaction
between the lags of REO share and the securities share is statistically insignificant. The REO
effect is -0.32 for B&Ls that held no securities, and -0.30 at B&Ls with the mean lagged
security share.
       Overall, these robustness checks indicate that the REO share effect is robust and the
effect remains statistically significant and does not become lower than -0.27 in any of the
robustness checks.Finally, in addition to the robustness tests, we follow a strategy used by
Altonji, Elder and Taber (2005) to evaluate the sensitivity of our results to potential correlation
between unobservables and both new loans and the REO share. In general these other
unobservable factors are other time-varying shocks within B&Ls or within each local market.
We have in mind here factors such as whether potential borrowers stayed away from B&Ls
with high REO shares. To examine whether these considerations could be responsible for our
results, the Altonji et al. procedure suggests that if the estimates are not sensitive to the
inclusion of observables, then they are also unlikely to be driven by the presence of
unobservables. To estimate the sensitivity, they compute the ratio of the OLS estimates with
covariates as controls divided by the implied bias, which is computed as the OLS estimate with
covariates minus the OLS estimate without covariates. This ratio measures how strong the
selection on unobservables would have to be, relative to selection on observables, to explain
the entire OLS treatment effect. For the coefficient of -0.33 in the full specification in column
6 of Table 5, the estimated ratio implies that selection on unobservables would need to be 3.2




                                                                                                19
times stronger than selection on observables to reach that value. The lowest ratio measure for
any specification in Table 5 is 2.3, and the range of estimates for Table 6 is 1.7 to 3.7.15


Controlling for Government Policy During the 1930s there were several government policy
changes in the mortgage industry that might have influenced the relationship between the new
loans share and the lagged REO share and the new loans share.
         In 1916 the state of New York organized its own “S&L Bank,” that became the model
for the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) created at the national level in 1932 (Scott Frame,
Hancock and Passmore, 2012). Both institutions were designed to provide access to liquidity
to firms that voluntarily joined the system by purchasing shares in the institutions. System
members could obtain advance "loans" based on mortgage collateral. By 1927 about half of
New York B&Ls had joined, and during the 1930s about half of those firms also joined the
FHLB while staying in the state bank. The remaining members of the New York S&L bank
did not join the FHLB. Very few New York B&Ls joined the FHLB and not the State bank.
In this sense, the New York bank and the FHLB were close substitutes.
         To determine how the New York and Federal system influenced the impact of REO on
new loans, we run different specifications where we interact the REO share with alternative
measures of FHLB access. We use two variables to approximate this access. The first dummy
identifies banks that were members of either the New York S&L Bank, the FHLB, or both.
The second dummy variable includes only FHLB members, independently of their status in the
New York S&L Bank. These two variables are identical, of course, for the other states. The
results in Columns 2 and 3 in Table 7 show that controlling for the inclusion in the FHLB
system leads to the same REO effects of around -0.32 and -0.33 for firms that were not in either
system. Meanwhile, the independent effect of entering the FHLB system was positive as
expected, since it gave the firm more access to liquidity. The coefficients of the interactions of
FHLB access with REO were -0.048 and -0.002, which imply that access to the FHLB led to
more negative effects of REO on new loans, although these coefficients are not statistically
significant. Thus, problems with REO became even more salient for new lending when the
B&Ls had better access to short-term liquidity. We see this finding as a robustness check of
the impact of REO rather than an analytical finding about the interactions of the two because




15
  The ratio estimates for Table 5 from specification 2 to 6 are 2.4, 2.3, 2.7, 2.7. and 3.2. In Table 6 the ratio
estimates from specifications 2 to 6 are 2.1, 1.7. 1.8, and 3.7.

                                                                                                                    20
joining the FHLB system likely was determined by other factors affecting both REO share and
new loans.
        Firms that switched from the B&L format to the new S&L structure might have had
unmeasured features we have not captured. The negative effect of lagged REO share on new
loans share might only have been present in the old B&Ls that were not able to convert to the
new way to do business in the industry. If true, we would expect to see no REO effect on new
loans in B&Ls after they transformed into S&Ls. Column 4 of Table 7 shows the estimates of
the full specification when we add to the sample the observations of the B&Ls that converted
to S&Ls after they make the switch. We also allow the coefficient of interest to vary before
and after the change. The REO coefficient for this group of firms is even more negative and it
is statistically significant.
        In 1932 and to a much lesser extent through 1935, the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation began providing loans to B&Ls as part of its program for helping financial
institutions.    This was similar to the program that offered loans to commercial banks
(Calomiris, Mason, and Bobroff 2013; Vossmeyer 2016). The aid was meant to provide
liquidity to the financial institutions to prevent closure and return to more normal operations.
The RFC aid may reveal information about the B&L that was otherwise unobserved with our
data and also provided additional funds for new loans. In Table 7 we show the results of the
analysis when we add the correlate for RFC lending in two forms. In column 5 the analysis
adds a dummy that has a value of 1 for all years after the B&L received a loan and 0 otherwise,
and an interaction between the dummy and REO from the prior year. In column 6 the analysis
adds an RFC variable that replaces the 1 in the dummy in specification 5 with the value loaned
and also has an interaction term. In the two columns the coefficient of the REO measure is -
0.308 and -0.324, which suggests that the impact of REO for B&Ls that did not receive loans
is very similar to the coefficients in other specifications. In addition, the coefficients of the
RFC measures and their interaction terms with REO are not statistically significant, which
implies that the B&Ls receiving RFC loans did not act differently from those who did not. The
conclusion therefore is that the RFC did not change the relationship between REO and new
loans.16
        In the main estimation procedure we control for the impact of the HOLC troubled loan
purchase and refinance program with the county-by-year fixed effects because we do not have



16
   We owe special thanks to Angela Vossmeyer who shared with us the RFC data cards for the B&Ls in these
states that she had collected.

                                                                                                           21
firm-specific information on the loan purchases made by the HOLC. When the HOLC
purchased a troubled loan, a foreclosure and consequent REO was prevented, while the B&L
had additional funds that could be loaned. Thus, any omitted variable bias was likely to be
negative, leading to overstatement of the negative relationship between REO and new loans.
The HOLC program made only a handful of purchases in December 1933, then made the vast
majority in 1934 and 1935 (Home Owners Loan Corporation 1933).We can assess the situation
for firms in the absence of the HOLC by comparing the year-by-year coefficients between 1931
and 1933 and the HOLC years of 1934 and 1935 in Figure 3. Prior to 1931 foreclosure rates
were very low and the REO share was low enough that there is only a weak relationship
between REO share and new loans. Between 1931 and 1933 the foreclosure crisis spiked and
the HOLC had barely started its purchases. In Figure 3 the average for the coefficients for
1931 through 1933 is roughly the same as the coefficients in 1934 and 1935 when the HOLC
was actively purchasing loans, although the earlier coefficients are imprecisely estimated. 17
The results suggest that the negative omitted variable bias associated with the absence of firm-
specific HOLC information was relatively small.


Heterogeneity by State and City Size
        The structure of mortgage finance might have varied across states and city sizes given
state regulations, laws governing the foreclosure process, or other housing market features. For
example, the foreclosure process took about 16 months to complete in Iowa and Wisconsin, on
average, but just a few months in New York and North Carolina (Russell 1937). Table 8
provides estimates of the impact of the REO share on new loans by state and by county size.
The REO coefficients for smaller counties in specification 2 in Table 8 suggest that the negative
impact of REO on new loans was -0.43, much stronger than the overall coefficient of -0.33 and
roughly double the -0.21 coefficient for larger counties in specification 3.
        The REO coefficients for three of the four states in Column 4 of Table 8 are negative
and statistically significant. Iowa’s coefficient of -0.44 and North Carolina’s of -0.48 are about
a third larger than the overall coefficient of -0.33 while New York’s coefficient of -0.29 is
roughly the same. In specifications 5 and 6 the REO coefficients are estimated by county size
within the states. As in the whole sample, the negative coefficients for smaller counties in New
York and Iowa are roughly twice the magnitude of the coefficients in the larger counties. The



17
   When we estimate the model with just the years from 1928 through 1933, the REO coefficient is -0.293, but it
is imprecisely estimated with a standard error of 0.22.

                                                                                                            22
REO effects in Wisconsin are negative but are smaller and not statistically significant. One
reason may be that the sample for Wisconsin starts only in 1935 and thus does not cover the
peak period of foreclosures that is included in the time frame for the other states.
       The more negative effects in the smaller counties may be a sign of less liquidity and
less depth in the housing markets than in larger markets. Resale of REO likely had stronger
negative effects on housing prices, thus lowering the value of the loan collateral that backed
the failed loans more. Secondary markets for B&L shares were less likely to develop in smaller
counties and B&Ls in smaller areas likely had smaller networks of potential investors.
Courtemanche and Snowden (2011) and Fishback et al (2011) found substantially larger effects
of the HOLC purchase and refinancing of loans on housing prices and home ownership in
smaller counties for similar reasons.


7. CONCLUSIONS
       Events since 2007 have reminded us that recessions accompanied by housing crises
are unusually severe and protracted. In response, there has been much recent work on the
contributory role of financial frictions in these outcomes. For the 1930s episode examined
here, we have shown that the supply of credit from the nation’s most important class of
mortgage lenders was reduced by frictions caused by foreclosures generated during the crisis.
The friction in this case, perhaps better called a clog, was real estate on B&Ls’ balance
sheets. The real estate that replaced interest-bearing loan assets within these mutual lending
organizations generated lower gross returns and imposed higher service and maintenance
costs. The combination reduced the pool of loanable funds generated by current assets and
cut off new sources of funding by discouraging new B&L investments. For the
intermediaries in our four-state sample, a one-standard-deviation increase in the share of
assets owned as foreclosed real estate in the prior year lowered the share of assets devoted to
new loans by approximately 5 percentage points, or about one-third of the mean share of
assets dedicated to new loans during the 1930s. This mechanism accounts for 30 percent of
the drop in the mean value of new mortgages issued by these B&Ls between 1929 and 1935
and much less of the recovery in new lending after 1935 as REO shares remained elevated
throughout the decade. These empirical results stand up to a broad range of robustness
checks and represent evidence that REO on the balance sheet of intermediaries strongly
depressed new lending.
       Mortgage foreclosures also spiked dramatically during the Great Recession of 2007
and generated similarly low returns and high costs to participants within mortgage lending
                                                                                              23
networks. It is not easy to trace, measure or estimate the impact of this REO on new lending
for the modern era, however, because the impacts are imposed on, and often contested by,
multiple participants linked through complex lending networks. The historical context,
therefore, offers an unusual and valuable perspective on a mechanism that is less transparent
today. B&Ls were the leading institutional residential mortgage lender entering the Great
Depression, were exclusively local and residential in lending, and originated, held and
serviced each loan in their portfolio. As equity-financed corporations, and not depository
institutions, B&Ls were permitted to continue operation even as REO increased dramatically
as a share of assets. These features make the REO-new lending mechanism transparent and
measurable for B&Ls of the 1930s and, as we have argued here, especially for B&Ls in our
four-state sample for which new lending activity is observable for each year.
       Our results suggest fruitful areas of investigation for both the historical and modern
eras. The large literatures on the role of commercial bank suspension and failures during the
Great Contraction, to begin with, largely miss the housing crisis of the 1930s because banks
played such a small role in home lending. It is important to better understand how the
restrictions in B&L lending shown here impacted households and homebuilders. We also
need to better understand whether federal policy ameliorated the reduction in credit. Chief
among these is the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC) that purchased distressed
mortgage loans from lenders, including B&Ls, and then refinanced and funded the new loans.
More than 2 million homeowners applied for HOLC refinancing between 1934 and 1936, and
the agency accepted one-half of these applications with many of the 1 million rejected
applications ascertained to be “too distressed” to warrant refinancing (Fishback, Rose, and
Snowden 2013). Most of these ended up as foreclosed real estate on the balance sheets of
B&Ls or other lenders. The analysis here, in this respect, offers a complementary view of the
positive impact that HOLC had on homeownership, prices and building during the 1930s.
       The results also suggest some important questions for the modern era. Financial
innovation has segmented origination, servicing and funding, but during a foreclosure crisis
those systems must still absorb the costs and delays associated with the resulting REO. We
need to better understand how these costs are distributed and funded within modern lending
channels, whether and by how much they choke off new lending, and how policy
interventions can be structured to ameliorate these impacts.




                                                                                                24
25
References

Adelino, Manuel, Kritopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. (2014). “Identifying the Effect of
       Securitization on Foreclosure and Modification Rates Using Early-payment Defaults.”
       Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, vol. 49 no. 3, pp. 352-378.
Abramovitz, Moses. (1964). Evidences of Long Swings in Aggregate Construction since the
     Civil War¸ NBER Occasional Paper 90, New York: National Bureau of Economic
     Research.
Anenberg, Eliot and Edward Kung. (2014) “Estimates of the Size and Source of Price Declines
      Due to Nearby Foreclosures.” American Economic Review, vol. 104, no. 8, 2527–51.
Bernanke, Ben. (1983) “Non-monetary effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of
      the Great Depression.” American Economic Review, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 257-276.
Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. (1996) “The Financial Accelerator and
      the Flight to Quality,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 1-15.
Bernanke, Ben. (2012) “Housing Markets in Transition”
      https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20110210a.htm
Bodfish, Morton. (1935) The Depression Experience of Savings and Loan Associationsin the
       United States. United States Building and Loan League.
Bodfish, Morton (1928) “Costs and Encumbrance Ratios in a Highly Developed Real Estate
       Market,” The Journal of Land & Public Utility Economics 4, no. 2, pp. 125-38.
Bodfish, Morton and A. C. Bayless. (1928) “Costs and Encumbrance Ratios in a Highly
       Developed Real Estate Market,” The Journal of Land & Public Utility Economics, vo.
       4, no. 2, pp. 125-138.
Bodfish, H. Morton (1931) History of Building and Loan in the United States. Chicago:
       United States Building and Loan League.
Bolch, Ben, Rendigs Fels and Marshall McMahon. (1971). "Housing Surplus in the 1920's?"
       Explorations in Economic History v8(3): 259-83.
Bordo, Michael, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene White, editors. (1998) The Defining Moment:
       The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brocker, Michael and Christopher Hanes. (2014) “The 1920s American Real Estate boom
      and the Downturn of the Great Depression: Evidence from City Cross-Sections.”
      Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective. Edited by Eugene N.
      White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback. Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press, pp. 161-202.
Calomiris, Charles, Joseph Mason, Marc Weidenmier, and Katherine Bobroff. 2013. “The
       Effects of Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance on Michigan’s Banks’
       Survival in the 1930s.” Explorations in Economic History 50 :526-547.
Carlson, Mark, Hui Shan, Missaka Warusawitharana . (2013). “Capital Ratios and Bank
       Lending: A Matched Bank Approach.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 22
       (2013): 663-687.
Carlson, Mark, and Kris James Mitchener. 2009. “Branch Banking as a Device for
       Discipline: Competition and Bank Survivorship during the Great Depression,”
       Journal of Political Economy, vol. 117, no. 2, pp. 165-210.

                                                                                              26
Carlson, Mark, Kris James Mitchener, and Gary Richardson. 2011. “Arresting Banking
       Panics: Federal Reserve Liquidity Provision and the Forgotten Panic of 1929,”
       Journal of Political Economy, vol. 119, no. 5, pp. 889-924.
Carter, Susan, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael Haines, Alan Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and
        Gavin Wright. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the
        Present. Millennial Edition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, Harold and Lee Ohanian. (2004). “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great
       Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, vol.
       112, no. 4, pp. 779-816.
Cordell,,Larry, Liang Geng, Laurie S. Goodman and Lidan Yang (2015). “The Cost of
       Foreclosure Delay,” Real Estate Economics, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 916-56.
Cortes, Gustavo and Marc Weidenmier. Forthcoming. “Stock Volatility and the Great
        Depression.” Review of Financial Studies.
Courtemanche, Charles and Kenneth Snowden. (2011) Repairing a mortgage crisis: HOLC
      lending and its impact on local housing markets. Journal of Economic History, 71(2),
      307-337.
Crafts, Nicholas and Peter Fearon, editors. (2013) The Great Depression of the 1930s:
        Lessons for Today. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2008) “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression,” American
       Economic Review. 98(4): 1476–1516.
Ewalt, Josephine H. (1962). A Business Reborn. Chicago: American Savings and Loan
       Institute Press
Federal Home Loan Bank Board. (1934) “What Can Be Done with Frozen Assets?” Federal
       Home Loan Bank Review 1(2) (November): pp. 7-10.
Federal Home Loan Bank Board. (1936) “Foreclosures and New Residential Construction in
       Large Urban Counties” Federal Home Loan Bank Review 2(7) (April): pp 229-32.
Federal Home Loan Bank Board. (1938) “The Problem of Real Estate Owned By
       Institutions” Federal Home Loan Bank Review 4(9) (June): pp 308-10.
Federal Reserve Board. (2012) “The U.S. Housing Market: Current Conditions and Policy
       Considerations.” White paper, https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/other-
       reports/files/housing-white-paper-20120104.pdf
Field, Alexander. (1992) “Uncontrolled Land Development and the Duration of the
        Depression in the United States,” Journal of Economic History, vol. 52, no. 4, pp.
        785-805.
Field, Alexander. (2014) “The Interwar Housing Cycle in the Light of 2001-2012: A
        Comparative Historical Perspective.” Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical
        Perspective. Edited by Eugene N. White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 39-80.
Fishback, Price. (2017) “How Successful Was the New Deal? The Microeconomic Impact
       of New Deal Spending and Lending Policies” Journal of Economic Literature 55(4)
       (December 2017): 1435-85.




                                                                                             27
Fishback, Price V., William C. Horrace, and Shawn Kantor. (2005) “Did New Deal Grant
       Programs Stimulate Local Economies? A Study of Federal Grants and Retail Sales
       during the Great Depression,” Journal of Economic History, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 36–71.
Fishback, Price V. and Valentina Kachanovskaya. (2015) “The Multiplier for Federal
       Spending in the States During the Great Depression,” Journal of Economic History,
       vol. 75 no. 1, pp. 125–162.
Fishback, Price, Shawn Kantor, Alfonso Flores-Lagunes, William Horrace, and Jaret Treber.
       (2011) “The Influence of the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation on Housing Markets
       During the 1930s,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 24, pp. 1782-1813.
Fishback, Price and Trevor Kollmann. (2014) “New Multicity Estimates of the Changes in
       Home Values, 1920-1940.” Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical
       Perspective. Edited by Eugene N. White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 203-244.
Fishback, Price, Jonathan Rose, and Kenneth Snowden. (2013) Well Worth Saving,
       University of Chicago and NBER.
Fleitas, Sebastian, Price Fishback, and Kenneth Snowden. (2018). “Economic Crisis and the
        Demise of a Popular Contractual Form: Building & Loans in the 1930s.”, Journal of
        Financial Intermediation 36: 28-44.
Frame, Scott, Diana Hancock, and Wayne Passmore. (2012) “Federal Home Loan Bank
       Advances and Commercial Bank Portfolio Composition,” Journal of Money, Credit,
       and Banking, vol. 44, pp. 661-684.
Ghent, Andra C. and Marianna Kudlyak. (2011) Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default:
       Evidence from U.S. States. Review of Financial Studies 24(9), 149–86.
Gjerstad, Steven and Vernon Smith. (2014) “Consumption and Investment Booms in the
       1920s and Their Collapse in the 1930s.” Housing and Mortgage Markets in
       Historical Perspective. Edited by Eugene N. White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price
       Fishback. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 81-114.
Gjerstad, Steven and Vernon Smith. (2014). Rethinking Housing Bubbles: The Role of
       Household and Bank Balance Sheets in Modeling Economic Cycles. New York:
       Cambridge University Press.Grebler, Leo, D. Blank and L. Winnick. (1956) Capital
       Formation in Residential Real Estate. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hansen, Alvin H. (1964). Business Cycles and National Income. New York: W.W. Norton.
Hausman, Joshua, Paul Rhode, and Johannes Wieland. (2017) “Recovery from the Great
     Depression: The Farm Channel in Spring 1933.” Working paper.
Harriss, C. Lowell. (1951) History and Policies of the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation.
       New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hickman, Bert G. (1973). "What Became of the Building Cycle?" in Nations and Households
      in Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz edited by P. David and
      M. Reder, pp. 291-314, New York: Academic Press.
Home Owners’ Loan Corporation. 1933. Minutes (Resolutions) of the HOLC Board
     Meetings, 1933. Entry 45, boxes 1 and 2. Records of the Federal Home Loan Bank
     System, Record Group 195, National Archives II in College Park, Maryland.
Housing and Home Finance Agency. (1948) Housing Statistics Handbook.


                                                                                           28
Hughes, Jonathan and Louis Cain. 2011. American Economic History, 8th edition. New
      York: Addison-Wesley
Iowa State Auditor. (Various Years). Report on the Condition of Building and Loan
       Associations for the Year Ending December 31. Des Moines, Iowa: State of Iowa.
Jalil, Andrew and Gisela Rua. (2015) “Inflation Expectations and Recovery from the
        Depression: Evidence from the Narrative Record,” Finance and Economics
        Discussion Series, Division of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal
        Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 2015-029.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. (1997) “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
       vol. 105, no. 2, pp. 211-248.
Kruger, Samuel (2018). “The effect of mortgage securitization on foreclosure and
       modification.” Journal of Financial Economics 129, pp. 586–607.
Mishkin, Frederic. (1978) “The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression,” Journal
      of Economic History, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 918-937.
Mitchener, Kris James. (2005) “Bank Supervision, Regulation, and Instability during the
      Great Depression.” The Journal of Economic History, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 152–185.
New York Superintendent of Banks. (Various Years). Annual Report of the Superintendent
     of Banks Relative to Savings and Loan Associations, Savings and Loan Bank of the
     State of New York and Credit Unions for the Year. Albany, NY: J.B. Lyons
     Company Printers.
North Carolina Insurance Department. (Various Years). Financial Condition of Building and
       Loan Associations.
Parker, Randall E. (2007) The Economics of the Great Depression. A Twenty-First Century
        Look Back at the Economics of the Interwar Era. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Parker, Randall E. (2002) Reflections on the Great Depression. Northampton, MA:
        Edward Elgar.
Pence, Karen. (2006) “Foreclosing on Opportunity: State Laws and Mortgage Credit.”
       Review of Economics and Statistics 88(1): 177–182.
Piskorsi, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. (2010) “Securitization and Distressed Loan
       Renegotiation: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, vol. 124 no. 4, pp. 1449-1496.
Postel-Vinay, Natacha. (2016) “What Caused Chicago Bank Failures in the Great
       Depression? A Look at the 1920s,” Journal of Economic History, vol. 76, no. 2, pp.
       478-519.
Richardson, Gary, and William Troost. (2009) "Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking
       Panics during the Great Depression: Quasi‐Experimental Evidence from a Federal
       Reserve District Border, 1929–1933." Journal of Political Economy 117, no. 6, pp.
       1031-1073.
Rose, Jonathan D. (2014) “The Prolonged Resolution of Troubled Real Estate Lenders.”
       Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective. Edited by Eugene N.
       White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, pp. 245-286.



                                                                                             29
Rose, Jonathan D. and Kenneth Snowden (2013). “The New Deal and the Origins of the Modern
       American Real Estate Loan Contract,” Explorations in Economic History 50(4), 548-66.
Snowden, Kenneth (1997). ”Building and Loan Associations in the U.S.: The Origins of
       Localization in the Residential Mortgage Market." Research in Economics, vol. 51
       no. 3, pp. 227-50.
Snowden, Kenneth (2003). “The Transition from Building and Loan to Savings and Loan,”
     in Finance, Intermediaries and Economic Development, edited by S. Engerman, P.
     Hoffman, J. Rosenthal, and K. Sokoloff, pp. 157-206. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press.
Snowden, Kenneth (2010). "The Anatomy Of A Residential Mortgage Crisis: A Look Back
     To The 1930s," in The Panic of 2008: Causes, Consequences and Proposals for
     Reform, edited by L. Mitchell and A. E. Wilmarth, pp. 51-75, Northhampton MA.:
     Edward Elgar Publishing. Snowden, Kenneth. (2014) “A Historiography of Early
     NBER Housing and Mortgage Research.” Housing and Mortgage Markets in
     Historical Perspective. Edited by Eugene N. White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price
     Fishback. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 15-38.
Taylor, Jason E. and Todd C. Neumann. (2016) “Recovery Spring, Faltering Fall: March to
       November 1933,”Explorations in Economic History, vol. 61, pp. 54–67.
Vossmeyer, Angela. (2016). “Sample Selection and Treatment Effect Estimation of Lender
     of Last Resort Policies.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 34(2): 197-
     212.
White, Eugene Nelson. (1984) “A Reinterpretation of the Banking Crisis of 1930.” The
       Journal of Economic History, vol. 44, no. 1, 1984, pp. 119–138.
White, Eugene. (2014) “Lessons from the Great American Real Estate Boom and Bust of the
       1930s.” Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective. Edited by Eugene
       N. White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, pp. 115-160.
Wisconsin State Banking Commission. (Various Years). Annual Report on the Condition of
      Wisconsin Building and Loan Associations and Investment Associations As At the
      Close of Business on December 31. Madison, WI.




                                                                                          30
Figure 1: Real estate owned as a percent of assets at building and loan associations
            in Iowa, New York, North Carolina and Wisconsin, 1920-1940




                                                                                       31
Figure 2: Home Mortgage Loans and REO




                                        32
Figure 3: Effect of REO on New Loans, Event Study Specification




                                                                  33
                   Table 1: The Building and Loan Industry in 1929-1939


   REGION                 1929                   % Change 1929-1939               1939
                              Assets                          Mortgage          % Assets in
                Number      (millions)     Number Assets        Loans             REO
     U.S.        12,342       8,695         -33%    -35%        -47%               12%
 New England       358         637           -1%     -2%        -18%                9%
 Mid-Atlantic     5,772       2,974         -46%    -51%        -64%               22%
E North Central 2,395         2,488         -22%    -34%        -51%               12%
   W North
    Central        671         599            -6%    -31%         -40%              8%
South Atlantic    1,911        547           -32%     18%          6%               2%
E South Central    279         176             6%     -7%         -24%             12%
   W South
    Central        444         511           -24%    -48%         -53%              6%
   Mountain        178         152           -13%    -35%         -45%              8%
    Pacific        334         611           -16%    -38%         -42%              5%
   Sources: Monthly Labor Review, Nov 1930, pp.114-5, Jan 1941, pp.126-7, May 1943, p.937,
   Federal Home Loan Bank Board, Eighth Annual Report, 1940, pp.175-6, Federal Home Loan
   Bank Board, Ninth Annual Report, 1941, pp. 242-5




                                                                                        34
  Table 2: Building and Loans in Sample Reporting New Loans


                                                                                     Member
                                                                 Making
                                                        Active          Member           of
                          North     New                           Zero
Year    All     Iowa                        Wisconsin    in               of          FHLB
                         Carolina York                            New
                                                        1940             FHLB            or
                                                                 Loans
                                                                                      NYSB
1928      607       73       227       307                 440        28                  124
1929      610       74       233       303                 444        33                  130
1930      617       75       235       307                 453        44                  143
1931      606       75       229       302                 454        61                  159
1932      595       74       222       299                 454        84                  180
1933      577       74       209       294                 453       118        163       297
1934      542       74       197       271                 438        82        192       312
1935      677       69       182       243        183      533        71        255       360
1936      653       69       174       230        180      524        66        268       365
1937      628       66       167       220        175      528        54        263       357
1938      614       64       163       216        171      534        59        276       366
1939      590       64       163       205        158      539        41        271       356
1940      544       63       160       198        123      544        18        246       326
Total    7860      914      2561     3395         990     6338       759      1934       3475
  Sources and Notes: Sources are balance sheet information reported in various years by the
  Iowa State Auditor, the New York Superintendent of Banks, the North Carolina Insurance
  Department, and the Wisconsin State Banking Commission.




                                                                                        35
           Table 3: Assets and Liabilities Categories
        Assets                            Liabilities

   Mortgage Loans                     Ownership Shares
     Cash Items                 Advanced Payments Received
  Real Estate Owned                   Undivided Profits
      Securities                         Borrowings
     Receivables                          Reserves
Office & Miscellaneous                  Miscellaneous




                                                             36
                             Table 4: Descriptive Statistics
                                 All Sample           Pre 1935            Post 1935
                                 (N=7315)             (N=4131)            (N=2592)
                             Mean     Std.Dev.    Mean     Std.Dev.   Mean    Std.Dev.
 New Loans Share              0.15      0.18      0.15         0.20   0.16      0.14
 Lagged REO Share             0.08      0.14      0.02         0.06   0.15      0.18
 Lagged Tot Assets           12.60      1.53      12.46        1.60   12.81     1.40
 Lagged Shares Share          0.86      0.09      0.87         0.09   0.85      0.09
 Lagged Advanced
 Payments Share               0.00      0.01      0.00         0.01   0.00      0.00
 Lagged Undivided Profits
 Share                        0.04      0.04      0.05         0.04   0.04      0.04
 Lagged Borrowings Share      0.05      0.07      0.06         0.07   0.04      0.06
 Lagged Reserves Share        0.03      0.03      0.02         0.02   0.04      0.03
 Lagged Mortgage Loans
 Share                        0.83      0.16      0.90         0.09   0.74      0.19
 Lagged Cash Share            0.03      0.05      0.03         0.05   0.04      0.04
 Lagged Securities Share      0.04      0.05      0.03         0.04   0.05      0.05
 Lagged Receivables Share     0.02      0.02      0.02         0.03   0.01      0.02
Sources and Notes: Sources are balance sheet information reported in various years by the
Iowa State Auditor, the New York Superintendent of Banks, the North Carolina Insurance
Department, and the Wisconsin State Banking Commission.




                                                                                         37
                          Table 5: Effects of Real Estate Owned on New Loans


                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
Lagged REO Share             -0.2260***   -0.3840***   -0.4004***   -0.3564***   -0.3593***   -0.3299***
                              (0.0421)     (0.0419)     (0.1043)     (0.0410)     (0.1031)     (0.1053)
Lagged Tot Assets            -0.0138***   -0.0845***   -0.0685***   -0.0888***   -0.0737***   -0.0717***
                              (0.0029)     (0.0124)     (0.0119)     (0.0120)     (0.0121)     (0.0140)
Lagged Mortgage Loans
Share                                                   -0.0690                   -0.0503      -0.0850
                                                        (0.0938)                  (0.0935)     (0.1083)
Lagged Cash Share                                      0.4327**                  0.4275**     0.3399**
                                                        (0.2040)                  (0.1975)     (0.1530)
Lagged Securities Share                                -0.2788**                 -0.2638**     -0.1281
                                                        (0.1220)                  (0.1174)     (0.1297)
Lagged Receivables Share                                -0.0094                   -0.0234      -0.2068
                                                        (0.2712)                  (0.2726)     (0.2410)
Lagged Shares Share                                                  0.0674*      0.0657*      0.0813*
                                                                     (0.0369)     (0.0394)     (0.0451)
Lagged Advanced
Payments Share                                                       0.1939        0.1168      -0.1559
                                                                     (0.5256)     (0.5093)     (0.5506)
Lagged Undivided Profits
Share                                                                -0.2906      -0.2751      -0.0565
                                                                     (0.1887)     (0.1828)     (0.1972)
Lagged Borrowings Share                                             -0.1651***   -0.1371**     -0.1129*
                                                                     (0.0593)     (0.0611)     (0.0655)
Lagged Reserves Share                                               -0.3789**    -0.3762**     -0.1181
                                                                     (0.1602)     (0.1622)     (0.1747)
B&L FE                          No           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Year FE                         No           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
County-by-Year FE               No           No           No           No           No           Yes
Observations                    7315        7315         7315         7315         7315         7315

  Sources and Notes: Sources are balance sheet information reported in various years by the
  Iowa State Auditor, the New York Superintendent of Banks, the North Carolina Insurance
  Department, and the Wisconsin State Banking Commission. The asterisk (*), (**), (***)
  means statistically significantly different from zero at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level in a two-
  tailed t-test, respectively.




                                                                                                       38
      Table 6: Results of Robustness Tests: City-by-Year Fixed Effects, Changes in
                 Leadership, Survivors, and Interactions with Liquid Assets


                                  -1           -2         -3         -4         -5         6           7
 Lagged REO Share                 -0.3299*** -0.3319*** -0.3591** -0.3537*** -0.2867*** -0.2962*** -0.3201***
                                  (0.1053) (0.1181) (0.1400) (0.1082) (0.1025) (0.1048) (0.1102)
 Lagged REO Share times                                              0.0824*
 Lagged Management Change                                            (0.0455)
 Lagged REO Share times                                                                    -1.3121**
 Lagged Cash Share                                                                         (0.6136)
 Lagged REO Share times                                                                                -0.2161
 Lagged Securities share                                                                              (0.3693)
 Lagged Tot Assets                -0.0717***              -0.0794*** -0.0722*** -0.0724*** -0.0711*** -0.0717***
                                  (0.014)                 (0.0257) (0.014)      (0.016)    (0.0139) (0.0140)
 Lagged Mortgage Loans Share      -0.085       -0.1949    -0.1065    -0.0815    0.0407     -0.0808     -0.0822
                                  (0.1083)     (0.1212)   (0.1396)   (0.1077)   (0.1005)  (0.1067)     (0.1087)
 Lagged Cash Share                0.3399**     0.3576**   0.1537     0.3459**   0.5240*** 0.3906**     0.3432**
                                  (0.153)      (0.1621)   (0.1777)   (0.1528)   (0.1902) (0.1683)      (0.1533)
 Lagged Securities Share          -0.1281      -0.2490*   -0.2029    -0.1208    -0.0468    -0.1257     -0.1065
                                  (0.1297)     (0.1413)   (0.1581)   (0.1297)   (0.112)    (0.1287)    (0.1467)
 Lagged Receivables Share         -0.2068      -0.3762    0.0055     -0.1999    -0.2644    -0.2139     -0.2080
                                  (0.241)      (0.257)    (0.4176)   (0.2405)   (0.2088)   (0.2394)    (0.2405)
 Lagged Shares Share              0.0813*      0.0451     0.0709     0.0813*    0.0094     0.0773*     0.0819*
                                  (0.0451)     (0.0479)   (0.0506)   (0.0448)   (0.0673)   (0.0446)    (0.0453)
 Lagged Advanced Payments Share -0.1559        -0.2047    -0.2385    -0.1589    -0.1182    -0.1642     -0.1533
                                  (0.5506)     (0.5969)   (0.7158)   (0.5474)   (0.5324)   (0.5476)    (0.5516)
 Lagged Undivided Profits Share   -0.0565      -0.0386    -0.364     -0.0516    0.0772     -0.0603     -0.0585
                                  (0.1972)     (0.1929)   (0.2792)   (0.1964)   (0.2283)  (0.1960)     (0.1970)
 Lagged Borrowings Share          -0.1129*     -0.1713** -0.0632     -0.1112*   -0.2097** -0.1158*     -0.1122*
                                  (0.0655)     (0.0677)   (0.089)    (0.0656)   (0.0901) (0.0646)      (0.0658)
 Lagged Reserves Share            -0.1181      0.0488     0.0537     -0.1071    -0.2616*   -0.1244     -0.1168
                                  (0.1747)     (0.1621)   (0.2848)   (0.1751)   (0.1337)   (0.1699)    (0.1754)
 B&L FE                           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
 County-by-Year FE                Yes          Yes        No         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
 City-by-Year FE                  No           No         Yes        No         No         No          No
 Sample                           All          All        All        All        Stayers    All         All
 Observations                     7315         7315       4309       7315       5614       7315        7315
Sources and Notes: Sources are balance sheet information reported in various years by the
Iowa State Auditor, the New York Superintendent of Banks, the North Carolina Insurance
Department, and the Wisconsin State Banking Commission. The asterisk (*), (**), (***)
means statistically significantly different from zero at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level in a two-
tailed t-test, respectively.



                                                                                                        39
Table 7: Robustness Checks Associated with Government Policies
                                           (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
Lagged REO Share                       -0.3299***     -0.3161***      -0.3298***     -0.3003***     -0.3075***     -0.3249***
                                        (0.1053)        (0.1079)       (0.1076)       (0.1006)       (0.1089)        (0.1057)
Lagged REO Share times                                  -0.0475
Lagged FHLB Indicator 1                                 (0.0574)
Lagged REO Share times                                                  -0.0023
Lagged FHLB Indicator 2                                                (0.0560)
Lagged REO Share times                                                               -0.6302***
Lagged Federal Indicator                                                              (0.2076)
Lagged FHLB Indicator 1                                0.0330**
                                                        (0.0162)
Lagged FHLB Indicator 2                                                0.0243**
                                                                       (0.0117)
Lagged REO Share times                                                                                -0.0724
Lagged RFC Indicator                                                                                 (0.0899)
Lagged REO Share times                                                                                                0.0000
Lagged RFC Amount                                                                                                    (0.0001)
Lagged RFC Indicator                                                                                  0.0093
                                                                                                     (0.0234)
Lagged RFC Amount                                                                                                     0.0001
                                                                                                                     (0.0001)
Lagged Tot Assets                      -0.0717***     -0.0744***      -0.0729***     -0.0688***     -0.0715***     -0.0717***
                                        (0.0140)        (0.0137)       (0.0140)       (0.0135)       (0.0139)        (0.0139)
Lagged Mortgage Loans Share              -0.085         -0.0898         -0.085         -0.0569        -0.0865        -0.0859
                                        (0.1083)        (0.1099)       (0.1094)       (0.1045)       (0.1087)        (0.1085)
Lagged Cash Share                       0.3399**       0.3321**        0.3353**       0.3909**       0.3384**       0.3393**
                                        (0.1530)        (0.1524)       (0.1533)       (0.1526)       (0.1527)        (0.1529)
Lagged Securities Share                  -0.1281        -0.1460         -0.1398        -0.1100        -0.1308        -0.1294
                                        (0.1297)        (0.1320)       (0.1318)       (0.1293)       (0.1290)        -0.1293
Lagged Receivables Share                 -0.2068        -0.2150         -0.1975        -0.1803        -0.2089        -0.2064
                                        (0.2410)        (0.2429)       (0.2416)       (0.2350)       (0.2416)        (0.2415)
Lagged Shares Share                      0.0813*        0.0890*        0.0816*         0.0867*       0.0814*         0.0807*
                                        (0.0451)        (0.0450)       (0.0453)       (0.0490)       (0.0454)        (0.0453)
Lagged Advanced Payments Share           -0.1559        -0.1632         -0.1696        0.1313         -0.1582         -0.157
                                        (0.5506)        (0.5274)       (0.5418)       (0.4879)       (0.5550)        (0.5515)
Lagged Undivided Profits Share           -0.0565        -0.0388         -0.0204        -0.102         -0.0451        -0.0551
                                        (0.1972)        (0.2023)       (0.1979)       (0.2042)       (0.1982)        (0.1967)
Lagged Borrowings Share                 -0.1129*       -0.1379**       -0.1249*       -0.1128*       -0.1147*        -0.1134*
                                        (0.0655)        (0.0656)       (0.0659)       (0.0638)       (0.0648)        (0.0658)
Lagged Reserves Share                    -0.1181        -0.1217         -0.1048        -0.1496        -0.1092        -0.1174
                                         (0.1747)         (0.1749)      (0.1755)       (0.1845)      (0.1742)       (0.1743)
B&L FE                                      Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
County-by-Year FE                           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Sample                                       All             All           All        + Federals        All            All
Observations                                7315            7315          7315           7429          7315           7315
Sources and Notes: Sources are balance sheet information reported in various years by the Iowa State Auditor, the New York
Superintendent of Banks, the North Carolina Insurance Department, and the Wisconsin State Banking Commission. The asterisk
(*), (**), (***) means statistically significantly different from zero at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level in a two-tailed t-test,
respectively.

                                                                                                                              40
                           Table 8: Heterogeneity of REO Effects by State and City Size

                                         (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)             (6)
Lagged REO Share                    -0.3299***   -0.4355***    -0.2098**
                                      (0.1053)     (0.1251)     (0.0917)
Lagged REO Share times                                                      -0.4504***   -0.4818***    -0.2716**
State of Iowa                                                                 (0.1463)     (0.1696)     (0.0956)
Lagged REO Share times                                                      -0.4393***   -0.4574***
State of North Carolina                                                       (0.1176)     (0.1319)
Lagged REO Share times                                                       -0.2877**    -0.4735**     -0.2216**
State of New York                                                             (0.1145)     (0.2189)      (0.0920)
Lagged REO Share times                                                         -0.1588      -0.1115       -0.1724
State of Wisconsin                                                            (0.1110)     (0.1756)      (0.1045)
Lagged Tot Assets                   -0.0717***   -0.0704***   -0.0839***    -0.0729***   -0.0707***    -0.0843***
                                      (0.0140)     (0.0190)     (0.0127)      (0.0138)     (0.0192)      (0.0129)
Lagged Mortgage Loans Share            -0.0850      -0.1254      -0.0513       -0.0912      -0.1256       -0.0485
                                      (0.1083)     (0.1226)     (0.1104)      (0.1083)     (0.1233)      (0.1096)
Lagged Cash Share                    0.3399**      0.4386*        0.2048     0.3317**      0.4366*         0.2054
                                      (0.1530)     (0.2315)     (0.1545)      (0.1531)     (0.2291)      (0.1528)
Lagged Securities Share                -0.1281      -0.1431      -0.1133       -0.1356      -0.1466       -0.1114
                                      (0.1297)     (0.1835)     (0.1207)      (0.1280)     (0.1827)      (0.1196)
Lagged Receivables Share               -0.2068      -0.1305      -0.3007       -0.2147      -0.1359       -0.3002
                                      (0.2410)     (0.4494)     (0.1837)      (0.2407)     (0.4499)      (0.1813)
Lagged Shares Share                   0.0813*      0.1144*        0.0167      0.0797*      0.1119*         0.0172
                                      (0.0451)     (0.0601)     (0.0535)      (0.0440)     (0.0601)      (0.0529)
Lagged Advanced Payments Share         -0.1559    0.4025**       -1.1686       -0.1633    0.4042**        -1.1523
                                      (0.5506)     (0.1613)     (0.7795)      (0.5478)     (0.1586)      (0.7695)
Lagged Undivided Profits Share         -0.0565       0.0535      -0.3393       -0.0444       0.0506       -0.3476
                                      (0.1972)     (0.2589)     (0.2634)      (0.1978)     (0.2590)      (0.2644)
Lagged Borrowings Share              -0.1129*       -0.1069      -0.1243       -0.1076      -0.1091       -0.1206
                                      (0.0655)     (0.0988)     (0.0901)      (0.0653)     (0.0986)      (0.0912)
Lagged Reserves Share                  -0.1181      -0.2387       0.1215       -0.1156      -0.2439        0.1178
                                      (0.1747)     (0.2319)     (0.2209)      (0.1757)     (0.2406)      (0.2244)
B&L FE                                   Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
County-by-Year FE                        Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Counties in Sample                       All       Smaller        Larger         All       Smaller         Larger
Observations                            7315          4569         2733         7315          4569          2733
          Sources and Notes: Sources are balance sheet information reported in various years by the
          Iowa State Auditor, the New York Superintendent of Banks, the North Carolina Insurance
          Department, and the Wisconsin State Banking Commission. The asterisk (*), (**), (***)
          means statistically significantly different from zero at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level in a two-
          tailed t-test, respectively.




                                                                                                       41
