                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           TAKEOVER BIDS BELOW THE EXPECTED
                               VALUE OF MINORITY SHARES




                                 Lucian Arye Bebchuk




                                Working Paper No. 2524




                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 1988




I would like to thank Dilip Abreu, Oliver Hart and Steve Shavell for Oelpful
conversations and comments and the National Science Foundation (grant SES—8708212)
for its financial support. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2524
                                                February 1988




          Takeover Bids Below the Expected Value of Minority Shares




                                   ABSTRACT




     Focussing on takeover bids whose outcome can be predicted in advance

with certainty, Grossman and Hart estsblished the proposition, which

subsequent work accepted, that successful bids must be made at or above the

expected value of minority shares. This proposition provided the basis for

Grossman and Hart's identification of a free-rider problem and became a

major premise for the analyaia of takeovers. This paper showa that this

important proposition does not always hold once we drop the assumption that

the only successful bida are those whose success could have been predicted

with certainty. In particular, it is shown that any unconditional bid that

is below the expected value of minority shares but above the independent

target's per share value will succeed with a certain positive probability;

that the bidder's expected payoff from such a bid (not counting the

transaction costs of making the bid) is always positive; and that bidders

might elect to make such bids. These results have implications for the

nature of the free-rider problem and for the operation of takeovers; in

particular, it ia shown that, when a raider can increaae the value of a

target's assets, the raider might elect to bid even if no dilution of

minority shares is possible and it holds no initial stake in the target.



                                                  Lucian Arye Bebchuk
                                                  Harvard Law School
                                                  Gambridge, MA G2l38

                                                  (617)-495-3138
                            I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY



       tn   an already classic paper, Grossman and Hart (1980) developed a model

of takeover bids and stimulated much theoretical work on the subject (see,

eg.,   Harris and Raviv (1986),    P'ng (1985),   Scharfstein (1987), Shleifer and

Vishny (1986),     and the survey by Dreyfus (1986)). Focussing their analysis

on bids whose outcome can be predicted in advance with certainty, Grossman-

Hart established the proposition, which subsequent work accepted, that

successful bids must be made at or above the expected value of minority

shares. This proposition led to Grossman and Hart's insightful observation

that a free-rider problem exists, and it was used by them and subsequently

by others to analyze the operation of takeovers. This paper shows that this

important proposition does not always hold once we drop the assumption that

the only successful bids are those whose success could have been predicted

with certainty. It is shown that certain bids below the expected value of

minority shares may succeed with a certain positive probability, that such

bids may be profitable and may be used by bidders, and that these

possibilities have implications for the nature of the free-rider problem and

for the operation of takeovers.

     Suppose that the value of a target's assets is V0 per share under the

present management, and that under the control of a given "raider" the value

of these assets would increase to Vt per share. Suppose also that the

expected value of minority shares in the event of a takeover, Vm, exceeds

    because "dilution" of the value of minority shares would either be

impossible or at least possible only to a limited extent       Grossman and Hart,

assuming that the only successful bids are those whose success can be

predicted with certainty, showed that a takeover bid by the raider at any

price below Vu cannot succeed.    A   success with certainty, they pointed out,

cannot be a rational expectations outcome of a bid below Vm: for supposing

                                             1
that a takeover is going to take place, each atomistic shareholder will

prefer to hold out and end up with a minority share worth               rather   thar,


have his share acquired for the lower bid price. Thus, minority

shareholders' ability to free ride on the raider's improvement (at least in

part> would rule out a takeover at any price below                even if this offered

price exceeds the target's independent value V0.

      An important implication that Grossman-Hart drew from their conclusion

that only bids at or above Vm can succeed concerns the special case in whic

no dilution is possible (i.e., Vm=Vt). In this case, Grossman-Hart

suggested, the raider would not be able to make any gain on shares acquired

through a successful takeover bid. Therefore, since there are costs to

making a bid, the raider would not bid, and the absence of dilution would

thus prevent a value-increasing takeover from taking place.

      The significance of the Grossman-Hart conclusions concerning the

outcome of bids below Vm has been well recognized. The free-rider corollary

--   that   without dilution a raider would be unable to profit on shares

acquired through      a   bid   -   - motivated, and served as a useful
                                                                        starting point

for, an examination of what explains the making of takeover bids, Grossman

and Hart (1980) suggested that bids are made because legal rules and charter

provisions do enable acquirers to dilute the value of minority shares; and

Shleifer and Vishny (1986) demonstrated that a raider that holds a stake in

the target prior to bidding will gain from the appreciation of its initial

stake (even if it makes no gain on shares acquired through its bid).

Furthermore, the Grossman-Hart proposition has been an important premise of

subsequent models of the case in which some dilution is possible (which has

beer, generally regarded, following Grossman and Hart, to be the common

case)       that bids below     m cannot succeed has been    generally assumed by

analysts modelling the operation and outcome of bids.


                                                   2
     This paper drops the Grossman-Hart assUniption that the only successful

bids are those whose success could have been predicted with certainty, and

it then reconsiders the prospects, profitability, and use of bids below
                                                                        Vm.
It is shown that any bid below       but above V0 may succeed if the bid is

unconditional --   that   is, a bid committing the bidder to purchase tendered

shares even if the bid fails. The intuition behind this result can be stated

briefly as follows. In the case of an unconditional bid below        but above

V0, although certain success of the bid is not a rational equilibrium

outcome, neither is a certain failure. Non-tendering is not an equilibrium

strategy for the target's shareholders because, if other shareholders are

going to hold out and the bid is going to fail, each atomistic shareholder

will prefer to tender and have his share acquired for a price
                                                              exceeding the

target's independent value V0. Such an unconditional bid has a unique

symmetric equilibrium, which I identify and characterize, in which

shareholders use mixed strategies and the bid may consequently either

succeed or fail.

     Furthermore, I show that unconditional bids below    V but   above Vo may

he profitable and consequently may be used
                                           by bidders. Although such a bid
would produce a loss if the bid fails and the bidder must purchase shares at

a price exceeding
                  V0, the expected payoff from the bid, exclusive of the
transaction costs of making the bid, is shown to be always positive. To

examine when such bids will be used, I analyze when their expected
                                                                   payoff
will exceed both the costs of making the bid and the expected
                                                              payoff from

bidding at or above   V.   In particular, I show that, in the absence of

dilution, a raider that can increase the value of the target's assets may

hid even if it holds no initial stake in the target; and that,    in the

presence of some dilution, a bidder may elect to bid below Vm, even though

such a bid would not succeed with certainty as would a bid at
                                                              Vm.


                                           3
      Section II analyzes the case in which no dilution is possible and

Section III analyzes the case in which some dilution is possible. Section IV

then makes concluding remarks concerning the implications of the paper's

analysis.


                    II. BIDDING     JHEN NO DIUJTION IS POSSIBLE


A.   A.ions
      The   value of the target's assets under existing management is V0 per

share. If another agent --        which   I shall call "the raider" --       gains   control

over the target, the per share value of its assets will be                V>V0. IV-V0      is

the per share improvement that a takeover by the raider can produce.

      In the event of a takeover, the bidder will be unable to dilute the

value of minority shares. Thus, minority shares will have a per share value

of

      The target has     N   shares, where   N   is large. The raider will have control

if and only if it owns at least kN shares, where O<k<l indicates the

fraction of shares necessary for control. The raider is assumed, for

simplicity of exposition, to hold no initial stake in the target. (The

analysis can be adjusted to apply to the case in which the raider owns

initially some non-controlling fraction s (s<k) of the target's shares.)

      Each share of the target is held by one shareholder. Because               N   is

large, I shall assume, like Grossman and Hart, that the atomistic

shareholders ignore the possibility that their decision will determine the

outcome of a bid. Dropping this assumption would make the analysis more

complicated but would not change its conclusions.

      It is   assumed,   as in Grossman-Hart, that, if the raider does bid and

its bid fails, the per share value of the target's shares will be the

"status quo'    value    of V0.   That   is, should the   bid   fail,   investors will not


                                                   4
expect the failing bidder (or another bidder) to make a subsequent bid; If

the raider's failing bid requires it to purchase some shares, the raider is

expected to (or even has committed itself to) sell those shares on the

market or hold them as a non-controlling block.

        In the event that the raider elects to bid, B will denote the bid

price. For any bid B,     b   will denote the value of (B-V0)/I; that is, b is the

fraction of the takeover improvement that is offered by the raider as a

premium.

        T will denote the number of shares attracted by a bid. We shall

consider two kinds of bids: conditional, where the raider is willing to buy

shares only if T>kN, and unconditional, where no such condition is attached.

        The total cost to the raider of making a bid is C, The raider will of

course elect to bid only if the expected profit on shares purchased through

the bid exceeds C.

        It is easy to see that,   although a bid with         would succeed, it
                                                        BVt
would not provide the raider with any gain on shares purchased through the

hid. Thus, we should consider whether the bidder can make a gain by bidding

below         In particular, since it is clear that any bid below
         V.                                                       V0 would
attract no shares, we should focus on bids that are below
                                                          Vt but not below




B. Conditional    Bid Below Vt Cannot Succeed


        It is worth starting the analysis with conditional bids, the case in

which the proposition that bids below            cannot succeed does always hold.

     Consider a bid with VO<B<Vt that is conditional on TkN.          In this

situation, the dominant strategy of each atomistic shareholder will be to

tender.   In the event that the bid fails, the shareholder's tender decision

will not matter; whether he tenders or holds out, his share will not be


                                             5
acquired. In the event that the bid succeeds, non-tendering (and thus ending

up with Vt) is clear].y preferable to tendering (and having one's share

acquired for B<Vt). Thus, we have the following proposition.


Proposition j: Any bid VO<B<Vt (Ob<l) which is conditional on the bidder's

gaining control (TkN) will fail.


C. Unconditional Bids        below Vt         Succeed


      Let us now consider the outcome of a bid VO<B<Vt that is unconditional..

In this situation, there is no equilibrium in pure strategies.

      Non-tendering is no longer an equilibrium strategy (as it was in the

case of a conditional bid). For, assuming that other shareholders are going

to hold out, a shareholder will not be indifferent between tendering and

holding out (as he was in the case of a conditional bid): he will prefer to

tender and have his share acquired for B rather than remain with a share in

the independent target worth V0.

      As to tendering, it is not an equilibrium strategy for the same

reasons as in the case of a conditional bid. Assuming that others are going

to tender and   a   takeover is going to take place, a shareholder will prefer

to hold out and end up with a minority share worth         V rather   than tender and

have his share acquired for the lower bid price of B.

      it remains then to consider the possibility of an equilibrium in mixed

strategies. Focussing on the possibility of a symmetric equilibrium, let us

consider the shareholder strategy of tendering with probability t and

holding out with probability l-t, where O<t<l. If all the shareholders

follow this strategy, the likelihood of a takeover will be



(1)      Pr(t) =    I   -
                            F(N,t,kN-l)   =
                                               N

                                              j=kN
                                                     ••1   t(l-t)
                                                      6
where F(x,y,z) is the binomial distribution function,
                                                      indicating the

probability that out of x independent trials, each with probability y of

success, no more than z will be successful.

        Since N is large, the binomial distribution can be well approximated

using the normal distribution (see Feller, Ch. 7). In particular, Pr(t) can

be well approximated by


(2)          Pr(t)       1    -




where        is the standard normal distribution function and

                              kN - tN
(3)          q(t)             _______
                             jNt (1- t)

        Clearly,     for t to define an equilibrium strategy, a given shareholder

must    be   indifferent between tendering and holding out, given the probability

Pr't)    that the bid will succeed. In comparison to
                                                     non-tendering, tendering
produces a gain of (B-V0) in the event that the bid fails and a loss of

(VtB) in the event that the bid succeeds. That                          is, t must satisfy


(4)      (B-V0)*[1-Pr(t)}              -
                                            (VtB)*[pr(t)J        0,


or, rearranging terms


                                  1     1            0
(5)      Pr(t) = 1                          =
                              [q(t)IJ                       b.
                         -



                                                v-v
                                                 t  0

        It can be easily seen that Pr(t) goes to zero as t goes to zero, that

Pr(t)    goes to     1   as    t goes to        1, and that Pr(t) increases monotonically in

the   Interval (0,1). Thus, for                  any V0<B<v, there is exactly one value of t,

let us    denote it by            r,   which    satisfies (5).    We   can thus state the following

proposition.




                                                            7
Proposition 2:       For     any unconditional bid VO<BVt,                      there       is a unique symmetric

equilibrium, in which shareholders tender with probability r(B) satisfying
                                               B -
                       kN    -   rN                      V0
(6)         1
                                          1
                     ,/Nr(l-r)            j    Vt
                                                     -
                                                          V0


and in which the bid consequently succeeds with probability


(7)         Pr(r)      b =       (B-V0)/(Vt-V0).

Remarks: (i) An increase in the Bid Price B will raise both the likelihood

of a takeover Pr(r) and the equilibrium probability of tendering                                           r.    Pr(r)

will increase because it will always equal b, the fraction of the

improvement that the raider's premium is offering. r will increase to

produce the necessary increase in Pr(r)                        .   Both     Pr(r) and r will go to 1 as B

goes to     V,    and both will go to 0 when B goes to V0.

                (ii) An increase in the control fraction                        k   will not affect the

value of Pr(r) but it will raise r. Since Pr(r) is always equal to b, it is

independent of the value of other parameters. The value of                                      i-   will increase,
however, to maintain this necessary equality between Pr(r) and b; as k

increases, the        i-   which      produces a given value of Pr(r) increases as well.


D.    Th   ted             Payoff             Bidding below Vt

       When      a bidder makes an unconditional bid                        VO<B<Vt,    there        are   two


possible outcome. The bid may succeed in attracting kN shares or more, in

which case the bidder will gain (Vt-B) for each tendered share. Or the bid

may fail, in which case the bidder will lose (B-V0) fom each tendered share.

Thus, the bidder's expected payoff (not counting the costs of making the

bid) will be


                                          kN-l                                          N
(8)        W(B)     (B       V0)
                                      *    V f(N,r,j)j             +   (V   -       *   V f(N,r,j)j
                                          j=l                                        j=kN

                                                                   8
where f(x,y,z) is the binomial density function, indicating the likelihood

that out of N independent experiments, each with probability of success y,

there will be exactly z successes. Again, using the normal approximation, we

can get

                             q(r)
(9)     W(B)     -
                      (B-V0) J        (x){x]Nr(l-r)       + Nrjdx        +


                             +       (V-   B)
                                                f    (x)[xJNr(l-r)       ÷   Nrldx
                                             cl(r)



where    '(.)   is    the standard normal density function.


Proposition 3: The expected payoff to the bidder (not counting the costs of

making the bid) from making any unconditional bid O<B<Vt is positive.


Remark: The result in Proposition 3 can be intuitively explained as follows.

If the bidder expected to purchase the same number of shares whether the bid

succeeds or fails, then his expected payoff, per share to be purchased,

would   be   Pr(r)(Vt-B)
                                 -
                                      [l-Pr(r)](B-V).           But the fact that r is an

equilibrium strategy (i.e., that shareholders are indifferent between

tendering and holding out) implies that this payoff would be zero. Thus,

because the bidder can expect to purchase more shares in the event that the

bid succeeds (TK)           that in the event that the bid fails (T<K), it follows

that the bidder faces a positive expected payoff.


Proof:    Rewriting (9) we get



1O)     W(B)           (B-V0)     J   (x)[xNr(l-r)         +    Nrdx     +


                  +   (V-   V0)        f   (x)xJNr(l-i)         dx   +
                                      q(r)
                 +    (V-   V0)        J (x)Nrdx
                                      q(r)
                                                            9
       The first expression on the right-hand side of (10) can be shown to

equal (B-V0)*Nr. The third expression on the right-hand side can be shown

to equal (VtVo)*Pr(r)Nr.            Thus,   by the condition that       r is the equilibrium


probability of tendering and thus satisfies                    Pr(r)(B-V0)/C-V0) (see      (7)),

the first and third expressions add up to zero.                   Thus, the value of W(B) is

equal to the value of the second expression. Doing the integration in that

expression we get

                         ________________             2
                                            hfq(t)]
(11)       W(B)       jNr(l-r)/2s


and the right-hand side of (11) is clearly positive.


E. The Optimal     Bid

       Supposing that the raider is going to make an unconditional bid

VO<B<Vt,   its    optimal bid is given by the solution to the problem

(12)       max W(B)
              B


       Solving this maximization problem provides the following proposition,

which is proven in the Appendix.


Proposition 4: The optimal bid is one offering a premium

equal to half of the potential improvement (B =(V+V0)/2)                   .   In   the face of

this bid, each shareholder will tender with probability equal to the

control fraction (r=k), and the bid will succeed with likelihood 1/2.


F. The   Incentive to Bid
       We can now determine when the raider will elect to                 bid (even though

there is no dilution). If the raider does bid, it will offer, by proposition

4, a price of (Vt+V0)/2. Substituting this value for B in (11) and making




                                                          10
the calculation shows that the raider's expected payoff in such a case will




            I       t+o      1
                                 =   ./Nk(l-k)/2ir   *   I
 13)
           L         2       j


        Since the raider will bid if and only if the expected payoff given by

(13) exceeds the cost C of making the bid, we have the following

proposition.


Proposition 5; In the absence of dilution, the raider will bid for the

target if and only if the ratio of the costs of making the bid to the total

improvement produced by a takeover satisfies

                C          _____________
(14)                 <    .Jk(1-k)/2rN



        For example, supposing that N=l000 and k=l/2, a bid will take place if

and only C is no larger than 0,6% of the total improvement to be produced.


                         III. BIDDING WHEN SOME DILUTION IS POSSIBLE


        Let us now consider the case in which dilution of the value of minority

shares would be possible to some extent. Specifically, suppose that in the

event of a takeover the raider would be able to dilute the value of each

minority share by an amount 0, where I>D>0. Thus, (1-0)                   is that part of the

improvement produced by a takeover that the raider would be unable to deny

minority shareholders, and on which these shareholders could thus free ride.

Thus,    the value of minority shares in                 the event of a takeover will be


Vm =    VtD,    where    Vo<VmJt*


        Because the concern of this paper is with                  bids below the expected
value of minority shares, there is no interest in                  analyzing the obvious case
in which D>I and hence V5<VQ. In this case, a bid                  below Vm cannot succeed.
Note, however, that in such a case, a bid below
1985).
                                                                 V  may succeed (see Bebchuk


                                                         11
       As before, the interest is in examining bids with Vo<B<Vm. In

particular, we shall examine whether such bids may succeed and whether

raiders will choose to make such bids.


A. The Outcome     of Bids Below Ve

       The analysis of the outcome of a bid below Vm can proceed in the same

way as it proceeded in Section II. For the analysis of bid outcomes in

section II depended only on the relationship between B, V0, and the expected

value of minority shares Vm; Vt appeared in that analysis only because,

given the assumption of no dilution, Vm was equal to Vt.

       A   bid below Vm that is conditional on the bidder's gaining control is

bound to fail,     for the same reasons as those identified in Section II. Non-

tendering is a dominant strategy, because (i) assuming that the bid is going

to fail (and tendered shares are consequently going to be returned), a

shareholder will be indifferent between tendering and non-tendering, and

(ii) assuming that the bid is going to succeed, a shareholder will prefer to

remain with minority shares worth Vm than to have his share purchased for a

price below that value. Thus, we have


Proposition    :   Any bid with B<Vm which   is conditional on the bidder's

gaining control (TkN) will fail.


       In the case of an unconditional bid below         there is no equilibrium
                                                    Vm
in pure strategies, for the same reasons as those discussed in Section II.

Supposing that other shareholders are going to tender, a shareholder will

prefer to hold out; and supposing that other shareholders are going to hold

out,   a   shareholder will prefer to tender. Proceeding in the same way as in

Section II, we find that there is a unique symmetric equilibrium in mixed

strategies which is characterized by the following proposition.



                                             12
Proposition 1: For any unconditional bid Vo<B<Vm, there is a unique symmetric

equilibrium,         in which shareholders tender with probability r(B) satisfyirg


                                 -       N              B     -V0
            1    -
(15)                                              j
                         JNr(1-r)                 j     Vm
                                                              -

                                                                   V0


and in which         the bid         succeeds          with       probability

                             B       -

                                             V0
                Pr(r)    =               -
                               m                  0



       Thus, the likelihood that an unconditional bid is going to succeed is

equal to the ratio of the premium offered to that part of the improvement

that minority shareholders can capture.


B. The Expected Payoff from Bidding below

       When a bidder makes an unconditional bid Vo<B<Vm, there are two

possible outcomes. If the bid fails which has a likelihood of

(VmB)/(VmVo), the bidder will lose (B-V0) on each tendered share. If the
bid succeeds, which has a likelihood of (BVo)/(VnVo), the bidder will make

a gain of
                (V-V0) on each tendered share and in addition a gain of 0 on each
non-tendered share, Since Vt-B = D + (VmB), the bidder's gain in the event

of a takeover can be alternatively described as a gain of 0 on all of the

target's shares and in addition a gain of (VmB) on each tendered share,

Thus, the bidder's expected payoff from the bid (not counting the costs of

making the bid) will be

                                              kN-l
                                                  E
                                                                                             N
                                                                                                           +
                                                                                                                    B-V0
(17)     W(B)           -(B - V0)                     f(N,r,j)j         +     (V   -
                                                                                       B)    E f(N,r,j)j       DN
                                                                                                                    Vm -V0
                                              j=l                                           j=kN

where,   as before, f(.,.,.) is the binomial density function, Again, using

the normal approximation, we can get




                                                                         13
                                q(r)
(18)           W(B) = - (B-U0)      (x)[x,INr(1—r) + Nrjdx        +
                               J

                                                                                           B   -
                                                    _______                                        V0
                              (U-   B)
                                         J
                                              &(x){xjNr-r)      Nr]dx           +     ON

                                         q(t)


where,     as before,     4.) is    the standard    normal    density function.
         Noting    the similsrity between the first two expressions on the right-

hand side of (18) and the two expressions on the right-hand side of (9)                            ,    we

can follow the steps taken in proving proposition B to get



(19)           W(B) =     JNr(l—r)/2s     e     tO(t)Ju V)            B        I
                                                                          Un

snd since the first expression on the right-hand side of                       (19)   is clearly

positive, we have the following proposition.


ftgosition         :    the expected payoff to the bidder        (not counting the costs of

making the bid) from making any unconditional bid O<B<Vm is greater than

     B    -
              V3
DN




0. The Possible Use of Bids Below Vm


         In the case in which no dilution is possible, the only two options of

the bidder that required our consideration were bidding below
                                                              Vm and not
bidding; for, in the absence of dilution, the bidder could not make any gain

on shares acquired through a bid at or above Vm=Vt. Thus, the bidder's

choice was         determined by comparing the      maximum    expected payoff from bidding
below    '1m   with the cost of making a bid. In ths case in which dilution is
possible, however, a bid at            Vm=VtID    will provide the bidder with a gain of
D*N (not counting the costs of making the bid). Thus,                     it is necessary to


                                                     14
examine whether a bid below           will ever be more profitable than a bid at

Vm. As will be seen below, the answer to this question is affirmative.

       Assessing the consequences of lowering its bid from            a bidder will

have to    consider two   effects. On the one hand, while a bid at            is bound to

succeed,    the lower bid may fail; in this case,      lowering the bid would

produce a loss, both because the bidder would lose on shares purchased

through the failing bid and because the bidder would lose the potential gain

of ON   that bidding at V    could produce. On the other hand, the lower bid may

succeed; in this case, lowering the bid would produce a saving of x on each

share purchased through the successful bid.

       We have seen that in the no-dilution case of 0=0,
                                                         Vm=Vt, it would be
indeed optimal for the bidder to lower its bid from             to (Vm+Vo)/2      In

comparison to this no-dilution case, the presence of dilution increases the

cost of lowering the bid from            in the presence of dilution,     a   bid at Vm

would produce a gain of DN, and any lowering of the bid from this level

would increase the likelihood of losing this potential gain. Thus, it seems

reasonable to suspect that whether the optimal bid would be lower than V

 and, if so, by how much      -   - would depend on the size of 0 relative to     I. In

particular, it seems reasonable to suspect that increasing 0 makes it less

likely that the optimal bid will be below Vm or, if the optimal bid is below

Vm,   that the optimal bid fall below Vm by a substantial margin. And indeed,

such a relationship is suggested by the following two propositions, which

are proven in the appendix.


Proposition 2: Supposing that the raider is going to bid, a sufficient

condition for the optimal bid to be below Vm is that        D   satisfy



(20)        D<   -I
                                               15
gition 10:            Supposing that the raider is going to bid, a sufficient

condition for the optimal bid to be above         VmaD   is that D satisfy


                   Fk(l-k)/2m2Nj
                                   /4
(21)       D    1 +    [K(l-k)/2a2.1/4
                                  N

       To illustrate, suppose for example that k=0.50 and that N=l,000. Then,

by proposition    9     a sufficient condition for the optimal bid to be below

is that B is no greater than 0.33*1. And, by proposition 10, a sufficient

condition for the optimal bid to exceed      VnD/4      is that B is not lower than

  15*

                                IV,CONCLUDING   R.IARKS


       This paper has extended the Grossman-Hart analysis to allow for bids

whose outcome cannot be predicted in advance with certainty. It has been

shown that, once such bids are introduced, the proposition that all

successful bids must be made at or above the expected value of minority

shares does not always hold. Bids below the expected value of minority

shares may succeed, may be profitable, and may be used.

       A crucial distinction that the analysis has highlighted is the

difference in consequences between conditional bids and unconditional bids

While conditional bids below Vm cannot succeed, unconditional bids may. The

power of unconditional bids results from the fact that they offer

shareholders the prospect of having their shares acquired even if the bid

fails. Because of shareholders' desire to have their shares acquired in such

a case,   a   failure with certainty cannot be     a   rational expectations outcome

of an unconditional bid. Thus, what might enable such a bid to succeed is

the possibility that it will fail.




                                             16
     Note that the paper's analysis assumed that all the target's

shareholders have the same information. In this framework, the sharehoifers

uncertainty about the bid's outcome (which led some of them to tender) was

solely rooted in their use of mixed strategies. It should be possible,

however, to construct a model in which the shareholders' uncertainty about

the outcome is rooted, at least in part,    in differences among the

shareholders in their estimates of Vm or Vt.

     It should be emphasized that, although the Grossman-Hart conclusions

concerning takeover bids must be refined in the way described above, the

main insights offered by their analysis do remain: the importance of

dilution in inducing bids, and the importance of the expected value of

minority shares in determining tender offers and bid outcomes. In

particular, although it was shown that bids might be made even in the

absence of dilution, there should be no question that the presence of

dilution is very important in explaining takeover bids.




                                           17
                                                          APPENDIX



Proof   of Proposition 4:
       Differentiating           the right-hand side of (11) with respect to B gives:


             W'(B) =     jN/2 I          Jr(l-r)          -l/2q(r)                           +
(Al)                                                                 [-q(r)]   q'(r) r'(B)


                          +      jN/2 I           _____ (l-2r)       e   -l/2[q(r)J2,(5)
                                              2Jr(l-r)


        To   get   q' (r) we differentiate both sides of (3) and get


                         -
                                 —       r(l-k)   +   k(l-r)
(A2)         q'(r)
                                           2[r(l-r)]
       After substituting the right-hand side of (A2) for q' (r) In (Al) and

some algebraic manipulation we get



(A3)         W'(B)   =   JN/2        I    (l/2){r(lr)]3/2 r'(B) *

                             *
                                 {(l/N)(l2r)r(lr) + (k-r)[r(-k) + k(lr)]}
The sign of the right-hand side of (A3) depends on the sign of the sum in

the braces (since all the terms outside the braces are positive)                             Since N is

large, the value of the sum                  in braces        (largely) depends on the second

expression in the braces. And the second expression is positive for r<k and

negative for r>k. Thus, the optimal B is that (approximately) which would

produce a r equal to k.

        Finally, from (2) it follows that the probability of a takeover

associated with r=k is 1/2. And from (5) it follows that the B which will

produce such r and Pr(r) is                  (V       +   V0)/2.




                                                                18
Proof of Proposition 2:

        Consider the             consequences of lowering                               a    bid from Va by an arbitrarily

small    .    On the one hand, such lowering of the bid introduces a likelihood

of    /(VmVo)          that the bid will fail.                             Denoting by            T       the expected number of

tendered shares conditional on the bid's failure, the expected loss in the

event that lowering the bid leads to the bid's failure is


(A4)         D*N    +
                        Tnt*(Vmc)

The first expression is the loss of the potential profit that a bid at Vm

would produce, and the second expression is the expected loss on the shares

that would have to be purchased through the failing bid.

        On the other hand, the lower bid might also succeed with probability

                                         in which case lowering the bid would produce a saving of
(VmVoE))/(VmVo),
     on each share purchased through the bid. Denoting by                                                         T    the expected

number of tendered shares in the event that the bid succeeds, the gain from

lowering the bid in the event that the bid succeeds is


(A5)         Tt*e


        Thus, a bid at                   Vms         will be superior to a bid at Vm if and only if

                                     S                                     S

(A6)                                                      > (                            [D*N +                             s) Tnt
                        v - v
                   -                                                                                          -         -
             (1                                  Tt                   v    - v                        (Va         v0
                             a               0                         a           0

or, after rearranging terms, if and only if

                                                              D
(A7)
             Tt
                   -
                        Tt       v       -   v        >           -
                                                                               N        (1   -
                                                                                                      -   v           Tt
                                 in              0        m            0                         in         0



Note that by setting                             sufficiently small                     we can set the value of the right-

hand side of (A7) as close as we wish to Tt and the value of the second

expression on the right-hand side as close as we wish to Tnt                                                                Note also that

                                                                                   19
T      must by definition be lower than kN, And, finally, note that by setting

  sufficiently small                we can get the equilibrium probability of tendering r

to be as close to 1 as we wish and thus also get
                                                 Tt to be as close to N as
we wish. Putting all of this together, it follows that a sufficient

condition for (A7) to hold is that

                     D
(AS)                 -
                                <    I-k
                Vm



or, using the fact that                   VmVo         I-D, that

                   1-k
(A9)            D< 2-k

Proof of         2ition               :

        If   the bidder bids below                             its expected payoff will be as given               by
(19).    Using the analysis of proposition 4, the maximum value of the first

expression on the right-hand side of (9) is [Nk(l-k)/2ir]'2*I (a maximum

that is obtained at B(Vm+Vo)/2) And the second expression on the right-

hand side of (19) must be smaller than                                                     Thus,   the expected
                                       DNtaD/(VmVü)].

payoff to the bidder from any bid below                            VmmD           cannot exceed

                 _________                                     V       -       aD -VO
(AlO)           INk(l-k)/2r          (V-V)            +   DN               -




        In   contrast, if the bidder bids at                       Vm           its gain will be DN. Thus, a

sufficient condition for the optimal bid to exceed                                             is that DN exceed
                                                                                        VmaD
the right-hand side of (AlO) and thus that


                         aD                __________
(All)           DN
                     Vm    -   vo         JNk(l-k)/2ir (Vm         -
                                                                        VO)


And,    after                             I-D   for
                 substituting                         VmVo and             rearranging terms we get

                          [k(lk)/2a2N]4
(21)            D    1 +       [k(l-k)/2a2N] l'4
                                              /




                                                                   20
                                   REFERENCES



Bebchuk,    L. (1985), A Model of the Outcome of Takeover Bids, Discussion
        Paper No. 11, November, Program in Law and Economics, Harvard Law
        School.


Dreyfus, J. F. (1986), The Takeover Process: A Survey of Recent Theoretical
     Developments, Unpublished Manuscript, March, Graduate School of
     Business, New York University.

Feller, W. (1968), An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its
     Applications (3rd edition, John Wiley and Sons, New York).

Grossman, S. and 0. Hart (1980), Takeover Bids, the Free Rider Problem,
     and the Theory of the Corporation,      Journal of Economics, Vol.
     11, Spring, pp. 42-64.

Harris, M. and A. Raviv (1986), Corporate Control Contests and capital
     Structure," Dept. of Economics, Northwestern University, forthcoming in
     the Journal of Financial Economics.
P'ng,    I. (1985), The Information Conveyed by a Tender Offer and the Takeover
        Price of a Target Firm, Working Paper No. 3, March, Graduate School of
        Management, UCLA.

Scharfstein, D. (1987), The Disciplinary Role of Takeovers, M.I.T. Sloan
     School of Management, forthcoming in the Review    Economic Studies.

Shleifer, A. and R, Vishny (1986), Large Shareholders and Corporate
     Control, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 94, June, pp. 461-488.




                                           21
