NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING THE IMPACT OF HOUSEHOLD INNOVATION USING
ADMINISTRATIVE DATA
Javier Miranda
Nikolas Zolas
Working Paper 25259
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25259

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

I Javier Miranda attest that I have not received any funding for this work outside of my regular
salary at the U.S. Census Bureau. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Javier Miranda and Nikolas Zolas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring the Impact of Household Innovation using Administrative Data
Javier Miranda and Nikolas Zolas
NBER Working Paper No. 25259
November 2018
JEL No. O3,O31,O35
ABSTRACT
We link USPTO patent data to U.S. Census Bureau administrative records on individuals and
firms. The combined dataset provides us with a directory of patenting household inventors as well
as a time-series directory of self-employed businesses tied to household innovations. We describe
the characteristics of household inventors by race, age, gender and U.S. origin, as well as the
types of patented innovations pursued by these inventors. Business data allows us to highlight
how patents shape the early life-cycle dynamics of nonemployer businesses. We find household
innovators are disproportionately U.S. born, white and their age distribution has thicker tails
relative to business innovators. Data shows there is a deficit of female and black inventors.
Household inventors tend to work in consumer product areas compared to traditional business
patents. While patented household innovations do not have the same impact of business
innovations their uniqueness and impact remains surprisingly high. Back of the envelope
calculations suggest patented household innovations granted between 2000 and 2011 might
generate $5.0B in revenue (2000 dollars).

Javier Miranda
U.S. Bureau of the Census
Center for Administrative Records Research
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
javier.miranda@census.gov
Nikolas Zolas
Center for Economic Studies
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
nikolas.j.zolas@census.gov

1

Introduction

The study of innovation has traditionally centered on the institutions where it is believed
to be conducted, which has primarily consisted of the firm. The underlying assumption is
that innovation is the output from an R&D production function that has the inventor at
its core and where the inputs (materials and human capital) are fully accounted for. Some
of the inputs may take the form of knowledge originating outside the firm like universities,
government labs and other firms. In this regard government and universities labs have long
been recognized as sources of knowledge and invention. Other firms may contribute to the
R&D process through research joint ventures or may license their technologies. Increasingly
however, researchers are highlighting the importance private households play as sources of
invention and innovation in this process (e.g. von Hippel, de Jong, and Flowers (2012) and
Arora, Cohen, and Walsh (2016)). In this paper we aim to contribute to this strand of the
literature by using U.S. Census Bureau administrative data combined with USPTO patents
data to document household innovations. The use of administrative data gets around some
of the problems with current studies in this area, specifically small sample sizes in household
surveys, low power estimates, and low response rates which may raise questions about nonresponse bias (Deming, 1990).
Use of administrative data provides a rich picture of the types of innovations undertaken
by households and their characteristics but it has its own limitations. We focus on the set
of household innovations we can identify in administrative data; that is, those that are
granted a patent by the USPTO. Admittedly this excludes perhaps what might be the
lion share of household innovation; that which is not patented. By contrast we focus on
what might be the most valuable innovations (Arora, Cohen, and Walsh, 2016) and we
do so in a systematic manner. We match these patents to Census Bureau administrative
files to understand the demographic characteristics of household inventors as well as the
characteristics of the unincorporated businesses they start to get a sense for their impact and

value.1 Use of administrative records comes with other important limitations. Specifically,
there is no way for us to determine whether these patents where developed during leisure
time or as a remunerated activity. Here we make the strong assumption that if they have
not been assigned to a firm there was no direct remuneration for the development of the
innovation.
When documenting the characteristics of household innovations we describe the technology classes they fall under, their impact and novelty as captured by the analysis of backward
and forward looking citations, and the breadth of their application as captured by a generality index. In addition we document the characteristics of inventors, their age, gender, race
and origin. When looking at business formation we examine the dynamics of unincorporated
businesses that are tied to inventors and their performance relative to similar businesses
without inventors specifically their revenue and growth performance.
We find household inventors are disproportionately U.S. born relative to salaried inventors. They are relatively white. Household inventors are disproportionately under 25 and
over 55. Across the board we find a deficit in female and black inventors relative to the
overall working age population.
Household inventors work on technology classes disproportionately tied to consumer
products such as Design, Mechanical and Other. Patents associated with household innovation are about 1/2 as likely to be considered “radical”.2 In terms of value, household
innovations accumulate approximately 27-33% fewer citations on average. While their citation impact is smaller it remains remarkably high. Finally, we find few household inventors
attempt to create a business around their invention. When they do these businesses have
higher revenues on average and are more than twice as likely to transition to hire their first
employee than nonemployers who do not patent. Back of the envelope calculations suggest
1

Patents by independent inventors have been found to display the largest rates of transfer (Serrano, 2010)
so in future drafts we will explore the characteristics of patents that transition to existing firms.
2
We follow the definition in (Dahlin and Behrens, 2005), a radical innovation is one that is considered
novel, unique and impactful.

2

patented household innovations granted in a given year might generate revenue $5.0B in
revenue in 2000 dollars.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background. We
follow with a description of the data in section 3. We describe basic features of patented
household inventions in section 4. Our analysis of business formation and outcomes follows
in section 5. We conclude in section 6.

2

Background

Innovation is traditionally thought of as a process that takes place inside of a firm. In this
context, outside sources of knowledge and invention including universities, government labs
and other firms have long been recognized as important inputs to the firm’s R&D function.
Increasingly however innovation researchers are focusing on households as important sources
of knowledge and innovation. The study of household innovation however has been hampered
by data availability.
The first set of household innovation studies looked at user innovations in specific product markets. Early examples include von Hippel (1976) and Shah (2000) looking at user
innovation in scientific instruments and new sporting goods respectively. Their methodology
involves a retrospective study of a selected sample of commercially successful innovations as
identified by either experts in the field or by direct analysis of new product features. This
was followed by interviews of relevant product and industry experts. Both these authors
find a large percentage of the innovations were in fact invented, prototyped and tested by
users of the equipment rather than the equipment manufacturer. In the case of scientific
instruments, von Hippel (1976) finds existing instrument manufacturers would incorporate
user innovations into their products with a focus on improved engineering. In the case of
sporting goods Shah (2000) finds users built innovative equipment for their own use. The

3

inventors tended to be young and they often built businesses in order to appropriate the
benefits from their innovations.
Follow-up studies have tried to more broadly describe the characteristics of the innovators and rate of user innovation. Lüthje (2004) conducts a survey of users of outdoor sporting
equipment identified from the direct mail order listing of two sporting goods manufacturing
firms. While response rates are relatively low at 26%, the author finds a large share of
respondents, 37%, claimed at least one idea. Of these 30% claimed their idea provided a
solution to a problem that was not offered by the manufacturer. Reportedly, only 4 in 10
took their ideas beyond concept by developing prototypes. Franke and Shah (2003) look
at innovation within four distinct communities of extreme sports enthusiasts. Communities
of consumer users were identified through websites or competition rosters. With a survey
response rate of 38% the authors find 32% of community members claimed an innovation
and of these 14.5% considered the innovation to be a completely new product. In their sample, 23% of innovators believed their innovations had been or would be commercialized by
a third party. These innovators did not appear to benefit financially from their innovations.
Whether results from these and other surveys of lead users and enthusiasts are representative
of broader user communities remains an open question.3
von Hippel, de Jong, and Flowers (2012) take a broader approach to this question by
conducting a household survey to look at inventions by a representative sample of consumers
in the U.K. These are innovations tied to households and their unincorporated businesses.
Specifically they look at the development and modification of consumer products by product
users. The types of household innovations they focus on exclude on-the-job innovations
which are already accounted for in official statistics. Instead they focus on innovations that
were developed during uncompensated leisure time. With a survey response rate of 15%
they find 6.2% of U.K. consumers engaged in consumer product innovation in the previous 3
3

A good survey of consumer user studies can be found in de Jong (2016).

4

years. When comparing against the amount of R&D investment by U.K. firms they estimate
the volume of household based expenditure exceeded that of firms by a factor of 2.3 times.4
They conclude private households are a major source of invention.
In a survey centered on consumer product innovations von Hippel, de Jong, and Flowers
(2012) find 98% of innovations are product modifications rather than new product creations.
Most of the innovations, 80%, are in a few product classes that are related with how people
spend their time: craft and tools, sports and hobbies, gardening as well as child, dwelling
or pet related. Only 17% of the innovations are believed to be adopted by others to some
degree and only 2% of the innovations are protected by intellectual property rights. There
are relatively few software innovations. von Hippel, de Jong, and Flowers (2012) are the only
study collecting demographic information from a representative consumer sample rather than
a community of interest. They find inventors tend to be male, educated, and either a student
or age over 55. Issues with this and other representative consumer surveys that have followed
include high non-response rates, small sample sizes, and confusion regarding the definition
of innovation by consumers. With these limitations a general conclusion is the apparent low
adoption rates of innovations by enterprises.
Following a different approach Arora, Cohen, and Walsh (2016) conduct a survey of
manufacturing firms to examine the extent to which firms in the U.S. use external sources
of invention for their innovations. Arora, Cohen, and Walsh (2016) focus on the whole
manufacturing sector regardless of industry or whether firms own patents or conduct R&D.
Their sample is drawn from the Dun & Bradstreet business frame but adjusted with U.S.
Census Bureau based weights to match the population of manufacturing firms by industry,
size and age. For the analysis they focus on product innovations (and exclude process
innovations) at firms with more than 10 employees. With response rates of 30.3% they find
that of the 16% of firms that innovated (introduced a product that is new to the market),
4

von Hippel, de Jong, and Flowers (2012) find the average customer invention requires an expenditure of
£101 and 4.8 days.

5

49% report their most important new product originated from outside. They find customers
are the most pervasive source of invention although not the source of the most valuable
ones. The more valuable inventions are sourced from technology specialists which include
independent inventors. These inventors patent their own inventions at relatively high rates,
56%, higher than university, supplier and customer sourced inventions at 36%, 34% and 16%
respectively. They find independent inventors are also a more common source of inventions
for small firms.

3

Data

We focus our analysis on patented household innovations. Our primary source of patent data
is the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office PTMT Custom Patent Data Extract. These data
are produced annually from the bibliographic text (i.e., front page) of the patent documents.
It covers all granted patents by the USPTO and detailed information including the patent
number, type of patent, filing date, issue date, inventor information, assignee name at time
of issue, and classification information for each.
We use the patent class information to impose some initial restrictions on the patents we
analyze. Depending on the patent documents, patents can be assigned to firms, individuals
or governments. These can each be either domestic or foreign. In addition the patents can
be unassigned. This happens when the inventors have not granted the rights to the invention
to a corporation, university or government agency, or to other individuals. In these cases the
patents are assumed to remain with the inventor, but in some cases can later be reassigned to
firms. We exclude from the set of patents we analyze those that belong to governments and
all foreign patents. We assume these are not tied to independent U.S. based inventors. Table
1 looks at the number of patents by assignee type in our sample. We center our analysis on
patents granted between 2000 and 2011. Our sample includes a total of 1.29 million patents
granted between 2000 and 2011. The bulk of these, 80%, are assigned to businesses. Most

6

of the remaining patents, 19.2%, are unassigned. There are very few patents, 0.8%, assigned
to individuals. While unassigned patents are assumed to belong to the inventor it will be
the case that some of these belong to firms but were not assigned at time of grant. We
explore the extent of this problem by reviewing patents with large team sizes of inventors
to get a sense for the amount of noise in the data. Our assumption is that the average firm
patent will be developed by larger teams of inventors. The results can be seen in Figure 1.
The team size distributions for unassigned and individual assigned patents are fairly similar
and well to the left of firm assigned patents. Unassigned patents have the larger share of
single inventor patents (nearly 80% of unassigned patents have a single inventor). Looking
at the right tale of the distribution, we find that fewer than 1% of unassigned and individual
assigned patents have inventor team sizes of 5 or more, compared to the nearly 7% of firm
assigned patents.
Firm assigned patents present a challenge to us. The patent data does not include
firm identifiers or flags that might help us distinguish patents assigned to employers from
those assigned to nonemployer businesses. It is not unreasonable to think however that
independent inventors might assign their patents to their own unincorporated nonemployer
business. However, we do not want to exclude these inventors from our analysis since their
patents might be particularly valuable. We rely on the U.S. Census Bureau longitudinal
patent-business database (BDS-IF) to identify and exclude from our analysis patents assigned
to employer businesses while keeping those assigned to nonemployer businesses.5 We identify
patents assigned to nonemployer firms by matching all patents to the U.S. Census Bureau’s
Business Register of nonemployer firms.6 A large percentage of patents, nearly 80%, match
to the employer universe files. The employer matches tend to be based on the assignee
5

The BDS-IF identifies patents assigned to employer businesses while keeping those assigned to nonemployer businesses. See Graham, Grim, Islam, Marco, and Miranda (2018) for details of the matching methodology. Briefly, it uses both the assignee and inventor information to form a match. The use of two independent
pieces of information to identify the assignee firm provides a high level of reliability in the match.
6
All businesses that file an income tax form to the IRS authorities and have no associated payroll tax form
are included in the nonemployer Business Register. See Appendix A for details of the matching methodology.

7

name and address, while the nonemployer matches mostly occur through the inventor. We
remove the known employer matches from Graham, Grim, Islam, Marco, and Miranda (2018)
from our universe of matches, leaving us with approximately 200,000 raw nonemployer firm
matches. Our set of initial matches require further refining. A high quality firm-inventor
match does not guarantee the inventor is matched to its firm. Think of an inventor named
David Smith in D.C. and a company named David Smith located also in D.C. First, there
are possibly many unincorporated entities named David Smith so the match might not be
unique. Even if the match is unique we do not know whether the owner is the inventor (i.e.
there are many David Smiths). We retain only cases where the social security number of the
inventor and the social security number in the nonemployer firm record line up.7 This filtering
process leaves us with a total set of approximately 125,000 patents. We remove an additional
55,000 patents by only keeping the unduplicated matches.8 Finally, we drop patents that
are associated with nonemployers that have an unusually large number of patents assigned
to them.9 This leaves us with a total of 68,000 patents associated to nonemployer businesses
that we are confident belong to the inventors behind the patents.
Table 2 shows the percentage of patents matched to employer businesses (E) and nonemployer business (NE) by assignee type and year. Patents that remain unmatched (U) are
not associated with business activity as captured by the Business Register. To be clear,the
set of unmatched patents might include some that were matched to a Census dataset but
where the match either could not be uniquely resolved to an inventor or assignee or was
not linked through the PVS process.10 Table 2 highlights a clear separation in the match
7

This comparison is done indirectly. The Census Bureau strips personally identifiable information from
all of its internal files to protect the confidentiality of records. Specifically the Census Bureau replaces and
individual’s name, address (and SSN if present) with a Protected Identification Key (PIK) using the PVS
system (Wagner and Layne, 2014). Each name-address pairing has a unique PIK in the system. The Census
Bureau assigned a PIK to the patent data using the name and location information.
8
The PVS system does not guarantee an inventor in the USPTO database will receive a unique person
identifier. In cases where the identifying information is not unique enough multiple PIKs are assigned.
9
These might be holding entities with no associated employers.
10
See Appendix A for details of the match and Table A8 for a breakdown of unmatched patents

8

rates by assignee type, with the vast majority of firm-assigned patents linked to employer
firms. By contrast individual-assigned patents have much lower match rates. Only about
50% of patents are associated with some form of business activity with most of it tied to
nonemployer firms. Only 30.4% of unassigned patents are tied to some form of business
activity. We have no links to employer businesses since there is no available firm assignee
information in the patent document for these patent types.

4

Characteristics of Patented Household Innovations

In this section, we describe the characteristics of patents and inventors associated with what
we call patented household innovations which include patents that are either unassigned or
are assigned to individuals. We contrast those with patents assigned to firms. We start by
describing differences in the demographic composition of the inventors associated with the
patents, before delving into the characteristics of the actual patents.

4.1

Inventor Demographics

To highlight potential differences in demographic characteristics of inventors associated with
household innovations we link demographic information from administrative U.S. Census
Bureau files to the inventors in the patent records. They provide basic demographic information including gender, race, country of origin and birth date for all people in the U.S.
with a social security number.
Information from the demographic files is linked by use of a Protected Identification Key
(PIK) available on both sets. We are not able to uniquely identify all inventors in the patent
documents in our files due to limitations of the data.11 There are 1.48M inventors associated
with the 1.29M patents that form our analysis. We are able to obtain demographics for
11

The identification would be greatly facilitated if the USPTO were able to collect either a birth date or
a SSN/TIN.

9

inventors on 856,000 of the 1.29M patents.12 Overall we find inventors tied to firm assignees
are more likely to be uniquely identified than individual assignees or unassigned patents.
We also find that patents unmatched to demographic data are mostly concentrated in the
sectors of ”Design” and ”Plants”. Details of the matching procedures are results can be
found in Appendix B.
Table 3 shows demographic information for the set of inventors we were able to identify
by assignee type and type of economic activity. There are some notable differences in the
demographic composition of the patent types but also some similarities. The first thing to
notice is that the vast majority of patents are filed by males. This is true across all assignee
types and is consistent over time.13 Innovation activity whether household or firm based
is a male dominated activity. This is consistent with Bell, Chetty, Jaravel, Petkova, and
Van Reenen (2016), who find a similar deficit in female innovators.
Firm-based patents disproportionately favor foreign-born inventors relative to individualassigned patents and unassigned patents, with approximately 1/3 of inventors affiliated with
firm-assigned patents being foreign born, compared to 20% for other assignee types. Given
this it is perhaps not too surprising that firm-assigned patents are less likely to be associated
with black or white inventors and nearly twice as likely to be associated with “other” races
relative to individual-assigned and unassigned patents. The share of foreign born inventors
outweighs their relative share in the labor force at 16.7% of the total in 2015.14 We find there
is a deficit of black inventors across the board again consistent with Bell et al. (2016).15
Finally, individual-assigned and unassigned patents disproportionately favor both older
(over 55) and younger inventors (less than 25). Nearly 1/3 of the household inventors are
55 years and older, compared to the 20% found in firm-assigned patents. This is consistent
12

We are able to identify demographics from 884,000 patents, but 28,000 of the patents are later classified
as reassigned, which are dropped from our analysis
13
Time series results not shown.
14
Shares of foreign born in the labor force are reported in Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016).
15
Blacks and whites made a 12% and 79% respectively of the labor force population in 2015 (Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 2016).

10

with von Hippel, de Jong, and Flowers (2012) who find household innovations are disproportionately tied to students and men over 55.
To summarize our findings, household innovators (associated with individual assigned
and unassigned patents) are more likely to be US born, white, less than 25 and over 55
than firm based innovators. In the case of the latter, the proportion of household innovators
above the age of 55 is more than 12 percentage points higher (31.6 versus 18.8). Across the
board we find a deficit of female and black inventors relative to the population of employed
workers and over representation of foreign born inventors.

4.2

Technology Class

We next focus on the types of technology classes associated with household innovations. Previous research has focused on consumer product innovations and found innovations tended
to be focused in a few product classes. Here we focus on the broader set of patented innovations. We look at the technology composition by assignee-type. We also look at those
that lead to direct business activity and those that do not. For our classification, we use the
primary USPC code assigned to each patent and group them into eight broad classes consisting of: Chemicals, Computers and Communication (C&C), Design, Drugs and Medicine
(D&M), Electrical and Electronics (E&E), Mechanical, Plant Patents and Other. The grouping by USPC class is based on Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001) and expanded to include
new patent classes as detailed in Dreisigmeyer, Graham, Grim, Islam, Marco, and Miranda
(2014). Table 4 shows the breakdown by assignee type. We find firm assigned patents are
disproportionately in Chemical, C&C and E&E relative to individual assignee and unassigned patents. By contrast they are underrepresented in Design, Mechanical and Other.
Table A12 in Appendix C provides a listing of technology subcategories associated with each
broad class. Amongst the technologies included in Mechanical and Others are Motors, Engines & Parts, Transportation and Miscellaneous such as hardware and tools. Others include
Amusement Devices, Apparel & Textile, and Furniture & House Fixtures and miscellaneous

11

such as Robots and Aquatic Devices. All fairly typical consumer products. Design patents
provide protection to ornamental designs embodied in or applied to an article of manufacture. Analysis of the top 50 companies having been granted design patents shows that these
are dominated by technology, automotive, and consumer product companies.16
Table 5 breaks down the previous table by business activity. The patterns here replicate the findings discussed regardless of business type. A few things stand out. First, the
majority of Design patents are not associated with business activity and remain unmatched.
This is true for both individual assigned and unassigned patents and suggests fundamental
differences perhaps in the value of design patents vis-a-vis utility patents and maybe the
requirements for grant. Second, patents with a firm assignee in the Drugs & Medical class
are harder to match to business databases perhaps due to the complex structure of firms
developing them.
We combine our technology classes with the individual demographics to identify compositional differences between employer patents and household innovations. Table 6 takes the
difference in the proportion of patents by technology class and demographic characteristic
between nonemployer patents and employer patents. The table highlights several key differences, most of which are significant. Design patents clearly differentiate themselves in terms
of demographics. The previous sections have alluded to the fact that nonemployer patents
are disproportionately male, U.S. born, white and older than employer patents. However,
this does not seem to be the case for Design patents, where the opposite holds. It appears
design patents in employer businesses are disproportionally associated with white, male, U.S.
born inventors where they might hold a relative advantage signaling to the very different
nature of these types of patents.
16

For details see report from Intellectual Property Owners Association (2015).

12

4.3

Team Size

Evidence from surveys and product studies suggest the complexity and knowledge embodied
in household innovations might not run very deep. A typical story might be that of a
consumer that modifies the face of a clock to teach their kids how to tell time.17 Consistent
with this survey data also shows that the average expenditure in developing a household
innovation is not very high. In this section we explore whether this is also true of patented
household innovations. We follow Jones (2009) and use team size as a measure of the
complexity and depth of knowledge associated with a particular innovation. The burden of
knowledge hypothesis would indicate household innovations require smaller team sizes.
Figure 1 plots the distribution of team sizes by assignee types and shows that firmassigned patents tend to be significantly larger on average. The size distribution for individual assignee and unassigned patents is fairly similar and rests well to the left of firm assigned
patents. A large share of individual-assigned and unassigned patents are developed by a
single inventor relative to patents assigned to firms. There are single inventors on 60.7% of
individual-assigned patents and 83.5% of unassigned patents versus 30.8% on firm-assigned
patents. Table 7 tabulates the mean team size by assignee type, technology class and type
of business and finds similar results across them. Team sizes for patents matched to nonemployer business tend to be significantly smaller on average than patents matched to employer
firms, having on average nearly one less team member. Patents with no associated business
activity have the smallest team size on average. Consistent with Jones (2009) and Kim and
Marschke (2015) Drugs and Medicines and Chemicals tend to be composed of the largest
inventor teams, while Design patents consist of the smallest teams.
17

This story is taken from von Hippel, de Jong, and Flowers (2012)

13

4.4

Impact

Household survey data indicates the impact and quality of household innovations might not
be very high. Survey respondents often indicate they do not expect their inventions to be
adopted. In this section we explore whether this extends to patented household innovations.
In this section we follow the literature and use citation counts as a noisy measure of the
quality of a patent and their technological impact. We then use a new measure of impact
that takes account of the structure of forward and backward looking citations to identify
radical patents. Finally we examine whether these innovations are general purpose or instead
narrow in application. We ignore truncation issues in the analysis assuming similar impacts
across types of patents.

4.4.1

Citations

For our citation measures we use the latest citation count (as of December 2015) collected
from PatentsView and link them to our dataset. Figure 2 shows the distribution of citation
counts by assignee type. Table 8 reports the means by assignee type, business type and broad
technology class. On average, individual-assigned patents have a lower mean citation count
than firm-assigned patents. The mean citation for firm-assigned patents is 16.4, while the
mean citation count for individual-assigned patents is 11.3 and 10.2 for unassigned patents.18
The difference in average citation counts is driven in part by an across the board lower
citation count across technology classes. However, some of the largest differences in mean
citation counts can be found in the Design, Mechanical and Others categories precisely the
areas where household innovations are concentrated so composition effects contributes to
the overall difference. More interestingly perhaps is the finding that household innovations
are quite heavily cited on average and in some areas such as Computers & Communications
18

Approximately 160,000 patents out of the 1.29M have zero citations. The proportion of patents with
zero citations by matched data and assignee type is approximately equivalent to the proportion of total
patents by matched data and assignee type.

14

and Electrical & Electronic the difference is not very large. Looking at the citations across
type of business activity we find patents have a mean citation count of 16.4, 13.4, and 11.4
respectively for patents associated with employer businesses, nonemployer businesses and no
business activity. Again, these differences appear to be driven by composition effects as well
as generally lower citation counts within particular technology classes.
To examine differences in citation counts after controlling for technology composition we
run a Poisson regression on citations looking at the impact of business type after controlling
for patent class (main USPC code) and grant year. The results are found in Table 9. Column
(1) looks at citation impact by business type and Column (2) by assignee type. Focusing on
Column (1) we see the difference in the logs of expected citations is 0.288 units higher for
patents matched to employer firms and 0.06 units higher for patents matched to nonemployer
firms relative to unmatched patents, holding everything else constant. This is equivalent to
a citation count that is 33.4% higher for employer-matched patents and 6.2% higher for
nonemployer-matched patents, for a difference of 27% in citations between employer and
nonemployer patents. Looking at the differences in citations by assignee type, Column (2)
we find a similar difference between firm assigned patents and individual assigned patents.
The coefficient values give a difference in the logs of expected citations to be 0.096 units higher
for firm assigned patents and -0.247 units lower for individual assigned patents relative to
reassigned patents. This is equivalent to a citation count that is 10% higher for firm assigned
patents and 22% lower for individual assigned patents, for a difference of 32%.

4.4.2

Radical Patents

Households innovators will be relatively resource constrained compared to firms. These
innovators might choose to focus on technologies that require smaller investments and prior
knowledge –they are not complex. Consistent with this idea section 4.2 documented the
disproportionate weight design patents have amongst household innovators. In this section
we explore whether this might lead them also to work on innovations that represent breaks

15

with past knowledge within specific technology fields. In this section we assess the proportion
of breakthrough patents amongst patented household innovations as defined by whether they
represent a “radical” break from existing knowledge in that field. Since it is the focal point
of a new technological trajectory the patent itself must be cited.
Our measure builds on the concepts of Dahlin and Behrens (2005) but is extended to
the universe of patents in the USPTO patent database (Dreisigmeyer et al., 2014). Dahlin
and Behrens (2005) define the term radical invention as one that meets three properties: 1)
it is novel - it has distinctive features that are missing in previously observed inventions; 2)
it is unique - it is the focal point of a new technological trajectory; 3) it must be adopted - it
should influence future inventions. The authors operationalize this idea by examining both
forward and backward citation patterns for any given patent. Forward citations are citations
to a patent made by other later patents. It is a measure of the patents impact on future
inventions and its value in the market. Backward citations are defined by the prior art cited
by the patent itself. Backward citations contain information about the radicalness of the
innovation. The more radical a technology the more likely it is to cite prior art outside its
own patent class since this will necessarily involve combining different elements rather than
inventions from its own field.
Table 10 reports the number of patents (per thousand) that qualify as being radical
by assignee type, business type and technology class. In general, patents matched to employer firms are more than twice as likely to be considered radical versus patents matched to
nonemployer firms and unmatched patents. This does not appear to be driven by compositional differences in the patent types, as employer-match patents and firm-assigned patents
consistently have higher rates of radical patents across all technology classes. Design patents
appear to have high rates of radical innovations. Many of these appear to be self referencing
and not have much of an impact outside the patenting firm suggesting these might be disproportionately defensive patents. While there are relatively fewer radical patents amongst
household innovators there is still a non trivial number of them. We examine some of the

16

radical patents identified. The bulk of them are found in Computers & Communications,
Design, and Drugs & Medical. They include a system for providing traffic information to
a plurality of mobile users connected to a network, a system for dynamically pushing information to a user utilizing global positioning system, a method and apparatus for securing
a suture and a flash memory drive with quick connector. All these technologies had broad
impacts in their fields.

4.4.3

Generality Index

Finally we describe the breath of impact patented household innovations have outside of their
own field. Some technologies are more specific with a limited application across industries
while others have a wider field of application. We use the patent classification codes to
generate a measure of generality, Gi , that is close to that used by Hall and Trajtenberg
(2004) as follows:
v
uX
u n 2
sij
Gi = t
j

where sij denotes the percentage of citations received by patent i that belong to patent class
j, out of n patent classes. This is simply the square root of the Herfindahl concentration
index and therefore if a patent is cited by subsequent patents that belong to a wide range of
fields the measure will be low and close to zero. By contrast if the citations are concentrated
in a few fields the measure will be close to 1. Further, if a patent has a single citation in
the same technological field this measure will be equal to 1 and it won’t be defined when it
receives no citations.19
We compute a Generality Index for patents in our sample that were granted up through
2008 to limit the impact of right censoring. Table 11 looks at the mean generality index
19

This modified measure of generality retains important properties of metric spaces (or distance functions)
that allow us to measure the distance, instead of just a similarity, between two patents.

17

by assignee type, type of business activity and technology class. In general firm assigned
patents find application across a broader set of technological fields. This is particularly true
for Chemical, Drugs & Medical and Mechanical. Independent inventors appear to focus
on technologies that have narrower impacts. Across the board and as expected patents in
Computers & Communications and Chemical have broader applicability receiving the highest
number of citations outside their field. By contrast Design patents have the most limited
application.

5

Business Formation and Outcomes

Having established how patents associated with household innovations differ from traditional
patents, this section looks at the types of business associated with household innovations;
their characteristics, innovation dynamics and outcomes. The goal is to assess whether
the innovator is able to monetize their innovation, either through increased business income
possibly from licensing or use of the patent. There are other ways the inventor might monetize
their innovation that we do not observe here such as through direct payments.20 It should be
noted that the majority of patented household innovations are not directly tied to a business
that the inventor owns. Table 5 shows that only 19% of patented household innovations;
those accounted for by individual assignee and unassigned patents, are associated with a
business. The equivalent rate for patents with a declared business assignee is 93%.

5.1

Characteristics of Patenting Firms: Industry, Age and Size

We start by looking at the industry composition of the nonemployer firms that obtain a
patent. Patenting nonemployer firms are extremely rare. Out of more than 20M nonemployer
firms in a typical year, only around 5,000 firms will seek out a patent (less than 0.03%).
20

This form of income might be observed through their income tax forms.

18

We limit our analysis to nonemployer firms that are born after 2000. We exclude existing
nonemployers born prior to avoid left censoring in the patents we can match.21 Figure 3 shows
the industry composition of patenting nonemployer firms weighted by number of patents they
own, top, and that of all nonemployer firms, bottom. Figure 3 shows, a disproportionate
share of patents originate at nonemployer firms that engage in Professional Services followed
by Finance & Real State and Retail. This is very different from the industry composition of
nonemployer firms, which is dispersed much more evenly across industries.
Businesses associated with household innovations differ from the overall population of
nonemployer businesses. We are interested in understanding whether the trigger for creating
these businesses is the expectation of a patent grant and thus a means to try to capitalize on
an innovation or instead the business activity predates the patent application. We explore
similar patterns for firms with employees. Figure 4 graphs the distribution of firm age when
the firm/inventor applies for their first patent for both employer and nonemployer firms.22
We define firm age based on the year the business first filed income taxes.
We look at applications by patenting firms in 2010. We limit our analysis to firms
up to age 10. If a firm first files income taxes after the application is filed we assign a
negative age equal to the difference between application year and birth year. Figure 4 shows
a significant share of businesses apply for their patent before they generate revenue. The
mass of distribution is to the left of their second year of business activity. Approximately
43.6% of nonemployer firms that are granted a patent apply for the patent prior to starting
their nonemployer business activity. For many other businesses the birth of the business
coincides with the patent application year.
A non trivial number of patent applications, 18%, are filed three or more years after
starting the business activity suggesting.
21

Currently we can only work with patent data starting in 2000. If we were to include incumbent nonemployers in 2000 there would be no way for us to determine which ones received a patent prior to 2000.
22
We only observe granted patents.

19

Compared to employer businesses household innovators are more likely to start their
business at time of application, although the two distributions are centered around age zero.
The tighter distribution for nonemployers can be attributed to the shortened lifecycle of
nonemployer firms, most of whom are very short-lived with more than 50% of nonemployer
firms exiting before year 2 and 70% of nonemployer firms exiting by year 3 (Fairlie and
Miranda, 2017)
We are interested in understanding the revenue generated by household innovations visa-vis innovations tied to established employer businesses. Figure 5 looks at the revenue
distribution for firms that own patents as a function of their employer status. As before
we focus on the cross section of firms age 10 or less in 2010. Revenue follows a log-normal
pattern with the distribution centered at $10,000 for household innovations.23 Revenue for
innovative employer businesses is similarly shaped but centered around much larger revenues
of $1.2 million. Businesses associated with household innovations do not appear to generate
much income on average at time of application. There is however a fairly wide distribution
with a standard deviation of $97,500.
Figure 6 looks at income growth before and after patent grant. To avoid composition
effects as a result of firm exit we show results for a balanced panel of firms that survive
for a minimum of 5 years. For comparison we show revenue for employer businesses. We
normalize revenue to equal 100 at grant time, t, to facilitate comparison with employer
businesses. Figure 6 shows income growth prior to patent grant is considerable and very
similar for both employer and nonemployer business. In the two years prior to patent grant
revenue grows by 25% relative to the base. Income plateaus for nonemployer business shortly
after grant and starts declining one year after. Very few firms transition to employer status
so this pattern is not due to excluding successful exits out of nonemployment.
Revenue growth by employer businesses seems to be very different after grant. These
23

It should be noted that firms who patent prior to starting their business (negative age firms) are not
included in the distribution

20

firms display an acceleration of revenue that seems to exhaust itself two years after grant.
Overall these results suggest that on average household innovators are not as successful in
capitalizing their innovations after grant.

5.2

Dynamics and Transition to Employer Status

Finally, we look at the probability that a nonemployer business hires employees in particular
whether patenting activity is associated with the successful growth expansion to a business
that generates paid jobs for other individuals. For this exercise we focus on the cohort of new
nonemployer startups in 2000 and ask ourselves how many transition into employer status
each year after.
We find that of the approximately 5.24M new nonemployer entrants in 2000, around
100,000 eventually transition to employer firms over their life, for a cumulative transition
rate of approximately 2%. Of this cohort, 3,700 nonemployer firms hold a patent. Of these,
less than 130 will transition to employer firms over their life cycle, for a cumulative transition
rate of around 3.4%, or 70% higher than non patenting firms. Annual transitions are graphed
in Figure 7. As we can see, patenting firms are more than twice as likely to transition to
employer firms within the first two years, relative to non patenting firms.

5.3

The value of Household Innovations

Relatively few household innovations become the foundation of a business. However, those
that do give us an indication of the value of these innovations if only from the revenue they
generate. Household innovations that do not directly translate into a business owned by
the inventor might be expected to generate income in other ways that we do not observe
in the data such as contracts or direct payments. Many other might be monetized by
incumbent companies with specific market knowledge and resources to market and profit
from the innovation. Many other may simply never be pursued directly but contribute to
the knowledge base that generate other innovations. Other innovations might go unnoticed
21

and yet other may simply have no value at all. Assigning value to these innovations is difficult
if not impossible. However, a simple back of the envelope calculation might give us a sense
of the magnitude of their overall value. To this end we calculate a range of potential values
based on both the marginal and average direct income generated by businesses owned by
household inventors. We focus first on innovations that are tied to nonemployer businesses.
We calculate the average income generated by those business while they remain in operation.
For simplicity we ignore income generated by these businesses after they hire their first
employee since there are relatively few transitions. We base our calculation on the cohort of
firms born in 2000 that own a patent. We track these firms through 2011 or until they exit.
Our starting point for identifying the economic value of these patents is to first come
up with a revenue elasticity for each patent grant. In Table 12 we run several revenue
specifications based on known factors that are seemingly unrelated to the innovation itself,
but can potentially impact the revenue stream of these businesses. These include technology
sector and zip code-year controls, as well as demographic controls (male, U.S. born, race
and age) across the full nonemployer sample and patenters-only. In column (5), we control
for selection using a Heckman selection model. The results from our specifications reveal
that patents have a positive and significant impact on revenue. Across all nonemployer and
patenting firms, the specifications suggest that a 10% increase in granted patents is associated
with a 0.3-0.4% increase in revenue (combining the elasticities of the patent application and
grant), while a 10% increase in citations is associated with a 0.03-0.06% increase in revenue.
These results are consistent after controlling for selection.
In attempting to compute the economic value of these patents, we first need to tabulate
the total number of household innovations as measured by patents and number of businesses
associated with these patents. Table 1 and Table 2 tell us that we have approximately
93,000 matched patents to nonemployer businesses. These 93,000 patents match to 42,000
unique nonemployer businesses (2.2 patents per business). Assuming the same employer-tononemployer match ratios in Table 2 and applying them to the set of unmatched patents gives

22

us 184,000 unmatched nonemployer patents, which would convert to approximately 83,000
nonemployer businesses (assuming the same ratio of patents per business). We therefore
need to approximate the revenue streams for the 83,000 ”missing” nonemployer businesses
to tabulate the full economic impact of household innovations. Nonemployer businesses with
patents generate approximately $10,200 in annual revenue on average (versus $9,700 generated on average for nonemployer businesses who hold no patents). Nonemployer businesses
with patents also have an average survival rate of 3.95 years (versus 2.72 years for nonemployer businesses without patents). Therefore, if we take the aggregate lifetime revenue
of the 42,000 nonemployer businesses with patents, we get an economic value of approximately $1.7B (or $18,500 per patent). Applying the same values to the 83,000 ”missing”
nonemployer businesses with patents gives us a cumulative economic value of $5.0B for all
household innovations between 2000 and 2011 in real 2000 dollars.
It is important to note that this calculation requires a number of strong assumptions
which may differ greatly from reality. First, the revenue generated by business started by
household inventors themselves is the same as the revenue generated by household innovations whose outcomes we are not able to observe including those sold to or appropriated by
existing businesses. Second, businesses started by household inventors would not generate
revenue where it not for the innovation. Third, the cost of developing the innovation is
negligible. Finally, we have limited our analysis to patented household innovations. While
arguably the most valuable innovations likely they represent but a small portion of all household innovations. We have made no effort at placing an economic value to innovations that
are not known to the patent system.

6

Conclusion

Households are increasingly recognized as an important source of invention and innovation.
Survey data shows independent inventors contribute substantially to consumer product in-

23

novations that are later incorporated into the products of incumbent firms. A challenge with
survey data are the small sample sizes which either limits what we can learn about the most
valuable innovations (the right tail of the distribution) or limits the scope of the innovations
we can study. In this paper we use administrative data from the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office and the U.S. Census Bureau to describe patented household innovations in a systematic way. While patented innovations arguably represent but a very small slice of household
innovations it is perhaps the most valuable one. We match these patents and their inventors
to U.S. Census Bureau demographic and business data. We explore the demographic characteristics of housed inventors vis-a-vis salaried inventors, the characteristics and impact of
their innovations, and their value when these inventors monetize their innovations through
their own business.
We find household inventors are disproportionately born in the U.S. when compared
with salaried inventors and consequently they are also relatively white. Businesses that
hire inventors disproportionately hire foreign born inventors relative to their size in the
population an indication these corporations might engage in brain gain by tapping foreign
markets. Household inventors are disproportionately under 25 and over 55 consistent with the
idea that household innovation is a leisure activity. Across the board, whether household or
corporate inventors, we find a deficit in female and black inventors relative to the population
as a hole.
Looking at the types of innovations we find household inventors work in technology
classes disproportionately tied to consumer products such as Design, Mechanical and Other.
These patents are about 1/2 as likely to be considered “radical” when compared with corporate patents. In terms of value, household innovations accumulate approximately 27-32%
fewer citations on average. While their citation impact is smaller it remains remarkably
high with an average of 13.6 citations per patent (through December 2016). Finally, we find
relatively few household inventors start a business around their innovation. Only 19% of
household innovations are tied to a business. These businesses average $10,000 in revenue at

24

time of patent application and are more than twice as likely to transition to hire their first
employee than nonemployers who do not patent.
Finally, our back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest patented household innovations
granted between 2000 and 2011 may generate approximately $5.0B in 2000 dollar revenue.
While this might not be extraordinary when compared to the value of corporate patents, it
is non-trivial, which raises important questions about R$D and innovation policy.
To conclude, patented household innovations have impact and value. Many of them are
radical and represent breakthroughs in their fields. Despite efforts to understand their role
in the economy our knowledge of innovations and their inventors remains limited. Administrative data helps shed light on this population and their impact. Combined with a targeted
survey of household inventors and their patented inventions could go a long way to expand
our knowledge in this area.

25

References
Arora, A., W. M. Cohen, and J. P. Walsh (2016) “The acquisition and commercialization
of invention in American manufacturing: Incidence and impact,” Research Policy, 45(6),
1113–1128.
Bell, A., R. Chetty, X. Jaravel, N. Petkova, and J. Van Reenen (2016) “The lifecycle of
inventors,” .
Bell, A., et al. (2016) “The lifecycle of inventors,” .
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016) “Foreign Born Workers: Labor Force Characteristics
2015,” Press Release, https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/forbrn.pdf. Published 201605-19. Accessed 2017-02-18.
Dahlin, K. B., and D. M. Behrens (2005) “When is an invention really radical?: Defining
and measuring technological radicalness,” Research Policy, 34(5), 717–737.
de Jong, J. P. (2016) “Surveying innovation in samples of individual end consumers,” European Journal of Innovation Management, 19(3), 406–423.
Deming, W. E. (1990) Sample design in business research, vol. 23. John Wiley & Sons,
illustrated, reprint, revised edn.
Dreisigmeyer, D., S. Graham, C. Grim, T. Islam, A. Marco, and J. Miranda (2014) “A Patent
Classification System for the Business Dynamics Statistics,” Discussion paper, mimeo.
Fairlie, R. W., and J. Miranda (2017) “Taking the Leap: The Determinants of Entrepreneurs
Hiring Their First Employee,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 26(1), 3–
34.
Franke, N., and S. Shah (2003) “How communities support innovative activities: an exploration of assistance and sharing among end-users,” Research policy, 32(1), 157–178.
Graham, S. J., C. Grim, T. Islam, A. C. Marco, and J. Miranda (2018) “Business dynamics
of innovating firms: Linking US patents with administrative data on workers and firms,”
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 27(3), 372–402.
Hall, B. H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001) “The NBER patent citation data file:
Lessons, insights and methodological tools,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hall, B. H., and M. Trajtenberg (2004) “Uncovering GPTs with patent data,” Discussion
paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Intellectual Property Owners Association (2015) “IP Spotlight 2015,” Web Report,
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/forbrn.pdf. Published 2015-07-31. Accessed 201702-18.

26

Jones, B. F. (2009) “The burden of knowledge and the death of the renaissance man: Is
innovation getting harder?,” The Review of Economic Studies, 76(1), 283–317.
Kim, J., and G. Marschke (2015) “Teams in R&D: Evidence from US Inventor Data,” .
Lüthje, C. (2004) “Characteristics of innovating users in a consumer goods field: An empirical
study of sport-related product consumers,” Technovation, 24(9), 683–695.
Serrano, C. J. (2010) “The dynamics of the transfer and renewal of patents,” RAND Journal
of Economics, 41(4), 686–708.
Shah, S. (2000) “Sources and patterns of innovation in a consumer products field: Innovations in sporting equipment,” Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, WP-4105.
von Hippel, E. (1976) “The dominant role of users in the scientific instrument innovation
process,” Research policy, 5(3), 212–239.
von Hippel, E., J. P. J. de Jong, and S. Flowers (2012) “Comparing Business and Household
Sector Innovation in Consumer Products: Findings from a Representative Study in the
United Kingdom,” Management Science, 58(9), 1669–1681.
Wagner, D., and M. Layne (2014) “The Person Identification Validation System (PVS):
Applying the Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications (CARRA)
Record Linkage Software,” Discussion paper.

27

Table 1. U.S. Patents by Assignee Type and Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Total

Individual
970
980
930
890
860
790
980
870
760
850
960
950
10,800

Business Unassigned
Total
79,500
21,500
107,000
82,900
20,100
109,000
81,200
19,000
106,000
82,900
18,300
107,000
80,100
16,300
101,000
71,400
13,500
89,000
88,700
16,200
110,000
81,600
14,900
101,000
81,400
14,300
99,400
84,700
13,400
102,000
108,000
16,500
130,000
110,000
15,900
130,000
1,032,000
200,000 1,290,000

Source: Authors calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents by US entities between
2000-2011. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure requirements.

Table 2. Percentage of Patents: by Assignee Type, Type of Business & Year

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Total

Individual
E NE
U
2.1 57.9
40
1.4 63.8 34.7
(D) 55.5 44.5
(D) 56.9 43.1
(D) 53.8 46.2
1.6 55.6 42.7
2 51.4 46.6
1.8 52.3 45.9
2.6 48.1 49.3
1.4 50.5 48.1
1.3 55.5 43.3
1.7 56.3
42
1.3
55 43.7

Business
Unassigned
E NE
U E NE
U
91.5 1.8 6.7 0 28.8 71.2
91.6 1.9 6.5 0 29.2 70.8
92 1.7 6.3 0 23.5 76.5
92.4 1.7 5.9 0 23.7 76.3
92.2 1.7 6.1 0 23.9 76.1
91.8 1.8 6.4 0 25.3 74.7
91.8 1.8 6.3 0 23.7 76.3
92.2 1.7 6.1 0 21.5 78.5
92.2 1.7 6.1 0 21.4 78.6
92.3 1.7 6.1 0 21.4 78.6
92 1.7 6.2 0 23.5 76.5
90.9 1.9 7.2 0 23.9 76.1
91.9 1.8 6.3 0 24.4 75.6

Source: Authors’ calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011. Notes: Type of business: E=Employer, NE=Non-Employer, U=Unknown. (D) identifies
suppressed values.

28

Table 3. Inventor Demographics: by Assignee Type and Type of Business

Male
U.S. Born
Black
White
Other
Age < 25
25 < Age <55
Age >55
Total Inventors∗
Total Patents∗

Individual
Business
Unassigned
E
NE
U
E
NE
U
E
NE
U
86.5 91.4 90.6
92.1
91.8
90.7 (0)
89.3
87.7
66.1
67.4
63.2 (0)
82.8
81.3
72.1 82.1 80.3
1.8
2.1
3.5
0.9
0.9
1 (0)
3.1
4.2
73.9
75.8
72.9 (0)
84.2
83.1
78.4 84.8 83.1
19.8 13.1 13.4
25.2
23.3
26.1 (0)
12.6
12.8
1.8
1.6
3.9
0.5
1.2
0.9 (0)
2
2.3
73.9 67.1
58
81
75.3
77.1 (0)
65
63.1
24.3 31.4 38.1
18.5
23.5
22 (0)
33
34.5
110 6,600 1,200 1,320,000 19,200 77,100 (0) 37,300 38,400
60 4,700 1,100
666,000 10,800 40,400 (0) 31,100 35,100

Source: Authors calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011. Notes: Type of business: E=Employer, NE=Non-Employer, U=Unknown. ∗ Counts are
rounded to comply with disclosure requirements. (D) identifies suppressed values.

Table 4. Percent of U.S. Patents by Assignee Type and Technology Class
Individual Business Unassigned
Chemical
6.9
10.7
5
C&C
11.3
29.4
5.8
Design
19.8
9.2
27.1
D&M
10
11.4
6.4
E&E
8.6
18.2
8.1
Mechanical
16
10.6
17.5
Others
26.7
10.1
29
Plant
0.6
0.4
1.1
∗
Total
10,800 1,030,000
200,000
Source: Authors calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011. Notes: Technology Class: C&C=Computers & Communications, D&M=Drugs & Medical,
E&E=Electrical & Electronic. ∗ Total patent counts in this row are rounded to comply with disclosure
requirements.

29

Table 5. Patent Technology Class: Percent by Assignee Type and Type of Business
Individual Assignee
Business Assignee
E
NE
U
E
NE
U E
Chemical
7
8.6
4.8
10.7
10
10.8 0
C&C
16.8 15.1
6.3
29.5
29.4
28.1 0
Design
14
3
41.1
9.3
6.9
9.4 0
D&M
25.9 11.6
7.6
11
13.5
16.6 0
18.5
13
15.2 0
E&E
15.4 10.4
6.2
Mechanical 11.2 18.9
12.6
10.8
9.8
8.7 0
Others
7.7 32.3
20.3
10
13.9
9.9 0
0.3
0.9
0.9 0
Plant
2.1
0
1.2
Total∗
140 5,900 4,700 949,000 18,000 65,500 0

Unassigned
NE
U
6.1
4.6
9.3
4.6
4.8
34.3
7.8
6
9
7.8
22.5
15.8
40.4
25.3
0.1
1.4
49,000 151,000

Source: Authors calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011. Notes: Each column adds up to one. Technology Class: C&C=Computers & Communications,
D&M=Drugs & Medical, E&E=Electrical & Electronic. Type of business: E=Employer,
NE=Non-Employer, U=Unknown. ∗ Total patent counts in this row are rounded to comply with disclosure
requirements. (D) identifies suppressed values.

Table 6. Demographic Differences by Technology Class: Non-Employer versus Employer
Male US Born Black White
Other Age<25 25<Age<55 Age>55
Chemical
0.8*
7.1*** 0.6*** 5.3*** -5.9***
1.2***
-11.3*** 10.2***
6.6*** 0.6*** 4.5***
-5***
0.5***
-9.9***
9.3***
C&C
0.3
Design
-6.1***
-0.9 4.3*** -5.8***
1.5*
1.7***
-8.7***
7***
D&M
2.1***
5*** 0.7*** 3.9*** -4.6***
0.7***
-11*** 10.3***
E&E
0.1
8.2*** 0.7*** 7.4*** -8.2***
1.4***
-13.2*** 11.8***
Mechanical -0.9***
7*** 0.9*** 4.8*** -5.8***
1.2***
-11.6*** 10.4***
6.4***
2*** 2.8*** -4.7***
1.1***
-8.9***
7.8***
Others
-5.4***
Plant
1
28.8***
-0.7 -12.5** 13.2***
1.9
-12.2
10.3
Total
-1***
10.4*** 1.1*** 7.1*** -8.3***
1.1***
-11.8*** 10.8***
Source: Authors calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011. Notes: Numbers represent the difference in the proportion of patents between nonemployer and
employer patents. Technology Class: C&C=Computers & Communications, D&M=Drugs & Medical,
E&E=Electrical & Electronic. Type of business: E=Employer, NE=Non-Employer, U=Unknown. *
p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

30

Table 7. Mean Team Size: by Technology Class, Assignee Type and Type of Business
Individual Assignee
E NE
U
Chemical
3.1 1.93
1.38
C&C
2.67 1.88
1.31
Design
1.9 1.68
1.42
D&M
2.92 1.9
1.46
E&E
2.18 1.76
1.31
Mechanical 1.63 1.68
1.24
Others
1.73 1.67
1.27
Plant
2
1
1.04
All Patents 2.38 1.8
1.36

Business Assignee
Unassigned
E NE
U E NE
U
3.06 2.47 2.86 0 1.48 1.32
2.65 2.32 2.53 0 1.47 1.27
2.21 1.7 2.11 0 1.28 1.19
3.1 2.45 2.91 0 1.53 1.39
2.56 2.13
2.4 0 1.38 1.22
2.49 1.98
2.3 0 1.29 1.15
2.44 1.98 2.28 0 1.29 1.15
1.25 1.15
1.3 0 1.68 1.31
2.65 2.24 2.49 0 1.37 1.21

Source: Authors calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011. Notes: Technology Class: C&C=Computers & Communications, D&M=Drugs & Medical,
E&E=Electrical & Electronic. Type of business: E=Employer, NE=Non-Employer, U=Unknown. (D)
identifies suppressed values

Table 8. Mean Citation Count: by Technology Class, Assignee Type and Type of Business
Individual Assignee
E
NE
U
Chemical
8.9 7.52 7.25
C&C
17.04 23.21 19.89
Design
6.65 8.58 6.18
D&M
18.86 23.73 17.65
E&E
12.09 13.1 9.61
Mechanical 10.88 7.81 7.78
Others
9 9.98 8.98
Plant
1.67
0.5 0.36
All Patents 13.1 13.28 9.34

Business Assignee
Unassigned
E
NE
U E
NE
U
10.42 8.78 11.77 0 7.08 6.22
20.34 23.92 21.93 0 16.41 14.41
12.32 11.38 10.7 0 8.55 7.07
25.73 22.81 21.75 0 18.66 15.32
13.84 16.26 15.14 0 10.6 8.88
11.79 14.88 12.64 0 8.13 6.56
14.45 12.39 12.3 0 8.03 7.72
0.31 0.35 0.32 0 0.76 0.29
16.36 16.49 16.81 0 10.13 8.09

Source: Authors calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011. Notes: We exclude patents with zero citations. Technology Class: C&C=Computers &
Communications, D&M=Drugs & Medical, E&E=Electrical & Electronic. Type of business: E=Employer,
NE=Non-Employer, U=Unknown. (D) identifies suppressed values

31

Table 9. Pseudo-Maximum Log Likelihood Regression on Patent Citations
(1)
(2)
Citations
Citations
-0.1616*** -0.1622***
(0.00760)
(0.00757)
0.07265*** 0.06831***
(0.00426)
(0.00403)
0.23618***
(0.02269)
0.07342***
(0.01385)
Dropped
Dropped

Dependent Variable
Grant Year
Team Size
Employer Patents
Non-Employer Patents
Unmatched Patents
Firm Assigned Patents

Unassigned Patents

Dropped

0.04132
(0.02733)
-0.2460***
(0.02746)
Dropped

USPC Fixed Effects
Constant

Yes
326.192***
(14.7814)
1,290,000

Yes
327.522***
(14.7207)
1,290,000

Individual Assigned Patents

Observations

Standard Errors are clustered at the USPC Technology Class level. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Table 10. Proportion of Radical Patents (per thousand): by Technology Class, Assignee
Type and Type of Business
Individual Assignee
E NE
U
Chemical
0 3.9
4.5
C&C
41.7 14.5
6.7
Design
0 11.2
9.8
D&M
0 13.1
8.4
E&E
0 6.5
0
Mechanical
0 4.5
3.4
Others
0 5.7
3.1
Plant
0
0
0
Total
7 7.8
6.4

Business Assignee Unassigned
E NE
U E NE
U
18.1 17.5 17.6 0 1.7
2
14.1 18.7 15.5 0 5.7 3.7
28.4 19.8 21.9 0 9.4 12.3
25.6 22.8 22.3 0 3.4 3.2
13.2 15.2 14.8 0 2.3 3.1
12 17.8 16.5 0 2.8 2.3
15.2
13 16.5 0 1.8 1.4
1.6
0
5.2 0
0 0.5
16.8 17.2 17.4 0 2.9 5.7

Source: Authors calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011. Notes: Technology Class: C&C=Computers & Communications, D&D=Drugs & Medical,
E&E=Electrical & Electronic. Type of business: E=Employer, NE=Non-Employer, U=Unknown

32

Table 11. Mean (Modified) Generality Index: by Technology Class, Assignee Type and
Type of Business
Individual Assignee
E NE
U
Chemical
0.6 0.64
0.62
C&C
0.58 0.59
0.6
Design
0.87 0.8
0.86
D&M
0.63 0.68
0.71
E&E
0.62 0.66
0.69
Mechanical 0.61 0.72
0.71
Others
0.64 0.69
0.7
Plant
1
1
1

Business Assignee
Unassigned
E NE
U E NE
U
0.6 0.61 0.59 0 0.63 0.65
0.63 0.62 0.63 0 0.62 0.63
0.88 0.84 0.88 0 0.79 0.86
0.66 0.66 0.65 0 0.68 0.71
0.66 0.64 0.65 0 0.66 0.68
0.67 0.66 0.66 0 0.7 0.72
0.67 0.68 0.67 0 0.69 0.7
0.99
1 0.99 0
1
1

Source: Authors calculations based on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011. Notes: Technology Class: C&C=Computers & Communications, D&D=Drugs & Medical,
E&E=Electrical & Electronic. Type of business: E=Employer, NE=Non-Employer, U=Unknown

Table 12. Regression Results on Non Employer Revenues
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

OLS
All
0.0048***
(0.0003)
0.0305***
(0.0009)
0.0135***
(0.0010)
-0.0019***
(0.0003)
No
Yes
Yes
0.019
198,110,000

OLS
Patenters Only
0.0060***
(0.0009)
0.0260***
(0.0039)
0.0078***
(0.0023)
-0.0027***
(0.0009)
No
Yes
Yes
0.259
41,500

OLS
All
0.0045***
(0.0003)
0.0262***
(0.009)
0.0117***
(0.0009)
-0.0027***
(0.0003)
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.062
198,110,000

OLS
Patenters Only
0.0056***
(0.0009)
0.0175***
(0.0039)
0.0079***
(0.0023)
-0.0035***
(0.0009)
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.278
41,500

Regression
Sample
Citations
Patent Applications
Patent Grants
Team Size
Demographic Controls
Zip-Year Fixed Effects
Patent-Sector Fixed Effects
R-Squared
Observations

Robust Standard Errors are clustered at the patent-sector level. Selection equation for Column 5 includes
demographic controls and Zip-Year fixed effects. The selection coefficient is -6.0557 with s.e. 0.0628 and is
significant to the 0.1%. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.

33

(5)
Heckman
Selection
(Second Stage)
All
0.0039***
(0.0008)
0.0254***
(0.0011)
0.0139***
(0.0011)
-0.0026***
(0.0004)
Yes
Yes
Yes
198,110,000

Figure 1. Kernel Distribution of Team Size by Assignee Type, 2000-2011

Source: Own calculations based on USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011.

Figure 2. Kernel Distribution of Citation Counts by Assignee Type, 2000-2011

Source: Own calculations based on USPTO data on granted patents applied for between
2000-2011.

34

Figure 3. Industry Composition of Nonemployer Firms: Patenting (top)/All (bottom),
2000-2011

Source: Own calculations based on USPTO and U.S. Census Bureau data. Granted
patents applied for between 2000-2011.

35

Figure 4. Kernel Distribution of Age of Nonemployer Firm for First Patent, 2010

Source: Own calculations based on USPTO and U.S. Census Bureau data on patent
holding firms age 10 years or less in 2010.

Figure 5. Kernel Distribution of Size of Nonemployer Firm for First Patent, 2000-2011

Source: Own calculations based on USPTO and U.S. Census Bureau data on granted
patents applied for between 2000-2011.

36

Figure 6. Total Income Before and After First Patent, Balanced Panel

Source: Own calculations based on USPTO and U.S. Census Bureau data on granted
patents applied for between 2000-2011. Sample includes a balanced panel of patenting
firms centered at patent grant.

Figure 7. Transition to Employer Firms by Year, 2000 Cohort

Source: Own calculations based on USPTO and U.S. Census Bureau data. 2000 cohort of nonemployer
business.

37

Appendix A

Matching Process and Data Construction

In this section, we outline the matching process between USPTO granted patents and the
full non-employer dataset (iLBD) at Census. We start by describing the individual datasets
and features of the datasets that will be matched. We then outline the matching algorithm
and post a number of statistics on the match rates across different patent types.

A.1

USPTO Patent Data

The USPTO patent database consists of all granted patents applied for between 2000 and
2011 by US entities and excludes all foreign entities, as well as government patents.24 Counts
of domestic patents with inventor and assignee data are plotted in Figure 1.
Our matching algorithm attempts to create name and address matches from two distinct
sources of information contained in USPTO patent record: i) The assignee, typically a firm,
for whom patent ownership belongs, and ii) the inventor – persons who may or may not be
affiliated with a firm. In cases where no assignee is named, it is assumed that the patent’s
ownership remains with the inventor(s).
We compile our matching database from two distinct sources of PatentsView data from
USPTO, each associated with either the Assignee or the Inventor.
Our matching algorithm attempts to create name and address matches from two distinct
sources of information contained in USPTO patents: i) The assignee, typically a firm, for
whom patent ownership belongs, and ii) the inventor persons who may or may not be
affiliated with a firm that came up with the patent. In cases where no assignee is name,
it is assumed that the patents ownership belongs to the inventor and/or inventors. We
are primarily interested in collecting names and any geographical data associated with the
24

We only keep patents of assignee type ”02 - US Company and/or Corporation” and type ”04 - US
Individual”, as well as patents with missing assignee information that originate in the US and contain US
inventor data.

38

Figure A1. Mean (Modified) Annual Patent Application Counts of Granted US Patents by
Application Year, 2000-2013

patents. We compile our matching database from two distinct sources of data from USPTO,
each associated with either the Assignee or the Inventor.

A.1.1

Cleaning of USPTO Assignee Data

The matching information for assignees is limited to the firm name, city and state. We use
city and state as our blocking variables and allow for fuzzy matching based on name. We
start with approximately 1.29M patent observations across all years and drop around 260,000
patents that do not have an assignee name to match against, leaving us with 1.03M patents
to match assignee information against. Nearly all of the 1.03M patents have geographic
information, including city and state to match against.
In each year, there are on average 18,000 unique assignee names to match against and
slightly more geographic pairs, indicating that a small subset of assignees apply for patents
from multiple locations. The total number of unique assignees between 2000 and 2011 is

39

Table A1. Assignee Counts from USPTO data on granted patents by US entities, 2000-2011

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Total

Domestic Patents
All Patents
with Assignees
107,000
79,500
109,000
82,900
106,000
81,200
107,000
82,900
101,000
80,100
89,000
71,400
110,000
88,700
101,000
81,600
99,400
81,400
102,000
84,700
130,000
108,000
130,000
110,000
1,290,000
1,030,000

Unique AssigneeGeographic Pairs
20,800
21,000
19,600
19,200
18,600
17,100
19,900
18,300
17,900
17,900
21,200
21,700
123,000

Unique Assignees
18,800
18,900
17,800
17,700
17,200
15,900
18,300
17,000
16,700
16,700
19,800
20,200
102,000

Source: Authors calculations on public USPTO data on granted patents applied for by US entities between
2000-2011. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure requirements.

approximately 102,000 and provide potential matches for 1.03M patents (80% of possible
matches).

A.1.2

Cleaning of USPTO Inventor Data

Inventors are listed separately from the Assignees and are considered wholly different as they
are typically employees of the assignee firms. Inventor data contains a separate identifier
for each inventor and also contains city and state level geographic data. Multiple inventors
can work on each patent. The number of inventors greatly exceeds the number of assignees.
Because the Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (iLBD) mainly consists of personlevel identifiers, inventors will serve as a primary matching criteria.
In each year, there are around 160,000 unique inventor names on average to match the
iLBD against and nearly 1M unique individuals associated with patents granted between
2000-2011. Nearly all of the data contains geographic information of some form, including
city and/or state, with a small proportion of inventors applying for patents across multiple
locations. Combining this data with the Assignee data gives us the full matching criteria
40

Table A2. Inventor Counts from USPTO data on granted patents by US entities, 2000-2011

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Total

Domestic Patents
All Patents
with Inventors
107,000
107,000
109,000
109,000
106,000
106,000
107,000
107,000
101,000
101,000
89,000
88,900
110,000
110,000
101,000
101,000
99,400
99,300
102,000
102,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
1,290,000
1,290,000

Unique InventorGeographic Pairs
161,000
166,000
165,000
169,000
164,000
149,000
177,000
166,000
166,000
175,000
220,000
222,000
1,200,000

Unique Inventors
153,000
158,000
157,000
160,000
156,000
142,000
167,000
157,000
157,000
165,000
205,000
207,000
990,000

Source: Authors calculations on public USPTO data on granted patents by US entities between 2000-2011
Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure requirements.

to perform our name and address match. To summarize our matching frame, we have
approximately 180,000 unique inventors and assignees to match the iLBD against in every
year. These 180,000 inventors and assignees represent around 110,000 patents in each year
for 1.29M total patents.

A.2

Integrated Longitudinal Business Database Cleanup

On the non-employer side of the data, we start by combining all of the individual crosssections of the Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (iLBD) starting in 2000 until
2011. The iLBD consists of both non-employer businesses (identified with an Employer
Identification Number, EIN) and sole-proprietorships (identified by a Protected Identification
Key, PIK). The breakdown and counts of businesses of each type are as follows:
The identifying information used to link to the patents consists of a name, city and
state, along with a unique identifier that is able to link non-employer businesses over time.
Names are given by two separate name variables. We separate the two name variables and

41

Table A3. Non-Employer Businesses Counts by Type
Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Total

Non-Employer
Businesses
16,530,000
16,980,000
17,650,000
18,650,000
19,520,000
20,390,000
20,770,000
21,710,000
21,350,000
21,700,000
22,110,000
22,490,000
239,850,000

Non-Employer
EIN
2,120,000
2,230,000
2,270,000
2,420,000
2,530,000
2,670,000
2,590,000
2,620,000
2,540,000
3,000,000
3,000,000
3,050,000
31,040,000

Non-Employer
PIK
14,410,000
14,750,000
15,380,000
16,230,000
16,990,000
17,720,000
18,180,000
19,090,000
18,810,000
18,700,000
19,110,000
19,440,000
208,810,000

Source: Nonemployer Statistics
Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure requirements.

stack them with their unique identifier in order to obtain every name combination in the
database. In addition, approximately 55% of the names consist of two individuals separated
by an ampersand, such as ”John & Jane Doe”. We separate out each of these observations
into two observations (e.g. ”John Doe” and ”Jane Doe”). All together, these combinations
give us more than 297M+ unique observations for the 183M non-employer businesses to
match against.

A.3

Matching Algorithm

Once the two matching datasets have been completed, we run the following name and address
matching algorithm in order of best possible match to worst possible match.
a. Name, City and State Only the inventor dataset of the USPTO contains CITY data
b. Name and State Includes both Inventor and Assignee data and consists of the largest
possible match
c. Name Only Worst possible match set, but we can keep unique matches

42

Table A4. Number of Patent Matches by Match Criteria, 2000-2011
Number of Matches % of Total Matches
Match Criteria 1 - Name, City and State
713,000
69%
Match Criteria 2 - Name and State
207,000
20%
Match Criteria 3 - Name Only
117,000
11%
Total
1,037,000
Source: Authors calculations using iLBD Data. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with
disclosure requirements.
Table A5. Breakdown of Matches by Identifier, 2000-2011
Matched Patents Inventor Only Assignee Only
Match Criteria 1 - Name, City and State
713,000
500,000
102,000
Match Criteria 2 - Name and State
207,000
130,000
53,000
Match Criteria 3 - Name Only
117,000
78,000
26,000
Total Patents
1,037,000
708,000
181,000
Source: Authors calculations using iLBD Data. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with
disclosure requirements.

Both
112,000
24,000
13,000
149,000

We use SAS PROC DQMATCH algorithm to run the match. After each step, we only
keep the residual non-matched patents so that each patent can only be matched according
to one of the criteria sets above. Table A4 provides summary statistics on the full match
rates by step. These consist of the raw matches (prior to any cleaning).
We are able to match approximately 80% of the 1.29M patents that we start out with.
More than two-thirds of the matches occur at the highest quality where the patent’s assignee/inventor’s name, city and state matched a non-employer business’ name, city and
state. Approximately 1/5 of the matches occur at the ”name and state” resolution, with the
remaining matches occurring at the ”name” resolution. Each of these matches can occur
through an inventor match, assignee match, or for some patents, in both. The breakdown
of match by identifier is:
Nearly 70% of the matches occur through the inventor, which is expected since nearly
90% of the patent matching criteria are through the inventor. About 14% of patents are
matched through both the inventor and assignee, with the remaining being matched through
the assignee. The next step in the matching process is to filter out the patents that are actually linked with employer firms, keep patents that have identified inventors in the PVS

43

process, drop duplicate matches (e.g. more than one identifier for a patent-name combination) and finally augment our data using unique PVS’ed patents.

A.4

Cleaning the Set of Matches

Starting with our set of 103M matches, the first step in the cleaning process is to remove all
of the patents associated with employer firms using an existing Census firm-level crosswalk
(see Graham et al. 2015). These patents may have matched to the non-employer data either
through the inventor who is employed by an employer firm who is the assignee, or if the
name of the non-employer business is very similar or identical to the name of an employer
businesses. The existing Census firm-level crosswalk exists from 2000-2011 and covers more
than 1.5M patents, of which 958,000 originate in the US, with the remaining belonging to
foreign assignees with US subsidiaries. This crosswalk was created using a triangulation
of name-address matching of assignee data merged with linked employee-employer inventor
data. The crosswalk covers around 90% of all domestic patents with firm assignees. Filtering
out the employer patents will remove approximately 80% of the patents matched to the nonemployer data (838,000 patents were removed). This is suggestive that a large percentage of
inventors at employer firms also have non-employer businesses. Not all of the patents from
these inventors are removed from the final dataset, rather only the patents that are identified
to being assigned to an employer firm.
The next step in the cleaning of the matches involves filtering out the matches that have
not been linked to Census data using the Census Bureau’s Person Identification Validation
System (PVS). The PVS process assigns an anonymous, unique person identifier (PIK) to
individuals using name and address information and matching it against the Social Security
Administration’s numerical identification file (”Numident”). The matching process is probabilistic and it is possible for an individual to receive multiple identifiers (PIKs), especially
if the provided only partial information. The USPTO patent data underwent the full PVS
process for the original Census firm-level crosswalk, generating PIKs for all of the inven-

44

tors identified in patents, based on names and a zip code. Because the information used
to generate these matches is rather coarse (only name and zip), approximately 30% of the
patent-inventor combinations have a unique identifier (PIK), while 75% have fewer than 5
identifiers. The zip code is the unique characteristic here that we miss in our non-employer
matching process and hence, can be used to validate our existing matches. Our filter involves
directly linking all of the PIKs assigned to each patent from the PVS process and merging
them with the PIKs generated in the non-employer matches. We drop patents that were
matched to the non-employer through the inventor name but are not identified in the PVS
process. This removes nearly 40% of the existing matches.
The third step in the filter process drops duplicate matches by patent identifier and
name. These are patents that cannot be assigned to a specific person or business because of
multiple matches. There are several instances where patents match to multiple non-employer
identifiers after the name and address match and after the filters have been applied. Since
there is no way to distinguish between these non-employer matches, we elect to drop them.
This removes 45% of existing matches.
The next step in the filter process involves ”winsorizing” our existing matches by the
assignee code. In this case, we count the number of patents by assignee code-year and drop
the patents for the assignee code-year combinations that are in the top 0.5%. This number
ranges between 20-50 patents per year. Our assumption lies in that due to size constraints,
the number of patents a non-employer business can produce in a year are limited and that
these observations are likely to have been missed by the existing Census firm-level crosswalk
or are ”unique” for entirely different reasons. This removes a further 7.5% of matches.
Finally, we augment our matches using the unique inventor identifiers from the PVS
process. As mentioned earlier, approximately 30% of the patent-inventor combinations have
a unique identifier (PIK). We keep the ones with the unique identifier and merge them
with the full non-employer database to identify non-employer businesses that our matching
methodology may have missed. We then augment our existing matches with this database.

45

Table A6. Filtering Out Employer Patents, 2000-2011
Removal of
Winsorize and
Grant Year Original Match Employer Patents Keep PVS Drop Duplicate Augment with PVS
2000
83,800
19,700
14,400
10,500
10,200
2001
86,000
19,000
14,100
10,500
10,100
2002
84,100
18,000
11,300
8,700
8,300
2003
85,100
17,300
10,900
8,500
8,200
2004
80,900
15,900
9,900
7,600
7,400
2005
71,800
13,700
8,500
6,800
6,500
2006
88,500
16,500
9,900
8,000
7,700
2007
81,300
14,700
8,500
6,800
6,500
2008
80,600
14,300
8,000
6,400
6,100
2009
83,200
14,000
8,000
6,400
6,000
2010
106,000
18,200
10,700
8,700
8,200
2011
106,000
18,300
10,400
8,300
7,900
Total
1,037,000
200,000
125,000
97,000
93,000
Source: Authors calculations using LBD Data. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with
disclosure requirements.

This increases the number of matches by approximately 5% for a total of 68,400 matched
patents. The table below summarizes the full effect of each matching stage.
This completes the matching process for the nonemployer data. Starting from 1.29M
patents, we are able to successfully match 68,400 patents to the nonemployer data. The full
breakdown of matches by dataset is below.
We denote the ”unmatched” as unknown since a fairly large proportion of these patents
were initially matched to the nonemployer dataset, but were dropped either because the
inventor’s personal identifier was not listed in the PVS process, or because the inventionname combination had more than one individual listed (dropped out during deduplication
process). A breakdown of the ”Unknown” matches is given in Table A8.
Table A8 tells us that approximately 141,000 of the 273,000 unknown patents were
unmatched across all Census datasets, which implies that around 132,000 patents were linked
to the nonemployer. Of these, approximately, 67% were dropped as they were not listed in
the PVS process, with the remainder dropping due to either being duplicates or ”winsorized”.

46

Table A7. Total Matches by Type, 2000-2011
Grant Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Total

Total
Employer
107,000
72,700
109,000
75,900
106,000
74,700
107,000
76,600
101,000
73,800
88,900
65,500
110,000
81,500
101,000
75,300
99,300
75,100
102,000
78,200
130,000
99,500
130,000
99,900
1,290,000 949,000

Nonemployer
10,200
10,100
8,300
8,200
7,400
6,500
7,700
6,500
6,100
6,000
8,200
7,900
93,000

Unknown
24,400
23,200
23,000
22,100
20,200
16,900
20,600
18,800
18,200
17,800
22,000
22,100
249,000

Source: Authors calculations using LBD Data. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure
requirements.

Table A8. Breakdown of Unknown Matches, 2000-2011
Grant Year Total Unknown
2000
24,400
2001
23,200
2002
23,000
2003
22,100
2004
20,200
2005
16,900
2006
20,600
2007
18,800
2008
18,200
2009
17,800
2010
22,000
2011
22,100
Total
249,000

Unmatched
14,800
14,200
13,300
13,000
11,600
9,600
11,700
10,500
10,000
9,700
11,900
11,600
142,000

Matched Drop in PVS Process
9,600
6,400
9,000
6,000
9,700
7,700
9,100
7,400
8,600
7,000
7,300
6,100
9,000
7,900
8,300
7,400
8,300
7,400
8,100
7,200
10,200
8,900
10,500
9,500
108,000
89,000

Duplicates/Winsorized
3,200
3,000
2,000
1,700
1,500
1,100
1,100
900
800
900
1,200
1,100
18,600

Source: Authors calculations using LBD Data. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure
requirements.

47

Table A9. Breakdown of PVS Process for Inventors, 2000-2011
Inventor PIKs
Grant Year Patents PVS Patents Inventor Names Inventor PIKs (Highest PVS)
2000
107,000
82,700
165,000
748,000
418,000
2001
109,000
88,400
183,000
802,000
468,000
2002
106,000
79,100
172,000
760,000
442,000
2003
107,000
80,900
180,000
787,000
470,000
2004
101,000
77,900
175,000
754,000
453,000
2005
89,000
69,700
159,000
693,000
422,000
2006
110,000
83,800
196,000
853,000
531,000
2007
101,000
74,300
177,000
773,000
496,000
2008
99,400
72,700
176,000
750,000
486,000
2009
102,000
77,000
190,000
833,000
546,000
2010
130,000
101,000
252,000
1,110,000
731,000
2011
130,000
102,000
255,000
1,130,000
755,000
Total
1,290,000
989,000
2,280,000
9,980,000
6,220,000
Source: Authors calculations. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure
requirements.

Appendix B

Unique
Inventor PIKs
128,000
143,000
136,000
143,000
139,000
126,000
155,000
139,000
138,000
149,000
198,000
199,000
1,790,000

Patents with
Unique Inventor PIKs
71,800
77,600
70,100
72,200
69,600
62,500
75,300
66,900
65,500
69,500
91,500
91,800
884,000

Matching Demographics to Patent Data

Matching the patent data to the demographic data is a relatively straightforward process
of merging multiple files and dropping duplicate matches allocated in the PVS process. We
start with the original patents that have undergone the PVS process. Of our starting point
of 1.29M patents, 989,000 have undergone the PVS process (76.7%). These 989,000 PVS’ed
patents have 2.28M inventor names associated with the patents (average team size of approximately 2.3) and 9.98M inventor PIKs associated with them, indicating that each inventor
name has on average around 4 PIKs. We start by keeping the PIK with the highest PVS
score by patent-inventor combination. This removes 3.76M of the 9.98M starting inventor
PIKs. We want to unduplicate the remainder of these PIKs and only keep the inventors
with a unique PIK. Removing all of the duplicate PIKs associated with each inventor name
leaves us with 1.79M unique inventor PIKs associated with nearly 884,000 patents from the
989,000 patents that underwent the PVS process. A yearly breakout of the counts is below.
If we break out the counts by assignee type, we find differences in the ratio of the
patents that undergo the PVS process by assignee type, along with differences in the ratio
of inventors that unique PIKs by assignee type. Firm assignees are most likely to have
undergone the PVS process (82%), followed by individual assignees (75%), while fewer than
50% of unassigned patents undergo the PVS process. Looking at the proportion of inventors
48

that have unique PIKs by assignee type, we find that nearly 91% of inventors in firm assigned
patents have a unique PIK associated with their name. This is higher than the ratio found
in individual assigned patents (83%) and the ratio in unassigned patents (76.7%). The full
breakdown by assignee type is below.
Starting from the nearly 884,000 patents with unique inventor PIKs, we then merge it to
the Census Numident file which contains the demographic information we are interested in.
The Numident match rate is around 100%, thus completing the full demographic matching
process for each patent. Turning back to the unmatched patents, we break down the match
rate by sector. We show that the patents without unique PIKs and no demographic data
are mainly concentrated in the ”Design” and ”Plant” patent sector as shown in the table
below.

Appendix C

Technology Classes

49

50

Individual Assignee
Business Assignee
Unassigned
Patents with
Patents with
Patents with
Grant Year Patents PVS Patents Unique Inventor Patents PVS Patents Unique Inventor Patents PVS Patents Unique Inventor
2000
970
810
650
79,500
65,100
58,300
21,500
13,400
10,200
2001
980
870
710
82,900
71,500
64,500
20,100
12,500
9,500
2002
930
660
560
81,200
66,200
60,100
19,000
8,900
6,700
2003
890
670
560
82,900
68,400
62,400
18,300
8,500
6,500
2004
860
640
550
80,100
66,600
60,700
16,300
7,700
5,900
2005
790
600
490
71,400
60,000
54,800
13,500
6,800
5,200
2006
980
700
600
88,700
72,800
66,500
16,200
7,500
5,900
2007
870
620
510
81,600
65,000
59,600
14,900
6,400
4,900
2008
760
490
430
81,400
64,100
58,700
14,300
6,000
4,600
2009
850
590
470
84,700
68,500
62,800
13,400
5,800
4,400
2010
960
720
590
108,000
89,700
82,400
16,500
7,800
6,000
2011
950
730
610
110,000
90,800
83,300
15,900
7,800
6,000
Total
10,790
8,090
6,720
1,032,000
849,000
774,000
200,000
98,900
75,800
Source: Authors calculations. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure requirements.

Table A10. Breakdown of PVS Process for Inventors by Assignee Type, 2000-2011

Table A11. Breakdown of Demographic Match Rate by Sector, 2000-2011
Sector
Individual Assignee Firm Assignee
Chemical
75.1
82.2
C&C
73.9
81
Design
11
11.4
D&M
75
83
E&E
75.4
82.2
Mechanical
75.6
82.1
Others
75.7
80.9
Plant
11.9
10.1
Total Proportion
62.1
75

Unassigned
47.1
52.1
9
50.7
43.6
47.4
51.8
5
38

Source: Authors calculations using LBD Data. Notes: Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure
requirements.

51

Table A12. Technological Categories as Defined in Hall et al.(2001) Plus additions in Bold
Cat. Code Category Name
1
Chemical

2

3

4

5

Computers & Communications

Drugs & Medical

Sub-Cat. Code Sub-Category Name
11
Agriculture, Food, Textiles
12
Coating
13
Gas
14
Organic Compounds
15
19

Resins
Miscellaneous-chemical

21

Communications

22

Computer Hardware & Software

23
24
25
31
32

Computer Peripherals
Information Storage
Data Processing
Drugs
Surgery & Medical
Instruments
Biotechnology
Miscellaneous - Drug & Med.
Electrical Devices

Electrical & Electronic

33
39
41

Mechanical

42
43
44
45
46
49
51

52
53
54
55
59

6

Others

61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

7
8

Design
Plant

79
89

Patent Classes
8, 19, 71, 127, 442, 504
106,118, 401, 427
48, 55, 95, 96
532, 534, 536, 540, 544, 546, 548, 549, 552,
554, 556, 558, 560, 562, 564, 568, 570, 987
520, 521, 522, 523, 524, 525, 526, 527, 528, 530
23, 34, 44, 102, 117, 149, 156, 159, 162, 196,
201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 208, 210, 216, 222, 252,
260, 261,349, 366, 416, 422, 423, 430, 436, 494,
501, 502, 506, 510, 512, 516, 518, 585, 588
178, 333, 340, 342, 343, 358, 367,
370, 375, 379, 385, 398, 455, 725
341, 380, 382, 395, 700, 701, 702, 704, 705,
706, 707, 708, 709, 710, 712, 713, 714, 902
345, 347, 726
360, 365, 369, 711, 720, G9B
715, 717, 718, 719
424, 514
128, 600, 601, 602, 604, 606, 607

435, 800, 930
351, 433, 623
174, 200, 327, 329, 330, 331, 332,
334, 335, 336, 337, 338, 392, 439
Electrical Lighting
313, 314, 315, 362, 372, 445
Measuring & Testing
73, 324, 356, 374, 850
Nuclear & X-rays
250, 376, 378, 976
Power Systems
60, 136, 290, 310, 318, 320, 322, 323, 361, 363, 388, 429
Semiconductor Devices
257, 326, 438, 505
Miscellaneous - Elec.
191, 218, 219, 307, 346, 348, 377, 381, 386, 703, 716
Materials Processing & Handling
65, 82, 83, 125, 141, 142, 144,
173, 209, 221, 225, 226, 234,
241, 242, 264, 271, 407, 408,
409, 414, 425, 451, 493
Metal Working
29, 72, 75, 76, 140, 147, 148, 163,
164, 228, 266, 270, 413, 419, 420
Motors, Engines & Parts
91, 92, 123, 185, 188, 192, 251, 303,
415, 417, 418, 464, 474, 475, 476, 477
Optics
352, 353, 355, 359, 396, 399
Transportation
104, 105, 114, 152, 180, 187, 213, 238, 244, 246,
258, 280, 293, 295, 296, 298, 301, 305, 410, 440
Miscellaneous - Mechanical
7, 16, 42, 49, 51, 74, 81, 86, 89,
100, 124, 157, 184, 193, 194, 198,
212, 227, 235, 239, 254, 267, 291,
294, 384, 400, 402, 406, 411, 453,
454, 470, 482, 483, 492, 508, 968
Agriculture, Husbandry,
43, 47, 56, 99, 111, 119, 131, 426, 449, 452, 460
Food
Amusement Devices
273, 446, 463, 472, 473
Apparel & Textile
2, 12, 24, 26, 28, 36, 38, 57, 66,
68, 69, 79, 87, 112, 139, 223, 450
Earth Working & Wells
37, 166, 171, 172, 175, 299, 405, 507
Furniture, House Fixtures
4, 5, 30, 70, 132, 182, 211, 256, 297, 312
Heating
110, 122, 126, 165, 237, 373, 431, 432
Pipes & Joints
138, 277, 285, 403
Receptacles
53, 206, 215, 217, 220, 224, 229, 232, 383
Miscellaneous - Others
1, 14, 15, 27, 33, 40, 52, 54, 59, 62, 63, 84, 101, 108,
109, 116, 134, 135, 137, 150, 160, 168, 169, 177, 181,
186, 190, 199, 231, 236, 245, 248, 249, 269, 276, 278,
279, 281, 292, 300, 368, 404, 412, 428, 283, 289, 434,
441, 462, 503, 901, 903, 977, 984
Design patents
Dxx
Plant patents
PLT

Source: Hall et al. (2001) plus own additions based on new technology codes.

52

