                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           DESIGNED TO FAIL:
                  EFFECTS OF THE DEFAULT OPTION AND
          INFORMATION COMPLEXITY ON STUDENT LOAN REPAYMENT

                                      James C. Cox
                                     Daniel Kreisman
                                     Susan Dynarski

                                    Working Paper 25258
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w25258


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November 2018




We thank the Russell Sage Foundation for funding through its Behavioral Economics Grants
program (Award #98-16-12). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by James C. Cox, Daniel Kreisman, and Susan Dynarski. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Designed to Fail: Effects of the Default Option and Information Complexity on Student Loan
Repayment
James C. Cox, Daniel Kreisman, and Susan Dynarski
NBER Working Paper No. 25258
November 2018
JEL No. I2,I20,I21,I22,I23,I28,J01

                                          ABSTRACT

We ask why so few student loan borrowers enroll in Income Driven Repayment when the
majority would benefit from doing so. To do so we run an incentivized laboratory experiment
using a facsimile of the government’s Student Loan Exit Counseling website. We test the role
information complexity, uncertainty about earnings, and the default option play. We show that
despite an ex ante optimal choice, the majority choose, or are defaulted into, a plan that offers no
protection against default. We find the default option is a driver of this phenomenon, suggesting
the government has an easy policy lever to lower default rates – change the default plan.


James C. Cox                                             Susan Dynarski
Department of Economics                                  University of Michigan
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies                    Weill Hall
P.O. Box 3992                                            735 South State Street
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992                                   Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
Georgia                                                  and NBER
jccox@gsu.edu                                            dynarski@umich.edu

Daniel Kreisman
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
Georgia
dkreisman@gsu.edu
1 Introduction
Behavioral economics has taught us that defining the default option, changes in framing, and increases in
complexity can have substantial and costly impacts on important decisions. We have seen evidence of this
with respect to healthcare (Winter et al., 2006), retirement savings (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Thaler and
Benartzi, 2004), student aid (Bettinger et al., 2009; Castleman and Page, 2016), and organ donation
(Johnson and Goldstein, 2003), among many others. We ask whether similar mechanisms are at play in
how borrowers choose to repay their student loans.
           As of 2014, one-quarter of borrowers entering repayment in 2005, 2007 or 2009 had defaulted on
their student loans. To put that in perspective, within five years of exiting school roughly 25 percent of
borrowers from the most recent (2009) cohort had already gone through deferment, forbearance and
delinquency into default. This need not be the case. Borrowers with Direct Loans have the option to choose
a repayment plan that adjusts with their earnings. Under these income driven repayment plans (IDRs),
repayments are a percentage (typically 10-15%) of discretionary income above a threshold (usually 150%
of the poverty line) with an added benefit of forgiveness often after 25 years. Thus, if borrowers experience
job loss or low income, small or nonexistent required repayments reflect this. In this sense these plans work
as a form of insurance against low earnings in part by providing protection from default.
           Yet, surprisingly few students choose one of these plans. According to the Government
Accountability Office (GAO)1 less than one-quarter of borrowers with Direct Loans are enrolled in some
form of income driven repayment plan, with the vast majority enrolled in the Standard 10-year fixed
repayment plan – the default option. A 2012 study by U.S. Department of the Treasury linking loans to tax
records reached similar conclusions. Worse, Treasury found that 70% of defaulted borrowers met the
criteria for enrolling in an IDR plan, which would have protected them against default. These defaults are
costly. For borrowers a default affects credit scores, limiting access to future credit, and can adversely affect
job prospects, potentially leading to further debt at higher interest rates. For the taxpayer, these defaults
increase loan-servicing costs and directly detract from a taxpayer-subsidized program’s solvency. The
default rate among those who did enroll in an IDR plan, Treasury found, was less than 1%.
           Why are so many borrowers not enrolling in income driven repayment? Viewed through a classical
framework, forward-looking borrowers with full information will make optimizing choices given their
preferences for risk, consumption and expected future earnings. Low uptake of income driven repayment
plans among a large number of students who both stand to benefit and qualify is one of many indicators
that this is not the case. We believe a behavioral explanation is more likely. We test three main hypotheses
as to what might explain the surprisingly low uptake of income driven repayment plans.


1
    GAO (2012, 2015).


                                                       2
        First, we ask whether it is simply the power of the default option. All borrowers are automatically
placed into the Standard plan and remain in that plan unless they take active steps to change. A wealth of
research on other topics suggests that under these circumstances the effect of the default option should be
strong. Second, we ask whether and to what degree borrowers’ choices might also be driven by inaccurate
information about their future earnings. Several studies suggest that students are overly optimistic about
their employment and earnings prospects, potentially leading them away from income driven repayment
plans that act as insurance against low earnings or unemployment. Third, we ask what role information
complexity plays in suboptimal decision-making. At present borrowers are faced with no fewer than seven
repayment options, each with its own complicated set of rules. Moreover, the Department of Education and
allied non-profit student loan servicers present borrowers with a potentially overwhelming amount of
information on repayment plans. We ask whether this complexity paralyzes or confuses borrowers,
potentially reinforcing the power of the default option.
        To test these hypotheses we run an incentivized laboratory experiment using a facsimile of the
federal government’s Student Loan Exit Counseling web interface. The government’s Student Loan Exit
Counseling is required of all students with federal loans upon exiting schooling or falling below full-time
status. It provides student borrowers with information about repayments and repayment options, and affords
them an opportunity to select a repayment plan. Recreating this environment in the lab allows us to study
the effect of varying parameters such as the default option and the way information is presented in a manner
that will allow us to interpret results for the current policy environment.
        We incentivize our experiment by telling subjects they will receive a draw from a distribution of
what recent college graduates might expect to earn over each of the next 25 years, and that after subtracting
necessary living expenses and any payments due on their student loans in each period, what is left over is
converted according to an exchange rate to U.S. dollars, meaning they keep some fixed percentage of their
net earnings. Subjects thus face a choice between a repayment plan that requires quick and possibly lower-
cost repayment, and one that provides protection against default and allows for a longer repayment horizon,
potentially at the cost of increased interest capitalization. Importantly, if in any period earnings net of living
expenses are less than what they are required to repay on their student loan according to their repayment
plan, they will go into default, which both reduces their future earnings in the experiment and triggers an
additional fixed monetary penalty.
        As in current Department of Education policy, the Standard plan is the pre-selected default option
in our Baseline treatment. We then ask whether simply changing the default option can lead students to
better choices of repayment plan. We choose the REPAYE plan (a revised version of Pay As You Earn) as
our IDR policy alternative as it is the government’s current and most highly publicized income driven
repayment option, and hence the most policy-relevant candidate. In addition to changing the default from



                                                        3
Standard to REPAYE, we also include treatments that give students straightforward information about the
distribution of earnings of recent college graduates, treatment cells that present them with a pairwise choice
between Standard and an income driven plan, and treatments that reduce the complexity of information
found on the Exit Counseling site.
         We find that the default option has a dominant effect on borrowers’ choices. While nearly 60% of
borrowers in the baseline treatment choose the Standard plan, near identical to the actual proportion among
current borrowers, only 34% choose it when the default option is an income driven plan. This suggests that
the government has a very easy policy lever to pull if it wants to increase uptake of income driven repayment
plans.
         We contrast this with our second finding. Providing borrowers with clear and concise information
about the distribution of earnings among recent college graduates has little effect on decision making.
Nearly an identical share chooses the Standard plan whether or not we provide this earnings information.
Similarly, we find little impact of reducing complexity and choices. When borrowers are presented with
only a pairwise choice, between Standard and an income-based plan, and simple information as opposed to
the complexity on the government site, they are equally likely to choose Standard as they are when they
face the full amount of complexity. Further experimental treatments check for effects of changing the plan
name (from “Standard” to “Fixed”), allowing students to ignore counseling before making a decision (a test
of effects of impatience), or estimating effects by subject risk tolerance. None of these treatments elicit
significant differences from the baseline treatment.
         Taken together the evidence suggests that the default option plays an outsized role in borrowers’
choice of repayment plan, driving them in many cases to suboptimal choices.



2 Background
The U.S. Department of Education (ED) is the largest originator of student loans in the country. The
majority of loans are distributed to students through the Direct Loan Program, which makes both
unsubsidized and subsidized loans, the latter to students with demonstrated financial need. 2 Education
provides the loans and maintains an informational website. The servicing of loans, including
communicating with and counseling borrowers on plans and repayment options, is contracted out to four
Title IV or six non-profit servicers.
         Historically, take-up of income driven repayment plans (IDRs) has been low despite efforts by The
Department of Education to promote them. These plans tie repayments to earnings, for the most part taking

2
 Interest does not accrue on the subsidized version while borrowers are in school, during a 6-month post-schooling grace period,
and during periods of deferment (for continued schooling or economic hardship). Borrowers also have the option to consolidate
Direct Loans; consolidation affects their terms and repayment.


                                                               4
15% of adjusted gross income above 150% of the poverty line with forgiveness after 20-25 years. Most
borrowers are eligible for these plans, in particular in the first years after exiting school, when earnings low.
Hershbein et al., (2014) estimate that up to 99% of recent borrowers would have been eligible in their first
year.
          It is unclear why take-up is so low. A recent working paper by Abraham, et al. (2018) explores the
importance of the framing of IDRs vs. fixed plans coupled with students’ earnings expectations. The authors
survey undergraduates at the University of Maryland and present respondents with scenarios in which they
are assigned some level of borrowing and a set of choices between a fixed repayment plan and one that
adjusts to income, with various framings. They find that students are more likely to choose a generic IDR
plan when framing focuses on the insurance aspects of the plan, suggesting that the government’s current
framing, which emphasizes the potential for a longer repayment period and higher total payments, is in part
acting as a deterrent. Moreover, they find that these framing effects are larger for students expecting a
higher probability of low or no earnings after graduation but, conditional on this probability, expected
earnings do not significantly interact with framing.
          Borrowers’ decisions about student loan repayments can have lasting consequences. There is
currently no way to discharge student loan debt through bankruptcy. Any unpaid student debt is discharged
only upon death or, in rare cases, permanent disability.3 Negative credit reports or low credit scores from
late payments or default on student loans can reduce access to credit or increase its cost. Gaulke and
Reynolds (2018) show that just entering delinquency on student loan repayments leads to nearly a 50 point
hit to credit scores.4 It can also affect access to housing, and can reduce employment opportunities through
employers’ screening of credit histories.5 Research has shown the effect of student loan debt on everything
from occupational choice (Rothstein and Rouse, 2011) and small business formation (Ambrose, et al., 2015)
to home ownership (Mezza, et al., 2016).
          The benefits of IDR’s are not limited to protection against default. They also afford flexibility and
lower the burden of repayments for those with low incomes, for whom payments can be a large percentage
of take-home pay. Muller and Yannelis (2018) compare borrowers who were and were not eligible for IBR


3
  A recent paper by Yannelis (2017) suggests that reintroducing bankruptcy protection or eliminating wage garnishment would
substantially increase default rates through “strategic” default by borrowers.
4
  Other recent papers attempt to directly estimate the effect of flags on credit histories, largely from bankruptcy, on liquidity and
employment. Bos, et al. (2018) find that each additional year of negative credit information reduces employment by 3 percentage
points and earnings by $1,000 using data from Sweden. Herkenhoff et al. (2016) find that after credit flags are removed from
histories, non-employed and self-employed individuals are more likely to move into UI covered employment at firms that pay
higher wages. Another recent paper by Dobbie et al. (2016) finds that when bankruptcy flags are removed individuals have
greater access to capital and borrow more, but they estimate only small and imprecise effects on labor market outcomes.
5
  A Society for Human Resource Management survey found that up to 60 percent of employers conducted background checks of
at least some of their employees, usually for jobs involving financial responsibility. See also National Public Radio (2012) and
New York Times (2013).




                                                                  5
after its introduction in the wake of the Great Recession. They find that enrolling in an IDR plan reduced
student loan defaults as well as the sensitivity of those defaults to home price fluctuations.67
           Similarly, Herbst (2018) estimates the effect of enrolling in IDR on a variety of outcomes. The
author’s research relies on phone calls encouraging borrowers who are 10 or more days delinquent to sign
up for an IDR plan. The author then makes pre-post comparisons between those who sign up for IDR and
those who do not. He finds that IDR enrollees are less likely, by 21 percentage points, to fall 10 or more
days delinquent four to seven months after the treatment. Enrollees also had higher credit scores and were
more likely to hold a mortgage two years after. Similarly IDR enrollees also paid down more of their debt
each month, despite lower required average payments, as a result of more timely and consistent repayment.
From a variety of evidence, income-driven repayment plans both lower default rates and raise expected
repayments.
           So why don’t more borrowers choose IDRs? We next describe features of the student loan policy
environment that we believe impact students’ decisions and how we test for their significance in our
experiment.


2.1 The power of the default option
There is ample evidence that the default option – the pre-selected option that individuals must take active
steps to override – can have substantive impacts on important decisions. Johnson and Goldstein (2003) for
example apply this to organ donation, showing that in European countries where citizens are required to
opt into organ donation, participation rates are very low, while in countries where citizens must opt out
rates are nearly 100%. Similarly, Madrian and Shea (2001) demonstrate that workers in the same firm hired
under opt-in vs. opt-out regimes for 401k retirement plans have dramatically different participation rates
and investment choices. These and a variety of other studies suggest that individuals may take the default
option as a recommendation, and that the informational and effort costs of switching can play a dominant
role.
            The student loan case fits this pattern precisely. First, students are pre-selected into the Standard
10-year fixed repayment plan. Second, the name of the plan itself, “Standard,” may suggest that this is the
recommended option. Third, the cost of switching when not previously enrolled is high - borrowers must
contact their servicer, fill out a series of forms, and show proof that they are not able to make minimum
payments in order to switch to an income-driven plan. A U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015)
report addressing low IDR uptake notes that, while the Department of Education maintains information on


6
    The study focused on Income Based Repayment (IBR), the leading plan at that time.
7   See Ionescu (2009) and Gary‐Bobo and Trannoy (2015). for more theoretical work on student loan repayment schemes.




                                                               6
IDR programs on its website, it has not established requirements for how servicers should communicate
with borrowers about these plans. Their review of communications by servicers found “inconsistency” and
lack of specificity in the information provided to borrowers about IDR plans. Borrowers were forced to
seek out this information themselves, ostensibly from the government’s student loan site (which we utilize
in our experiment). The GAO concludes that in many cases borrowers are in fact unaware of these plans.
Each of these factors can increase reliance on the default option, and they motivate our experiment.


2.2 The relevance of information about earnings
Standard human capital models of schooling often assume students have reasonably good, if not perfect,
foresight into their future earnings. Thus, given perfect credit markets young adults can make optimizing
decisions about college-going. Yet, empirical work (e.g. Betts, 1996) demonstrates that students’ prior
beliefs are not very accurate and that updating their beliefs with new information can have profound impacts
on educational investments (including borrowing).
         For example, Wiswal and Zafar (2015) show that students revise their beliefs about future earnings
when shown the population distribution they can expect to face. They conclude that there is a strong role
for “information campaigns” focused on providing students with accurate information. Current student loan
exit counseling does not provide borrowers with information as to what recent graduates might expect to
earn. If borrowers are over confident, they may be less likely to take IDR plans that offer insurance against
low earnings.
         To test this hypothesis, we include treatment cells where students are presented with simple
graphical and text information presenting what recent college graduates earn in their first few years after
college, including the share that earn less than what it would take to make the minimum payment on a
$23,000 loan under the 10-year fixed repayment plan, which is what subjects will face in the experiment.


2.3 The role of complexity
While classical economics suggests that having more feasible options is better, the behavioral literature
suggests that increasing the number of choices and complexity of the decision environment can lead to sub-
optimal decision making, often referred to as “choice overload” or “comparison friction”. Behavioral
economists and psychologists find that as the number of choice options increases (overload) and the
availability of information becomes more difficult to access (friction) reliance on the default option
increases.8 We expect this mechanism may be at work as students choose among loan repayment options.
There are multiple options to choose from, including: Standard, Graduated, Extended, Graduated-Extended,


8
 Cronqvist and Thaler (2004) show this with respect to Social Security options in Sweden,. King, et al. (2012) report implications
of choice friction in a field experiment on choice of Medicare Part D prescription drug plans in the U.S.


                                                                7
Income Based Repayment (IBR), Income Contingent Repayment (ICR), Pay as You Earn (PAYE) and
Revised Pay As You Earn (REPAYE) plans.
         Further, the precise details of each program, including eligibility, are difficult to access and
comprehend. Students are making these decisions with a great deal of uncertainty about how interest
compounds, the insurance nature of the offer, eligibility for each program, and about their future earnings.
In fact, some evidence suggests that students have a poor grasp of the extent of their own borrowing (Akers
and Chingos, 2014). We ask whether this type of complexity is reinforcing the default option by including
treatments where subjects are presented with only two choices (REPAYE and Standard) and are given a
more straightforward description of each plan, its costs, and its benefits.9


3 The Experimental Environment

3.1 Student Loan Counseling
For our experiment we create a facsimile of the federal student loan Exit Counseling site, which all students
with federal loans are required to use upon exiting school.10 This site allows borrowers to look up their
current loans and choose a repayment plan as well as obtain information about repayment plans, how
interest accrues, the nature of deferment, forbearance, delinquency and default, and tips for repaying.
         The government site, StudentLoans.gov, 11 consists of multiple pages that are clicked through
sequentially. First, borrowers log in by entering their Federal Student Aid identification number to look up
their existing loans or enter their loan information manually. Subjects using our experimental site have a
loan amount and interest rate pre-entered for them. Once this information is populated, borrowers using the
government site or subjects using our laboratory facsimile click through the site’s pages. The first page
(“Understand Your Loans”) presents information on loan basics, including loan types, and allows students
to click on information describing key concepts such as interest accrual, capitalization, promissory notes
and acceleration. The second page (“Plan To Repay”) allows borrowers to enter their projected annual
income, to select any withholding and to enter other monthly expenses such as rent, utilities and
entertainment, amongst others. We pre-select our subjects to have a family size of one and to live in Georgia
(for purposes of calculating income tax). We enter monthly expenses to be 150% of the federal poverty




9
  We choose REPAYE as our alternative default option as it is the government’s most recent IDR plan and the most likely candidate
for an IDR default option.
10
   We make only minor changes to the site for the experiment: we do not allow subjects to enter personal information such as
social security numbers and we and pre-fill their state of residence as Georgia.
11
   The URL for the site is https://studentloans.gov/myDirectLoan/exitCounseling.action?execution=e1s1.




                                                               8
line; the purpose of this is to match what we deduct from their gross earnings in our experiment as living
expenses, which we tell them up front.12
         Once projected earnings are entered, repayment plans appear along with descriptions and radio
buttons to make a selection. In Appendix A2 we show a screen shot of this portion of the page with the loan
parameters we use in the experiment (a $23,000 Direct loan) and enter $24,000 in expected earnings in the
next year to provide an example for the reader.13,14 It is here where borrowers or subjects can choose a
repayment option by clicking on the radio button of the plan they want. If no action is taken, they remain
in the pre-selected default plan. At the bottom of page two there is a host of additional information including
repayment incentives and tips on navigating repayment.15 Pages three through five present no new choices,
but do provide additional, possibly overwhelming, information on avoiding default (page three, “Avoid
Default”), making finances a priority (page four, “Finances: A Priority”), and finally a summary page (page
five, “Repayment Information”) where they can enter contact information to facilitate contact with their
servicer. In the experimental facsimile, we replace page five with a summary page of their decisions (and
we do not allow them to enter personal information such as a driver’s license number, address, or phone
number).


3.2 Incentivizing the experiment
We set up the experiment by telling subjects that they have a Direct Subsidized federal student loan of
$23,000 at 4.6% interest – the maximum subsidized student loan amount at the time – and pre-entering this
information for them.16 In our instructions we describe the parameters of the experiment. Subjects are told
that they will be asked to go through student loan exit counseling and can choose a repayment plan. They
are also told that they will be compensated for the experiment by receiving a random draw “from the
distribution of what actual recent college graduates with a Bachelor’s degree might expect to earn over each
of the next 25 years.”
         The incentive structure in the experiment revolves around the trade-off between repaying quickly,
the risk of loan default, and the costs associated with defaulting. We take two steps to make these features
salient in our experiment. First, we tell subjects that at the end of each period we subtract from their gross


12
   In the experiment all earnings, repayments and poverty calculations are based on a single individual to abstract from dual
income and dual loan issues within households.
13
   Borrowers and subjects can enter as many earnings values as they like. In the case shown in the Appendix and which is
relevant to our experiment, borrowers with loans below $30,000 are not eligible for Extended repayment plans.
14
   The government’s web page extrapolates earnings at a 5% growth rate, which borrowers cannot change on ours or the
government’s site. The GAO has questioned this calculation and suggests that ED modify it to be more realistic.
15
   Note that some changes in details have taken place on StudentLoans.gov since our 2017 experiment and visiting the site now
may present somewhat different information. We have preserved and provide links to our experimental facsimile. To see exactly
what our subjects were presented with, go to https://excen.gsu.edu/jccox/instructions.
16
   This information is pre-entered for them on our facsimile of the student loan exit counseling website where they would
normally enter their Federal Student Aid identification number which would fill in the form with their loan information.


                                                              9
earnings federal payroll tax (FICA), and from the remainder of their earnings we subtract 150% of the
federal poverty line to represent necessary living expenses. This benchmark corresponds with the earnings
level at which students in income driven repayment plans are no longer required make loan payments.
            Second, we tell subjects that from their earnings net of tax and living expenses, we will subtract
any payments due on student loans. We inform them that if in any period their net earnings are less than
what they are required to repay on their student loan, they will go into default and incur a penalty (they are
afforded one period of forbearance, so default is not immediate).
            For the penalty, we impose a two-fold cost of default. First, we decrease future earnings by 10
percent (which reduces their expected payout from the experiment). Second, at the beginning of the
experiment we endow subjects with an $8 “gift”.17 If they default at any point, they forfeit this 8 dollars.
These penalties are meant to make the cost of default salient to participants. They are also structured to
replicate the fact that defaulting on a student loan has a significant impact on credit scores, potentially
increasing the cost of future borrowing, and possibly hurting future employment opportunities. The full set
of instructions provided to subjects is shown in Appendix A1.18
            Loan payments in each period depend on the repayment plan subjects select. If a subject chooses a
fixed repayment plan, for example the Standard plan, she faces an inflexible payment due each period. If
she chooses an income driven plan, payments are a deterministic function of earnings, and she cannot
default. Hence, by choosing one of the income driven repayment plans, subjects can completely inoculate
themselves against default.
            To generate earnings we use data from the 2012-13 (3-year) American Community Survey (ACS).
We limit the sample to 461,802 individuals ages 24-49 with a four-year bachelor’s degree. We estimate a
pooled regression of earnings on a quartic in years since age 24. We use coefficients from this regression
to create an empirical age-earnings profile which we then collapse into 20 representative ventiles.
Deducting FICA (7.65% of earned income) gives us Adjusted Gross Income (AGI). We then calculate
“discretionary income” as the difference between AGI and 150% of the one-person household poverty level,
which is $17,505.
            In Figure 1 we plot expected earnings from alternative repayment plans compared with the Standard
repayment plan by ventile of the earnings distribution where the only penalty to default is a 10% reduction
in future earnings as calculated from ACS data. The figure demonstrates that the income adjusting plans
are dominant at the low end of the earnings distribution: 35% of 24-year-olds have annual earnings below
150% of the poverty line and thus default with the Standard plan under our conditions.



17
     This 8 U.S. dollar endowment is separate from the 5 U.S. dollar show-up fee subjects receive that they cannot lose.
18
     Subjects could read the instructions on their computers and were given a paper copy to reference throughout the experiment.


                                                                 10
        Strikingly, the largest gap we see between the Standard plan and the income driven plans is for the
few borrowers just below the median of the distribution where borrowers earn about $10,000 more in
expectation from choosing Standard as opposed to REPAYE. Table 1 shows these differences in
expectation over the entire earnings distribution assuming only a 10% reduction in earnings following
default and not including the $8 fixed penalty. Not only do we show that borrowers under our scenario can
expect to gain about $14,500 by choosing REPAYE (or PAYE) over the Standard plan but, importantly,
the variance is far lower as well. Column 2 shows the difference in the standard deviation of net earnings
compared to the Standard plan. Not surprisingly, earnings variance is lower for IDR plans as default is not
in play. The purpose of this exercise is to demonstrate that under reasonable assumptions, there are very
few scenarios under which being tied to a fixed repayment plan is optimal, particularly if we assume
borrowers are risk averse.
        The realization of this simple parameterization of earnings and repayment reveals a salient feature
of the current set of repayment options offered by the federal government for Direct student loans – that
there is an ex ante dominant choice. In fact, we don’t even need these simulations to demonstrate this. One
of the government’s older plans (PAYE) stipulates that students are required to pay the minimum of 10%
of earnings above 150% of the poverty line or whatever their payment would be under the Standard plan.
In other words, PAYE offers the insurance protection against low earnings without adding a requirement
to repay quickly for high earners whilst maintaining the option to prepay to avoid interest capitalization.
The government, possibly realizing that this plan could be expensive, revised it with REPAYE, which
removes the Standard plan repayment cap and also removes a maximum earnings qualification condition.
We focus on this updated version here as it is the newest and most policy relevant option.
        We convert subjects’ simulated lab earnings into U.S. dollars at a rate of $2.50 for every 100,000
they earn in the lab. Figure 2 shows U.S. dollar payout differences compared with the Standard repayment
plan for all 20 ventiles of the lab earnings distribution, including the 8 U.S. dollar penalty subjects pay if
they default. It is important to keep in mind that only subjects in treatment arms that give information about
earnings of recent graduates at age 24 have some, but not full, information about the earnings distribution.


3.3 Main Treatment Cells
Table 2 lists the 14 treatment cells in our experiment. All of the treatments can be found in full at
https://excen.gsu.edu/jccox/instructions. The first 8 are our “main” treatments, which vary the three key
parameters discussed above (the default option; information about earnings; complexity). In treatments 1-
4 we retain the full amount of complexity and choices borrowers face outside of the lab and either change
only the default option to REPAYE (treatment 2), add only information about earnings (treatment 3), or
change both (treatment 4).



                                                     11
        We define treatment 1 as the “Baseline” treatment which presents the Exit Counseling web
interface as borrowers experience it on the government site – Standard is the pre-selected default option,
no information about earnings is provided, and they face the full complexity of information and choices. In
treatments where REPAYE is the default, we pre-select REPAYE as opposed to Standard and re-order
options such that REPAYE appears first (where Standard was) and Standard is then moved to the spot
where REPAYE was.
        In order to provide subjects with information about earnings we use data from the ACS and
calculate deciles of the empirical earnings distribution of recent graduates at age 24 as of 2015. To make
information easily understandable to subjects, we present them with bullet points describing what typical
college graduates with a Bachelor’s degree earn at that age. One of these bullet points indicates the share
that earned less than 150% of the poverty line. Below this information we provide a simple table that
displays deciles of the earnings distribution along with annual and monthly total and discretionary income.
Lastly, we provide three bullet points relating discretionary income to total income and repayments. This
information, displayed in Appendix A3, was designed to fit the formatting of the government site. Subjects
are shown this information on the second page of Exit Counseling, just above where they make their
repayment decision.
        We then repeat this 2x2 treatment matrix under simplified information in treatments 5-8, shown in
Table 2. Where our “Complex” treatments described above reflect what is actually on the student loan exit
interview, in our “Simple” treatments we limit to a pairwise choice between Standard and REPAYE and
provide only one page with a straightforward description of each plan. Appendix A4 shows a screen shot
of the decision page (page 2) for “Simple” treatments. Under simplified information, subjects are not
presented with all 5 web pages to click through, but are rather only given a pairwise set of choices and one
page of information to navigate.


3.4 Additional treatment cells
In addition to our main treatments, we test two additional hypotheses. The first is to address the fact that in
our experiment we direct subjects to Exit Counseling. In reality, although it is required by law, students can
skip counseling. We know of no statistics reporting the share completing counseling. If many borrowers
skip, then providing information about earnings or simplifying the information they see will only affect
those who choose to go to the site. On the other hand, if many borrowers skip, the effect of the default
option would be even stronger than we find here - if borrowers skip exit counseling they are automatically
defaulted into Standard outside of the lab.
        To test for this we modify four of our main treatment cells to allow subjects to skip the decision
making part of the experiment and promptly leave the lab to receive their payment under the default



                                                      12
repayment plan in the treatment (which is Standard or REPAYE depending on the treatment).19 Comparison
of data from otherwise identical treatments allows us to ask whether impatience and inattention significantly
promotes adoption of the default repayment plan. To execute this we include at the end of our instructions
language describing the option to exit the interview at any time, noting that subjects will then be assigned
a “pre-selected repayment plan” to pay off their loans if they do so. In addition, we include a “Skip Exit
Counseling” button on the menu of each page of the interface which is meant to replicate borrowers’ ability
outside the lab to exit counseling by simply closing their browser (perhaps because they become confused,
overwhelmed, impatient, or frustrated). These treatments also allow us to observe when in the interview
subjects exit; for example to see if they make it to the choice page, and the share of subjects who choose to
do so. Similarly, we can observe if subjects who persist are a select group by observing whether effects of
changing the default, reducing complexity or providing earnings information are different from those who
are not authorized to exit without sacrificing salient rewards.
            A second alternate hypothesis we test is the effects of plan names. One might expect that the name
itself, “Standard”, would imply a suggestion. It is not difficult to interpret “Standard” as “what everyone
else does” or what one “should” do. Overwhelmed or confused borrowers might not want to choose a “non-
standard” plan. To test this, Treatments 13 and 14 differ, respectively, from treatments 1 (baseline) and 3
(REPAYE + earnings information) only by changing the name of the Standard repayment plan to “Fixed.”
            The experiment is computerized and run in the laboratory of Georgia State’s Experimental
Economics Center (ExCEN). Subjects are recruited through the lab’s online recruitment facility using a
filter which limits participation to undergraduates beyond their freshman year who are U.S. citizens. These
restrictions were put in place to focus on subjects who persist through their first year of college, when
dropout is highest, and to focus on those eligible for federal student loans. We recruited 542 subjects to
participate in 15 sessions over the spring and fall of 2017 (the fall sessions were conducted for our additional
treatment cells, T9 – T14). At the end of a session we collect subjects’ demographic information and
conduct an incentivized risk elicitation task (Eckel and Grossman, 2002; 2008). The characteristics of
subjects who participated in the experiment are reported in Table 3. They are 38% male, 61% black, with
average age 20.6 years. Of these, 49% are arts and sciences majors and 27% business majors; 73% of our
subjects reported having student loans.



4 Results



19   Subjects in these treatments are allowed to leave the lab and collect repayment in a separate room as soon as they are finished.




                                                                  13
4.1 Benchmarking our Baseline treatment
We begin by benchmarking our Baseline specification to the distribution of repayment choices at the
national level. This is relevant to demonstrating that choices and incentives faced by subjects in the lab
parallel those faced by student borrowers outside of the lab. The rightmost column in Table 4 shows results
from the distribution of repayments as reported by two recent GAO reports and the distribution of
repayment choices selected by our subjects in the Baseline specification.20
        The earlier (2015) GAO report, using data from the National Student Loan Data System (NLSDS)
for borrowers with outstanding loan balances as of September 2014, finds 65% of borrowers in the Standard
plan, 14% in Graduated, and 19% in one of the income driven repayment plans. A similar (2016) study
from the GAO shows that 24% of borrowers in Q3 of 2013 through Q3 of 2016 were in an IDR plan with
the remaining 76% in the Standard or Graduated (fixed) repayment plans.
        The right-most column of Table 4 shows results from our Baseline treatment in which 62.5% of
our subjects chose the Standard plan, 12.5% chose Graduated, and 25% chose one of the IDR plans. If we
take the more recent (2016) GAO report in column 1 and compare with our Baseline results in column 3,
we find that 76% of our subjects chose a fixed repayment plan (Standard or Graduated) compared with 76%
of actual borrowers, and that 25% of our subjects chose an IDR plan while 24% of national borrowers are
in one of these plans. Comparing our results with the 2015 GAO report shows that we are within 1
percentage point of the share choosing Graduated repayment, and that our subjects were only 2 percentage
points less likely to choose the Standard plan, and had a marginally higher likelihood of choosing IDR
plans, by 6 percentage points, than actual borrowers.
        We believe that these figures suggest not only that our experiment reflects to some degree the data
generating process in actual repayment choices, lending credibility to the counterfactual policy simulations
we run, but also that our subjects are taking the experiment seriously and are not choosing blindly (any
more than they are outside of the lab).


4.2 The default option and information about earnings
Table 5 shows uptake rates across treatment cells in the complex environment. We collapse subjects’
repayment choices into four categories: Standard, REPAYE, Graduated and Other IDR plan. Effectively
this collapses the least utilized and older income driven plans (PAYE, ICR and IBR for New Borrowers) in
to Other IDR. The reason for this is that few subjects (or borrowers) choose these plans and for our purposes
they can be considered a single outcome – one that implies leaving the default and choosing an IDR plan
other than REPAYE.




                                                     14
        The Baseline treatment distribution is shown in row 1 of Table 5 where 62.5 percent of subjects
chose the Standard plan and only 7.5 percent chose REPAYE. The following three rows show the choice
distribution from changing the default option, from presenting earnings information, or from the
combination of the two. Raw means in Table 5 suggest that while providing borrowers with earnings
information has little impact, simply changing the default option results in a 28 percentage point (45%)
decrease in the share choosing Standard and a 24 percentage point, or four-fold, increase in the share
choosing REPAYE. The effect of changing the default option coupled with earnings information shows an
even larger impact.
        To facilitate interpretation and statistical tests given multiple potential outcomes, in Table 6 we
show results from a multinomial logistic regression and present transformed marginal effects. The purpose
of the regression is to observe changes in the observed choice distribution, as opposed to merely the effect
of switching to REPAYE on choosing Standard, though this statistic is covered as well. We estimate this
as follows:


               𝑃(𝑅𝐸𝑃𝐴𝑌𝐸)
        𝑙𝑛 #               0 = 𝛽45 + 𝛽55 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝐴𝑈𝐿𝑇 + 𝛽<5 𝐼𝑁𝐹𝑂 + 𝛽@5 (𝐷𝐸𝐹𝐴𝑈𝐿𝑇 & 𝐼𝑁𝐹𝑂) + 𝜀5
               𝑃(𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑑)
              𝑃(𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑)
       𝑙𝑛 #               0 = 𝛽4< + 𝛽5< 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝐴𝑈𝐿𝑇 + 𝛽<< 𝐼𝑁𝐹𝑂 + 𝛽@< (𝐷𝐸𝐹𝐴𝑈𝐿𝑇 & 𝐼𝑁𝐹𝑂) + 𝜀<
              𝑃(𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑑)
              𝑃(𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝐼𝐷𝑅)
       𝑙𝑛 #               0 = 𝛽4@ + 𝛽5@ 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝐴𝑈𝐿𝑇 + 𝛽<@ 𝐼𝑁𝐹𝑂 + 𝛽@@ (𝐷𝐸𝐹𝐴𝑈𝐿𝑇 & 𝐼𝑁𝐹𝑂) + 𝜀@
              𝑃(𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑑)


where the transformed 𝛽’s show the marginal effect of each treatment on the probability of choosing each
outcome relative to the Baseline. Note that the three treatments are modeled here as mutually exclusive for
ease of interpretation, thus the effect of both changing the default option and giving earnings information
(treatment 4) is not the sum of the three coefficients but rather is simply the set of coefficients in the third
column,.
        We complement these estimates with specification checks in Panel B that add session fixed effects,
school-within-the-college fixed effects, and a set of subject demographics including age, year in college,
gender, race, whether the subject reported having loans, and a measure of risk tolerance. We find that these
have no discernable impact on estimates (an F-test fails to reject the null that all are jointly significant).
        The table columns index each treatment relative to the Baseline, and the rows indicate the marginal
effect of these treatments on the likelihood of choosing each outcome. Thus, column 1 demonstrates that
switching the default option to REPAYE results in a 27 percentage point increase in selecting REPAYE
relative to the Baseline, and a 26 percentage point decrease in Standard.




                                                       15
        Column 2 of Table 6 shows the effect of providing information about the distribution of earnings
of recent graduates (treatment 3). Compared with the Baseline, we find that this has no discernable effect
on choosing Standard and results in a slight increase in choosing REPAYE, though this result is imprecise.
These limited effects are not simply the result of subjects ignoring the information we provide. As evidence,
Figure 3 shows subjects’ responses to survey questions asking what they expect to earn in their first year
after graduating, and what the average undergraduate might expect to earn. Not surprisingly, on average
subjects believe they will earn more than the typical undergraduate, and overestimate how much a typical
undergraduate earns. Subjects not exposed to treatments that provide earnings information say they expect
to earn nearly $50,000 after graduation, and expect the typical undergraduate to earn about $37,000. Yet,
those in treatments that included information about earnings reported they expect to earn $8,500 (17%) less
themselves and expect their peers to earn $5,200 (14%) less. Despite this updating, providing information
does not dissuade them from the Standard plan on average.
        In the final column of Table 6 we show the effect of both changing the default option and providing
information about earnings. The effect of both treatments compared with the Baseline is an increase in both
REPAYE and Graduated, and a large decrease in the probability of choosing Standard, though only the last
of these is statistically different from estimates of just changing the default to REPAYE shown in column
1. This suggests that the effect of earnings information on choices might depend on the framing subjects
face. When subjects are defaulted into the Standard plan, where income is not a factor in required
repayments, information about earnings is not salient. Yet, when subjects begin with REPAYE as the
default setting, they are confronted with income-contingent repayment that forces attention on earnings,
increasing salience.
        Our conclusions from the first set of estimates are three-fold. First, we find that the default option
plays a strong role; switching the default from the Standard plan to REPAYE reduces the share who select
the Standard plan by nearly half and increases the share who choose REPAYE by roughly a factor of four.
Second, we find that misguided beliefs about earnings cannot explain subjects’ choice of the Standard plan.
Third, we find that combining earnings information with switching the default led to better decision-making
than changing the default alone.


4.3 Reducing complexity
We next consider treatments where we limit the number of choice options and the amount and complexity
of information borrowers face when considering repayment options and ask whether this affects decision-
making. This has the advantage of isolating the decision between fixed (Standard) and flexible (REPAYE)
repayment options, similar to Abraham, et al. (2018), but comes at the cost of limited information to subjects
and a loss of straightforward policy implications - while reducing or reorganizing the amount of information



                                                     16
borrowers face is a realistic option, presenting them with only two choices may not be. The purpose here is
to observe whether information complexity is reinforcing the effects of the default option on choice of the
Standard plan.
        The first two columns of Table 7 show the distribution of repayment choices across our simplified
environment. In the Simple Baseline treatment (Standard is the default and no earnings information is
provided), 58 percent of subjects stayed in the Standard plan while the remaining 42 percent switched to
REPAYE. This 58 percent is close to the 62 percent we observe in the Baseline treatment with the complex
environment in Table 5.
        Of course, we cannot easily compare across treatment cells in simple and complex environments
as subjects are not presented with the same set or number of choices across treatments. If we assume
subjects who chose Other IDR when all options were available would also prefer REPAYE over Graduated
or Standard, we might expect that they would all move toward REPAYE when choices are limited to just
that option and Standard. In Table 5 we saw that 25 percent chose one of the IDR options, including
REPAYE, when all options were available. In the simple framework, when just the two options are
available, we observe 42 percent choosing REPAYE. Thus it appears that the simple environment, with
limited choices and information, may have increased the proportion of subjects’ choices from a fixed to an
IDR option by about 17 percentage points, though this is an upper bound estimate according to our
assumptions.
        Within treatments for the simple environment (reported in Table 7), we find that switching the
default option has no impact on the share of subjects who choose the Standard plan. In fact, an equal share
of subjects switch back to the Standard plan when placed in REPAYE as the default. This provides some
evidence that pairwise comparisons to isolate preferences for repayment types in the lab are not directly
transferable to policy scenarios where individuals face more complex information.
        Similarly, additional information about the distribution of earnings by itself has no impact on
choices either, even though this information, theoretically, should be more salient in the simple treatment
world where less information overall is present. Yet, similar to comparisons of the Baseline treatment in
the complex environment, a combination of switching the default and giving earnings information decreases
uptake of the Standard plan, here by somewhat less than half.
        The final two columns of Table 7 show coefficients from a linear regression with choosing Standard
as the dependent variable with (column 3) and without (column 4) subject covariates included. Results
confirm what we see in raw means – no effect from changing only the default or adding only information,
but changing both has a meaningful impact, decreasing the likelihood of choosing Standard by roughly 31
percentage points, equal to about 50 percent. This result, an interaction effect between changing the default
and providing earnings information, where we observe no effect of either treatment by itself, suggests that



                                                     17
the impact of new information, for example about earnings, may become more salient once individuals are
pried from the default option as we saw in the complex setting as well.


4.4 Risk and decision making
We thus far have found little evidence of gains from simply providing borrowers with information about
earnings. However, we expect that any effect of information might depend on subjects’ taste for risk. If (on
average) borrowers overestimate future earnings, then informing them that they are at higher risk for default
than their priors suggest should have strongest effects for those who most dislike risk.
          To examine this, we take four key treatment cells and interact each with a linear risk preference
measure. Our risk measure is taken from an Eckel-Grossman (2002, 2008) risk attitude elicitation task
where subjects are given 6 sets of paired lottery choices (coin flips) to choose between that vary in expected
payoff and risk, where subjects choosing option 6 have the highest risk tolerance in our case.21 The task is
incentivized with subjects earning between $0.20 and $7.00 depending on the riskiness of their gamble and
the outcome of their coin flip.
          Table 8 shows results from this regression. In columns 1-3 the dependent variable is a binary
indicator of choosing any IDR plan, including REPAYE. Columns 4-6 repeat the exercise using a binary
indicator for Standard as the dependent variable. In all cases we center the risk attitude measure at its mean
value of 3.7 (the median and modal value is 3 with a s.d. of 2.2). We find little relationship between risk
attitude and choices in the Baseline, observed in the main effect on the coefficient for Risk. Yet, we find
that providing information about earnings pushes subjects with a higher risk tolerance toward IDR plans
and away from Standard. This is inconsistent with a story where updated information about earnings has a
larger effect on more risk-averse subjects, but is consistent with a world in which less risk-averse
individuals are more likely to overestimate future earnings. We find some evidence of this. A regression of
expected earnings on risk attitude shows a positive though very noisy relationship between risk and
expected earnings, suggesting a $1,000 increase in expected own-earnings associated with a one unit
increase in our risk measure.


4.5 Alternative hypotheses: testing for effects of shirking and implicit endorsements
In our final set of treatments we test two potential alternative explanations for widespread use of the
Standard plan. One explanation is that borrowers shirk their responsibility for making an informed choice



21 Our risk elicitation task is taken, along with our demographics questionnaire, after subjects complete the experiment. In a

check we find that controlling for their earnings draw, to account for possible wealth effects on elicited risk preferences, has no
effect.




                                                                 18
of repayment plan by skipping counseling entirely. Another is that borrowers interpret the name “Standard”
as an implicit endorsement of this plan.
          We begin with shirking. In our main treatment cells we show effects for subjects who were required
to make a decision in order to collect salient payoffs from the experiment.22 But, student loan policy cannot
prevent shirking. Although exit counseling is “required” for all borrowers by the U.S. Department of
Education, we are unaware of any enforcement mechanism.
          In our first alternative treatment we tell subjects they can leave whenever they choose after hearing
instructions and descriptions of payoffs, and allow them to skip exit counseling entirely but still collect
rewards from the experiment. The analog of this in the national student loan program is borrowers who
never bother to complete exit counseling, or who begin counseling but quit before finishing. We implement
this in the lab by including in our instructions that subjects have the option to participate in exit counseling
and that at any time they can skip exit counseling, in which case they will be assigned to “a preselected
repayment plan” to pay off their loan. They are also told that they may leave the lab without completing the
experiment tasks and still receive full payment including salient rewards. The purpose of this treatment is
to gain insight into what degree being defaulted into the Standard plan outside of the lab is driven by
subjects never completing counseling or taking other active steps to learn about their repayment options.
We cross this treatment with four of our main treatments: Baseline, and REPAYE Default + Earnings
Information, across both the simple and complex information settings.
          Of the 155 subjects in these treatment cells, 20 percent skip the exit interview (see Table 9). Among
skippers, nearly all skipped on or before the decision page (page 2 of counseling) in which they see all of
the choices. We find that subjects were less likely to skip when presented with less information, suggesting
unsurprisingly a degree of impatience among college students. By construction, those who skip are
defaulted into the default plan according to their treatment cell, hence allowing for inattention and
increasing the switching cost naturally reinforces the power of the default.
          A more interesting question is, do those who do not skip counseling behave differently than
skippers? We find little evidence that they do. Table 10 compares outcomes when subjects are and are not
given the opportunity to skip Exit Counseling. We find that either in the simple or complex information
setting, when we compare those who did not skip with those who were not offered the option to skip, the
distribution of repayment choices looks quite similar (we cannot reject the null that proportions are the
same in nearly all cases). For example, in the true Baseline treatment, 63 percent remained in Standard.
When we allow subjects to skip, 74 percent remain in Standard. Of those who were given an opportunity

22
   In compliance with standard IRB policy, subjects could leave the lab at any time and receive their $5 participation (or show-
up) payment. In the main treatment cells, however, subjects must complete the decision-making part of the experiment in order
in order to also receive salient payoffs from choosing a repayment plan.




                                                               19
to skip but did not, 65 percent remained in the Standard plan, statistically no different than the 63 percent
who chose standard when they were required to finish the experiment to collect salient payoffs. We find
some evidence of a shift toward REPAYE among non-skippers in the Baseline, at the expense of Graduated,
but hypothesis testing fails to reject that the effect is zero.
         In a final test we ask if the name itself, “Standard”, may suggest to borrowers that this is the
recommended plan. In two final treatment cells we vary the name of the default option from “Standard” to
a less connotative “Fixed”. We do this for the Baseline and for REPAYE Default + Earnings Information
(treatments 13 and 14). Results in Table 11 show no statistical difference (from a chi-squared test) in the
distribution of repayment options suggesting that the name does not play a strong role in choices.


5 Conclusions and Policy Implications
Our experiment is motivated by the fact that many borrowers default on their student loans despite options
that provide protection against default though income driven repayment. In fact, many borrowers pass up a
plan that provides insurance against low earnings without requiring a sacrifice in consumption if earnings
are high.
         While standard models of economic behavior fail to explain this pattern, we find that behavioral
economics does. In our incentivized laboratory experiment we find that the default option plays an outsized
role in subjects’ choice of repayment plan, and that simply changing which plan is pre-selected reduces the
share of subjects choosing the Standard plan, the plan of “choice” among the majority of loan repayment
defaulters, by nearly half.
         In contrast, we find that while simply providing borrowers information about the distribution of
earnings they might expect leads them to update their beliefs about their own and others’ future earnings,
it has little effect on their choice of repayment plan. Yet, when we provide this information and change the
default option to an income driven plan, behavior does change. This suggests that earnings information
becomes salient when choice of income-invariant repayment plan requires a decision to actively switch
plans.
         We consider other mechanisms as well. In particular, we test how information complexity affects
behavior and ask what happens if we limit the number of choices and amount of information subjects face.
We find that reducing complexity does not dissuade subjects from the Standard plan. Our results support
the conclusion that the default option plays a stronger role than any of these other features of the student
loan policy environment, although they suggest an effect from adding earnings information with change in
the default, either in the complex or simple environment.
         Our results speak to three strands of research. First, we reinforce prior work demonstrating that the
default option influences choice and that a poor selection of that option can lead to suboptimal and even


                                                        20
detrimental outcomes (Samuelson and Zeckhauser, 1988; Madrian and Shea, 2001; Johnson and Goldstein,
2003; Thaler and Sunstein, 2003; de Haan and Linde, 2018).
        Second, we build on the literature addressing the causes (Abraham, et al., 2018; Looney and
Yannelis, 2015) and consequences (Baum, 2015; Bleemer, et al. 2014; Field, 2009) of student loan defaults.
In particular, through an experimental survey Abraham, et al., (2018) find that simply reframing a generic
IDR type repayment such that the insurance protection of the plan is emphasized over the increased cost
leads to increased take up. This fits as well within a related literature on informational nudges targeting
student borrowers at college entrance (Marx and Turner, 2018; Castleman and Page, 2016; Barr, Bird and
Castleman, 2017).
        Third, and in the broadest sense, we contribute to a discussion on returns to higher education. There
is no shortage of public opinion that we are in the midst of a student loan “crisis.” Yet, returns to college
remain large and increasing. Dynarski and Kreisman (2013) speak directly to this apparent contradiction in
the inability of many college graduates to repay loans, despite increasing long run returns to schooling. Part
of this is simply due to high variability in earnings in early careers, even for college graduates; and part of
it is due to the fact that returns to schooling accrue over a lifetime, not immediately after graduation. Hence,
offering flexible repayment plans that vary with earnings makes sense, both for borrowers and lenders. The
problem then is not that these programs are not offered, but rather that that are not utilized.
        One rationale for defaulting students into the Standard plan might be a belief that borrowers will
make optimizing decisions. Our results, in addition to statistics about repayment choice and default among
U.S. borrowers, suggest that this may in fact not be the case. For example, having been offered the
opportunity to choose an ex ante optimal plan, one would expect borrowers to choose it in large if not
overwhelming numbers. One would also expect to see borrowers with low earnings, putting them in
jeopardy of default, shift toward income driven repayment plans. There is little evidence of either behavior
in national student loan data.
        Importantly, in our case, if borrowers (or subjects) are behaving optimally and with full
information, then changing the default option should have little effect. We find the opposite. Given these
facts, it appears that there is potential to reduce default rates simply through a change in the default option.
Findeisen and Sachs (2016) show not only that income driven loan contracts are optimal from a public
investment standpoint, but also that these results can hold under a straightforward repayment schedule.
Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2016) make similar claims. Mueller and Yannelis (2018) demonstrate that
this type of repayment scheme is effective in providing protection from negative shocks. Herbst (2018)
shows that despite lower required contributions on average, IDR enrollees pay down more of their debt as
a result of more timely and consistent repayment.




                                                      21
         From a policy perspective, this need not be controversial. Australia and New Zealand have
implemented fully income contingent repayment strategies. The UK, Canada and South Africa feature them
prominently. Legislative efforts in the U.S. to shift to an income based repayment scheme have gained little
traction. Past efforts to nudge borrowers into income driven plans has seen limited success. But none of
these reform policies has shifted the default option.




                                                        22
References
Abraham, K., Ozbay, E.F., Ozbay, E., and Turner, L. (2018). “Framing Effects, Earnings Expectations,
     and the Design of Student Loan Repayment Schemes.” Working Paper.

Akers, Beth, and Matthew M. Chingos. "Is a student loan crisis on the horizon." Brown Center on Education
     Policy, Brookings Institution (2014).

Ambrose, B. W., Cordell, L., & Ma, S. (2015). The impact of student loan debt on small business formation.
    Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 15-26.

Ballance, J., Clifford, R., & Shoag, D. (2016). “No More Credit Score”: Employer Credit Check Bans and
      Signal Substitution,”. Working Paper.

Barr, A., Bird, K., & Castleman, B. L. (2016). Prompting active choice among high-risk borrowers:
      Evidence from a student loan counseling experiment. EdPolicyWorks Working Paper.

Baum, S. (2015). Does Increasing Reliance on Student Debt Explain Declines in Entrepreneurial Activity?
    Posing the Question, Gathering Evidence, Considering Policy Options. Research Report. Urban
    Institute.

Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P., and Sanbonmatsu, L. (2009). The role of simplification and
      information in college decisions: Results from the H&R block FAFSA experiment. Technical report,
      National Bureau of Economic Research.

Betts, J. R. (1996). What do students know about wages? Evidence from a survey of undergraduates, Journal
       of Human Resources, vol. 31, issue 1, 27-56.

Bleemer, Z., Brown, M., Lee, D., & Van der Klaauw, W. (2014). Debt, Jobs, or Housing: What's Keeping
     Millennials at Home?, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 700.

Bos, M., Breza, E., & Liberman, A. (2018). The labor market effects of credit market information. The
     Review of Financial Studies, 31(6), 2005-2037.

Castleman, B. L. and Page, L. C. (2016). Freshman year financial aid nudges: An experiment to
      increase FAFSA renewal and college persistence. Journal of Human Resources, 51(2): 389–415.

Conqvist, H. and Thaler, R. H. (2004). Design choices in privatized social-security systems: Learning from
     the Swedish experience. American Economic Review, 94(2):424–428.

Cohen-Cole, E., Herkenhoff, K., & Phillips, G. (2016). The Impact of Consumer Credit Access on
     Employment, Earnings and Entrepreneurship. NBER Working Paper.

Cronqvist, H. and Thaler, R. (2004). Design Choices in Privatized Social-Security Systems: Learning
     from the Swedish Experience. American Economic Review, vol. 94, issue 2, 424-428.

Dobbie, W., Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., Mahoney, N., & Song, J. (2016). Bad credit, no problem? Credit and
     labor market consequences of bad credit reports. NBER working paper #w22711.

Dynarski, S. & Kreisman, D. (2013). “Loans for Educational Opportunity: Making Borrowing Work for
     Today’s Students.” The Hamilton Project at the Brookings Institution.


                                                   23
Eckel C., Grossman P. (2002). Sex differences and statistical stereotyping in attitudes toward financial risk.
      Evolution and Human Behavior 23(4): 281–295.

Eckel C. C., Grossman P. J. (2008). Forecasting risk attitudes: An experimental study using actual and
      forecast gamble choices. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 68(1): 1–7.

Field, E. (2009). Educational debt burden and career choice: evidence from a financial aid experiment at
       NYU law school. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1), 1-21.

Findeisen, S., & Sachs, D. (2016). Education and optimal dynamic taxation: The role of income-contingent
      student loans. Journal of Public Economics, 138, 1-21.

Gary‐Bobo, R. J., & Trannoy, A. (2015). Optimal student loans and graduate tax under moral hazard and
      adverse selection. The RAND Journal of Economics, 46(3), 546-576.

Gaulke, A. P., and Reynolds C. (2018). “Student Loan Repayment.” Working paper.

Haan, T. and Linde, J. (2018). ‘Good Nudge Lullaby’: Choice Architecture and Default Bias
     Reinforcement. The Economic Journal, Vol. 128, Issue 610, 1180-1206.

Herbst, Daniel (2018). “Liquidity and Insurance in Student Loan Contracts: Estimating the Effects of
     Income-Driven Repayment on Default and Consumption.” Working paper accessed 08/2018:
     https://drive.google.com/file/d/1A-gq_LIqffY6r2gDTcUK9-Y3ZV8Go6SU/view

Hershbein, B., Harris, B., and Kearney, M. (2014). Major decisions: Graduates’ earnings growth and debt
     repayment. Washington, DC: Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution.

Ionescu, F. (2009). The federal student loan program: Quantitative implications for college enrollment and
      default rates. Review of Economic dynamics, 12(1), 205-231.

Johnson, E. J. and Goldstein, D. (2003). Do defaults save lives? Science, 302(5649): 1338–1339.

King, J. R., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., Vermeulen, L. and Wrobel, V. (2012). Comparison Friction:
      Experimental evidence from Medicare drug plans. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1).

Klepfer, K. (2015). Informed or Overwhelmed? A Legislative History of Student Loan Counseling with a
     Literature Review on the Efficacy of Loan Counseling. Research Report. TG (Texas Guaranteed
     Student Loan Corporation).

Lochner, L., & Monge-Naranjo, A. (2016). Student loans and repayment: Theory, evidence, and policy.
     In Handbook of the Economics of Education (Vol. 5, pp. 397-478). Elsevier.

Looney, A., & Yannelis, C. (2015). A crisis in student loans?: How changes in the characteristics of
     borrowers and in the institutions they attended contributed to rising loan defaults. Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, 2015(2), 1-89.

Marx, B. M. and Turner, L. J (2018). Student Loan Nudges: Experimental Evidence on Borrowing and
     Educational Attainment. NBER Working Paper No. 24060.




                                                     24
Madrian, B. C. and Shea, D. F. (2001). The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401 (k) participation
     and savings behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4):1149–1187.

Mezza, A., Ringo, D., Sherland, S., & Sommer, K. (2016). Student Loans and Homeownership. Finance
     and Economics Discussion Series Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs Federal
     Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. Working Paper.

Mueller, H. M., & Yannelis, C. (2018). The rise in student loan defaults in the Great Recession. Journal of
     Financial Economics.

National Public Radio. 2012. “Bad Credit Reports Affect Job Applicants.” National Public Radio
     http://www.npr.org/2009/08/11/111769999/low-credit-scores-affect-job-applicants.

New York Times. 2013. “Employers Pull Applicants Credit Reports.” The New York Times
    http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/12/business/employers-pull-applicants-credit-reports.html.

Rothstein, J., & Rouse, C. E. (2011). Constrained after college: Student loans and early-career occupational
     choices. Journal of Public Economics, 95(1-2), 149-163.

Samuelson, W., & Zeckhauser, R. (1988). Status Quo Bias in Decision Making. Journal of Risk and
    Uncertainty, vol. 1, issue 1, 7-59.

SHRM. 2010. “Background Checking: The Implications of Credit Background Checks on the Decision to
    Hire or Not to Hire.” Society for Human Resource Management.

Thaler, R. H. and Benartzi, S. (2004). Save more tomorrow: Using behavioral economics to increase
      employee saving. Journal of political Economy, 112(S1):S164–S187.

Thaler, R. H. and Sunstein, C. R (2003). Libertarian Paternalism. American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No.
      2, 175-179.

U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015). Federal student loans: education could do more to help
     ensure borrowers are aware of repayment and forgiveness options. GAO-15-663.

U.S. Government Accountability Office (2016). Education needs to improve its income driven repayment
      plan budget estimates. Technical Report GAO-17-22.

Winter, J., Balza, R., Caro, F., Heiss, F., Jun, B.-h., Matzkin, R., and McFadden, D. (2006).
     Medicare prescription drug coverage: Consumer information and preferences. Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences, 103(20):7929–7934

Wiswal, M. and Zafar, B. (2015). Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification using an
    Information Experiment. The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 82, Issue 2, 791-824.

Yannelis, C. (2017). Strategic default on student loans. Working Paper. Downloaded from
     http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/workshops/financelunch/past/pdf/Strategic%20Default.pdf.




                                                    25
Tables



Table 1: Simulated earnings differences and standard deviations vs. standard plan
                                  Difference from Standard Plan
                         Earnings-Repayments          Difference of 1 s.d.   Prob(Default)
Standard                           $0                         $0                  0.35
Graduated                        -$375                      -$1,272               0.35
REPAYE                          $14,734                    -$17,296                0
PAYE/IBR-New                    $14,561                    -$18,359                0
ICR                              $8,916                    -$12,456                0
Notes: Table shows expected difference in earnings less repayments compared with Standard repayment plan
(column 1) and expected standard deviation differences (column 2) from Standard plan (this is sd(plan)-
sd(standard)). Simulated earnings draws pre-tax income from work ventiles from distribution of four-year
college graduates age 24 in 2015. Earnings then grow for 25 years assuming a quartic growth rate estimated
from empirical cross-section in same year. Earnings are reduced by 10% in each year following repayment
default (only possible for Standard and Graduated).




                                                       26
 Table 2. Student loan experiment treatments
                                   Informational        Earnings
 Treatment          Default plan                                      Skip option   Name change
                                   environment          information


 Main Treatment Cells
 T 1 (Baseline) Standard           Complex
 T2             REPAYE             Complex
 T3             Standard           Complex              Yes
 T4             REPAYE             Complex              Yes

 T5                 Standard       Simple
 T6                 REPAYE         Simple
 T7                 Standard       Simple               Yes
 T8                 REPAYE         Simple               Yes

 Additional Treatment Cells
 T9              Standard          Complex                            Yes
 T 10            REPAYE            Complex                            Yes
 T 11            Standard          Simple               Yes           Yes
 T 12            REPAYE            Simple               Yes           Yes

 T 13               Standard       Complex                                          “Fixed”
 T 14               REPAYE         Complex                                          “Fixed”
Table shows all treatment cells.




                                                   27
Table 3. Subject summary statistics
                                                           Mean                   s.d.
Male                                                       0.38                  (0.48)
Age                                                        20.6                  (2.32)
White                                                      0.10                  (0.30)
Black                                                      0.61                  (0.49)
Hispanic                                                   0.04                  (0.21)
Asian                                                      0.13                  (0.34)
Other                                                      0.11                  (0.31)
Year 2-5                                                   0.98                  (0.14)
Has loans                                                  0.73                  (0.44)
School
  Business                                                  0.27                 (0.44)
  Arts & Sci.                                               0.49                 (0.50)
  Policy                                                    0.08                 (0.28)
  Health                                                    0.08                 (0.26)
  Other                                                     0.09                 (0.28)
Obs.                                                                   542
Notes: Table shows means (sd) for subjects in the experiment. All measures are self-reported.




                                             28
Table 4: Experimental and actual take-up rates.
                       GAO (2016)               GAO (2015)                       Baseline
Standard                                          0.65                            0.63
                           0.76
Graduated                                         0.14                            0.13
IDR plans                  0.24                   0.19                            0.25
Other                       n/a                   0.02                             n/a
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 show the distribution of repayment plans for borrowers with outstanding
balances as of 2013-2016 (column 1) and 2014 (column2) from two GAO reports (GAO 215, 2016).
Column 3 shows results from our Baseline specification.




                                              29
Table 5: Repayment choices under full information.
                            Standard REPAYE                   Graduated       Other IDR   N
T1. Baseline                  0.625        0.075                0.125           0.175     40
                             (0.490)      (0.267)              (0.335)         (0.385)
T2. REPAYE Default            0.342        0.316                0.237           0.105     38
                             (0.481)      (0.471)              (0.431)         (0.311)
T3. Earnings Information      0.538        0.205                0.128           0.128     39
                             (0.505)      (0.409)              (0.339)         (0.339)
T4. REPAYE Default            0.162        0.378                0.324           0.135     37
    + Earnings Information   (0.374)      (0.492)              (0.475)         (0.347)
Table shows distribution (mean, sd) of repayment choices under full information.




                                              30
Table 6: Effects of changing the default and information on repayment choice
                                                               Treatment
                               T2. REPAYE Default          T3. Earnings Info       T4. REPAYE Default
                                                                                     & Earnings Info

Panel A: Unadjusted
Standard                             -0.259***                   -0.0967                 -0.470***
                                      (0.095)                    (0.099)                  (0.097)
REPAYE                                0.271**                     0.190                  0.337***
                                      (0.113)                    (0.122)                  (0.108)
Graduated                              0.0723                    -0.0347                   0.156*
                                      (0.093)                    (0.107)                  (0.085)
Other IDR                             -0.0842                    -0.0589                   -0.024
                                      (0.076)                    (0.075)                  (0.066)
Obs.                                                               154

Panel B: With covariates
Standard                             -0.274***                   -0.0428                 -0.400***
                                      (0.094)                    (0.100)                  (0.099)
REPAYE                               0.293***                    0.211*                  0.361***
                                      (0.111)                    (0.120)                  (0.107)
Graduated                              0.0938                    -0.0492                   0.154*
                                      (0.091)                    (0.102)                  (0.085)
Other IDR                              -0.113                     -0.119                   -0.114
                                      (0.074)                    (0.073)                  (0.071)
Demographics                              x                          x                        x
Risk                                      x                          x                        x
School FE                                 x                          x                        x
Session FE                                x                          x                        x
Obs.                                                               154
Table shows marginal effects from a multinomial logistic regression of repayment choice (rows) on each
treatment (columns). Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                    31
Table 7: Effect of default and information under simple choices and information.
                                              Means                               Regression
                                     Standard  REPAYE             N          Dep. Var. = 1[Standard]
                                        (1)       (2)                         (3)            (4)
T5. Simple Baseline                    0.579     0.421            38
                                      (0.500)   (0.500)
T6. REPAYE Default, Simple             0.553     0.447            38         -0.0263        -0.0666
                                      (0.504)   (0.504)                      (0.115)        (0.121)
T7. Earnings Information,              0.605     0.395            38          0.0263        -0.0232
    Simple                            (0.495)   (0.495)                      (0.114)        (0.115)
T8. REPAYE Default                     0.333     0.667            39        -0.246**       -0.312***
    + Earnings Information,           (0.478)   (0.478)                      (0.112)        (0.112)
    Simple

Regression controls
  Demographics                                                                                  x
  Risk                                                                                          x
  School FE                                                                                     x
  Session FE                                                                                    x
Obs.                                                                          153              153
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 show share choosing Standard and REPAYE across treatment cells (means, sd).
Columns 3 and 4 show effects of each treatment relative to Baseline from a linear probability model.
Dependent variable = 1 if subject chose Standard. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                   32
Table 8: Differences by risk preference (higher risk = less risk averse).
                                   Dep. Var. = Any IDR                 Dep. Var. = Standard
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Risk (centered)                0.014      -0.043     -0.048      -0.011       0.024        0.040
                              (0.026)    (0.045)    (0.052)     (0.025)      (0.048)      (0.054)
T2. REPAYE Default             0.173      0.172       0.143    -0.285**     -0.279** -0.261**
                              (0.108)    (0.108)    (0.112)     (0.111)      (0.112)      (0.111)
T3. Earnings Info              0.085      0.098       0.061      -0.088       -0.099       -0.022
                              (0.104)    (0.101)    (0.116)     (0.112)      (0.111)      (0.120)
T4. REPAYE + Info             0.260** 0.265**       0.204* -0.460*** -0.461*** -0.388***
                              (0.109)    (0.110)    (0.117)     (0.100)      (0.101)      (0.111)
Risk*(T2. REPAYE)                         0.053       0.044                   -0.004       -0.003
                                         (0.065)    (0.071)                  (0.071)      (0.073)
Risk*(T3. Earnings Info)                0.189*** 0.180**                    -0.150**       -0.133
                                         (0.068)    (0.084)                  (0.074)      (0.085)
Risk*(T4. REPAYE + Info)                  0.035       0.039                   -0.029       -0.058
                                         (0.072)    (0.081)                  (0.063)      (0.070)
Demographics                                            X                                     X
School FE                                               X                                     X
Session FE                                              X                                     X
Obs.                            154        154         154        154          154          154
Notes: Table shows coefficients from a linear probability model of main treatment cells interacted with a risk
parameter on choosing any IDR plan (columns 1-3) or choosing the Standard plan (columns 4-6). Risk
measure takes values 1-6 with 6 being the most risk tolerant. Measure is centered at mean value (3.7). Robust
standard errors in parentheses.




                                                      33
Table 9: Patterns of skipping counseling.
                                      Complex                           Simple
                                 T9.         T10.                T11.          T12.
                               Baseline    REPAYE              Baseline + REPAYE +
                                                                                             Total
                              Can Skip     Can Skip             Earnings     Earnings
                                                               Can Skip      Can Skip
Did not skip                        0.74             0.77         0.82         0.89           0.81
Skipped before counseling           0.10             0.03         0.03         0.00           0.04
Skipped on pages 1 or 2             0.08             0.21         0.15         0.11           0.14
Skipped on pages 3 or 4             0.08               0            0            0            0.02
Obs.                                 39               39           39           38            155
Notes: Table shows patterns of skipping exit counseling under treatments where subjects were given
the opportunity to skip and could leave when finished. Page 2 of exit counseling is where
subjects/borrowers see repayment options and can select a plan.




                                                34
Table 10: Distribution of repayment choices when subjects can skip counseling.
                                        Standard REPAYE Graduated Other IRD                            Obs.
Complex information
T1. Baseline                              0.625      0.075       0.125       0.175                     40
                                         (0.490)    (0.267)     (0.335)     (0.385)
T9. Baseline + Skip Option                0.744      0.103       0.026       0.128                     39
                                         (0.442)    (0.307)     (0.160)     (0.339)
  T9. Non-Skippers                        0.655      0.138       0.034       0.172                     29
                                         (0.484)    (0.351)     (0.186)     (0.384)

T2. REPAYE Default                              0.162        0.378         0.324        0.135          37
                                               (0.374)      (0.492)       (0.475)      (0.347)
                                                0.179        0.538         0.103        0.179          39
T10. REPAYE + Skip Option
                                               (0.389)      (0.505)       (0.307)      (0.389)
  T10. Non-Skippers                             0.233        0.400         0.133        0.233          30
                                               (0.430)      (0.498)       (0.346)      (0.430)

Simple Information
T7. Baseline, Simple + Earn Info                0.579        0.421                                     38
                                               (0.500)      (0.500)
T11. Baseline Simple + Earn Info                0.718        0.282                                     39
    + Skip Option                              (0.456)      (0.456)
  T11. Non-Skippers                             0.656        0.344                                     32
                                               (0.483)      (0.483)

T8. REPAYE, Simple + Earnings                   0.333        0.667                                     39
                                               (0.478)      (0.478)
T12. REPAYE, Simple + Earnings +                0.368        0.632                                     38
      Skip Option                              (0.489)      (0.489)
  T12. Non-Skippers                             0.412        0.588                                     34
                                               (0.500)      (0.500)
Notes: Table shows mean (sd) of repayment choices when subjects can and cannot skip exit counseling.




                                                   35
Table 11: Effect of changing the name from "Standard" to "Fixed".
                            Standard     REPAYE        Graduated                   Other IDR        Obs.
Baseline                      0.625        0.075          0.125                      0.175           40
                             (0.490)      (0.267)        (0.335)                    (0.385)
Standard = Fixed              0.525        0.175          0.125                      0.175           40
                             (0.506)      (0.385)        (0.335)                    (0.385)

REPAYE +                         0.162           0.378             0.324              0.135          37
Earnings Info                   (0.374)         (0.492)           (0.475)            (0.347)
REPAYE +                         0.175           0.450             0.125              0.250          40
Earnings Info + Fixed           (0.385)         (0.504)           (0.335)            (0.439)
Table shows means and standard deviations across two identical treatments where only the name "Standard"
is changed to "Fixed".




                                                   36
Figures


Figure 1. Simulated earnings differences vs. standard plan

                                            60
   Difference from Standard Plan ($000's)




                                            50

                                            40

                                            30

                                            20

                                            10

                                             0

                                            -10
                                                  1        5                     10                  15      20
                                                                  Ventile of the earnings distribution

                                                      Graduated           REPAYE             PAYE/IBR-new   ICR


Notes: Figure plots expected difference in earnings less repayments compared with Standard repayment plan by ventile
of the earnings distribution. Simulated earnings draws pre-tax income from work ventiles from distribution of four-
year college graduates age 24 in 2015. Earnings then grow for 25 years assuming a quartic growth rate estimated from
empirical cross-section in same year. Earnings are reduced by 10% in each year following repayment default (only
possible for Standard and Graduated).




                                                                                      37
Figure 2. Experimental compensation vs. Standard plan

            Difference from Standard Plan ($'s)   10


                                                   8


                                                   6


                                                   4


                                                   2


                                                   0


                                                       1        5                     10                  15      20
                                                                       Ventile of the earnings distribution

                                                           Graduated           REPAYE             PAYE/IBR-new   ICR


Notes: Figure plots expected difference in experimental compensation compared with Standard repayment plan by
ventile of the earnings distribution. The exchange rate is $2.50 per 100,000 earned in simulated lab earnings.
Subjects begin with an $8 U.S endowment which subjects lose if they default.




                                                                                     38
Figure 3. Effect of information about earnings on earnings expectations




                                                       50,000
                  Expected earnigns after graduation
                                                       40,000
                                                       30,000
                                                       20,000
                                                       10,000
                                                       0




                                                                Not given earnings info      Given earnings info

                                                                                 Self              Others


    Notes: Figure shows mean responses to question what do you (others) expect to earn in the first year after
    graduation. Left two bars show means for subjects who did not receive information about the distribution of
    earnings. The right bars show means for those who received this information as part of treatment.




                                                                                        39
Appendix
A1. Subject instructions.




           Instructions
           In the following you will experience a simulation of the federal government’s Student Loan Exit
           Counseling in which students learn about student loan repayment options and can choose a re-
           payment plan. For our purposes, we will assume you have a direct subsidized student loan of
           $23,000 at an interest rate of 4.6%.
           Your payment for participation in this study will come from “lab earnings” taken over 25 “lab years.”
           These “lab earnings” are designed to reflect a random draw from the distribution of what actual
           recent college graduates with a Bachelor’s degree might expect to earn over each of the next 25
           years.
           To create your “lab earnings”, we begin by dividing the distribution of pre-tax earnings from work
           for 24 year olds in the U.S. with a Bachelor’s degree into 20 representative individuals. You are then
           randomly assigned to be one of these individuals – thus you have an equal chance of being in the
           bottom, middle or top of the earnings distribution. You will then receive what a typical individual
           at that place in the distribution might expect to earn each year for each of 25 “lab years.”
           At the end of each “lab year” we first calculate your “discretionary earnings” by subtracting from
           your “lab earnings” basic living expenses, which we set equal to 150% of the current federal poverty
           line, and withholding for Social Security and Medicare. From this we then subtract payments due
           on your student loan until the loan is either paid oﬀ or, in some cases, forgiven. The remainder (your
           “discretionary earnings” less any loan repayment) you will keep. These remaining “lab earnings” will
           be converted into real U.S. dollars at a rate of $2.50 per 100,000 “lab dollars” earned.
           In addition, you will start the study with a gift of $8 real U.S. dollars.
           If in any “lab year” your “discretionary earnings” are less than what you are required to repay on your
           student loan, your loan will go into default. If you default on your loan, you will receive a penalty
           in the loss of your $8 U.S. dollar gift in addition to a 10% penalty on all future “lab earnings”
           thereafter.

              Summary

             • You begin with a direct subsidized loan of $23,000 at 4.6% interest.
             • You then complete the Student Loan Exit Counseling.
             • You are then randomly assigned a stream of “lab earnings” drawn from the distribution of
               what 24 year old college graduates might expect to earn over each of the next 25 years.
             • At the end of each “lab year” basic living expenses and federal withholdings are deducted
               from your “lab earnings” first, then payments on student loans are deducted if any balance
               remains. The remaining “lab earnings” you keep.
             • These are converted into real U.S. dollars at an exchange rate of $2.50 for every 100,000
               “lab dollars” you have left over in each year.
             • If in any “lab year” you default on your student loan repayment because you cannot make
               your payment, you forfeit your $8 gift and all future “lab earnings” are reduced by 10%.
             • You will learn your “earnings” draws after completing the Exit Counseling.

           If you have any questions, please raise your hand and someone will approach you and answer your
           question. When you’re ready to begin, please click on the Begin button at the bottom of this page.
           You may take as much time as you want to obtain information from the Exit Counseling site.




                                                                40
A2. Repayment options on facsimile exit counseling website.




Notes: Image shows repayment options as seen by subjects. A value of $24,000 was entered as expected earnings
after college in order to create initial monthly and total payments.



                                                      41
A3. Earnings information on facsimile website.




Notes: Image shows screen shot of information provided to subjects in treatment cells that provided information
about the distribution of earnings for recent college graduates.




                                                        42
A4. Simplified Information on facsimile website




                                                  43
A5. Alternate subject instructions.


You now have the option to participate in the Student Loan Exit Counseling.

If you decide to participate:
    • You will have an opportunity to study student loan repayment plans and select a plan to pay off
        your loan.

You may also skip the Student Loan Exit Counseling. If you skip:
   • You will be assigned a preselected repayment plan to pay off your loan.

At any time you can click on the “Skip Exit Counseling” button below or on any other page during the
Exit Counseling to conclude student loan portion of the experiment:
    • You will learn your “earnings” draws immediately after completing the Student loan Exit
        Counseling or clicking on “Skip Exit Counseling” button.

You can leave the experimental lab as soon as you see your final earnings on your screen.




                                                  44
