                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MARKET ACCESS, TRADE COSTS, AND TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION:
                   EVIDENCE FROM NORTHERN TANZANIA

                                       Shilpa Aggarwal
                                         Brian Giera
                                        Dahyeon Jeong
                                      Jonathan Robinson
                                         Alan Spearot

                                      Working Paper 25253
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25253


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2018

We are grateful to Sheah Deilami-Nugent and David Roughgarden for outstanding work
coordinating field activities, and BRAC Tanzania and IPA Tanzania for administrative support.
We thank Patrick Olobo for his collaboration. Anouk Faoure, Petra Gram, Matthew Krupoff and
Alexandra Murphy provided excellent research assistance. We thank Lauren Falcao Bergquist,
Shoumitro Chaterjee, Alain de Janvry, Betty Sadoulet and seminar participants at Ashoka
University, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, UC Berkeley, ISB, LSE, the University of Maryland,
NBER Trade and Agriculture Conference, NEUDC, the University of Virginia, UCSC, the
University of West Virginia and, the WEAI, the University of Pittsburgh, and Stanford University
for helpful comments. We acknowledge funding from the IGC (grant 1-VRC-VTZA-
VXXXX-89307), the National Science Foundation (SES 1658942), Innovations for Poverty
Action, ISB and UCSC. The data collection approval was approved by the IRBs of UCSC and the
Indian School of Business, and by the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
(COSTECH). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Shilpa Aggarwal, Brian Giera, Dahyeon Jeong, Jonathan Robinson, and Alan Spearot.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Market Access, Trade Costs, and Technology Adoption: Evidence from Northern Tanzania
Shilpa Aggarwal, Brian Giera, Dahyeon Jeong, Jonathan Robinson, and Alan Spearot
NBER Working Paper No. 25253
November 2018
JEL No. F14,O12,O13,O18,Q12

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper, we quantify market access in rural Tanzania, and the extent to which it constrains
agricultural productivity. We collect granular data on farmer input and sales decisions, input and
output prices, and travel costs in all 1,183 villages in two regions of Tanzania. We find that a
village in the 90th percentile of the travel-cost adjusted price distribution faces input and output
prices 40-55% less favorable than a village at the 10th percentile. In reduced form, an additional
standard deviation of travel time is associated with 20-25% lower input adoption and output sales.
We develop and quantify a spatial model of input adoption and conservatively estimate that
farmers behave as if they face travel costs of 6% ad-valorem per kilometer of travel, which is
equivalent to 40% when traveling to the closest retailer. Holding exogenous local factors fixed,
we estimate that reducing travel costs by 50% (approximately the effect of paving rural roads)
doubles adoption and reduces the adoption-remoteness gradient by 18%.


Shilpa Aggarwal                                  Jonathan Robinson
Indian School of Business                        Department of Economics
Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500032                     University of California, Santa Cruz
India                                            457 Engineering 2
shilpa_aggarwal@isb.edu                          Santa Cruz, CA 95064
                                                 and NBER
Brian Giera                                      jmrtwo@ucsc.edu
Amazon Research
69 Alta Vista Dr.                                Alan Spearot
Santa Cruz, CA, 95060                            University of California, Santa Cruz
bgiera14@gmail.com                               acspearot@gmail.com

Dahyeon Jeong
University of California, Santa Cruz
dajeong@ucsc.edu
1     Introduction
It is widely believed that poor access to markets – due mainly to poor transportation infrastructure
– limits agricultural productivity in rural areas of developing countries, by making it harder to
access productivity-enhancing inputs like fertilizer and to obtain high prices for harvest output
(World Bank, 2008; 2017).1 However, while remoteness no doubt limits market access, there is
little research to rigorously quantify its effect.
    In this paper, we rigorously document market access among farmers in two regions – Kilimanjaro
and Manyara – of Northern Tanzania. Together, these two regions represent 6 percent of the land
area and population of the country. Our data collection exercise spans the entire supply chain of
maize (output) as well as of fertilizer (input) in all 1,183 villages in these two regions, including (1)
surveys with a random sample of 2,845 farmers in 246 randomly selected villages; (2) surveys with
532 agro-input retailers (agrovets) that sell fertilizer (this sample represents the universe of retail
locations available to farmers);2 (3) a retrospective panel of monthly buying and selling prices of
maize from a randomly selected sample of maize-sellers in each of the 226 markets in the area; (4)
collection of information on road quality, travel times, and travel costs to all villages from their
respective local markets as well as from 6 major urban centers, and travel times and costs between
each market and each major urban center; and (5) driving times and distances pulled from Google
Maps API for the universe of bilateral village pairs, as well as for pairs of villages and major urban
centers across central and northern Tanzania, plus Dar es Salaam.
    We make three main contributions. First, we precisely document spatial price dispersion for
input and output prices, inclusive of trade costs. To do this, we use our extensive travel cost data to
estimate travel costs to every destination, and then take the most favorable prices for farmers. We
find clear evidence of large and economically meaningful spatial heterogeneity in both input and
output prices. For both, we find that the price difference between the 90th and the 10th percentile
of delivered input prices is equivalent to about 50% of the mean. We find similar evidence of greatly
reduced market access in remote rural areas using a variety of other measures.
    Second, we conduct a reduced-form investigation of the correlation between usage and remote-
ness on the input side, and sales and remoteness on the output side, where remoteness of any
location is proxied by the weighted average of travel times from a set of local regional hubs. We
find striking correlations between remoteness and all measures of input usage and output sales.
In particular, we find that a standard deviation increase in remoteness is associated with a 9-17
percentage point reduction in the probability of using fertilizer and a 6-9 percentage point reduction
in the probability of selling maize. Put differently, we find that input usage in the most remote
villages in our study sample is approximately only a third of that in the least remote villages, while
    1
      Transportation infrastructure is particularly underdeveloped in Africa as the continent has only 137 kilometers
of roads per 1000 square kilometers of land area, with only a quarter paved. In contrast, the average for developing
countries outside the region is 211 kilometers of roads per 1000 square kilometers, with more than half paved (World
Bank, 2010). For comparison, the US has 679 kilometers per 1000 square kilometers, with nearly 2/3 paved.
    2
      As discussed later, we successfully surveyed 532 agrovet out of a universe of 585. For the remaining agrovets, we
impute prices as described later.




                                                          2
maize sales are only 45 percent as high.
   While we find clear evidence of reduced market access, and while it is also clear that this reduced
access will affect the choice set and decisions of farmers, it is not possible to quantify these effects
in the reduced form alone, since remote villages and villagers may differ in other ways as well. To
perform this quantification absent experimental variation, our third contribution is to develop a
spatial model of fertilizer adoption in which the decision to adopt fertilizer is based on local output
prices, innate farmer productivity, the distribution of delivered input prices and retailer quality,
and idiosyncratic shocks. Transportation costs affect the distribution of prices by increasing the
costs for farmers to reach a particular agrovet to buy inputs, as well as those to reach the local
market to sell their harvest.
   On the input side, the structure of the model (which is based on Eaton and Kortum, 2002)
facilitates a decomposition of choosing an agrovet into three components, (1) the decision whether
to adopt anywhere; (2), the decision of which location to buy from; and (3) the decision of which
retailer to pick within that location. Our novel farmer surveys reliably record the first two of these
decisions, and also allow us to calibrate (1) local non-price factors that may affect adoption, and
(2) the implied trade cost of choosing an agrovet. On the latter, we derive a novel multinomial
logit specification that estimates the implied iceberg trade costs to each location as a function of
distance, while using location-specific dummies to account for other amenities available at each
location (which may represent unmodeled issues like experience in selling inputs and likelihood
of stockouts). The results suggest that transportation costs are large: our preferred specification
yields estimates of local iceberg cost that are, at the conservative end, 6% ad-valorem per kilometer
of travel. This is approximately 40% to reach the average closest agrovet, and thus these costs are
economically meaningful, and suggest significant non-pecuniary costs of travel. These may include
other factors such as the opportunity cost of the time to travel, risk-aversion related to potential
stockouts, or information frictions, among others. After estimating trade costs, we use the model
to build a market-clearing condition for fertilizer for each agrovet, which is a function of the spatial
distribution of fertilizer expenditures by each farmer and the probability that a farmer at each
location adopts at a given agrovet. We balance these market clearing conditions by finding a vector
of agrovet “amenities” that exactly rationalize the market-shares of each agrovet.
   Finally, we use the estimated parameters from the model to simulate market access counter-
factuals. For input market access, our primary counterfactual is reducing trade costs incurred to
reach retailers by 50%, which is roughly equivalent to the realized reduction in travel time due
to road upgrading (Casaburi, Glennerster and Suri 2013). This policy roughly doubles adoption
relative to baseline, and also reduces the distance gradient by 18%. We also evaluate how the
costs for retailers to source inputs from distributors affect the adoption decision. After cutting
the wholesaler-retailer transportation costs by half, adoption rises by about 1 percentage point, or
4%, and yields a 4% reduction in the remoteness-adoption gradient. We also study hypothetical
entry counterfactuals, where we find that while agrovet entry in remote areas has a larger effect
on adoption, the profitability from doing so falls by 0.35 log points for each standard deviation




                                                   3
increase in remoteness. Finally, subject to a number of caveats based on data availability for maize
markets, we reduce transportation costs by 50% for reaching output markets, and find a slightly
smaller change in adoption, though a slightly larger reduction in the adoption-remoteness gradient
(when compared with input market access).
    This paper sits at the intersection of trade and development economics. On the development
side, our paper contributes to a literature examining why Sub-Saharan Africa has lagged behind the
rest of the developing world in agricultural technology adoption (World Bank 2008). Many studies
find evidence of large yield increases of using improved inputs (i.e. Duflo, Kremer and Robinson
2008; Beaman et al. 2013; Stewart et al. 2005; Udry and Anagol 2006), though the evidence is much
more mixed on whether using these inputs is profitable (i.e. Duflo, Kremer and Robinson 2008;
Beaman et al. 2013). Our results quantify the extent to which profitability, and thus adoption, will
tend to be lower in more remote locations, due to less favorable input and output prices for farmers.
In this sense, our work is closely related to Suri (2011), who shows that many Kenyan farmers with
high gross returns to hybrid seeds choose not to adopt them because the fixed costs of obtaining
seeds are too high, presumably due to travel costs. Our paper is differentiated by focusing on
heterogeneity in market access, rather than on heterogeneity in returns. Related work in Minten,
Koru, and Stifel (2013) also focuses on remoteness and profitability and documents significant
farmer-to-retailer transaction costs to reach price-controlled input cooperatives in a rugged region
in northern Ethiopia.3
    Our paper is related to a rapidly growing literature about the effect of roads or other infrastruc-
ture improvements on development outcomes and on the spatial distribution of economic activity,4
which includes a whole host of outcomes other than just prices, including consumption diversity,
farm investments, human capital investment, migration, and occupation choice (Aggarwal, 2018a;
b; Adukia et al., 2016; Asher and Novosad 2016; Brooks and Donovan, 2017; Morten and Oliveira
2016). In our paper, we focus narrowly on the specific effect of transportation costs on market
access (i.e. the actual time and money costs of transportation and the presence of intermediaries
and the prices they charge) in isolation, without changing other margins.5
    Our work is also related to a voluminous trade literature which attributes price differentials
across space to three primary components – marginal trade costs (e.g. Donaldson, 2018; Eaton
and Kortum, 2002; Keller and Shiue, 2007; Sotelo, 2018), spatially varying mark-ups (Atkin and
Donaldson, 2015; Asturias et al., 2017), and the organization of intermediaries (Allen and Atkin,
    3
      Specifically, the authors document the farmer-reported cost of renting cargo transport (predominantly a donkey
in this region) and the time cost of travel for a trip to the market town along the only route of egress from their
villages. Our study differs in its focus on access to all, privately owned intermediaries for inputs, the costs of transport
along both rural and feeder roads, and also the quantification of the adoption decision through the lens of a spatial
economic model.
    4
      A partial listing of papers includes Aggarwal (2018), Alder (2017), Adukia et al. (2016), Asher and Novosad
(2016), Banerjee et al. (2012), Bird and Straub (2016), Bryan and Morten (2017), Gertler et al. (2014), Ghani et al.
(2016), Khanna (2016), Shamdasani (2016), and Storeygard (2016). See Donaldson (2016) for a review.
    5
      Technological advances may make it possible to decouple market access from traditional road infrastructure. For
example, Rwanda has a “droneport” already under construction just outside the city of Kibuye, and which will be
ready by 2020. Drones capable of transporting cargo of up to 20 kilos over a distance of 100 kms already exist.




                                                             4
2016; Dhingra and Tenreyro, 2017; Bergquist, 2017; Casaburi and Reed, 2017; Chatterjee, 2018).
Our paper is most closely related to Atkin and Donaldson (2015), who estimate trade costs in a
situation in which an oligopolist intermediary buys products at wholesale prices, transports them
to distant markets and sells them directly to consumers. By contrast, we are interested in how
trade costs affect the buying decisions of final consumers (in this case, farmers), as well as pricing
decisions by retailers.     6

    Finally, much of the trade literature, which has documented larger gains from integration when
there are input-output relationships (e.g. Yi, 2001; Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare, 2014; Sotelo,
2016) has only evaluated economies under the assumption of monopolistically competitive or purely
competitive sectors at a fairly aggregate level (e.g. international trade by industry).7 By contrast,
our model yields a structural discrete choice problem in which farmers choose whether to adopt,
and if so, choose the best agrovet from which to purchase fertilizer from a potentially concentrated
group of agro-retailers.        8

    The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background and context on
our study region, and lays out the sampling strategy that was adopted for this project. Section
3 explains the data, and documents summary statistics about the various data-collection units.
Section 4 presents our main results. We put our findings in the context of a spatial model, which
is presented and calibrated in Section 5, and run policy counterfactuals in Section 6. Section 7
discusses the validity of our results outside of the study context of Northern Tanzania. Section 8
concludes with a discussion.


2     Background on fertilizer market and study regions
This study took place in the Kilimanjaro and Manyara regions9 of Northern Tanzania. The two
regions are a combined 57,000 square-kilometers (6% of the land mass of Tanzania), contain 1,183
villages, and had a population of 3.1 million in 2012 (National Bureau of Statistics, 2013). Compared
to developed countries, the quality of roads in Kilimanjaro and Manyara is very poor: for example,
the paved trunk road density is 2.2 percent in Kilimanjaro (i.e. there are 2.2 kilometers of paved
   6
     Though not directly comparable since they are at different points in the supply chain, our average ad-valorem
“travel costs” of farmers procuring fertilizer, as calculated through interviews with transport providers, turn out to
be similar to those of the intermediaries in Atkin and Donaldson (2015). Our costs, however, are calculated over a
much shorter trip. Specifically, to find the best travel-adjusted price for fertilizer, our results suggest that for the
typical village, the best option is 10km away. In Atkin and Donaldson, ad-valorem estimates are calculated based on
the cost difference of a trip to the most remote location (500 miles away) relative to the least remote location (50
miles away), which is approximately a 720km difference.
   7
     Our work is closely related to Sotelo (2016) develops a model of regional trade in agriculture and road quality
in Peru to study the impact of road and output shocks on regional welfare and crop choice. Our work differs in its
focus on local intermediaries and how their presence affects the landscape of market access.
   8
     Yi (2001) provides an influential take on the role of vertical relationships in the growth of vertical trade that is
germane to our work. Intuitively, if inputs are traded from one country to another, and then final goods are traded
back to the origin country, the role of distance is amplified by the multiple stages of production. That is, since borders
must be crossed more than once, the costs of distance are amplified by the number of times the good crosses the
border prior to consumption. Our field work has identified that economy in rural Tanzania is similar to this setting,
where inputs are sourced from larger cities, and output, if sold at all, is trade back to these same cities.
   9
     Tanzania has 31 regions in all, including 5 in Zanzibar.



                                                            5
roads per 100 square kilometers of area), 0.15 percent in Manyara, and 0.7 percent in Tanzania
overall (TanRoads and PMO-RALG, 2014), compared to 68 percent in the US and an OECD
average of 134 percent10
    The main crop grown in this area is maize. There are two growing seasons in this area: a longer,
more productive “long rains” season, which runs from March to June, and a less productive “short
rains” season from October to January. Input usage tends to be much higher in the long rains,
and some farmers decide not to plant in the short rains at all. Our main outcomes are based on
behavior in the long rains.
    As in much of Sub-Saharan Africa, production capacity of fertilizer is virtually non-existent in
Tanzania and almost all of what is used is imported via the port at Dar es Salaam (FAOSTAT Online
database, 2016; Hernandez and Torero, 2011), and then transported throughout the country over
surface roads, including to the study regions. In all of these respects, the study area is fairly similar
to other countries throughout East Africa that predominantly grow maize and import fertilizer, such
as Kenya, and perhaps a little bit better than landlocked countries such as Malawi and Uganda,
that can receive fertilizer only after it has traversed the distance between a neighboring coastal
nation’s port and their shared border, and then must travel further inland to reach farmers.


3     Data and summary statistics
To construct our sample, we first assigned every village in our sample to a market catchment area.
This was done by visiting ward offices (the ward is the lowest administrative level in Tanzania)
and asking the ward officer to list the market that people from that village frequented. We use
this market designation as the unit over which to measure the price of maize, which is commonly
transacted in such markets, We use this market information in two main ways. First, we randomly
selected markets for inclusion in the price collection from this list. Second, it was not feasible to
travel individually from every village to a particular point to measure transport costs. Instead, we
measure transport costs, requiring routes to go through the market center – we measure distances
from every village to its closest market, and from every market to the main road. A map of the
villages in our sample is included as Figures 1.
    We have four main sources of data we use in this draft: agrovet surveys, farmer surveys,
transport surveys, and maize price surveys. All were collected from January 2016 to December
2017 in Kilimanjaro and February to May 2018 in Manyara.11
  10
     Information compiled from various resources. The Roads Act, 2007 (No. 13 of 2007) defines a a trunk road as
one that is primarily (i) a national route that links two or more regional headquarters or (ii) an international through
route that links regional headquarters and another major or important city or town or major port outside Tanzania.
A regional road is a secondary national road that connects (i) a trunk and district or regional headquarters; (ii) a
regional headquarters and district headquarters.
  11
     We also collected data on maize intermediaries who buy directly from farmers (“agents”) and on larger warehouses
that buy from these agents (“stores”), as well as logbooks of transactions from stores. We do not utilize this data in
this version of the paper.




                                                           6
3.1    Agrovet surveys
We conducted a census of all agricultural input retailers (known as “agrovets” locally) in the region,
finding a total of 585 that sold either fertilizer or seeds. agrovets. We then revisited these agrovets
to conduct a longer survey which took about 2 hours to complete. Of these 585, we did surveys
with 532 of them (see Web Appendix Table A1, which reports survey compliance and attrition).
The survey asked questions about varieties of fertilizer sold, and their prices, quantities, and the
wholesale costs of acquiring stock from the distributor. The survey took care to differentiate
fertilizer types by distributor, brand, and type – thus the level of granularity should be akin to
the barcode-level. The survey also included a number of questions about costs of travel to the
distributor, as well as some background characteristics.

3.2    Farmer surveys
We conducted farmer surveys in 246 randomly selected villages in three waves. The first wave
occurred in 115 villages in Kilimanjaro in early 2016, the second wave in 97 villages in Kilimanjaro
in 2017, and the third wave in 50 villages in Manyara in 2018. The surveys included questions
on input usage and prices, transport costs and agrovet choice, maize sales, harvest output, and a
series of household and demographic questions. Though the exact questions varied from survey to
survey, the general format was very similar across rounds. The main difference across rounds was
the sampling procedure and the number of farmers enrolled per village: in round 1, households were
selected from a random walk procedure12 , while in rounds 2-3 households were pre-identified from
a village listing exercise conducted with local leaders. In Wave 1, we sampled only 5 households
per village for budget reasons, while in Waves 2-3 we selected 18 households per village. While this
differing sampling procedure could result in differential selection, we find no qualitative difference
in results from the two methods, and thus we pool all surveys together in the analysis.13

3.3    Measuring transport costs
One of the primary contributions of this work is to carefully document transport costs incurred by
farmers. We measured transportation costs in several ways. First, we collected GPS location for
every village in both the study regions,14 from which we calculated driving times and distances using
the Google API (via the statistical program R). Second, we conducted surveys of transportation
operators in every village in our sample, which were either motorbike taxis (“Boda Bodas”), or
consumer van taxis (“Dala Dalas”). In each village, we asked up to 3 operators how much it cost to
   12
      In particular, enumerators were instructed to first find a landmark. These landmarks included a pri-
mary/secondary school within the village (1st choice), local church within the village (2nd), Boda stand within
the village (3rd). Once the landmark was identified, the enumerators randomly picked a direction to begin their
fieldwork, and selected every third homestead, or the next homestead after five minutes of walking, whichever came
first.
   13
      Results disaggregated by survey method are available on request.
   14
      We cross-checked these GPS coordinates, and filled in a handful of missing values, using a dataset of postal
geocodes from www.geopostcodes.com.




                                                        7
travel to the major towns in Kilimanjaro (Arusha and Moshi), the capital city (Dar es Salaam) and
the market center. In Manyara, in addition to Arusha, Moshi and Dar es Salaam, we also asked
about trip costs and times to Babati, Dodoma, and Tanga.
    Third, enumerators recorded information on road quality and travel times as part of their field
work. To get to a market center and village from a major hub, enumerators took the standard
routes, which usually entailed travel for some distance along a major trunk road, and then turning
off to travel for some time on unpaved feeder roads and village roads. To measure travel times, field
officers recorded their GPS location at the point at which they had to turn off the main road, and
then recorded the travel time, distance, and road quality on the road to the market center associated
with the village. Once reaching the market, enumerators took a second form of transportation to
the village, recording again distance, travel time, and road quality. We use this data to correlate
costs of travel with road quality, and to estimate the percentage of roads which are paved versus
gravel or dirt (to inform later counterfactuals).

3.4   Maize prices
To measure maize prices, we visited markets post-harvest in September and October of 2017 in
Kilimanjaro and February to May of 2018 in Manyara. During these visits, enumerators sampled
up to 3 maize sellers per market to document pre- and post-harvest prices for maize during recent
seasons. These data allow us to compare prices across markets at the same point in time, though
they are not intended to be used in panel analysis.

3.5   Summary statistics on villages
A map of Kilimanjaro and Manyara is shown in Figure 1. We surveyed all villages in these regions.
Summary statistics on villages are provided in Table 1. The average village has 2,842 people (see
table notes), and is located 11.3 kilometers from the nearest market center. It takes about 40
minutes by vehicle to reach the market and a round-trip costs about $1.92 on average. The average
village is over 70 km away from a major hub, and travel there would be an almost 3 hours-long
round-trip, and cost $6. For both measures, there are many villages that are much further away
than this - the standard deviation of both is large.
    Panel B shows information on the quality of the rural roads connecting markets and villages.
Roads are about 1/3 paved, 1/3 dirt, and 1/3 gravel, and travel times according to google are fairly
slow: 30.6 km/hour on rural roads compared to 49.5 km/hour on the main roads.


4     Results
4.1   Defining remoteness
We define remoteness as proximity to major hub towns, where distributors are located. There
are a number of potential hubs, but they differ in their importance. To capture this, we weight



                                                    8
the distance to each town by the population of that town – the rationale for this is that bigger
population centers will have more distributors than smaller ones. Our measure of remoteness for
each village v therefore becomes
                                                         X dhv
                                       remotenessv =                                                 (1)
                                                          poph
                                                         h

where poph is the population of hub h and dhv is distance from village v to that hub. For interpre-
tation, we standardize this measure to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. The distribution of
this variable can be seen in Web Appendix Figure A1. The least remote areas (near major hubs)
are approximately -2 standard deviations from the mean, while the most remote are +3 standard
deviations away. The difference between these (5 standard deviations) is useful for benchmarking
differences in outcomes between the most and least remote areas (similar to the approach taken in
Atkin and Donaldson, 2015)

4.2   Calculating travel cost-adjusted prices
For each village, we assume that farmers are free to travel to any market to buy or sell, but must
incur a transportation cost, which we calibrate using information from transport surveys and google
distances. Specifically, using Google API, we calculate the route from every village to every agrovet.
This route will involve either (1) traveling only on local roads over a relatively short distance, or (2)
using local roads to connect to trunk roads. We calibrate the costs of local and trunk roads using
our transport operator surveys, and information collected by enumerators during their own travel.
We present these results in Table 2. Columns 1-3 show costs of traveling from market centers to
hub towns, which involves primarily traveling on trunk roads. We find a cost of about $0.021 per
km, or $1.20 per hour of travel. The remaining columns replicate this on rural roads, where we find
higher costs for rural travel.
   With these, we calculate a travel cost-adjusted price of fertilizer for every village as follows:

                                          rvtc = min{rj + cjv }                                      (2)
                                                 j


where rj is the price at agrovet j and cjv is the cost of traveling to an agrovet, and returning
with a bag of fertilizer from agrovet j to village v. Farmers must therefore make a round-trip
for themselves, and a one-way trip for the fertilizer itself. To calibrate these costs, we use survey
questions which asked those farmers who traveled to market about travel costs for themselves and
the fertilizer (Web Appendix Table A1). We do this for a 50 kg bag of fertilizer, the modal amount
purchased by farmers. We find that transporting a 50 kg bag of fertilizer costs about 75% as much
as transporting a person over the same distance, implying therefore that a farmer must make 2.75
trips to buy a bag (2 for himself and 0.75 for the bag).
   For maize prices, we adopt a similar approach, but instead construct the maximum travel cost-
adjusted selling price for maize:




                                                     9
                                         ptc
                                          v = max{pm − cmv }                                      (3)
                                                 m

   Here, pm is the price of maize post-harvest for market m, and cmv is the cost of traveling from
village v to market m. We use a 120 kg bag for this calculation, and assume that the cost of
transport is twice that of fertilizer (i.e. proportional to the size).
   We calculate these prices for every village-agrovet and village-market pair. We then take the
minimum input price and the maximum output price faced by each village. Our first main result
is that we find substantial heterogeneity in these measures of travel cost-adjusted prices. Figure 2
plots CDFs of village-level “best” prices of inputs and output, adjusting for travel costs, and show
tremendous heterogeneity in prices across villages. In Panel A, for maize prices, we observe that
one standard deviation in the best travel cost-adjusted selling price of maize is 15% of the mean,
and the ratio of this price between the 90th and the 10th percentile ratio is similar to about 40%
of the mean. Panel B shows the distribution of transportation cost-adjusted fertilizer prices, where
the standard deviation in travel cost-adjusted prices is 15% of the mean, and ratio of this price
between the 90th and the 10th percentile is equivalent to about 60% of the mean.

4.3     Reduced form analysis
4.3.1    Specification

From the above data sources, we are able to construct transportation costs to every village in our
sample, using either survey transport costs or Google maps. Our main empirical specification then
becomes:
                                      mvt = θremotenessv + vt                                    (4)

where mvt is a measure of market access (or related outcome) at location v in year t.
   TFor the market access measures estimated as above, we include no controls. However, for
farmer outcomes such as input adoption, it is clear that usage will depend not only on market
access but also other characteristics such as income and land suitability. Therefore, these are
estimated at the farmer level as:


                                mf vt = µremotenessv + βXf vt + f vt                             (5)

   where subscript f refers to farmer and Xfvt is a vector of other controls. These controls include a
host of characteristics from the survey, such as land ownership, income, asset ownership, education
and other demographic characteristics, as well as soil information from the FAO-GAEZ. All farmer-
level results are presented both with and without these controls.

4.3.2    Summary statistics and correlations with remoteness

Table 3 shows some statistics on demographic and background characteristics, buying and selling
of maize, production capacity and harvest output, and displays how these variables vary with



                                                     10
remoteness. From Panel A, we see a number of differences: farmers in more rural areas are less
educated, own fewer assets, have less access to finance, and earn less income from sources outside of
farming. These farmers also tend to have larger families and larger farms. These differences must
be accounted for when doing policy counterfactuals.
   Panel B shows production capacity, based on GIS data from the FAO-GAEZ database, which
provides information on counterfactual yields with and without inputs. The key concern here would
be that more remote areas are less suitable for fertilizer, for whatever reason. At the mean, the
FAO estimates that using inputs would more than quadruple yields. We do find that the yield
increase is lower in rural areas – in villages one standard deviation away from the mean, yields
using inputs are 260% of those without inputs, compared to over 300% at the mean. Comparing
the most and least remote areas (roughly from -2 to 3 standard deviations), we estimate a yield
increase of over 500% in the least remote areas compared to 200% in the most remote. Thus, while
we should expect lower usage in remote areas since returns are lower, the yield increases are still
extremely large everywhere. We control for these measures in our main regressions.
   Finally, Panel C shows harvest output from the most recent long rains. Total yields are similar
by remoteness, but yield per acre is lower in rural areas (since farm size is larger). In particular, 1
standard deviation increase in remoteness is associated with a reduction in harvest output per acre
of about 20%. This is consistent with lower input usage in rural areas, or with differences in other
factors such as soil quality.
   In conclusion, Table 3 makes clear that it is difficult to pinpoint the role of input prices on
outcomes, since access to roads is correlated with so many characteristics. Ultimately this motivates
the use of an economic model to conduct counterfactuals.

4.3.3   Access to input markets

Table 4 shows how remoteness correlates with access to input markets. We first tabulate access to
retailers over a distance that is reasonably traveled by farmers. Web Appendix Figure A2 shows
a CDF of the distance farmers travel to access inputs, conditional on purchase. We find that
approximately 60% of purchases are made within 10 km of a farmer’s village, and 80% within 20
km. We therefore show results within 10 km of a farmer’s village. Panel A shows several measures
of retailer activity in the area, including a dummy for whether there is at least one retailer within
10 km, the number of retailers within 10 km, and the minimum distance to a retailer. On each
measure, we find clear evidence of reduced access in remote villages, all significant at 1%.
   Panel B of Table 4 shows our key measure of access, travel cost-adjusted prices. We find that
one standard deviation of remoteness raises prices by about $2.3, equivalent to about 9.5% of the
mean. This implies a difference in prices of approximately 50% between the most and least remote
villages in our study sample. We then decompose this price difference into differences in the price
itself, and in the travel cost. We find that the contributions of retail prices and transportation costs
are approximately equal in their contribution toward the increase in delivered prices.
   To investigate this further, we look at agrovet pricing in Web Appendix Table A3. We note



                                                   11
that these results should be taken with some caution, since they are conditional on entry (i.e. the
agrovet location is not exogenous), and so we take these as more descriptive than definitive. Panel
A shows the gradient of distance on sales and product variety, showing little heterogeneity except
for the costs of reaching a wholesaler. In surveys, we find that nearly all agrovets travel themselves
to distributors to access inputs, and we find that these costs are higher in rural areas (naturally),
since they must travel further.
       Panel B shows the relationship on prices and markups. Note that these regressions are the
fertilizer type level (i.e. product barcode). We find some weak evidence that rural shops face
slightly higher wholesale prices (significant at only 10%) and some stronger evidence that they
charge higher retail prices. The effect is modest though statistically significant: a 1 standard
deviation increase in distances is associated with 2.5% higher prices. We then calculate markups,
inclusive of transport costs. We find no strong evidence of differential markups in rural areas – while
retail prices are higher, this is largely due to transport costs directly passing through to farmers.
From this, we conclude that much of the higher retail prices are a result of higher marginal costs
of accessing inputs.15

4.3.4      Access to output markets

Table 5 performs a similar analysis, but on the output side. As before, Panel A shows that more
remote villages are less likely to have a market within 10 km and have to travel farther to reach a
market where maize is sold. Panel B shows travel cost-adjusted prices for maize. Since there are
large seasonal price fluctuations in rural Tanzania as in much of rural Africa,16 we use a price for
the single point in time which is most relevant for farmers: immediately post-harvest. Our surveys
show that most farmers who sell do so shortly after harvest. We find that travel cost-adjusted
prices of output are lower in remote areas. As before, we decompose this into the retail price and
the travel costs, finding that while retail maize prices rise modestly, transport costs to the closest
maize market rise by $3.9 with each standard deviation in remoteness, overwhelming the increase
in price of maize.
       Finally, we show 2 other measures of price, measured at the village level: (1) we asked farmers
what the “going price” of maize was after the last harvest; (2) we collected information on sales
  15
     In Web Appendix Table A4, we conduct two robustness checks. First, we only surveyed retailers within the
regional boundaries and thus have no information on retailers in neighboring regions. While most of these boundary
areas are remote, it is nevertheless possible that there exist lower-priced retailers just over regional boundaries. Since
we miss these, we may overstate travel cost-adjusted prices. To address this, we drop all villages within 10 km of
regional boundaries – results are actually stronger. Second, while we had high survey completion rates among agrovets
(91% – see Web Appendix Table A1), we nevertheless do not have the universe of retail options. This suggests that
retail price heterogeneity is understated. However, it may affect the regression results. To address this, we conduct a
bounding exercise in Web Appendix Table A4, Panel B. In this exercise, we estimate the distribution of prices within
regions. We then assign prices in the tails of this distribution (the 10th or 90th percentile) to missing agrovets in a
way that attenuate our regression results – for example, in remote areas, we assign agrovets low prices. This exercise
lowers the coefficient marginally, but the qualitative results are unchanged.
  16
     Aggarwal, Francis and Robinson (2018) document an average price increase of about 46% over the season for
the years 2006-16 in Kisumu market in neighboring Kenya; Bergquist, Burke, and Miguel document increases in the
range of 15-30% for a sample of markets in the east African region.




                                                           12
prices for all farmers who sold maize. While this latter measure is affected by selection, we minimize
this problem by taking the average sales prices across the village. Both of these show no correlation
with distance.

4.3.5         Farmer decisions

The results so far show clear evidence of reduced market access on both input and output markets,
and of higher prices for inputs and lower (travel cost-adjusted) prices for output. These results
should imply lower input usage and maize sales in rural areas. We investigate this in Table 6,
where we present results with and without a full set of farmer controls from the surveys (Columns
2-3). In Panel A, we present indicators for using inputs as well as the quantity used, for both
seeds and fertilizer. In all specifications, these relationships are very strong (significant at 1%) and
large. We find that use of fertilizer is 9-17 percentage points lower in villages 1 standard deviation
away, and that of hybrid seeds is 5-7 percentage points lower. Since the distance between the least
and most remote regions is about 5 standard deviations, the regressions predict approximately a
minimum of 45 percentage point lower usage in the most remote villages, which translates to about
80% of the mean in the least remote areas. The effect for seeds is smaller but still evident.
         Similarly, in Panel B, we see strong evidence that sales are lower in remote areas. While the
regression predicts that 44% of farmers will sell in the semi-urban areas, this declines to only 14%
in the most remote areas. This is predominantly coming from a decline in sales to agents (since
agents are by far the most common way to sell maize), but there are declines in sales at the market
as well.
         Consistent with this, Panel C shows buying behavior. Rural farmers are more likely to buy
maize and are more likely to be net buyers of maize. Interestingly, we find a lot of heterogeneity
in net buying behavior. We find that 37% of farmers buy maize but sell none, 24% sell maize but
buy none, and only 8% buy and sell maize (the other 30% do not transact on either side of the
market). The proportion that report buying and selling is lower than in other recent work such as
Bergquist, Burke and Miguel (2018).17


5         Model
The reduced form results summarized above suggest that more remote farmers suffer from reduced
access to input retailers as well as selling opportunities. However, as other factors are also correlated
with distance, we now quantify the impact of access to input and output markets by developing a
spatial model of fertilizer adoption. In the model, we will be careful to develop a rigorous model of
retailer choice, including for reasons unrelated to trade costs, as well as allowing for other factors
that may affect adoption but not related to input access.
    17
         See Web Appendix Figures A3 and A4 for a scatter plot of several of the key outcomes.




                                                            13
5.1      Model Preliminaries
Production and Inputs

We begin the model by presenting the two technologies available to farmers, and the role of retailer
choice in (potentially) affecting farmer productivity. The production function without fertilizer is:

                                                  Yi = θei0 Kiα0 L1−α
                                                                  i
                                                                      0
                                                                                                                      (6)

Here, θei0 is baseline productivity without fertilizer for farmer i, Ki is land held by farmer i, and Li
is labor hired/used by farmer i. If the going wage rate in i is wi and the selling price of maize is
pi , holding land fixed, profits can be derived as:
                                                                        1−α0    1       1−α0
                                                                1−α0
                                                                           α   α
                                                                                    −    α0
                                   Πi0 = α0 (1 − α0 )            α0    θei0 0 pi 0 wi          Ki
                                           = θi0 πi0                                                                  (7)
                                   1−α0                     1       1−α0
                           1−α0
                                      α             α
                                                                −    α0
Here, θi0 = α0 (1−α0 )      α0    θei0 0 and πi0 = pi 0 wi                 Ki . The former term, θi0 , will be represented
by a random variable with a village-specific mean, and the latter will be calculated as a function
of observed data for farmer i and elasticities that must be estimated.
    The production function with fertilizer splits up variable inputs into labor and fertilizer, and
also provides a productivity shock, θeijv :

                                          Yi = θeijv K α L(1−α)β M (1−α)(1−β)                                         (8)

Note that we are assuming that the exponents on capital and labor may be different for the tech-
nology with fertilizer, and that farmer i will receive a productivity of fertilizer that potentially
varies by agrovet j in location v. We discuss the motivation for this assumption shortly. Writing
the delivered price of fertilizer to i from agrovet j in v as rijv , solving for the optimal labor and
fertilizer inputs, profits from adoption can be written as:

                                                                  −σ
                                                    Πi = θijv πi rijv                                                 (9)

                                      1          1−α0
                                            −β                               κ1 18
              1−α                    α            α0
where σ ≡      α (1 − β),   π i = p i 0 wi              Ki , and θijv = κ2 θeijv . Here, the profitability of fertilizer
is a function of the productivity shock, θijv , which we will assume is random and with a central
moment that is dependent on the source of the fertilizer, the (delivered) price of fertilizer itself,
rijv , and deterministic profits based on local observables and technology πi .
 18
      κ1 and κ2 are constant functions of model parameters




                                                                14
Input and Agrovet Choice

Farmers have a choice of whether to purchase fertilizer, and if so, where to purchase fertilizer, which
itself is affected by prices for fertilizer at each agrovet location as well as the travel costs to get there
and back. Suppose that the set of villages that contain an agrovet is defined as V, where the price
charged at location v ∈ V by agrovet j is rjv . The per-unit cost to the farmer i, inclusive of transport
costs, will be written as rijv = rjv τiv , where τiv is an iceberg trade cost for farmer i in traveling to
v and back. Further, we assume that θijv , is a random variable that could represent unobserved
inputs purchased at agrovet j or location v, or perhaps other networking and information that is
acquired at location v that may increase profitability. Whatever the interpretation, we assume that
θijv is distributed according to Fréchet distribution with location parameter Tjv and dispersion
parameter ε. Precisely:

                                   Pr (θijv < θ) = exp −Tjv θ−ε
                                                                             
                                                                                                        (10)

Using this distributional assumption, the unconditional distribution of profits for farmer i buying
from agrovet j in location v is written as:
                                                                  
                                                            −εσ −ε
                              Pr (Πijv < π) = exp −Tjv πiε rijv π                                       (11)

We also assume that the outside option of not buying fertilizer is random. Specifically, θi0 is
distributed Fréchet with location parameter Ti0 . Thus, the distribution of profits is written as:

                                                           ε −ε
                                                                                 
                                  Pr (Πi0 < π) = exp −Ti0 πi0 π                                         (12)

Here, we allow for the average productivity of the outside option of not buying fertilizer to vary
by village i through the location parameter Ti0 . This may reflect difficulties in using or adopting
fertilizer that are specific to a location (poor soil quality, lack of training, existing norms, etc...).
   Farmer i chooses among locations v ∈ V and agrovets j ∈ Jv at each location to find the most
profitable option. Solving the standard discrete choice problem (which is derived in the technical
appendix), the probability that farmer i buys from agrovet j at location v is written as:

                                                              −εσ
                                                     Tjv πiε rijv
                             λijv =        ε +                                   −εσ                    (13)
                                                                       Tlv0 πiε rilv
                                                 P        P
                                      Ti0 πi0        v 0 ∈V    l∈Jv0                 0



Decomposing Choice Probabilities


Note that (13) can be broken up into the probability of adoption for i, and the probability i buys




                                                          15
from j at location v conditional on buying:
                                 P         P             −εσ                                        −εσ
                                    v 0 ∈V  l∈J 0 Tlv 0 rilv 0                                 Tjv rijv
               λijv =         ε P v P                                               ·P       P              −εσ       (14)
                                                                                                 l∈Jv0 Tlv 0 rilv 0
                                                               −εσ
                          Ti0 ππi0i     + v0 ∈V l∈J 0 Tlv0 rilv  0                      v 0 ∈V
                                                         v
                         |                      {z                                  } |        λ
                                                                                                  {z                }
                                                µi                                                 ijv|adopt

                     = µi · λijv|adopt                                                                                  (15)

Conditional on buying, all i-specific variables drop out of the choice probability. Imposing the
iceberg assumption for transport costs between farmer i and location v, we can write:
                                                                −εa −εa
                                                           Tjv rjv τiv
                             λijv|adopt = P                P              −εa −εa                                       (16)
                                                    v 0 ∈V   l∈J 0 Tlv 0 rlv 0 τiv 0
                                                                       v


where εa = εσ. Since trade costs are specific to location, not agrovet, we can pull the iceberg cost
out of the sum across agrovets at each location:
                                                                 −εa −εa
                                                            Tjv rjv  τiv
                             λijv|adopt = P                 −εa P                −εa                                    (17)
                                                    v 0 ∈V τiv 0    l∈J 0 Tlv 0 rlv 0
                                                                              v


Finally, we can rearrange in the form of two probabilities: the probability of buying from some
agrovet in location v, and then conditional on v, the probability of buying at agrovet j within v.
Precisely:
                                        −εa    P                 −εa                           −εa
                                       τiv           l∈Jv   Tlv rlv                       Tjv rjv
                    λijv|adopt = P            −εa P                        −εa      ·P               −εa                (18)
                                     v 0 ∈V τiv 0        l∈Jv0       Tlv0 rlv 0          l∈Jv   Tlv rlv
                                 |                     {z                       }
                                                    λiv|adopt


To characterize this probability, we will be estimating a functional form for trade costs, the elasticity
(εa ), and then also a vector of Tlv ’s. We address each component in order.

5.2   Calibrating the Farmer’s Problem
Estimating Transport Costs through Location Choice

The adopt-location-agrovet decomposition detailed above is helpful in that for two of those stages,
we have accurate measures of the probability in question for a large portion of the random sample of
farmers. Adoption probabilities, µi , which we will use later, are measured extensively within each
village. More novel is our measurement of bilateral probabilities for choosing a particular location
to purchase from some agrovet, λiv|adopt . While farmers had a somewhat difficult time recalling the
exact agrovet they went to for inputs, in most cases they recalled the location (village) in which the
agrovet was located. We now exploit this data to estimate transport costs, as revealed by location
choices.
   To begin, within a location v, we can construct the following index that measures the “return”


                                                                16
of buying inputs at this location, not including the costs of transport:
                                                   X
                                                               −εa
                                            φv =          Tlv rlv                                (19)
                                                   l∈Jv


Essentially, this is similar to a transformation of an inverse price index, but not accounting for
trade costs. These φv ’s are integrated into the choice probability for location v as follows:
                                                            −εa
                                                          τiv   φv
                                    λiv|adopt = P               −εa                              (20)
                                                       v 0 ∈V τiv 0 φv 0

To estimate equation (20), we need a dataset that identifies when each farmer i chooses location
v to purchase fertilizer. Thus, defining I as the set of farmers who adopt adoption, and V as the
set of locations with an agrovet, we construct a IXV dataset of bilateral visit indicators. There
will be many zeros in this dataset. For each bilateral combination, we will also measure distance
between the farmer’s village and the potential purchase location.
   Exponentiating the village share equation, and re-writing log (φv ) into a location v fixed effect,
dv , we can write:

                                                  exp (dv − εa log (τiv ))
                            λiv|adopt = P                                                        (21)
                                              v 0 ∈V exp (dv 0 − εa log (τiv 0 ))

As the main objective from this section is to assess the role of trade costs in agrovet choice (and
consequently, adoption), we need to specify a functional form for trade costs, τiv . As a starting
point, we will estimate a simple linear relationship between the elasticity adjusted log trade cost
and distance, with dummy variables for whether location v is outside the village’s urban or rural
market-catchment areas:

                                    −εa log (τiv ) = βdist distiv

Here, distiv is the kilometer distance between farmer i and location v.
   To allow for a potentially non-linear cost of travel for farmers by distance (for example, if
                                                                                  h , which are equal
required technologies differ at longer distance), we will also use distance bins Div
to one if the distance between i and v is in bin h, and zero otherwise. These will be used as the
primary specification as follows:
                                                           X
                                                                       h
                                        −εa log (τiv ) =           βh Div                        (22)
                                                               h

With the distance bins, the multinomial logit is written as:

                                                                h
                                                        P         
                                              exp dv + h βh Div
                            λiv|adopt   =P                  P       h
                                                                                                (23)
                                          v 0 ∈V exp dv 0 +  h βh Div 0




                                                          17
These cost estimates will include more than just the monetary costs of travel - there may be other
hassle/search costs associated with fertilizer purchases, and the distance bins will absorb these
aspects of the farmer decision problem as well.
       Equation (23) can be estimated by McFadden’s alternative-specific conditional logit. The results
from doing so are presented in Table 7. In the first column, we present the linear specification
of distance. Assuming εa ≈ 5 (which will be supported by later results), the results suggest that
iceberg transport costs for fertilizer are 3.4% ad-valorem per kilometer. As technologies may change
discretely depending on the distance to each agrovet (walking short distances, taking transit for
long distances), our preferred specification using distance bins is presented in column 2 of Table
7. The estimates suggest costly travel for farmers acquiring fertilizer. To interpret the coefficients,
we take two approaches. In the first, we can compare two locations with the same “return” from
fertilizer, dv , and then focus on the reduction in probability if one is (0,5] km way rather than 0 km
away (essentially in the same village). In this case, the probability that one chooses the location
(0,5] km away compared to 0km away (in the home village) for idiosyncratic reasons that overcome
trade costs is 0.25.19
       We can also interpret the results as log changes in trade costs via:

                                                              1 X     h
                                             log (τiv ) = −       βh Div                          (24)
                                                              εa
                                                                   h

Dividing the coefficient estimates by εa give us the log change in trade costs. Given the iceberg
assumption, this is also interpreted as the log change in the delivered price. Thus, at the central
estimate of εa ≈ 5, the comparison is equivalent to a 6.4% ad-valorem trade cost per km (measured
at 5km). Using the upper bound of each bin as a conservative measure to calculate ad-valorem
trade costs, the ad-valorem equivalent rises modestly over the next few bins - for example, choosing
an agrovet 15-20km away, the approximate ad-valorem equivalent trade cost evaluated at the upper
cutoff is 7.2% per km.
       Finally, we repeat the exercise from the reduced form section of the paper and calculate best
trade-cost-adjusted-prices for agrovets for all villages in the region, using the estimates of iceberg
costs as described above. These results are presented in Figure 3. Here, there is significantly more
heterogeneity in best trade cost adjusted prices for fertilizer, which suggests sizable non-pecuniary
costs of traveling to acquire fertilizer.

Calibrating Non-price Attributes of Each Agrovet

In the conditional multinomial logit used above, if enough farmers were sampled such that every
location with an agrovet was chosen, it would be possible to estimate precisely a value of φv for each
  19
       This is calculated precisely by calculating the ratio of probabilities:
                                           λ0−5km   exp (dv − 1.38)
                                                  =                 = 0.25
                                            λ0km     exp (dv − 0)




                                                              18
location (up to the usual normalization), and use this in resulting counterfactuals. Unfortunately,
funding was not sufficient to survey such a large sample, and thus, to recover all non-price attributes
of all locations that contain an agrovet, we must employ a combination of agrovet revenue shares
from our agrovet survey, and the spatial distribution of fertilizer expenditures from the farmer
survey.
       To derive a market-clearing condition that we intend to calibrate, we start from an equation
that summarizes expected agrovet sales as aggregated from spatial farmer-level demand. Defining
expected agrovet sales at j in v as E [vjv ], we have:
                                                  X
                                   E [vjv ] =            Li µi λijv|adopt E [Fi |adopt at jv]                              (25)
                                                     i

where E [Fi |adopt at jv] is expected fertilizer expenditures by i , conditional on adopting at jv,
and Li is the village population to use as weights in the demand equation. Noting that µi =
   E[Fi ]
E[Fi |adopt] ,   which is the ratio of the unconditional expected expenditures on fertilizer to the expected
expenditures on fertilizer, given adoption, we can write:
                                                 X                     E [Fi |adopt at jv]
                              E [vjv ] =              Li λijv|adopt                        E [Fi ]                         (26)
                                                                          E [Fi |adopt]
                                                 i

                                                                                                           E[Fi |adopt at jv]
Using the properties of the Fréchet distribution, it is straightforward to show that                         E[Fi |adopt]      =
1; that is, the expected expenditures conditional on adoption anywhere is the same as the expected
expenditures at some j, conditional on choosing j.20 Thus, we have:
                                                              X
                                                 E [vjv ] =        λijv|adopt E [Fi ]                                      (27)
                                                               i

Imposing the definition of λijv|adopt :

                                                                      −εa −εa
                                                                                             !
                                         X                       Tjv τiv  rjv
                            E [vjv ] =           Li      P       P              −εa −εa          E [Fi ]                   (28)
                                             i            v 0 ∈V   l∈J 0 Tlv 0 τiv 0 rlv 0
                                                                            v


Finally, we can combine the agrovet-specific non-price attributes and the price into an “agrovet-
                    −εa
effect” (ηjv ≡ Tjv rjv  ), and also impose the specification for transportation costs, to get:
                                                                                          !
                                                                        h η
                                                                 P        
                                   X                     exp − h βh Div      jv
                      E [vjv ] =        Li       P       P             P        h
                                                                                           E [Fi ]                        (29)
                                    i             v 0 ∈V   l∈J 0 exp −
                                                                   v     h βh Div 0 ηlv 0


To implement this equation, we use observed agrovet fertilizer revenues for each agrovet to proxy
for E [vjv ], and village-level fertilizer expenditures from the farmer’s survey to proxy for E [Fi ]. That
is, for this equation, we take i to represent villages and sum up expenditures within each village.
       However, we again run into an number of issues where our farmer survey was not large enough
  20
       See technical appendix for a proof




                                                                       19
to survey farmers from every village in the region, and the population of farmers within each
village. To this end, there are two issues to consider. First, within each village, while we surveyed
approximately 16 maize farmers per village, in some villages zero or full adoption is reported. In
reality, this may be accurate, or may be biased toward the bounds by a small sample. Further,
village adoption at the bounds will also complicate the calibration of the overall adoption decision
(which we describe in a moment). To facilitate a feasible calibration that is consistently applied
across market clearing conditions and the adoption decision, we first winsorize the village adoption
data to fall between 0.025 and 0.975.21 Then, for those villages that report zero adoption in the
sample, we assign a small value of E [Fi ] that is calculated via the model using the reported land
holdings of the village in the sample, the winsorized adoption share (0.025), and then the 1st
percentile
        value
                of fertilizer expenditures per acre of land across the entire sample of farmers who
         Fi    22
adopt, Ki     .
                  1
       Focusing on the sampling of villages, if we assume that the farmer sample captures the entire
geography of demand, there will exist agrovets in other locations that appear more remote than
they actually are since no farmers were surveyed in that location. This will cause a bias in estimates
of ηjv ’s by assigning a large value for agrovet locations without any farmers surveyed to make-up for
the incorrectly assigned remoteness. At present, the only solution to this problem is to assume that
all villages within a market-catchment area share the same characteristics as the (one) surveyed
village in that area. Since village selection within a market catchment area was random, this should
only add random measurement error to the village i observables that are used in the calibration.
       Two other empirical issues to consider are more straightforward. Since agrovet fertilizer revenues
and farmer expenditures are from different surveys, and the latter aggregated from a farmer level
sample, we normalize each to sum to one. After doing so, we can recover ηjv by solving the non-
linear system of equations formed using J agrovets and their revenue shares, as written in (29),
                                                       23 Then, after recovering the η ’s, we
                                        P P
under the normalizing assumption that     v  j ηjv = 1.                                 jv
                                                                              −εa
calibrate the value of εa using the following regression (based on ηjv = Tjv rjv  ):

                             log(ηjv ) = −εa log(rjv ) + βexperjv + district + ujv                                      (30)
                                                         |          {z           }
                                                                        log(Tjv )


where log(Tjv ) will be recovered as the components of the regression not equal to the elasticity-
adjusted log agrovet price. To account for other local factors that may be correlated with prices
and location quality, we include agrovet-level experience at that location, experiv , and district fixed
effects. Running this regression, instrumenting for current agrovet prices with one-year lagged
  21
     This effectively means that villages with zero adoption in the sample are assigned a level of adoption 50% lower
than the lowest observed (positive) adoption share in the sample. Or, alternatively, that we would need to double
the within-village sample size to find one farmer who adopts.                                               
  22                                                                                                               Fi
       Precisely, imputed (small) values for expected fertilizer expenditures are calculated by: E [Fi ] = 0.025   Ki
                                                                                                                            · Ki
                                                                                                                        1
  23
    This normalizing assumption is required since the probabilities within the sum in equation (29) are homogeneous
degree zero in η’s.




                                                              20
prices, yields an estimate of εa = 5.14.24

Calibrating Adoption

For the final part of the farmers problem, we work to recover the (relative) productivity of not
using fertilizer for each village, Ti0 . To begin, recall that the probability of adoption is written as:
                                                       P          P        −εa −εa
                                                         v 0 ∈V      Tlv0 τiv
                                                                       l∈Jv0  0 rlv 0
                                  µi =                   ε                                                                   (31)
                                                       πi0     P     P                −εa −εa
                                         Φi0 Ti0       πi     + v0 ∈V l∈J 0 Tlv0 τiv   0 rlv 0
                                                                                     v

                            ε                                                                          
                                          ε
where Φi0 = Ti0        πi0
                       πi         = Ti0 pi p wiεw εp = ε              α−α0
                                                                       αα0       and εw = ε β 1−α
                                                                                               α −
                                                                                                     1−α0
                                                                                                      α0        . Using the imputed
adoption shares for each village (as described in the preceding section), we recover Φi0 s by inverting
equation (31).
       Beyond calibrating the term related to non-adoption, Φi0 , the elasticities of adoption with re-
spect to price and wages will depend on the values of the parameters of the Cobb-Douglas production
functions with and without fertilizer. For assessing basic input counterfactuals and quantifying the
impact of remoteness on adoption, these production function estimates are not required. However,
they will be required for mark-up calculations to calibrate the agrovet pricing equilibrium; specif-
ically, separating the substitution elasticity εa from the native distribution parameter ε. In the
appendix, we detail a simple estimator for maize production with and without fertilizer, and using
the Tanzanian LSMS, produce estimates for α (0.431) and α0 (0.570). Also using the LSMS, we
use reported wages and labor and fertilizer expenditures to calculate the share of labor in variable
factors; β (0.75). Using these estimates, it is straightforward to calculate that ε=14.96. While this
may seem high, this essentially means that there is little idiosyncratic variation in quality-adjusted
prices at each agrovet, around the Tjv ’s. Practically, farmers are choosing the lowest quality ad-
justed price for each agrovet, with minimal other variation that distracts from prices, quality, and
transport costs.

Agrovet Pricing and Markups

In the farmers problem, adoption was a function of a quality-adjusted delivered price for fertilizer
at each agrovet option, as well as other terms that represent the relative incentives to abstain from
using fertilizer. When we evaluate various trade shocks, we could do so while holding agrovet prices
fixed. However, while this might be fine for local shocks, for a larger trade shock, such as a roads
program, allowing for retail prices and mark-ups to change is crucial for a realistic counterfactual.
We now derive the pricing problem for agrovets, and describe the calibration for mark-ups (which
is similar to Berry, 1994).
  24
    The first stage F-statistic for weak instruments is 304.147, and the Wu-Hausman test statistic for endogeneity is
0.001 (p-value 0.981), suggesting this IV approach is sound.




                                                                          21
    As is well-known, the first order condition for an oligopolist is a mark-up over marginal cost:

                                                              εdjv
                                                    rjv =              cjv
                                                            εdjv + 1

where cjv is the marginal cost for agrovet j in location v, and εdjv is the elasticity of agrovet j
demand with respect to it’s own price. Defining εvjv as the elasticity of revenue with respect to its
own price, we have:

                                                            εvjv − 1
                                                    rjv =            cjv                                   (32)
                                                               εvjv

                      λijv|adopt E[Fi ]
Defining sijv =   P
                       λi0 jv|adopt E[Fi0 ]   as the expenditure share on i within jv, in the technical appendix
                  i0
we derive the following:

                                                        ε−1 X
                                          εv = −εa +       εa sijv λijv
                                                         ε
                                                                       i

   This elasticity equation provides clear intuition regarding the spatial distribution of demand,
                                             P
market power and mark-ups. For each firm, i sijv = 1, and thus, variation in mark-ups depends
on the unconditional probability of a farmer from village i choosing agrovet j in village v. When
firms are “small” within the context of the market, λijv ≈ 0 for all i and the mark-up is pinned
down by the substitution across agrovets through the elasticity, εa .
    Using this elasticity formula calculated for each agrovet, we can then solve for the revealed
marginal cost of selling fertilizer by using the mark-up equation. The predicted markups have a
mean of 0.2164 (median = 0.2018), which while lower is not remarkably different from the measured
mark-ups in the reduced form (mean = 13%)


6     Counterfactuals
In this section, we use the calibrated and estimated parameters to evaluate a number of counter-
factuals on input and output market access. To solve for the counterfactuals, we simply solve for a
new vector of fertilizer prices that solves the first order conditions in (32), while taking into account
equilibrium changes in the farmers problem in response to new agrovet prices and/or trade costs.

6.1   Experiments on Input Access
We begin by focusing on the effects of local access to fertilizer on adoption decisions. A general
hypothesis that we have developed in the paper is that farmers are likely disadvantaged if agrovets
are not in close proximity. While a number of villages have an agrovet at that location, many do
not, and in some cases have to travel non-trivial distances to acquire fertilizer and other inputs.
We study these issues in two ways: reduction in transport costs, and effects of agrovet entry.



                                                               22
Transportation Costs

To study the role of access to inputs using a realistic counterfactual, we appeal to Casaburi, Glen-
nerster and Suri (2013) and evaluate the effects of a 50% reduction in iceberg costs through a
hypothetical roads improvement program. Such a cost reduction can also be motivated by local
speeds on trunk roads in Kilimanjaro being approximately 50% lower than US speed (according
to Google Maps). The results of this counterfactual in terms of adoption by each village are dis-
played in the top-left panel of Figure 4. The bottom left panel reports the effects on log fertilizer
expenditures within each village. For clarity, we have grouped villages into 20 equally sized bins
of standardized remoteness, and the points in the Figure represent average adoption within these
groups. For interpretation, we have also plotted lines of best fit when regressing baseline or coun-
terfactual adoption (or expenditures) on remoteness. For these regressions, we use the raw village
data rather than binned.
   In the top left panel, we find a large adoption effect of 28pp, or approximately twice baseline.
This counterfactual alone accounts for 18% of the adoption-remoteness relationship at baseline.
The results for expenditures are even more pronounced, where expenditures rise approximately
1.35 log points, though it is important to keep in mind that for many villages we are moving from
an extremely low base. Nevertheless, the log-expenditure-remoteness gradient is cut in half by this
counterfactual. Thus, we conclude that holding local factors fixed, access to input markets has
a large effect on adoption levels, and contributes substantially to the reduced adoption levels in
remote areas.
   Also on the input side, we evaluate how the costs for retailers to source inputs from distrib-
utors affects the adoption decision. Through our detailed agrovet surveys, as summarized in the
reduced form, we document that the costs of sourcing inputs from distributors rises significantly
with distance from Moshi. So, in the second counterfactual, we subsidize this cost by 50%. The
effects of this counterfactual are presented in the top-right panel of Figure 4. Here, adoption rises
by about 1pp, or 4.4%, and yields a 4% reduction in the remoteness-adoption gradient. Thus,
although effects on levels are modest, the effect of this subsidy on the remoteness gradient, despite
any absorption by mark-ups, is non-trivial.

Entry

An overarching question throughout the paper has been why agrovet access is worse in rural areas,
and in particular, why agrovets enter intensely in other areas. While we do not present an empirical
model of entry (for example, as in Seim, 2006), we do run a simple counterfactual to examine
profitability of entry and any corresponding effects on adoption. Specifically, we force a “median”
agrovet (as defined by Tjv and marginal cost, within a district) to enter every village in the sample
(one at a time, not simultaneously), and then measure the effects of that singular entry on adoption,
and also measure the profitability of the entrant after entry. We do this for every village in the
dataset, and then plot in the top panel of Figure 5 aggregate adoption (after entry) and entrant
profits as a function of distance to the village in which the entry took place. Very clearly, profits


                                                 23
are higher when entering less remote villages, though adoption effects are also higher when entering
the more remote villages. The former relationship is particularly strong, where a one standard
deviation increase in remoteness reduces the profitability of hypothetical entry by 0.35 log points.
Thus while access to agrovets in remote areas would improve adoption more so than entering less-
remote areas, the profitability analysis supports the argument that this lack of entry in remote
areas is logical.

6.2    Experiments in Output Access
Also summarized in the reduced form, more remote villages tend to travel farther to reach their
primary market, and these travel costs can reduce the margin available to selling their maize
harvest. Further, in the reduced form, the optimally chosen “best” travel-cost adjusted selling
prices are negatively correlated with remoteness. Subject to a number of caveats described below,
we now examine both margins on the output side and their effects on adoption.
   First, as in the reduced form exercises, we assume as that farmers optimally choose the best
market to sell, subject to the measured/estimated costs of transportation from village to village.
We measure the baseline best net-selling price, and then recalculate this best net-selling price after
reducing transportation costs by 50%. With the baselineand counterfactual net selling price, the
                                                                εp
shock that is relevant to the model for each farmer is Φi0 ppi0
                                                             ic
                                                                   , where the ratio of counterfactual
prices pic to baseline output prices pi0 is interacted with the original calibrated parameter and raised
to the price-elasticity εp . The results of this counterfactual shock are presented in the bottom left
panel of Figure 5. Here, we see an adoption-remoteness gradient that is cut by a similar amount
to the input market counterfactuals, and an adoption effect that is about 0.2, or 65%. Thus, this
counterfactual has a lower effect on adoption when compared with a 50% cut in farmer-retailer
transport costs, but a similar effect on the gradient. However, care must be taken in comparing the
two. In the case of the cut in farmer-retailer transport costs, the transport cost cut is interacted
with prices and calibrated agrovet quality terms, which adds noise to the shock. That is, while
a farmer might be more likely to travel to any agrovet, the transport shock is not concentrated
on the agrovet that is closest or that the farmer will necessarily choose. In contrast, the best net
selling price is determined by a simple calculation of the maximum net price, with no probability
of choosing different option. Thus, the noise in the farmer-retailer transport shock as it relates to
distance will attenuate its effect on the gradient, though still provide a sizable effect on adoption.
   Keeping in mind the same caveat for our final counterfactual, we now assume that farmers
sell at their closest market, and experience a 50% reduction in iceberg costs to that market, as
estimated by the agrovet choice problem. That is, the farmer must ship τim units of maize to the
market to effectively sell one unit. Thus the transport-adjusted selling price that we use for each
village above when calibrating adoption decisions is equal to pi = pm /τim , where pi is net selling
price to farmer i and pm is the price at the primary market for that village. To examine the impact
of output market access on adoption, we now run an experiment cutting the iceberg costs to reach
output markets by 50%. The results from this counterfactual are presented in the bottom-right



                                                   24
panel of Figure 5. Here, adoption almost doubles, and the adoption-remoteness gradient falls by
about 30%.
         Overall, access to output markets appears to be an important component of the input adoption
decision, and these effects deserve more detailed attention in follow-up work that more rigorously
documents the movement of maize from the plot to the market and beyond.


7         External validity
While our data collection spans a large portion of Northern Tanzania, our datais still limited to
only one region in one country. Do our results generalize? While we cannot provide a definitive
answer, we provide some suggestive evidence in this section.

7.1        Price Dispersion
To address this, we assembled five secondary datasets25 across 1,512 locations26 in 56 African
countries. We compare this to a small dataset we assembled between March and April 2016 with
251 retailers of various sorts (shops, agro-input dealers, and maize traders) in 82 markets in the
Kilimanjaro region.27 To quantify price dispersion, we first decompose variation in spatial prices
by running the following regression:

                                          log(pmcjt ) = γc + γj + γt + mjt                                            (33)

where pmjt (log) prices in market m for product j at time t in country c, and the γ terms are
country, product, and time fixed effects. We calculate the standard deviation of the resulting
residual. Results are reported in Web Appendix Table A5. In the secondary datasets, the standard
deviation is 0.45 for all products, 0.34 for maize, and 0.12 for fertilizer; in our Tanzania data,
the figures are 0.22, 0.14, and 0.09. The somewhat lower standard deviation in our data could be
indicative of reduced measurement error, or that prices vary less within the geographic concentrated
area of Kilimanjaro. Nevertheless, price dispersion is substantial within Kilimanjaro as well.
         We also follow the literature,28 to run dyadic regressions to look at price gaps, as follows:
    25
      We include the following datasets: (1) prices of 6 staple crops in 41 major market centers in 8 East African
countries from 1997-2015, collected by RATIN; (2) prices of 25 commodities from 276 markets in 53 countries in from
2013-2015, collected by Africafoodprices.io; (3) prices of 4 major varieties of fertilizer (Urea, DAP, CAN, and NPK
complex 17-17-17) in 129 markets in 7 East African countries collected by AMITSA; (4) prices of 5 major varieties
of fertilizer (Urea, CAN, DAP, and NPK 17 17 17) in 18 countries from 2010-16 in Africafertilizer.org; and (5) prices
of a number of commodities in 38 countries from 1992-2016 collected by the WFP.
   26
      These are not necessarily all unique locations. Though we have cleaned these datasets, there are some misspellings,
different names for the same markets, and also differing levels of granularity in the datasets.
   27
      To enroll participants, we visited each market and selected several types of retailers for project inclusion, including
fertilizer retailers (“agrovets”), maize sellers, and retail shops. Each respondent was called once per month and asked
about current retail and wholesale prices for each item in a pre-selected list of standardized goods (e.g., 200 ml box
of Azam juice). Respondents were compensated for participation by mobile money transfer.
   28
      See Engel and Rogers (1996). In addition, see papers on the effect of cell phones on price dispersion, for example
Aker (2010), Aker and Fafchamps (2015), and Jensen (2007).




                                                             25
                       log(| pmjt − pm0 jt |) = θ log(cmm0 ) + γm + γm0 + γj + mm0 jt                            (34)

    where pmjt − pm0 jt is the price gap between markets m and m0 and cmm0 is the cost of transport
between markets.29 Results are presented in Web Appendix Table A6. For each dyad, we regress
the absolute difference in log prices on two measures of distance: (1) kilometers between locations in
Columns 1, 4, and 7, and (2) driving time between locations in Columns 2, 5, and 8 (both calculated
via Google Maps API). We cluster standard errors by both the destination and origin market. In
each of the secondary datasets, we find significant, positive coefficients, suggesting that price gaps
are larger between more distant markets. The coefficients are economically meaningful: a doubling
of travel costs would increase price gaps by about 1-3% in the secondary datasets. In Tanzania,
we find that doubling distances would increase price gaps by a similar amount. Finally, we can use
this data to provide some descriptive evidence on road upgrading. We conjecture that price gaps
should respond to the time it takes to travel from point to point, and not the geographic distance
(since the time and other costs of traveling to sell items should be what is important). To examine
this, we regress price gaps on both distance and duration in Columns 3, 6, and 9. Consistent with
priors, we find that duration is significant, whereas distance is not – which suggests that improving
road quality would reduce these gaps.

7.2    Fertilizer adoption
In Web Appendix Table A7, we assembled data from the World Bank LSMS-ISA household panel
surveys for Ethiopia, Niger, Nigeria, Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda, to study how remoteness
affects fertilizer adoption. In the LSMS, measures of remoteness include distance to the main
market, and distance to a population center. Using both measures of remoteness, we find a negative
association between remoteness and technology adoption.


8     Conclusion
In this paper we collect detailed data on transportation costs, input and output prices, and the
intensive and extensive margins of input purchases and output sales from market actors across the
entirety of the supply chains for maize and fertilizer in all 1,183 villages in the Kilimanjaro and
Manyara regions of Northern Tanzania. This data enables us to document large heterogeneity in
market access, and study its implications for prices and for market participation. We find that
there is large variation in prices, and that the most remote villages face prices substantially higher
than the least remote (equivalent to about 40% of the mean). The rates and magnitudes of fertilizer
use and maize sales also display a large and significant distance gradient. Counterfactuals on the
input and output sides suggest an important role for lowering access barriers on the input side for
reducing this gradient, and a more qualified one for those on the output side.
  29
     These regressions are motivated by an assumption of free entry where an arbitrageur will enter if | (pm − pm0 ) |≥
cmm0 . While we know that free entry is not realistic in this context, we reproduce these results for comparability.



                                                          26
   The results of these counterfactuals lead directly to the question of policy implications. Many
African countries have experimented with input subsidies (some intermittently, and some more
consistently), and these have had large adoption and usage effects by directly lowering the delivered
price of fertilizer even though the transport cost may have stayed unaffected. However, most
farmers fail to graduate out of the subsidy for a host of reasons, potentially including the fact that
the market access issues remain unresolved. Therefore, policies that lower fertilizer prices through
reducing transport costs can potentially have lasting effects, such as improving transportation
linkages between markets and villages, and also between urban centers and villages. Initiatives to
organize farmers into cooperative groups that enable them to defray the total costs of transportation
over a large number of buyers may also be helpful.




                                                  27
References
 [1] Adukia, Anjali, Sam Asher, and Paul Novosad (2016). “Educational Investment Responses to
        Economic Opportunity: Evidence from Indian Road Construction.” Unpublished.
 [2] Aggarwal, Shilpa (2018a). “Do Rural Roads Create Pathways out of Poverty? Evidence from
        India.” Journal of Development Economics 133: 375-395.
 [3] Aggarwal, Shilpa (2018b). ”The Long Road to Health: Healthcare Utilization Impacts of a
        Road Pavement Policy in Rural India.” Unpublished
 [4] Aggarwal, Shilpa, Eilin Francis, and Jonathan Robinson (2018) “Grain Today, Gain Tomorrow:
        Evidence from a Storage Experiment with Savings Clubs in Kenya,” Journal of Development
        Economics 134: 1-15.
 [5] Alder, Simon (2017). “Chinese Roads in India: The Effect of Transport Infrastructure on
        Economic Development.” Unpublished.
 [6] Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis (2016). “The Welfare Effects of Transportation Infrastructure
        Improvements.” Unpublished.
 [7] Asher, Sam and Paul Novosad (2016). “Market Access and Structural Transformation: Evi-
        dence from Rural Roads in India.” Unpublished.
 [8] Asturias, Jose, Manuel Garcia-Santana, and Roberto Ramos (2017). ”Competition and the
        welfare gains from transportation infrastructure: Evidence from the Golden Quadrilateral
        of India.” Unpublished.
 [9] Atkin, David and David Donaldson (2015). “Who’s Getting Globalized? The Size and Impli-
        cations of Intra-National Trade Costs.” NBER Working Paper No. 21439
[10] Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Nancy Qian (2012). “On the Road: Access to Transporta-
        tion Infrastructure and Economic Growth in China,” Unpublished.
[11] Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry (2013). “Profitability of
        Fertilizer: Experimental Evidence from Female Rice Farmers in Mali.” American Economic
        Review 103 (3): 381-86.
[12] Bergquist, Lauren (2017). “Pass-Through, Competition, and Entry in Agricultural Markets:
        Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” Unpublished.
[13] Bergquist, Lauren, Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel (2017). “Selling Low and Buying High:
        an Arbitrage Puzzle in Kenyan Villages.” Unpublished.
[14] Berry, Steven (1994). “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation.” RAND
        Journal of Economics 25 (2): 242-262.
[15] Bird, Julia and Stephane Straub (2014). “The Brasilia experiment: road access and the spatial
        pattern of long-term local development in Brazil.” Unpublished.




                                                28
[16] Casaburi, Lorenzo and Tristan Reed (2017). “Competition in Agricultural Markets: An Ex-
        perimental Approach.” Unpublished
[17] Chatterjee, Shoumitro (2018). “Market Power and Spatial Competition in Rural India.” Un-
        published.
[18] Costinot, Arnaud and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (2014). “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quanti-
        fying the Consequences of Globalization.” In Handbook of International Economics, Volume
        4, Chapter 4. Editors: Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff. Elsevier.
[19] Dhingra, Swati and Silvana Tenreyro (2017). “Piggy-Back Exporting, Intermediation, and the
        Distributional Gains from Trade in Agricultural Markets.” Unpublished.
[20] Donaldson, David (2015). “The Gains from Market Integration.” Annual Review of Economics
        7: 619-647.
[21] Donaldson, David (2018) “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the impact of transportation
        infrastructure.” American Economic Review 108 (4-5):899-934.
[22] Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson (2008). ”How high are rates of return
        to fertilizer? Evidence from field experiments in Kenya.” American Economic Review 98
        (2): 482-488.
[23] Eaton Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002). “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Economet-
        rica 70: 1741–1779
[24] Gertler, Paul, Tadeja Gracner, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, and Alex Rothenberg (2014). “Road
        Quality and Local Economic Activity: Evidence from Indonesia’s Highways.” Unpublished.
[25] Ghani, Ejaz, Arti G. Goswami, and William R. Kerr (2016). “Highway to success: The impact
        of the Golden Quadrilateral project for the location and performance of Indian manufac-
        turing.” Economic Journal 126 (591): 317-357.
[26] Hernandez, Manuel and Maximo Torero (2011). “Fertilizer Market Situation. Market Struc-
        ture, Consumption and Trade Patterns, and Pricing Behavior.” International Food Policy
        Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington, DC, USA.
[27] Khanna, Gaurav (2016). “The Road Oft Taken: The Route to Spatial Development.” Unpub-
        lished.
[28] Minten, Bart, Bethlehem Koru and David Stifel (2013), “The last mile(s) in modern input
        distribution: Pricing, profitability, and adoption”, Agricultural Economics, Vol 44, pp. 629-
        646
[29] Seim, Katja (2006), “An Empirical Model of Firm Entry with Endogenous Product-Type
        Choices”, The RAND Journal of Economics, 37-3, pp 619-640
[30] Sotelo, Sebastian (2018). “Domestic Trade Frictions and Agriculture.” Unpublished.
[31] Storeygard, Adam (2016). “Farther on down the Road: Transport costs, trade and urban
        growth in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Review of Economic Studies 83 (3): 1263-1295.


                                                 29
[32] Suri, Tavneet (2011). “Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption.” Econo-
        metrica 79 (1): 159-209
[33] World Bank (2008). World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development. Washing-
        ton, DC: World Bank.
[34] World Bank (2010). “Africa’s Infrastructure: A time for Transformation.” Africa Development
        Forum. Washington, DC.
[35] World Bank (2017). “Enabling the Business of Agriculture 2017.” Washington, DC: World
        Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1021-3. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0
        IGO
[36] Yi, Kei-Mu (2003). “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?” Journal
        of Political Economy 111 (1): 52-102.


A     Deriving farmer profits, revenues, and input expenditures
The production function under basic technology is:

                                        Yi = θei0 Kiα L1−α
                                                       i                                          (35)

Here, θei0 is baseline productivity without technology for farmer i, Ki is land held by farmer i (which
is assumed to be fixed), and Li is labor hired/used by farmer i. Farmers who choose the baseline
technology maximize the following profit function:
                                        n                          o
                               Πi0 = max pi θei0 Kiα L1−α
                                                      i   − wi L i                                (36)
                                          Li


where pi is the output price and wi is the local wage. The first-order condition with respect to
labor is written as:

                                    (1 − α)pi θei0 Kiα L−α
                                                        i  = wi                                   (37)

Multiplying both sides of the first order condition by Li , it is straightforward to show that expen-
ditures on labor are linked to revenues (Ri0 ) and profits (Πi0 ) by

                           wi Li = (1 − α)pi θei0 Kiα L1−α
                                                       i   = (1 − α)Ri0                           (38)

and substituting into the profit function, we have:

                                          Πi0 = αRi
                                                 1−α
                                       ⇒ wi Li =     Πi0
                                                  α




                                                  30
Thus, labor expenditures are proportional to profits and revenues, a feature that will prove con-
venient when aggregating the model. Explicitly solving for labor in the first order condition, and
substituting into the profit function, we have:
                                                                    1    1        1−α0
                                                           1−α0
                                                                     α   α
                                                                              −    α0
                             Πi0 = α0 (1 − α0 )             α0    θei00 pi 0 wi          Ki
                                       = θi0 πi0                                                                     (39)

                                                       1                     1         1−α0
                                              1−α0
                                                        α             α
                                                                                   −    α0
Here, we have defined θi0 = α0 (1 − α0 )       α0    θei00 and πi0 = pi 0 wi                  Ki . We return to these two
terms momentarily when characterizing the adoption decision.
   The production function with fertilizer splits variable inputs into labor and acquired fertilizer,
Xijv , and also provides a productivity shock, θeijv , which may vary by the agrovet j location v pair
at which the fertilizer is purchased. Precisely, production is written as:

                                                 (1−α)β (1−α)(1−β)
                                 Yi = θeijv Kiα Lijv   Xijv                                                          (40)

The profit maximization problem when using fertilizer is written as:

                                               (1−α)β (1−α)(1−β)
                  Πi0 =      max pi θeijv Kiα Lijv   Fijv        − wi Lijv − rijv Fijv                               (41)
                            Li ,Xijv


Since technology is Cobb-Douglas, including within variable inputs, similar results from above apply
here. That is, writing expenditures on variable inputs as cijv Mijv , where cijv is the unit cost of a
bundle of variable inputs Mijv , it is easily shown that

                                                  (1−α)β (1−α)(1−β)
                 cijv Mijv = (1 − α)pi θeijv Kiα Lijv   Fijv        = (1 − α)Rijv                                    (42)

and

                                                Πijv = αRijv
                                                       1−α
                                         ⇒ cijv Mijv =       Πijv
                                                        α

Further, since labor and fertilizer have β and 1−β share in variable inputs, respectively, expenditures
on each input are written as:

                                                       1−α
                                        wi Lijv = β          Πijv
                                                         α
                                                             1−α
                                       rijv Fijv   = (1 − β)      Πijv
                                                               α

Thus, any results related to profits will apply to input expenditures as long as factor shares do not
change.
   Solving for the optimal labor and quantity of fertilizer from agrovet j and location v, profits of




                                                           31
i from adopting at jv are written as:

                                                                −σ
                                                  Πi = θijv πi rijv                                            (43)

               1−α
                                     1
                                         −β 1−α                         κ1 30
where σ ≡       α (1 − β),   πi = piα wi     α
                                                  Ki , and θibjv = κ2 θeibjv . Here, the profitability of fertilizer
at this location is a function of the productivity shock, θijv , the (delivered) price of fertilizer itself,
rijv , and profits based on local observables and technology πi .


B        Distributions of Fertilizer Expenditures
Above, we used the following property to generate a market clearing condition that can be taken
to the data:

                                  E [rFi | adopt at j in v] = E [rFi |adopt]                                   (44)

That is, that the expected fertilizer expenditures, conditional on adopting at location j, is the same
as the expected fertilizer expenditure, conditional on adopting anywhere. This is a similar result
to Eaton and Kortum (2003), where the price distribution conditional on being the lowest price
supplier is the same as the unconditional price distribution at that destination. Here, we prove the
similar result in the input adoption context.
       In the model, fertilizer expenditures at a particular agrovet are a scalar function of ex-post
profits when choosing that agrovet. Thus, we focus all proofs on the distribution of profits, and
then the analogue to revenues and input expenditures follows directly. To begin, we first derive the
distribution of profits for farmer i who buys from agrovet j in location v.
                                                                    
                                                              −σ
                                  Pr (Πijv > π) = Pr θijv πi rijv >π                                           (45)
                                                                   
                                                               π σ
                                                = Pr θijv > rijv                                               (46)
                                                               πi
                                                                    εσ −ε
                                                = 1 − exp −Tjv πiε rijv
                                                                          
                                                                        π                                      (47)

Defining γijv ≡ πiε rijv
                     εσ



                                   Pr (Πijv > π) = 1 − exp −Tjv γijv π −ε
                                                                                    
                                                                                                               (48)

Similarly, the distribution of profits of the outside option of not purchasing fertilizer are written as:

                                     Pr (Πi0 > π) = 1 − exp −Φi0 π −ε
                                                                                
                                                                                                               (49)

where Φi0 = Ti0 γi0 ≡ πiε
       Next, defining Πmax
                       i   as the profits available from the best agrovet option for farmer i, we write
  30
       κ1 and κ2 are constant functions of model parameters




                                                            32
the distribution of these profits as:

                                   Pr (Πmax
                                        i   > π) = Pr (Πijv > π for any jv)                                 (50)
                                                    = 1 − Pr (Πijv < π ∀ jv)                                (51)

Since θ’s at each j, v pair are drawn from independent distributions, this probability is simplified
as:

                                  Pr (Πmax
                                       i   > π) = 1 − Pr (Πijv < π ∀ jv)                                    (52)
                                                      Y Y
                                                = 1−           Pr (Πijv < π)                                (53)
                                                              v 0 ∈V j∈J   v
                                                              Y Y
                                                                               exp −π −ε
                                                                                           
                                                   = 1−                                                     (54)
                                                              v 0 ∈V j∈J   v



                               Tjv γijv , Pr (Πmax
                  P P
Defining Φi =                                  i   > π) can be simplified to:
                 v 0 ∈V j∈Jv


                                      Pr (Πmax > π) = 1 − exp −Φi π −ε
                                                                                      
                                           i                                                                (55)

Thus, the CDF of max profits for village i is written as:

                                  Gmax (π) = Pr (Πmax < π) = exp −Φi π −ε
                                                                                               
                                   i              i                                                         (56)

with pdf:

                                      gimax (π) = εΦi π −ε−1 exp −Φi π −ε
                                                                                      
                                                                                                            (57)

      Similarly, adding the option of not adopting, the distribution of profits considering all options,
Πi , is written as:

                               Pr (Πi > π) = Pr (Πijv > π for any jv ∪ Πi0 > π)                             (58)
                                             = 1 − Pr (Πijv < π ∀ jv ∩ Πi0 < π)                             (59)

Since θ’s at each j, v pair and for not adopting are drawn from independent distributions, this
probability is simplified as:

                   Pr (Πi > π) = 1 − Pr (Πijv < π ∀ jv ∩ Πi0 < π)                                           (60)
                                                  Y Y
                               = 1 − Pr (Πi0 < π)        Pr (Πijv < π)                                      (61)
                                                              v 0 ∈V j∈J   v

                                                               −ε
                                                                    Y Y
                                                                                   exp −Tjv γijv π −ε
                                                                                                        
                                      = 1 − exp −Ti0 γi0 π                                                  (62)
                                                                     v 0 ∈V j∈Jv




                                                         33
Using the definitions for Φi0 and Φi , this is simplified as:

                                    Pr (Πi > π) = 1 − exp − (Φi0 + Φi ) π −ε
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                          (63)

Thus, the CDF of max profits for village i is:

                                        Gi (π) = exp − (Φi0 + Φi ) π −ε
                                                                                            
                                                                                                                          (64)

with pdf:

                               gi (π) = ε (Φi0 + Φi ) π −ε−1 exp − (Φi0 + Φi ) π −ε
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                          (65)

Profits conditional on adoption

Using this pdf, we now derive the CDF of agrovet profits, conditional on adoption. To do this, we
start from the conditional probability formula:

                                                                 Pr (Πmax   < π ∩ Πmax  > Πi0 )
                            Pr Πmax                                   i            i
                                                      
                                i   < π adopt               =                max                                          (66)
                                                                        Pr (Πi    > Πi0 )

This can be re-written as:
                                                                  Z   π
                                                  1
          Πmax                                               Pr (s > Πi0 ) gimax (s)ds
                                
     Pr    i       < π adopt        =
                                        Pr (Πmax
                                             i   > Πi0 )  0
                                                         Z π
                                               1
                                                             exp −Φi0 s−ε εΦi s−ε−1 exp −Φi s−ε ds
                                                                                               
                                    =        max
                                        Pr (Πi   > Πi0 ) 0
                                                         Z π
                                               1
                                                             εΦi s−ε−1 exp − (Φi0 + Φi ) s−ε ds
                                                                                            
                                    =        max                                                   (67)
                                        Pr (Πi   > Πi0 ) 0

                   Φi0 +Φi                                        Φi
Mulitplying by     Φi0 +Φi ,   and then factoring out           Φi0 +Φi ,     we have:
                                                                          Z     π
                                            1              Φi
     Πmax                                                                           ε (Φi0 + Φi ) s−ε−1 exp − (Φi0 + Φi ) s−ε ds
                                                                                                                            
Pr    i     < π adopt          =
                                    Pr (Πmax
                                         i      > Πi0 ) Φi0 + Φi            0

                                                                                          Φi
From standard derivations using Fréchet, Pr (Πmax
                                               i   > Πi0 ) =                            Φi0 +Φi ,   and thus:
                                                  Z    π
                    Πmax                                   ε (Φi0 + Φi ) s−ε−1 exp − (Φi0 + Φi ) s−ε ds
                                                                                                   
              Pr     i      < π adopt       =                                                                             (68)
                                                   0
                                            = Pr (Πi < π)                                                                 (69)

Profits conditional on adoption from j

Next, we derive the expected profits, conditional on adopting fertilizer from location j. Precisely,
we will derive:




                                                                 34
                                                                         Pr Πijl < π ∩ Πijv > Πij 0 l ∀(j 0 , l) ∩ Πijv > Πi0
                                                                                                                                      
                                                        
      Pr Πijv < π adopt f rom j in v                            =                                                                        (70)
                                                                             Pr Πijv > Πij 0 l ∀(j 0 , l) ∩ Πijv > Πi0

The denominator in this equation is simply λijv , and thus, we factor it out of the probability. The
numerator is written similar to the previous derivation, where
                                                                               Z       π
                                                                         1
                                                                                           P r s > Πij 0 l ∀(j 0 , l) ∩ s > Πi0 gijv (s)ds (71)
                                                                                                                              
      Pr Πijv < π adopt f rom j in v                            =
                                                                        λijv       0
                                               !
                                                    − Tjv γijv , we can simplify Pr s > Πij 0 l ∀(j 0 , l) ∩ s > Πi0 as
                      P P                                                                                           
Defining Φ
         e ijv =                   Tjv γijv
                     v 0 ∈V j∈Jv

                                                                                                              
                   Pr s > Πij 0 l ∀(j 0 , l) ∩ s > Πi0                        = exp −Φi0 s−ε exp −Φ  e ijv s−ε
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                          (72)
                                                                                                     
                                                                              = exp − Φi0 + Φ e ijv s−ε                                   (73)
                               
Thus, Pr Πijv < π adopt f rom j is written as:
                                                            Z   π
                                                   1                                 
                                                                                e ijv s−ε εTjv γijv π −ε−1 exp −Tjv γijv s−ε ds
                                                                                                                            
Pr Πijv < π adopt f rom j                  =                        exp − Φi0 + Φ
                                                   λijv     0

                Tjv γijv
Factoring out   Φi0 +Φi ,   and then noting that Φi0 + Φi = Φi0 + Φ
                                                                  e ijv + Tjv γijv , we have:

                                                                                Z      π
                                                      1 Tjv γijv
                                                                                           ε (Φi0 + Φi ) π −ε−1 exp − (Φi0 + Φi ) s−ε ds
                                                                                                                                    
 Pr Πijv < π adopt f rom j                     =
                                                     λijv Φi0 + Φi                 0

               Tjv γijv
Since λijv =   Φi0 +Φi ,   we land at the final result:
                                                                    Z    π
                                                                             ε (Φi0 + Φi ) π −ε−1 exp − (Φi0 + Φi ) s−ε ds
                                                                                                                      
        Pr Πijv < π adopt f rom j                           =
                                                                     0
                                                            = Pr (Πi < π)

Thus, the distribution of profits adopting from j is the same as the distribution of profits adopting
anywhere.


C    Production Function Estimation with and without Fertilizer
As our dataset is not equipped for panel production function estimation, we will be using the
Tanzanian LSMS, which records output and input use by household-plot-time, and we exposit
the estimation accordingly. That is, the production functions under different technologies should
now be understood to be specific to a particular plot within a household. Simply manipulating
the Cobb-Douglas production functions for plot p of household i in time t, we get the following




                                                                              35
representation for output per unit of land:
                                                         
                              Yipt                     Lipt
                        log          = (1 − α0 ) log
                              Kipt                     Ki
                                                                                       
                              Yipt                      Lipt                           Mipt
                        log          = (1 − α) β log           + (1 − α) (1 − β) log
                              Kipt                      Kipt                           Kipt
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                              Mipt
To combine these equations into one specification, we need to eliminate log                                   Kipt       , which is not
defined when fertilizer is not purchased. However, exploiting the fact that relative demand for
fertilizer and labor is a constant function of local wages, delivered fertilizer prices and parameters,
we can write:
                                                                         
                                              Yipt                     Lipt
                                        log          = (1 − α0 ) log
                                              Kipt                     Ki
                                                                          
                                              Yipt                      Lipt
                                        log          = (1 − α) β log           + dit
                                              Kipt                      Kipt

where dit is a dummy variable for household i, and year t (that is meant to absorb local wages
and prices when using fertilizer). This motivates the following specification to test for differences
in production parameters with and without fertilizer.
                                                                              
           Yipt                             Lipt                            Lipt
 log                  = (1 − α0 ) log                  + (α0 − α) log                  · I(Mipt > 0) + DF Tipt + P lotip + uipt
           Kipt                             Kipt                            Kipt

Here, DF Tipt is a district-time variable, with and without fertilizer use, meant to absorb differences
is local wages and prices, and other local and shocks, that may vary by time and whether fertilizer
is used. While one could argue that local wages and prices should vary at a more granular level,
this is about as far as we can push the data given the other sets of fixed effects that are utilized.
P lotip is a fixed effect to absorb plot-specific sources of productivity differences. Within these fixed
effects, we estimate α0 and α using labor per unit of land and an interaction with a dummy variable
identifying fertilizer use. Appendix Table A7 reports these estimates. In the preferred specification,
we find that α0 = 0.57 and α = 0.421.
   The last production parameter to estimate is the expenditure share of labor compared relative
to total expenditures on labor and fertlizer. For this measure, we also use the Tanzanian LSMS. We
first average district-level, activity specific wages from all plots that hire labor, and then construct
an implied labor cost on each plot by summing the product of labor hours on each activity and
the average wage for that activity. Then, for those who adopt fertilizer, we divide the value of
fertilizer used on that plot by the sum of this same value and implied labor expenditure. For the
whole of Tanzania, the average of this fertilizer expenditure share is 0.25, and we use this value for
our counterfactuals by imposing that β = 0.75. Of note, the mean and median values of fertilizer
expenditure share for the subsample of regions in norther Tanzania (Arusha, Kilimanjaro, Manyara,
Tanga) is slightly higher at 0.28.




                                                                   36
D       Mark-ups
From above, we can write the expected fertilizer revenues for agrovet j in location v as:
                                                         X
                                           E [vjv ] =         µi λijv|adopt E [Fi |adopt at jv]
                                                          i

Since fertilizer expenditures are proportional to profits, and profits are invariant to the choice that
is made (in expectation)we have:

                                                                        1−αX
                                              E [vjv ] = (1 − β)             λijv E [Πi ]                                      (74)
                                                                         α
                                                                              i

Differentiating with respect to the fertilizer price, rjv , the elasticity of expected revenues with
respect to own price is:
                                                                                                     
                                dE [vjv ] rjv    X                      dλijv rjv   dE [Πi ] rjv
                                               =   sijv                           +                                            (75)
                                 drjv E [vjv ]                          drjv λijv    drjv E [Πi ]

                          λijv|adopt E[rmi ]                                                      dλijv rjv
where sijv =         P                            .   As a function of model parameters,          drjv λijv   is written as:
                         i0 λi0 jv|adopt E[rmi0 ]


                                                       dλijv rjv
                                                                 = −εa (1 − λijv )
                                                       drjv λijv

Given the assumption of the Frechet distribution, E [Πi ] can be written as:
                                                                                  1
                                                         E [Πi ] = κ (Φi0 + Φi ) ε

where κis a function of distribution parameters. Log-differentiating, it is straightforward to show
that:

                                                        dE [Πi ] rjv     εa
                                                                      = − λijv
                                                         drjv E [Πi ]    ε

Thus, the elasticity of expected revenues to price can be written as:
                                                                                 
                                   dE [vjv ] rjv        X                   1
                                                  = −εa   sijv (1 − λijv ) + λijv                                              (76)
                                    drjv E [vjv ]                           ε
                                                                    i
        P
Since       i sijv   = 1 for each jv, the elasticity of expected revenues to price can be simplified as:


                                             dE [vjv ] rjv          ε−1 X
                                     εv ≡                   = −εa +    εa sijv λijv                                            (77)
                                              drjv E [vjv ]          ε
                                                                                        i




                                                                         37
Table 1. Summary statistics on villages
                                                                                      (1)
                                                                                     Mean
Panel A. Travel costs to markets and major hub towns
Distance to nearest market center (km) - Google maps                                   6.52
                                                                                      (9.94)
Time for round-trip journey to nearest market center - surveys                         40.8
                                                                                     (39.30)
Cost of round-trip from village to nearest market center (USD) - surveys               1.92
                                                                                      (2.43)
Cost of round-trip from market center to village (paid by enumerator)                  2.53
                                                                                      (3.14)
Distance to a major hub (km) - Google maps                                             72.8
                                                                                     (56.10)
Round-trip travel time to a major hub (mins) - Google maps                            171.5
                                                                                    (115.10)
Round-trip cost of travel to a major hub (USD) - surveys                               5.72
                                                                                      (5.33)
Panel B. Road quality
Field Measurement of roads from market centers to villages
Percent of road that is:
  Paved                                                                               0.20
  Dirt                                                                                0.42
  Gravel                                                                              0.38

Travel speed on feeder roads and rural roads - km/hr (GPS surveys)1                   21.6
                                                                                    (11.80)
Google estimates
Travel speed on feeder roads and rural roads - km/hr (Google)                              36.7
                                                                                          (15.7)
Travel speed on major roads - km/hr (Google)2                                              46.1
                                                                                          (12.7)
Notes: The average village had approximately 480 households in the 2012 census and ranged in size
from 48 to 3241. Table includes 1,168 villages in the Kilimanjaro and Manyara regions of Tanzania.
There are 1,183 total villages in the area but several were not visited. Standard deviations in
parentheses.
1
  Feeder roads and rural roads are routes from villages to a nearest market.
2
  Major roads are routes from markets to a nearest city.




                                                 38
Table 2. Calibrating Travel Costs
                                             (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)
                                               From market center
                                                                                           From village center to market center
                                                to major hub town
                                          (Transport Operator Surveys)             Enumerator's Trips            Transport Operator Surveys
                                            Cost       Cost      Hours         Cost       Cost      Hours        Cost        Cost      Hours
Panel A. Costs from Markets
Google maps: kilometers to destination   0.021***
                                          (0.000)
Google maps: hours to destination                   1.261*** 0.998***
                                                     (0.028) (0.032)
Number of markets                           201        201      201
Number of observations                      900        900      893

Panel B. Costs from villages
Google maps: kilometers to destination                                        0.117***                         0.088***
                                                                               (0.011)                          (0.009)
Google maps: hours to destination                                                          3.544*** 0.724***                  2.609*** 0.839***
                                                                                            (0.274) (0.069)                    (0.252) (0.076)
Number of villages                                                                1127        1033       1036         1133      1133       1027
Number of observations                                                            1127        1033       1036         1133      1133       1027
Notes: Data is constructed from interviews with transportation operators, and from travel costs and times incurred by enumerators. There are
226 market centers in our sample. In both regions, transportation operators were asked about the 3 most important hubs (Moshi, Arusha, and
Dar es Salaam); in Manyara, they were also asked about 3 additional hubs (Tanga, Dodoma, and Babati). The unit of observation is the market-
hub level for Panel A, while it is the village-market pair level for Panel B. Standard errors in parentheses (clustered by market in Panel A).
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1
  Cost is for one-way trip for a given route.




                                                                         39
Table 3. Remoteness and farmer characteristics
                                                                    (1)                         (2)
                                                                                 Coefficient from regression on
                                                                   Mean       standardized distance from regional
                                                                                               hubs
Panel A. Demographic and background characteristics
Age                                                                49.76                     -0.98*
                                                                  (15.23)                    (0.52)
Female                                                              0.45                      -0.02
                                                                                             (0.02)
Married                                                             0.76                      0.00
                                                                                             (0.01)
Household size                                                      4.95                    0.26**
                                                                   (2.78)                    (0.11)
Years of education                                                  6.58                   -0.31***
                                                                   (3.56)                    (0.11)
Home has thatch roof                                                0.17                      0.03
                                                                                             (0.02)
Has cell phone                                                      0.89                   -0.03***
                                                                                             (0.01)
Has bank account                                                    0.15                   -0.05***
                                                                                             (0.01)
Has mobile money account                                            0.77                   -0.08***
                                                                                             (0.02)
Acres of land                                                       5.46                    1.37**
                                                                  (13.89)                    (0.57)
Has market business                                                 0.28                   -0.05***
                                                                                             (0.01)
Annual total income from non-farming (USD)                          408.9                  -74.72**
                                                                  (772.60)                  (30.25)
Panel B. Production Capacity (in kg/acre)1
FAO-GAEZ production capacity for low input level                   719.1                     39.83
                                                                  (296.70)                  (28.87)
FAO-GAEZ production capacity for high input level                   3039                  -282.91***
                                                                  (928.20)                  (81.80)
FAO-GAEZ production difference between high and low                 2320                  -322.75***
                                                                  (779.50)                  (67.22)
Panel C. Harvest Output
Total harvest output in 2016 long rains (kg)                       928.7                      -16.62
                                                                 (1360.00)                   (51.18)
Harvest output per acre                                             455.3                  -85.11***
                                                                  (384.30)                   (17.46)
Value of harvest output at average                                  201.9                      -3.61
   regional post-harvest price                                    (295.60)                   (11.13)
Notes: N = 2,845 farmers in 246 villages. In Column 1, standard deviations are in parentheses. In Column 2,
standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the village level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
1
  Regressions for production capacity are at village level.




                                                        40
Table 4. Remoteness, access to input markets and retail price heterogeneity
                                                                                (1)                       (2)
                                                                                             Coefficient from regression
                                                                               Mean         on standardized distance from
                                                                                                    regional hubs
Panel A. Summary measures of access to input retailers
Has at least 1 agrovet within 10 km of village                                 0.75                    -0.14***
 which sells fertilizer or seeds                                                                         (0.01)
Number of agrovets within 10 km of village                                      7.79                   -2.93***
 which sells fertilizer or seeds                                               (8.96)                    (0.25)
Distance to nearest agrovet                                                     6.79                    3.17***
 which sells fertilizer or seeds                                              (15.15)                    (0.47)

Panel B. Travel-cost adjusted prices faced by farmers
Minimum travel-cost adjusted price                                             24.19                   2.33***
 for 50 kg of Urea1                                                            (4.66)                   (0.12)

Decomposition of price between retail price and cost of transportation
Retail price at the location with the lowest                                      19.82                  1.09***
  travel-cost adjusted price (USD)                                                (2.63)                  (0.07)
Cost of travel to obtain minimum travel-cost                                      4.372                  1.24***
  adjusted price (USD)                                                            (4.39)                  (0.13)
Notes: The unit of observation is the village. Data is from the universe of villages in Kilimanjaro and Manyara regions (N
= 1,183). Travel costs imputed from transport surveys and Google maps. In Column 1, standard deviations are in
parentheses. In Column 2, standard errors in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
1
  We assume farmers buy a 50 kg bag in one trip (enough for 1 acre), and must incur the cost of a round-trip for herself,
plus the cost of carrying the bag of fertilizer, equivalent to 0.7 trips.




                                                            41
Table 5. Remoteness, access to output markets and output price heterogeneity
                                                                                              (1)                      (2)
                                                                                                          Coefficient from regression
                                                                                             Mean          on standardized distance
                                                                                                             from regional hubs
Panel A. Summary measures of access to output markets
Has at least 1 maize seller within 10 km of village                                          0.67                   -0.16***
                                                                                                                      (0.01)
Number of maize sellers within 10 km of village                                               1.89                  -1.06***
                                                                                             (2.48)                   (0.07)
Distance to the nearest output market with maize sellers (km)                                 8.67                  5.65***
                                                                                            (14.17)                   (0.42)
Panel B. Maximum imputed travel-cost adjusted price if farmers were to sell in a local market
Market survey: maximum travel-cost adjusted price                                      30.30                        -3.08***
 immediately after 2017 harvest (USD)                                                  (7.24)                         (0.20)
Decomposition of price between retail price and cost of transportation
Retail price at the location with the highest                                                39.34                  0.80***
 travel-cost adjusted price (USD)                                                            (3.17)                  (0.09)
Cost of travel to obtain the highest travel-cost                                              9.05                  3.88***
 adjusted price (USD)                                                                        (7.06)                  (0.18)

Panel B2. Price available within village by maize-buying intermediaries immediately after last season's harvest
Farmer surveys: average "going price" in local                                                 30.38                    0.16
                                            2
  village immediately after previous harvest                                                  (8.60)                   (0.62)
Farmer surveys: average village sales price                                                    25.86                    0.38
                        2
  after previous harvest                                                                      (6.24)                   (0.29)
Notes: The unit of observation is the village. Data is from the universe of villages in Kilimanjaro and Manyara regions (N = 1,183).
Travel costs imputed from transport surveys and Google maps. In Column 1, standard deviations are in parentheses. In Column 2,
standard errors in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
1
  We assume farmers sell a 120 kg maize bag in one trip, and must incur the cost of a round trip for herself and the cost of carrying
the maize that is equivaent to 1.7 trips.
2
  Data is only available from the farmer surveys (2,171 farmers in 137 villages).




                                                                  42
Table 6. Remoteness and input market access and adoption
                                                          (1)          (2)                    (3)
                                                                Coefficient from regression on standardized
                                                                        distance from regional hubs
                                                      Mean
                                                                                      Controls for soil and
                                                                   No controls
                                                                                     farmer characteristics
Panel A: Input usage
Used chemical fertilizer in previous long rains        0.39          -0.17***               -0.09***
                                                                       (0.03)                 (0.03)
Quantity of chemical fertilizer used (kg)             19.84         -13.06***               -6.46***
                                                     (31.63)           (2.15)                 (1.74)
Used improved seeds in previous long rains             0.66          -0.07***                -0.05**
                                                                       (0.02)                 (0.02)
Quantity of improved seeds used (kg)                   6.29          -1.30***               -1.21***
                                                      (8.21)           (0.36)                 (0.44)

Panel B. Maize sales
Sold maize after previous long rains                   0.32          -0.09***               -0.06**
                                                                       (0.02)                (0.03)
Total quantity sold (kg)                              388.1         -97.86***              -112.16**
                                                    (1142.00)         (35.11)               (48.86)
Sales to agents at home
Agent visited homestead                                0.31          -0.14***               -0.09***
                                                                       (0.03)                 (0.03)
Sold maize to an agent after previous long rains       0.17          -0.07***                -0.04**
                                                                       (0.02)                 (0.02)
Quantity sold to agents (kg)                           142          -46.39***               -39.11**
                                                     (433.70)         (13.80)                (18.61)
Sales at market
Sold maize at a market after previous long rains       0.06          -0.03***               -0.03***
                                                                      (0.01)                  (0.01)
Quantity sold at market (kg)                          34.42         -14.61***               -15.26**

Panel C. Maize purchases                             (197.10)          (5.32)                (7.72)
Farmer ever buys maize                                 0.48          0.11***                0.08***
                                                                       (0.02)                (0.02)
Quantity purchased in typical year (kg)                152.3         75.67***              65.05***
                                                     (315.50)         (15.79)               (17.92)
Net buying
Farmer buys maize but sells none                       0.37             0.11***               0.08***
                                                                         (0.02)                (0.03)
Farmer sells maize and buys none                        0.24            -0.09***             -0.06***
                                                                         (0.02)                (0.02)
Farmer buys and sells maize                             0.08              -0.00                 0.00
                                                                         (0.01)                (0.01)
Net buyer (quantity bought > quantity sold)             0.44            0.10***               0.07**
                                                                         (0.02)                (0.03)
Net seller (quantity bought < quantity sold)            0.26            -0.08***              -0.06**
                                                                         (0.02)                (0.03)
Notes: N = 2,845 farmers in 246 villages. See text for sampling details. Standard deviations are in
parentheses in Column 1. Standard errors, clustered at village level, in parentheses in Columns 2-3.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.


                                                     43
Table 7. Multinomial logit of agrovet choice
                                                       (1)                    (2)
                                                             Agrovet Chosen


Kilometers to agrovet                               -0.171***
                                                      (0.009)
Dummies for agrovet distance bin:
 between (0,5] km                                                          -1.380***
                                                                             (0.372)
  between (5,10] km                                                        -2.914***
                                                                             (0.379)
  between (10,15] km                                                       -4.331***
                                                                             (0.380)
  between (15,20] km                                                       -5.367***
                                                                             (0.400)
  between (20,30] km                                                       -5.875***
                                                                             (0.378)
  between (30,40] km                                                       -7.602***
                                                                             (0.449)
  between (40,50] km                                                       -8.685***
                                                                             (0.495)
  between (50,100] km                                                     -10.625***
                                                                             (0.560)
  over 100 km                                                             -14.253***
                                                                             (0.992)
Notes: N = 519 farmers, 119 observed locations. Omitted group is agrovet located in
respondent's village. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.




                                         44
a
    Figure 1. Map of Survey Region and Villages




                        45
                                                                  Figure 2. CDF of travel-cost adjusted prices across villages
                 1                    A. CDF of Maize Price                                                                                  B. CDF of Fertilizer Price




                                                                                                                          1
                 .8




                                                                                                                          .8
 % at or below




                                                                                                          % at or below
                 .6




                                                                                                                          .6
                 .4




                                                                                                                          .4
                 .2




                                                                                                                          .2
                 0




                                                                                                                          0
                      -80       -60       -40                     -20       0        20         40                                  -20         0          20          40          60            80
                        maximum travel-cost adjusted 120kg MAIZE price (%, mean = 0)                                                minimum travel-cost adjusted 50kg UREA price (%, mean = 0)




                                                                        C. CDF of Ratio of Maize Price to Fertilizer Price
                                                             1
                                                             .8
                                             % at or below
                                                             .6
                                                             .4
                                                             .2
                                                             0




                                                                  0             .2         .4                                  .6               .8              1
                                                                            ratio of price per kg between MAIZE and UREA


Notes: Each observation represents a village. Travel-cost adjusted prices are calculated through observed prices from an agrovet
survey, a maize price survey at markets and transport cost information collected from interviews with transport operators.
Vertical dotted lines represent a 10 percentile and a 90 percentile of the distribution.




                                                                                                     46
                          Figure 3. CDF of travel-cost adjusted prices (measured costs vs. estimated costs)




                          1
                          .8
          % at or below
                          .6
                          .4
                          .2
                          0




                                 20             30             40           50                60              70
                                                          50kg UREA price (USD)

                                                         Adjusted for pecuniary travel cost
                                                         Adjusted for 5% implied trade cost


Notes: Each observation represents a village. Travel-cost adjusted prices are calculated through observed prices
from an agrovet survey and transport cost information collected from interviews with transport operators. The
CDFs are censored at a 95 percentile for a better visual comparison.




                                                                 47
                                                                                                             Figure 4. Input Access Counterfactuals

                                                 Adoption                                                                                                                             Adoption
                    1.0           50% Reduction in Farm−Agrovet Transport                                                                                           50% Reduction in Distributor−Agrovet Transport




                                                                                                                                                            1.0
                                                                                                        ●     Counterfactual (Data)                                                                                                           ●     Counterfactual (Data)
                                                                                                              Counterfactual (Fit)                                                                                                                  Counterfactual (Fit)
                                       ●                                                                      Counterfactual (Mean)                                                                                                                 Counterfactual (Mean)
                                           ●
                                                                                                              Original (Data)                                                                                                                       Original (Data)
                                                                                                              Original (Fit)                                                                                                                        Original (Fit)
                    0.8




                                                                                                                                                            0.8
                                       ●
                                                                                                              Original (Mean)                                                                                                                       Original (Mean)
                                               ●                                                                                                                              ●
                                                   ●

                                                           ●       ●

                                   ●
                    0.6




                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                          0.59                                 ●                                   ●                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
Adoption




                                                                                                                                        Adoption
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                       ●                   ●
                                                                           ●           ●
                                                                                                         ●                                                                                                ●
                                                       ●                                                                                                                                          ●
                    0.4




                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                   ●                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                               ●                                                                                  0.32                    ●

                          0.31                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                             −0.122                               0.31                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                             (0.024)                                                                              ●           ●
                                                                                                   −0.148
                    0.2




                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                   (0.025)                                                                                    ●       ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −0.148             −0.143
                    0.0




                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.025)            (0.026)

                          −2               −1                          0                       1              2             3                                     −2              −1                          0                       1             2             3

                                                       Remoteness (Standardized)                                                                                                              Remoteness (Standardized)




                                         Fertilizer Expenditures                                                                                                              Fertilizer Expenditures
                                  50% Reduction in Farm−Agrovet Transport                                                                                           50% Reduction in Distributor−Agrovet Transport

                                                                                                        ●     Counterfactual (Data)                                                                                                           ●     Counterfactual (Data)
                    −5




                                                                                                                                                            −5




                                                                                                              Counterfactual (Fit)                                                                                                                  Counterfactual (Fit)
                                                                                                              Counterfactual (Mean)                                                                                                                 Counterfactual (Mean)
                                                                                                              Original (Data)                                                                                                                       Original (Data)
                                       ●                                                                      Original (Fit)                                                                                                                        Original (Fit)
                                        ●
                    −6




                                                                                                                                                            −6




                                                                           ●                                  Original (Mean)                                                                                                                       Original (Mean)
                                           ●               ●       ●                                                                                                           ●
                                               ●                                                         ●                                                                    ●
                                   ●                           ●
                                                                                   ●
                    −7




                                                                                                                                                            −7




                                                   ● ●                                                                                                                                ●                   ●
                          −6.85                                                                    ●
log(Expenditures)




                                                                                                                                        log(Expenditures)




                                                                       ●                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                           ●                                                                                                      ●               ●
                                                                                                                  ●         −0.42
                                                                               ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                  −8.06
                    −8




                                                                                                                                                            −8




                                                                                                                            (0.12)                                        ●               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                           −8.2                                                                                                                                    −8.2                       ●                                   ●
                                                                                               ●                                                                                                      ●       ●           ●                    ●
                    −9




                                                                                                                                                            −9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                   −0.81                                                                                                              ●                       −0.738
                    −10




                                                                                                                                                            −10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●    (0.138)
                                                                                                                   (0.14)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −0.811
                    −11




                                                                                                                                                            −11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (0.143)




                          −2               −1                          0                       1              2             3                                     −2              −1                          0                       1             2             3

                                                       Remoteness (Standardized)                                                                                                              Remoteness (Standardized)


 Notes: See text for discussion of counterfactuals.




                                                                                                                                       48
                                                                                                         Figure 5. Entry and Output Access Counterfactuals

                             % Change in Aggregate Adoption and Additional Entry                                                                                                         log(Entrant Profits) and Additional Entry

                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                             ●
                       1.5




                                                 ●




                                                                                                                                                                         −4
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                         ●                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                     ●
                                                             ●                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                 ●
                                                 ●       ●
                                                                                                                 ●                                                                            ●
% Change in Adoption




                                                                                                                                                                                              ●                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                          ●                                                                                                         ●




                                                                                                                                                                         −6
                                                                                                                                                                                             ●             ●                                    ●
                       1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                          ● ● ●                ●                       ●                                   ●




                                                                                                                                                          log(Profits)
                                                                                                                                                                                        ●     ●                                        ●●
                                                                         ●                               ●                                                                                                                             ●        ●                                      ●
                                             ●                   ●                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                     ●                                                                                              ●                    ●
                                                                                                                         ●                                                                 ●     ●
                                                                                     ●                               ●                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●     ●               ●
                                                                                             ●                                                                                     ● ●             ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●● ●●●                ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●                            ● ● ●                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                     ●●




                                                                                                                                                                         −8
                                                                         ●                                                                                                             ●              ●      ●                                                ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●                                             ● ●                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                      ●●                             ●                                                                                             ●      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                ● ●  ●      ●                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                         ●
                                                 ●       ●
                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●                                                                     −0.351
                       0.5




                                     ●              ● ●                          ●
                               ●                                                                                         ●        0.0886                                        ● ●          ●   ● ● ●                                                                             (0.164)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●                                               ●
                                                   ●
                                                     ●
                                                                                           ●                     ●●              (0.0353)                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●                                        ●




                                                                                                                                                                         −10
                                     ●     ●                             ● ●●            ● ●          ●                                                                                        ●       ●        ●
                                                                            ●                                                                                                              ●     ●              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                     ●                                                                                                   ●         ●
                                ●        ●●                                                                                                                                                     ● ● ●● ●                                                ●
                                    ●        ●●              ● ●●                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                      ●●●
                                        ●                                                                                                                                                                          ●                            ● ●
                                       ●              ●    ●                                                                                                                                          ●           ●●                                                       ●
                                      ●●●
                                        ●●●       ● ●● ●           ●
                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●●                ●
                                        ●   ●                ●                                                                                                                                            ●●
                                       ●●            ●
                                                      ● ●     ●                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●●
                                    ●● ● ● ●    ● ● ● ●
                                                      ●● ●   ●● ●
                                                                    ● ●                                                                                                                                         ●
                       0.0




                                           ●                             ●                                                                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                ●●●● ● ●         ● ●●●● ● ● ●




                                                                                                                                                                         −12
                                           ● ●  ●        ●
                                                         ●●● ● ● ●                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●                                                      ●



                                         −1                          0                               1                       2                   3                                        −1                            0                               1                      2                   3

                                                                 Remoteness (Standardized)                                                                                                                         Remoteness (Standardized)




                                              Adoption                                                                                                                                                 Adoption
                       50% Reduction in Pecuniary Trade Cost to all Maize Markets                                                                                                       50% Reduction in Iceberg to Nearest Market
                       1.0




                                                                                                                                                                         1.0



                                                                                                                 ●           Counterfactual (Data)                                                                                                                    ●        Counterfactual (Data)
                                                                                                                             Counterfactual (Fit)                                                                                                                              Counterfactual (Fit)
                                                 ●                                                                           Counterfactual (Mean)                                                ●●                                                                           Counterfactual (Mean)
                                                                                                                             Original (Data)                                                                                                                                   Original (Data)
                                                                                                                             Original (Fit)                                                                                                                                    Original (Fit)
                       0.8




                                                                                                                                                                         0.8




                                                 ●                                                                           Original (Mean)                                                  ●                                                                                Original (Mean)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                             ●                                                                                                     ●
                                                                 ●                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                         ●
                       0.6




                                                                                                                                                                         0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                         ●               ●                                                                                                                ●
Adoption




                                                                                                                                                          Adoption




                                                                                             ●                                                                                 0.58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                              0.51                                                               ●                                                                                  −0.148                                                                                 −0.099
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●           ●
                                                                             ●                                                                                                      (0.025)                    ●                                                           (0.027)
                       0.4




                                                                                                                                                                         0.4




                                                                                 ●                   ●                                                                                                                                      ●                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                     ●                                                               ●                                                                                                 ●
                              0.31                           ●                                                                                                                 0.31
                                                                                     ●               −0.148                                  −0.117
                       0.2




                                                                                                                                                                         0.2




                                                                                         ●           (0.025)                                 (0.029)
                       0.0




                                                                                                                                                                         0.0




                               −2                −1                          0                       1                       2               3                                 −2                  −1                          0                        1                      2               3

                                                                 Remoteness (Standardized)                                                                                                                         Remoteness (Standardized)


 Notes: See text for discussion of counterfactuals.




                                                                                                                                                         49
Web Appendix Table A1. Survey Compliance Rates
                                             (1)            (2)            (3)
                                       Survey Attempts   Completed   Compliance Rate
Farmer surveys 2016                          583           573            0.98
Farmer surveys 2017                         2535           2477           0.98
Agrovet surveys                              585           532            0.91
Maize sellers at markets                     445           438            0.98
Notes: see text of details of surveys.




                                          50
Web Appendix Table A2. Costs of transporting fertilizer and transporting farmer, by distance
                                                              (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)

                                                             Cost of transporting
                                                          fertilizer from agrovet in Cost of farmer traveling
                                                              destination village      himself to agrovet
                                                           (standardized to 50 kg)

Google maps: kilometers to destination                    0.036***                   0.047***
                                                           (0.020)                    (0.007)
Google maps: hours to destination                                     1.276***                    1.831***
                                                                       (0.677)                     (0.260)
Number of villages                                              73        73          119            119
Number of observations                                         341       341          988            988
Notes: Data is constructed from Farmer Surveys, conditional on making input purchases and/or selling output.
Clustered standard errors (by village) are reported in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                     51
Web Appendix Table A3. Remoteness and fertilizer retailer sales, prices, and markups
                                                          (1)                        (2)
                                                                        Coefficient from regression
                                                         Mean            on standardized distance
                                                                            from regional hubs
Panel A. Agrovet shop-level (N=507)
Sells fertilizer                                          0.87                       -0.03
                                                         (0.34)                     (0.02)
Number of varieties of fertilizer                         1.76                      -0.15*
                                                         (1.58)                     (0.09)
Quantity of fertilizer sold last year (kg)                5995                     -473.41
                                                        (12721)                   (757.30)
Sells seeds                                               0.72                       0.04
                                                         (0.45)                     (0.02)
Number of varieties of seeds                               1.2                       0.10
                                                         (1.26)                     (0.07)
Quantity of seeds sold last year (kg)                     2194                     903.59
                                                         (8008)                   (557.99)
Cost of transport from wholesaler (per 50 kg)             0.64                    0.30***
                                                         (0.69)                     (0.04)

Panel B. Prices and markups (Agrovet shop-variety level, N=938)
Retail price for 50 kilograms                            25.21                    0.65***
                                                         (5.21)                    (0.22)
Wholesale price for 50 kilograms                         21.43                     0.16*
                                                         (4.14)                    (0.09)
Markup (percentage points)1                              13.42                      0.86
                                                        (10.25)                    (0.62)
Notes: In Column 1, standard deviations are in parentheses. In Column 2, standard errors in
parentheses. Regressions in Panel B includes type and brand fixed effects.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
1
  Markup accounts for cost of transport to wholesaler.




                                                 52
Web Appendix Table A4. Robustness of Travel-cost Adjusted Prices
                                                                                                 (1)                    (2)
                                                                                                                 Coefficient from
                                                                                                                  regression on
                                                                                               Mean
                                                                                                              standardized distance
                                                                                                               from regional hubs
Panel A. Robustness to Dropping Villages Within 10km of Regional Borders
   A1. Input Side: Travel-cost adjusted fertilizer prices faced by farmers
   Minimum travel-cost adjusted price for 50 kg of Urea1                                       23.98                 2.70***
                                                                                               (4.44)                 (0.14)
    Decomposition of price between retail price and cost of transportation
    Retail price at the location with the lowest travel-cost adjusted price (USD)              19.91                 1.32***
                                                                                               (2.67)                 (0.09)
    Cost of travel to obtain minimum travel-cost adjusted price (USD)                          4.069                 1.38***
                                                                                               (3.99)                 (0.14)

    A2. Output Side: Travel-cost adjusted maize prices if farmers were to sell in a local market
    Market survey: maximum travel-cost adjusted price                                     30.07                     -3.71***
     immediately after 2017 harvest (USD)                                                 (7.18)                      (0.23)

    Decomposition of price between retail price and cost of transportation
    Retail price at the location with the highest travel-cost adjusted price (USD)             39.10                 0.89***
                                                                                               (3.20)                 (0.12)
    Cost of travel to obtain the highest travel-cost adjusted price (USD)                       9.03                 4.60***
                                                                                               (7.18)                 (0.21)

Panel B. Bounding regression coefficients by assigning prices to missing retailers1
   Input Side: Travel-cost adjusted fertilizer prices faced by farmers
   Minimum travel-cost adjusted price for 50 kg of Urea1                                       24.09                 2.26***
                                                                                               (4.69)                 (0.13)
    Decomposition of price between retail price and cost of transportation
    Retail price at the location with the lowest travel-cost adjusted price (USD)                19.84                 1.10***
                                                                                                 (2.58)                 (0.07)
      Cost of travel to obtain minimum travel-cost adjusted price (USD)                           4.25                 1.16***
                                                                                                 (4.35)                 (0.13)
Notes: Data is from the universe of villages in Kilimanjaro and Manyara region (N = 1183). The unit of observation is the village.
Travel costs imputed from transport surveys and Google maps. In Column 1, standard deviations are in parentheses. In Column 2,
standard errors in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
1
  In this calculation, we imputed prices to retailers with missing values. To do this, we estimated the distribution of prices within
region. We then assigned high or low prices to the missing agrovet (defined as being at the 10th or 90th percentile of this price
distribution) in a way that attenuated the regression coefficient. For example, a missing agrovet in a remote village was assigned a
low price, causing a flattening of the regression.




                                                                 53
Web Appendix Table A5. Input and output market price dispersion across countries
                                                    (1)                     (2)

                                                       Secondary Datasets         Tanzania Data2

Residual standard deviation in log prices for:3
   All products                                               0.45                     0.15
   Maize only                                                 0.34                     0.10
   Fertilizer only                                            0.12                     0.09
Notes: Secondary datasets include RATIN (prices of major crops across 41 major markets in 5
countries - Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Burundi, and Rwanda - over the 1997-2015 time period),
Africafoodprices.io (25 products over 276 markets in 53 countries), AMITSA (the Regional
Agricultural Input Market Information and Transparency System for East and Southern Africa,
which includes information on 9 fertilizer varieties in 95 markets in 8 countries), prices of 5 major
varieties of fertilizer (Urea, CAN, DAP, and NPK 17 17 17) in 18 countries from 2010-16 in
Africafertilizer.org; and prices of a number of commodities in 38 countries from 1992-2016
collected by the WFP.
1
  Maize prices are from a survey of market sellers in 98 markets conducted in October 2017.
Fertilizer prices are from surveys of agro-input retailers in 2017.
2
  Calculated from a regression of log prices on product, country, and time fixed effects. See text for
details.




                                                  54
Web Appendix Table A6. Dyadic price dispersion
                               (1)           (2)               (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)          (9)
                                                             Dependent variable: Absolute log price difference
Panel A. Secondary Datasets
Log (distance)                     0.03***       0.000         0.000       0.03***        0.000         0.000       0.01***       0.000         0.010
                                   (0.002)       0.000        (0.010)      (0.002)        0.000        (0.015)      (0.002)       0.000        (0.014)
Log (travel time)                               0.03***       0.03***                    0.04***       0.04**                    0.01***        0.000
                                                (0.002)       (0.011)                    (0.003)       (0.017)                   (0.002)       (0.016)

Products                             All           All           All        Maize         Maize        Maize       Fertilizer    Fertilizer   Fertilizer
Dependent variable mean              0.21         0.21          0.21        0.20          0.20         0.20          0.11          0.11         0.11
Dependent variable sd                0.20         0.20          0.20        0.17          0.17         0.17          0.13          0.13         0.13
Observations                      4,752,196    4,752,196     4,752,196     675,880       675,880      675,880       38,364        38,364       38,364
Number of locations                 1335         1335           1335        1335          1335         1335          1335          1335         1335
Countries                             49           49            49          43            43           43            18            18           18

Panel B. Northern Tanzania
Log (distance)                     0.01***                     -0.030      0.03***                     -0.10**      0.003*                       0.007
                                   (0.003)                    (0.020)      (0.011)                     (0.050)      (0.002)                    (0.017)
Log (travel time)                               0.01***         0.04*                    0.04***       0.16**                      0.004        -0.004
                                                (0.004)       (0.025)                    (0.016)       (0.069)                    (0.002)      (0.019)

Products                             All          All           All         Maize          Maize       Maize       Fertilizer    Fertilizer   Fertilizer
Dependent variable mean             0.16         0.16          0.16          0.21          0.21         0.21         0.13          0.13         0.13
Dependent variable sd               0.14         0.14          0.14          0.18          0.18         0.18         0.10          0.10         0.10
Observations                      22,386        22,376        22,376         6,873         6,873        6,873       15,064        15,056       15,056
Number of locations                  82           82            82            65            65           65            60           60           60
Notes: Regressions include product, month and year fixed effects. All regressions are within country. Travel time and distances calculated from Google
maps. See Web Appendix Table A3 and text for discussion of datasets.
Two-way clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                           55
Web Appendix Table A7. Adoption in LSMS-ISA surveys
                                                        (1)                    (2)
                                                  Dependent variable: used chemical
                                                        fertilizer in last season
Log of distance to nearest major market (km)        -0.027***
                                                      (0.005)
Log of distance to nearest population center (km)                            -0.019*
                                                                             (0.010)

Dependent variable mean                                   0.32                0.32
Independent variable mean                                 3.23                3.21
Independent variable sd                                   1.27                1.02
Observations                                             35,938              35,938
Individuals                                              26,653              26,653
Notes: Regressions include World Bank LSMS-ISA household panel surveys in Ethiopia,
Niger, Nigeria, Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda. Standard errors clustered at the
enumeration area level are in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                         56
Web Appendix Table A8. Production Function Estimates with and without fertilizer
                                                       (1)                                                 (2)
                                                              Dependent variable: log(Harvest/Acres)

log(Labor/Acres)                                        0.419***                0.433***                0.430***
                                                         (0.042)                 (0.042)                 (0.042)
log(Labor/Acres) x Used Fertilizer?                      0.124*                  0.124*                  0.149*
                                                         (0.075)                 (0.074)                 (0.077)
Used Fertilizer?                                          (0.33)                  (0.33)
                                                         (0.300)                 (0.298)

District-Year fixed effects                                                        X
District-Year-Fertilizer Use fixed effects                                                                  X
Plot fixed effects                                         X                       X                        X
Observations                                           3,395                    3,395                    3,395
Plots                                                  2,554                    2,554                    2,554
Notes: Regressions use World Bank LSMS-ISA household panel surveys from Tanzania, and Uganda. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                           57
                                      Web Appendix Figure A1. Distribution of Remoteness




                .4
                .3
             Density
              .2.1
                0




                       least remote       -1            0            1             2         most remote
                                                Standardized Value of Remoteness

Notes: Remoteness at the village level. Vertical dotted lines indicate the villages with minimum and maximum
remoteness.




                                                              58
                       Web Appendix Figure A2. CDF of Distance Farmers Travel to Purchase Inputs




                  1
                  .8
  % at or below
                  .6
                  .4
                  .2
                  0




                        0   10   20   30   40   50   60   70    80   90 100 110 120 130 140 150
                                                     Kilometers to agrovet

Notes: Each point represents a farmer. Purchase events include any kinds of agricultural inputs.
Vertical dotted lines indicate distances corresponding to the the 50th and 90th percentile.




                                                           59
