                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHEN FAIR ISN'T FAIR:
    UNDERSTANDING CHOICE REVERSALS INVOLVING SOCIAL PREFERENCES

                                           James Andreoni
                                             Deniz Aydin
                                            Blake Barton
                                        B. Douglas Bernheim
                                           Jeffrey Naecker

                                        Working Paper 25257
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25257


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2018




We would like to thank participants at the 2015 SITE Psychology and Economics Workshop, the 2016
AEA meetings, the 2016 New England Experimental Economics Workshop, the 2016 Early Career
Behavioral Economics conference, the 2017 Economic Science Association meetings, the Tenth Maastricht
Behavioral and Experimental Economics Symposium, and seminars at Columbia, Texas A&M, Cornell,
University of Southern California, Emory, Claremont Graduate University, University of Connecticut,
Yale, Bocconi, WBZ Berlin, University of Lyon, University of Zurich, Chapman University, University
of San Diego, the RAND Institute, Santa Clara University, and Caltech for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by James Andreoni, Deniz Aydin, Blake Barton, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Jeffrey Naecker.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Fair Isn't Fair: Understanding Choice Reversals Involving Social Preferences
James Andreoni, Deniz Aydin, Blake Barton, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Jeffrey Naecker
NBER Working Paper No. 25257
November 2018, Revised July 2019
JEL No. D03,D63

                                             ABSTRACT

In settings with uncertainty, tension exists between ex ante and ex post notions of fairness (e.g., equal
opportunity versus equal outcomes). In a laboratory experiment, the most common behavioral pattern
is for subjects to select the ex ante fair alternative ex ante, and switch to the ex post fair alternative
ex post. One potential explanation embraces consequentialism and construes the reversals as manifestations
of time inconsistency. Another abandons consequentialism in favor of deontological (rule-based) ethics,
and thereby avoids the implication that revisions imply inconsistency. We test between these explanations
by examining contingent planning and the demand for commitment. While the population appears
to be heterogeneous, our findings suggest that the most common attitude toward fairness involves
a time-consistent preference for applying naive deontological rules.


James Andreoni                                      B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego                 Stanford University
9500 Gilman Drive                                   Stanford, CA 94305-6072
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                             and NBER
and NBER                                            bernheim@stanford.edu
andreoni@ucsd.edu
                                                    Jeffrey Naecker
Deniz Aydin                                         Department of Economics
Olin Business School                                Wesleyan University
Washington University in St. Louis                  jnaecker@wesleyan.edu
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
daydin@wustl.edu

Blake Barton
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
blakeabarton@gmail.com
1    Introduction
Suppose that twenty lottery tickets will be divided between two equally deserving households, A
and B. Ten of the tickets are red and ten are blue. One of the twenty will be chosen at random,
and the household holding it will win a cash prize. Household A already holds all the red tickets,
but has done nothing to earn them. Your task is to allocate the blue tickets. How would you divide
them up? Most people express a strict preference for giving all ten blue tickets to household B in
order to even out the chances of winning, presumably in the interest of fairness.
    Now suppose that, after assigning all ten blue tickets to B, you learn that the winning ticket is
blue. You are then given a chance to reallocate the blue tickets. What would you do? As we show,
most people express a strict preference for reallocating the blue tickets equally between A and B,
again to even out the chances of winning.
    In our experience, the choice pattern just described strikes most people as eminently reasonable,
at least initially. However, if one adopts a consequentialist perspective on decision making as is
standard throughout economics, these choices violate the principle of time consistency. From this
perspective, the objective of initially allocating all blue tickets to B is to ensure that each household
has a 50% chance of winning the prize prior to the resolution of pertinent uncertainty (ex ante).
However, in light of the subsequent revision, A’s ex ante chances of winning are 75%: there is a 50%
chance that A wins because the winning ticket is red, and a 25% chance that A wins because the
decision maker reallocates tickets after learning that the winning ticket is blue. Thus, the revision
is inconsistent with a consequentialist interpretation of the ex ante objective.
    The current paper has two main objectives. First, we document the types of choice reversals
described above in a laboratory experiment. Indeed, we show that the single most common behav-
ioral pattern is for subjects to select the ex ante fair alternative ex ante (that is, before learning
the color of the winning ticket), and switch to the ex post fair alternative ex post (that is, after
learning the color of the winning ticket). This pattern does not diminish with experience, and the
preferences of most subjects are strict. Second, we attempt to distinguish between two classes of
potential explanations. One embraces consequentialism and construes the reversals as manifesta-
tions of time inconsistency. This inconsistency arises naturally from the tension between ex ante
and ex post perspectives on fairness: if the ex ante perspective is compelling ex ante and the ex post
perspective is compelling ex post, then a decision maker may shift from the first to the second as
events evolve. The other class of explanations rejects consequentialism along with the notion that
revisions imply inconsistency. Instead, it depicts decision makers as having time-consistent pref-
erences for applying simple (and arguably naive) deontological principles (rule-based ethics), even
though a consequentialist would deem their implications time-inconsistent. A rule that prescribes
egalitarian treatment of indistinguishable parties will likewise produce ex ante fair allocations for
actions executed ex ante, and ex post fair allocation for actions executed ex post.


                                                   1
   We employ two strategies to distinguish between these explanations. First, we assess the demand
for commitment among decision makers who have observed their proclivity to switch. In the
preceding example, if the decision maker is a time-consistent consequentialist, she will recognize
that her ex post choices will shift A’s ex ante odds of winning to 75%, and will therefore seek to
remove opportunities for revision. In contrast, if she has a time-consistent preference for applying a
simple deontological rule requiring egalitarianism, she will exhibit an aversion to any commitment
that would preclude her from responding ethically. For example, she will preserve the flexibility
to reallocate the blue tickets equally upon learning that the winning ticket is blue. Our second
strategy is to examine contingent planning. Instead of allowing decision makers to revise their
choices ex post, we require them to specify contingent plans for their revisions ex ante. Under
the hypothesis of time-inconsistent consequentialism, the decision-maker will choose a plan that
is ex ante fair accounting for the revision. In contrast, under our hypothesis concerning naive
deontological ethics, she will specify that “live tickets” should be reallocated equally ex post.
   Our data on the demand for commitment require careful interpretation. Roughly 40% of our
subjects strictly prefer commitment to flexibility, while roughly 30% prefer flexibility to commit-
ment. Taken at face value, this finding suggests that time-inconsistent consequentialists are a
bit more numerous than those who practice simple deontological ethics. However, the observed
preference for commitment likely overstates the prevalence of time-inconsistent consequentialists.
Subjects who are prone to exhibit the characteristic choice pattern (switching from ex ante to ex
post equalizing allocations) also disproportionately manifest a preference for retaining flexibility
over making commitments. Conversely, a preference for commitment is most prevalent among those
who are least likely to switch, which suggests that many of those who choose commitment do so to
avoid the annoyance of having to submit their preferences twice, rather than to preempt revisions.
Our analysis of contingent planning corroborates these inferences: many subjects choose an initial
allocation that is ex ante fair, but instruct us to reallocate their tickets evenly if it turns out that
the winning ticket is one of theirs. These results support our main conclusion: the most com-
mon attitude toward fairness involves a time-consistent preference for applying naive deontological
principles, even though a consequentialist would deem their implications time-inconsistent.
   Our findings have important practical implications. Even when people agree about the impor-
tance of fairness, they may disagree as to what constitutes a fair decision. An important dimension
of disagreement concerns the question of whether a fair society should pursue equality of opportu-
nity or equality of outcomes. Those who favor standards based on equality of original opportunities
tend to view fairness from an ex ante perspective. They tolerate even highly unequal outcomes
provided all parties had comparable shots at success. In contrast, those who favor standards based
on equality of updated opportunities or outcomes tend to think about fairness from an ex post per-
spective. Differences of opinion concerning the relative importance of these principles can produce



                                                   2
conflict over policy issues. However, our analysis suggests that those differences may not be stable.
In particular, we have shown that as information is revealed, people readily shift from the ex ante
to the ex post perspective. A society populated by such individuals would design policies ex ante
to promote equality of opportunity, only to undermine the objectives of those policies by consen-
sus (at least from the perspective of a consequentialist planner) once winners and losers emerge.1
Examples of potential applications include rules governing the treatment of pre-existing conditions
by health insurers, social insurance, policies impacting access to education, and the assignment of
priority for organ recipients; see the concluding section for further discussion.
    Our paper contributes to a large and growing body of empirical research on attitudes toward
fairness. The importance of fairness as a behavioral motivation is by now well-established.2 Several
previous experimental studies have examined whether people care about ex ante fairness, ex post
fairness, or both; see Bolton et al. (2005), Karni et al. (2008), Krawczyk and Le Lec (2010), Kircher
et al. (2013), Brock et al. (2013), and Trautmann and van de Kuilen (2016). Our contribution
involves exploring the existence and causes of choice reversals arising from the tension between ex
ante and ex post fairness.3
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We provide conceptual background in Section
2. We then describe the basic framework for our experiment in Section 3. Section 4 studies the
effect of ex ante versus ex post framing of allocation problems, and investigates whether concerns for
fairness generate choice reversals (revisions). Sections 5 and 6 test between competing explanations
by examining the demand for commitment and contingent planning. Section 7 concludes.
    1
      Coate (1995) makes a similar point in a setting where the inconsistency arises from a different source (the
Samaritan’s dilemma).
    2
      Classic experimental results include the tendency to divide a prize equally in the dictator game and reject lopsided
offers in the ultimatum game. See, for example, Forsythe et al. (1994), Hoffman et al. (1996), Camerer (1997), Bohnet
and Frey (1999), Andreoni and Miller (2002), Andreoni et al. (2003), Andreoni and Bernheim (2009), and Andreoni
et al. (2002). Early attempts to model concerns about fairness include Rabin (1993), Fehr and Schmidt (1999),
Bolton and Ockenfels (2000), and Charness and Rabin (2002). Related behavioral patterns are commonly observed
in the field. For instance, equal sharing is common in the context of joint ventures among corporations (Veugelers and
Kesteloot (1996), Dasgupta and Tao (1998), Hauswald and Hege (2003)), share tenancy in agriculture (De Weaver
and Roumasset (2002), Agrawal (2002)), bequests to children (Wilhelm (1996), Menchik (1980, 1988), Bernheim and
Severinov (2003)), and arbitration (Bloom (1986)).
    3
      To our knowledge, only one previous study (Trautmann and van de Kuilen, 2016) offers evidence potentially
related to the issue of fairness and time inconsistency. It examines a two-player allocation game in which nature
randomly tilts the outcomes in favor of one player or the other, and shows that players revise their ex ante choices
after the resolution of uncertainty with modest frequency. While it is obviously related to our work, the experimental
design implicates considerations other than fairness, in that each player has a selfish interest in the outcome. Ex
post and ex ante behavior may differ for three confounding reasons: opportunities for reciprocity only exist ex ante;
subjects may succumb to self-serving narratives ex post; subjects may revise their beliefs about other players’ choices.
In addition, the study investigates neither contingent planning nor the demand for commitment versus flexibility, and
consequently sheds no light on potential explanations for revisions.




                                                            3
2        Conceptual Issues
Distinguishing between consequentialist and non-consequentialist explanations for the apparent
choice reversals described at the outset of Section 1 requires a clear understanding of the pertinent
theories. This section explains these theories and describes their testable implications.

2.1       Consequentialism and concern for fairness as a source of time inconsistency

According to the doctrine of consequentialism, “whether an act is morally right depends only on
consequences.”4 Moral philosophers have devised many variants of consequentialism, and there
is disagreement as to what the doctrine entails. However, for the allocation problem described
at the outset of Section 1, a “plain-vanilla” interpretation of consequentialism would imply that
one should judge an allocation of lottery tickets based solely on its implications concerning the
probabilities with which each household would win the prize.
        Within a consequentialist framework, concerns for fair divisions of probabilistic claims on a
prize go hand-in-hand with time inconsistency. The objective of this subsection is to explain this
connection.
        To build intuition, we begin with a simple model. A natural hypothesis concerning fairness is
that, at any given point in time, the decision maker is concerned about the distribution of expected
utility. Focusing on the allocation task described in Section 1, we can write household i’s expected
utility as EUi = pi UiW + (1 − pi )UiL , where pi is the probability that i wins the prize, UiW is i’s
utility if i is the winner, and UiL is i’s utility if i is the loser. Allocating lottery tickets amounts
to selecting the probabilities pA , pB ∈ [0, 1] such that pB = 1 − pA . Assume the decision maker’s
preferences are governed by a strictly quasi-concave objective function of the form W (EUA , EUB ).5
If the problem is sufficiently symmetric so that W UAW , UBL is close to W UAL , UBW , the optimal
                                                                                     

choice – call it p∗A – is interior (and the optimal choice of pB is p∗B = 1 − p∗A ). Indeed, with perfect
symmetry, the decision maker’s ideal choice is to set p∗A = p∗B = 0.5.
        What happens when the decision maker is allowed to reallocate tickets after learning that some
are definitely losers, so that the ex post probabilities of winning the prize (conditional on the
initial ticket allocation) depart from p∗A and p∗B ? Re-optimizing W over probabilities yields the
same solution as before. Consequently, the decision maker revises her initial allocation to achieve
a division of the remaining “live” tickets that reinstates the probabilities p∗A and p∗B .
        The implied ex post revision is time-inconsistent: it reflects a failure to follow through on a
contingent plan that already specifies a desired outcome for every possible state of nature.6 As
    4
     See Sinnott-Armstrong (2015).
    5
      Note that any departure from linearity renders W nonlinear in probabilities, and hence inconsistent with the
independence axiom.
   6
     The phenomenon of time inconsistency is commonly associated with the notion of present focus, and in particular
with quasi-hyperbolic discounting (the β-δ model). It is important to bear in mind that present focus is merely an


                                                         4
a result, it induces ex ante odds that the decision maker finds unattractive from the ex ante
perspective. If she is sophisticated (in the sense that she anticipates her choice reversal), she will
seek to remove opportunities for revision by undertaking commitments prior to the resolution of
uncertainty. Similarly, regardless of whether she is sophisticated or naive, if she were asked to
specify a contingent plan for her revision before learning anything about the realization, she would
simply reaffirm her preference for her initial allocation.
    One should not infer from the preceding example that fair consequentialists are inevitably
time inconsistent. To illustrate, suppose the decision maker maximizes E (W (UA , UB )) instead of
W (EUA , EUB ). Notice that we can rewrite this objective function as

                                   pA W UAW , UBL + (1 − pA )W UAL , UBW .
                                                                       


Accordingly, the decision maker allocates all tickets to A when W UAW , UBL exceeds W UAL , UBW ,
                                                                                              

and all tickets to B when this inequality is reversed. While she could also choose an interior
allocation in the knife-edge case where W (UAW , UBL ) = W (UAL , UBW ), her preference would not be
strict – indeed, she would be indifferent among all possible allocations. The same decision rule is
optimal regardless of how tickets outside the decision maker’s control are distributed, and applies
with the same force both ex ante and ex post. Therefore, the decision maker is always content to
stick with her preferred ex ante allocation upon reaching the ex post position.7
    In our first example, the decision maker has a strict preference for interior probabilities, and
is also time-inconsistent. In our second example, the decision maker has a weak preference for
boundary allocations, and is time-consistent. These examples are representative, in that strict
preferences for interior values of p∗A and p∗B always imply time inconsistency. To understand why
this is the case, notice that p∗A ∈ (0, 1) cannot be a strict optimum unless utility is non-linear
in probabilities, which means that preferences violate the Independence Axiom.8 In other words,
someone who allocates probabilities in this way cannot be an expected utility maximizer.
    The next step is to recall that, within a consequentialist framework, EU preferences are time-
consistent while non-EU preferences are not.9 To be sure, a time-consistent individual may wish
to revise choices when new information becomes available. However, she will never do so if the
example of time inconsistency. The type of time inconsistency studied in this paper does not   involve Lpresent
                                                                                                                focus.
   7                                                                                   W    L                W
     When the decision maker sees the two households as equally meritorious (W UA        , UB  = W UA , UB      ), she is
indifferent about the division of lottery tickets both ex ante and ex post. Consequently, she is also indifferent about
making revisions and commitments. Under this hypothesis, behavioral patterns would likely be haphazard, but a
fortuitous resolution of indifference could nevertheless produce almost any choice pattern. To falsify this hypothesis,
one must therefore demonstrate that preferences for initial allocations, revisions, and/or commitments are strict. We
examine the strictness of preferences in sections 4.5 and 5.4.
   8
     Classical discussions of the inconsistency between a preference for ex ante fairness and the independence axiom
include Harsanyi (1955) and Diamond (1967). For more recent perspectives, see Fudenberg and Levine (2012) and
Saito (2013).
   9
      Classic references include Markowitz (1968) and Raiffa (1968). See also the excellent discussion in Machina
(1989), who emphasizes the role of consequentialism.


                                                           5
original choice specifies contingent actions tailored to each possible realization of that information.10
The connection between time consistency and the independence axiom is intuitive: in effect, time
consistency requires that the preferences governing choices at a given node in a decision tree are
independent of the probability with which the node is reached, as well as the consequences of
following any other positive-probability path.
       Putting these two classical observations together, one naturally arrives at the conclusion that
strict consequentialist preferences for interior probabilities generally imply time inconsistency.11

2.2      Non-consequentialism and time consistency

One should not conclude from Section 2.1 that strict preferences for interior probabilities necessarily
imply time inconsistency in all instances. Stepping outside the consequentialist framework, other
possibilities arise.

2.2.1      Naive deontological ethics

In moral philosophy, an important class of alternatives to consequentialism involve deontological
ethics. According to the deontological perspective, whether an action is morally right or wrong
depends on its conformance to specific rules and notions of duty. Kant’s categorical imperative is
perhaps the best-known theory of this type. Irrespective of their normative validity, deontological
perspectives such as Kant’s are likely far too complicated to provide good positive theories of ethical
reasoning. Even so, people routinely appear to employ simple deontological rules such as “do not
lie” and “do not steal”.
       When performing allocation tasks such as those described in Section 1, people may similarly
apply simple deontological principles. In principle, there are many possibilities. While we will not
be able to pin down a specific rule, we take the following to be a normatively appealing exemplar
from a larger class:

         When differences in claims on resources are the result of chance or other past events
         outside the control of the affected individuals, the ethical course of action is to impose
         equality.

       The mechanical application of this deontological principle replicates some of the main empirical
implications of fair consequentialism (under symmetry). In the ex ante setting, the decision maker
allocates the blue tickets to achieve an equal split overall, because the division of the red tickets
  10
     Consider, for example, the decision problem described in the introduction. There are twenty states of nature, each
corresponding to the selection of a particular lottery ticket. Any allocation of the tickets between the households is a
complete state-contingent plan specifying an assignment of the prize for every state of nature. Thus, a time-consistent
decision maker would not want to change the allocation upon learning that certain states did not materialize. As we
have already emphasized, any such revision alters the ex ante probability of winning.
  11
     A version of this point appears in Machina (1989). See also Trautmann and Wakker (2010).


                                                           6
was outside the control of both potential recipients. Yet in the ex post setting, she divides the blue
tickets equally, because the original ticket assignment and the selection of a blue ticket were both
outside the recipients’ control. Thus, her decision criterion generates an apparent choice reversal.
   Significantly, this theory departs from fair consequentialism with respect to empirical implica-
tions concerning the demand for commitment, and for contingent planning. It implies an aversion
to any commitment that would preclude the decision maker from responding ethically, for exam-
ple by reallocating the blue tickets to achieve equal division in accordance with her deontological
rule upon discovering that the winning ticket is blue. In such instances, the decision maker would
have a strict preference for flexibility. It can also rationalize instances in which the decision maker
instructs an agent ex ante to equalize holdings of the blue tickets if it turns out that the winner is
blue, because this instruction ensures an ethical action ex post.
   In short, the naive deontological principle discussed above leads the decision maker to agree
with the fair consequentialist that the ex ante perspective is compelling ex ante, and that the ex
post perspective is compelling ex post, but in contrast to consequentialism does not require her
to acknowledge any inconsistency between these judgments. On the contrary, the apparent choice
reversal reflects a time-consistent ethical preference for conforming to a fixed deontological rule.
   An individual who adopts the simple deontological ethic outlined in the preceding paragraphs
and applies it in the manner we have hypothesized may be naive in either or both of the following
senses. First, she may be philosophically naive, in that her application of the rule may involve
arbitrary narrow framing for which there is no ready normative justification. In particular, when
making her ex ante choice, her evaluation frame encompasses both the blue tickets and the red
tickets. However, when engaging in contingent planning ex ante, her evaluation frame encompasses
only the blue tickets, because she interprets the problem from the perspective of the stated ex post
contingency (instead of reformulating it from the perspective of her ex ante position before applying
her rule). Second, she may be cognitively naive, in that her lack of concern for the consequential
inconsistency of her ex ante and ex post choices may result from a logical lapse rather than a
deliberate judgment. To be clear, the simple deontological ethic does not require cognitive naiveté:
the decision maker might acknowledge the consequential equivalence of allocating all ten lottery
tickets to household B when A also holds ten possible winners, and doing so after learning that
A’s tickets are no longer “live,” but nevertheless deny the ethical equivalence of these alternatives.
In this paper, we do not attempt to distinguish between competing theories, such as these, that
might account for the adoption of a naive deontological ethic (although we do offer some suggestive
observations in the concluding section). Rather, we simply ask whether people behave in a way
that is consistent with the hypothesized ethic.




                                                  7
2.2.2        Resolute non-consequentialism

Another hypothesis worth investigating is that a fair decision maker violates the precepts of con-
sequentialism because she cares about process. In particular, she may behave consistently as time
passes because she takes past uncertainty (risks already borne) into account at each moment, in a
manner consistent with her earliest choices. People who behave in this manner are called resolute.12
A decision maker with resolute preferences for ex ante fairness engages in the same reasoning as a
consequentialist ex ante, but continues to evaluate actions from this ex ante perspective as events
unfold. A decision maker with resolute preferences for ex post fairness mimics the ex post reasoning
of a consequentialist, regardless of whether she contemplates the problem from and ex ante or ex
post perspective.
         Machina (1989) offers the following appealing illustration of resolute non-EU preferences. Mom
has two children, Ben and Abby, as well as a single treat. She cares about outcome fairness and
would ideally split the treat between them, but regrettably it is indivisible, so she must give it
to one or the other. Imagine she strictly prefers a coin flip over either sure outcome. Mom flips
the coin, and Abby wins. After pouting briefly, Ben has a sudden inspiration: he points out to
Mom that, in light of her stated and revealed preferences, she would be better off flipping the
coin again. Mom’s response: “sorry kid, you had your chance.” In this example, Mom strictly
prefers egalitarian allocations of chances to win a prize, but her preferences are resolute, so she is
time-consistent.
         The empirical implications of resoluteness are straightforward. A resolute decision maker with
strict fairness preferences is time-consistent and exhibits no choice reversals. She either selects the
ex ante fair allocation both ex ante and ex post, or the ex post fair allocation both ex ante and ex
post. She is indifferent between committing to an ex ante choice and retaining flexibility, and she
specifies no changes in ticket allocations when making contingent plans.


3         Experimental framework
Our study consists of a collection of related experiments. In this section, we summarize shared
aspects of the experimental design, data analysis, and implementation. In subsequent sections, we
provide additional detail concerning the individual experiments and summarize our results.

3.1        The basic allocation tasks

Each decision task involves the allocation of 20 lottery tickets between two impoverished Kenyan
families (A and B). The division of 10 tickets (numbered 11-20) is fixed in advance and varies from
    12
     The phrase “resolute preferences” appears to originate with McClennen (1989), but there are conceptual an-
tecedents. See the discussion in Machina (1989).



                                                      8
task to task (the “computer’s” ticket allocation). The subject allocates the remaining 10 tickets
(numbered 1-10). We then select one ticket at random, and the family “holding” that ticket receives
a $10 donation.13
       We implement donations with the cooperation of a well-established charity, GiveDirectly.14 The
organization operates a platform for donating money directly to needy households in poor African
nations. We selected the households viewed by our subjects from lists of GiveDirectly’s potential
recipients.
       We examine multiple variants of the allocation task, which differ with respect to the subject’s
knowledge and the timing of her decision. In all cases, the subject learns the computer’s allocation
before assigning her own tickets. The main variants are as follows:15

       Ex ante decisions. The subject makes her decision immediately after learning the computer’s
       allocation, without receiving any other information. We display her ticket allocation on the
       screen and ask her to review it; if desired, she can submit an updated allocation. She repeats
       this step until she confirms her choice. We then select a ticket at random, which determines
       the winner.

       Ex post decisions. We tell the subject that we have selected the winning lottery ticket at
       random. She also learns whether it is one of the computer’s tickets or one of hers. In the latter
       case, she then allocates her own tickets without knowing which is the winner. We display her
       ticket allocation on the screen and ask her to confirm or revise it. She repeats this step until
       she confirms her choice. We then reveal the winning ticket, which determines the winner.

       Ex ante decisions with surprise ex post revisions. After making one or more decisions
       in the ex ante frame, we return to these decisions and, one at a time, reveal to the decision
       maker whether the winning ticket is one of the computer’s tickets or one of hers. In the latter
       case, she does not learn the number of the winning ticket. We then display her ticket allocation
       on the screen again and, as in an ex post decision, ask her to confirm or revise it. (We do not
       advise her in advance that she will have another opportunity to revise her choices after learning
       whether the winning ticket is one of hers.) She repeats this step until she confirms her choice.
       The randomly selected ticket then determines the winner.

       We structure the presentation of each task to ensure that subjects view the two Kenyan house-
holds as equally deserving. At the outset of each task, subjects view photos of 16 potential recipients
  13
     The randomness of the outcome likely heightens fairness considerations. Cappelen et al. (2013) show that people
are particularly disinclined to accept ex post differences that result from luck rather than choice.
  14
     See http://www.givedirectly.org/. GiveDirectly is recognized as one of the most efficient charities serving this
sector. It was co-founded by a UCSD faculty member, a fact which may have enhanced its credibility with our UCSD
undergraduate subjects.
  15
     We explore additional variants in later sections.


                                                         9
including their Households A and B. We obtained the photographs from GiveDirectly, and they are
of the actual recipients. The composition of families within each group is uniform. In particular,
the recipients were shown in one of the following groups: single younger women, single older women,
couples with one child, or single men. To discourage subjects from searching for and inflating the
significance of minor differences between families, we do not indicate which household within a
group is A and which is B. Subjects are informed that the households and their respective roles
are assigned before they allocate their tickets. After viewing the photos, subjects make their allo-
cation choice by selecting whether each of their ten tickets should go to household A or household
B. Subjects see the computer’s allocation of tickets on this same interface, and they are warned
that they cannot not change this allocation. The few subjects who attempted to do so received an
error message and were returned to the allocation interface to try again. For more details on the
instructions and interface, see the screenshots in Appendix C.2.

3.2   Categorization of choices

To streamline our analysis of the data, we group allocations into five categories. Table 1 illustrates
this categorization for the case in which the computer allocates eight tickets to Household A.

   Ex-ante equalizing. The subject allocates tickets so that each potential recipient ends up
   with the same number in total. For example, if the computer allocates 8 tickets to recipient A
   and 2 to B, the subject allocates 2 to A and 8 to B.

   Ex-post equalizing. The subject allocates five tickets to both potential recipients.

   Overcompensating. The subject allocates enough tickets to the potential recipient who re-
   ceived fewer from the computer to skew the overall distribution in that recipient’s favor, over-
   compensating for the disparity. For example, if the computer allocates 8 tickets to A and 2 to
   B, the subject allocates 1 to A and 9 to B.

   Mixed. The subject allocates more tickets to the potential recipient who received fewer from
   the computer, but does not completely compensate for the disparity. For example, if the
   computer allocates 8 tickets to A and 2 to B, the subject allocates 4 to A and 6 to B.

   Reinforcing. The subject allocates more tickets to the potential recipient who receives more
   from the computer. For example, if the computer allocates 8 tickets to A and 2 to B, the subject
   allocations 6 to A and 4 to B.

3.3   Details concerning implementation

We conducted the experiment at the University of California, San Diego Economics Laboratory
within the guidelines of an IRB-approved human subjects protocol. Subjects viewed these instruc-

                                                 10
tions on computer screens and followed along as the study leader read them aloud. Participants
made all responses using a computer interface programmed with Qualtrics survey software. We
separated subjects with partitions to ensure that they felt their allocations were private. At the
end of the experiment, subjects completed a short questionnaire in lieu of individual debriefing. A
total of 702 subjects participated in the experiment across all treatments. Each subject received
$15 for participating. Typically, the experiment lasted 45 minutes.16
         After completing all survey tasks, subjects filled out a short survey on demographics, including
questions designed to elicit political inclinations. We did not find any robust relationships between
behavior and political views, but it is worth noting that our sample includes relatively few subjects
who self-identified as strongly conservative.


4         Framing effects and choice reversals
In this section, we demonstrate that subjects tend to choose ex ante equalizing allocations when
initially confronting tasks with ex ante framing, and ex post equalizing allocations when initially
confronting tasks with ex post framing. Furthermore, the initial framing does not lock them into
a perspective on fairness either across or within tasks. As a result, in tasks with ex ante decisions
and surprise revisions, the single most common behavioral pattern is for subjects to select the ex
ante fair alternative ex ante, and then switch to the ex post fair alternative ex post. This pattern
does not diminish with experience, and the preferences of most subjects are strict.

4.1        Experimental Design

In our four main treatments, each subject performs eight allocation tasks. We divide these tasks
into four sets of two, with sets separated by one-minute breaks. Subjects understand that they will
perform at most one task involving any given household, and they view 16 new potential recipients
in every round. We also advise them in advance that we will implement only one of the eight
allocations, chosen at random at the end of the experiment.
         Table 2 summarizes the structure of the four main treatments and indicates the number of
subjects who participated in each. The first column lists treatment labels, which describe each
treatment’s composition using simple shorthand notation: “A” denotes an ex ante task, “P” denotes
an ex post task, and “AR ” denotes an ex ante task with surprise ex post revision. Thus, the label
2A2P 4AR indicates that the treatment starts with two ex ante tasks (“2A”) followed by two ex
post tasks (“2P”), followed four rounds involving ex ante tasks with surprise revisions (“4AR ”).
Importantly, all revisions take place after the subject makes initial allocations in rounds five through
eight. The main treatments have a common structure: in the first four rounds, subjects perform
    16
    For more details on treatment balance, as well as screenshots of all instructions and decision tasks, see Section
C of the Appendix.


                                                         11
either ex ante tasks, ex post tasks, or a mixture of the two, while the last four rounds (listed after
the underscore) always consist of ex ante decisions with surprise ex post revisions.17
    We vary the computer’s ticket allocation by round, as shown in Table 3. In light of this variation,
ex ante fair choices exhibit a distinctive “fingerprint.” Subjects do not see this table in advance;
rather, they learn the computer’s allocation at the start of each round.

4.2    Basic Framing Effects

This section documents two findings concerning the initial allocation chosen in each task (that is,
before any revisions). First, subjects tend to choose ex ante equalizing allocations when initially
confronting tasks with ex ante framing, and ex post equalizing allocations when initially confronting
tasks with ex post framing. Second, perspectives on fairness exhibit no persistence: subjects readily
switch between ex ante and ex post perspectives across tasks, and responses to the initial framing
of a task do not depend on the framing of previously encountered tasks.
    To establish the first of these two findings, we focus on the first four rounds of treatments
4A 4AR , in which subjects start off with four ex ante allocation tasks, and 4P 4AR , in which
subjects start off with four ex post tasks. Figure 1 shows the distributions of choices across the five
categories defined in Section 3.2. Panels A and B pertain to subjects performing tasks with ex ante
and ex post framing, respectively, during the first four rounds. The height of each bar indicates the
fraction of choices that fell within a given category. The shading reflects the consistency of subjects’
choices – it indicates the extent to which the choices in a given category were made by subjects
whose decisions fell into that category every round (darkest shading), three-quarters of the rounds,
half of the rounds, or one-quarter of the rounds (lightest shading). Note that subjects made four
ex ante choices, but only two ex post choices, because their tickets were selected only half the time.
We highlight consistency across rounds because it could be an indication of the seriousness and
deliberateness with which subjects approached the tasks and acted on coherent decision principles.
    The differences between the distributions depicted in panels A and B of Figure 1 are striking.
For panel A, which pertains to initial tasks with ex ante framing, most choices are ex ante equalizing
(that is, fully offsetting). Furthermore, all fully consistent choosers were ex ante fair. In contrast,
for panel B, which pertains to initial tasks with ex post framing, the modal choice is ex post fair
(that is, it involves no offsetting). Indeed, moving from panel A to panel B, the primary change
is that the frequency of ex ante fair choices declines by 34 percentage points, while the frequency
of ex post fair choices rises by 35 percentage points. Notably, ex ante fairness remains reasonably
common in the ex post frame (consistent with findings in Cappelen et al., 2013), even among
consistent choosers, while ex post fairness is relatively rare in the ex ante frame.18
  17
      Explanations of other treatments, which we used to examine the strictness of preferences and to test between
competing theories of choice reversals, appear in subsequent sections.
  18
     The differences between initial decisions made with ex ante and ex post framing do not dissipate over the course of


                                                          12
    Standard tests for the equality of distributions, such as Pearson’s χ2 test, are inapplicable here
because they do not account for within-subject correlation across the four rounds. More specifically,
any test that treats multiple observations of choices by the same subject as independent will tend to
exaggerate the statistical significance of the differences across treatments. A resolution of this issue
requires assumptions about the structure of the underlying statistical process. Accordingly, we
pool the data from the two treatments, estimate a multinomial logit model with category-specific
constants and category-treatment interactions, and perform a χ2 test of the hypothesis that all the
coefficients for the interaction terms are zero, clustering standard errors at the subject level. For
the distributions depicted in Figure 1, we reject equality decisively (p < 0.001).
    So far, we have seen that the framing of the four initial decisions strongly influences the initial
perspective on fairness. That finding does not necessarily imply that our subjects will exhibit
choice reversals. After all, our experiment involves decision tasks that few if any subjects have
previously encountered. Perhaps someone who initially performs such a task with one type of
framing thinks through the class of tasks from that perspective, and then adheres to the resulting
decision principles through subsequent tasks, even if the framing changes. In that case, subjects
would exhibit no reversals. Thus we ask whether, subject by subject, choices change as the decision
frame changes.
    To investigate these issues, we focus on treatments with changing decision frames, beginning
with 2A2P 4AR , in which subjects performed two tasks with ex ante framing, then two with ex
post framing, then four with ex ante framing (followed by surprise revisions), as well as 2P2A 4AR ,
in which subjects performed two tasks with ex post framing, then two with ex ante framing, then
an additional four with ex ante framing followed by surprise revisions. For now, when examining
rounds 5-8, we will focus on the original choices, leaving the analysis of revisions to Section 4.3.
    Figure 2 displays distributions of choices over the same five categories as Figure 1, except that
here we report results separately for rounds 1-2, 3-4, and 5-8. The first row pertains to treatment
2A2P 4AR , while the second pertains to 2P2A 4AR . For comparison, we also include treatments
4A 4AR and 4P 4AR in the third and fourth rows, respectively. We have highlighted the shifting
frames both with text (labeled with “EA” or “EP” in the corner) as well as with shading (darker
background for the ex post frame).
    Looking at this figure, one sees a striking similarity between the distributions of choices made
within a given frame, regardless of the preceding choices. All of the choice distributions for ex
ante frames closely resemble the distribution in Panel A of Figure 1, in that ex ante fair choices
are predominant. All of the choice distributions for ex post frames resemble the distribution in
the first four rounds of treatments 4A 4AR and 4P 4AR as subjects have more time to think through their attitudes
toward these types of decision tasks. See Figure C.3 in the Appendix. Also, in Figure C.14, we show that the
differences between the distributions illustrated in panels A and B of Figure 1 are primarily attributable to consistent
choosers.



                                                          13
Panel B of Figure 1, in that ex post fairness is the most common decision type. Thus, framing
effects exhibit little if any persistence: choices depend on the framing of the current task, but not
to any significant degree on the framing of initial or previous tasks. Subjects readily shift their
perspectives on fairness back and forth along with the decision frame. Formal statistical tests
confirm these visual impressions.19

4.3    Choice Reversals

The previous section documented a pronounced and stable tendency for subjects to adopt an ex
ante perspective on fairness when making decisions with ex ante framing, and an ex post perspective
when making decisions with ex post framing. Those findings point to a potential source of choice
reversals, but do not actually establish that such reversals occur. It is one thing to invoke different
decision criteria in completely separate tasks, and potentially quite another to revise the choice
made in a given task after arriving at a set of applicable principles for that task. Conceivably,
people could apply their principles resolutely within each task while failing to do so across tasks.
    To determine whether choice reversals actually occur, we examine the decisions subjects make
when they are unexpectedly allowed to revise decisions ex post after allocating tickets ex ante.
(Recall that we frame these opportunities neutrally as a second round of “confirming” their choices
in order to mitigate possible experimenter demand effects). We first focus on revisions made for
rounds 5 through 8 of treatment 4A 4AR . The subjects in this treatment only encounter tasks
with ex ante framing prior to learning that they can revise the last four choices ex post. Revisions
were the rule rather than the exception. Subjects revised 68.3% of the original round 5-8 choices,
and 78.9% of subjects revised at least one choice.20 Consistent with the notion that the ex post
perspective on fairness becomes compelling once the ex post position is reached, switches to 50-50
were by far the most common type of revision (71.1%).
    Figure 3 displays the distributions for original and final choices (the left and center panels
respectively). A comparison of the two panels reveals the effect of unexpected revision opportunities
on the distribution of allocations. The overall distribution shifts dramatically from one in which
ex ante fair choices predominate to one in which ex post fair choices predominate. Indeed, there
is a striking resemblance between Figure 3 and Figure 1. The right panel of Figure 3 shows that
revisions generally implemented equal division ex post.
   19
      We reject the hypothesis that frame has no effect on allocations in rounds 1 through 4 of treatments 4P 4AR ,
4A 4AR , 2A2P 4AR , and 2P2A 4AR (p < 0.0001), while we fail to reject the hypothesis that treatment dummies
jointly have no effect on allocations in those same treatments (p = 0.19). Lastly, we fail to reject the hypothesis
that the distributions of allocations in the last 4 rounds of these treatments are indistinguishable from each other
(p = 0.36). From the figures, it is apparent that the failure to reject stems from the similarity of the distributions
rather than from low power.
   20
      The revision frequency started out at 75.8% in round 5, dropped to 64.7% in round 6, and then rebounded a
bit in rounds 7 and 8 (65.8% and 67.6%). Overall, there is no indication that the tendency to revise dissipates once
subjects become aware of their behavior.


                                                         14
    In principle, the choice reversals by subjects in treatment 4A 4AR could be the result of subjects
not considering the ex post perspective until they find themselves with ex post opportunities to
revise allocations. Conceivably, those who consider both the ex ante and ex post perspectives might
reconcile the conflict internally and display greater consistency as a result. Figure 2 suggests not:
subjects continue to adopt ex ante perspectives on fairness in tasks with ex ante framing, and
ex post perspectives in separate tasks with ex post framing, even after exposure to both frames.
However, that evidence stops short of demonstrating that subjects continue to reverse ex ante
decisions when provided with opportunities to make ex post revisions.
    To address this set of issues, we examine patterns of revisions in the three treatments that
expose subjects to the ex post perspective in rounds 1-4: 4P 4AR , 2A2P 4AR , and 2P2A 4AR .
The frequency of revisions in each of these treatments is 69.4%, 69.8%, and 53.1%, respectively.
As in treatment 4A 4AR , subjects who made revisions primarily switched to ex post equalizing
allocations. Moreover, differences in the distributions of revision types (whether the subject moved
away from, toward, to, or past ex post fairness) between treatment 4A 4AR on the one hand and
treatments 2A2P 4AR , 2P2A 4AR , and 4P 4AR on the other were not statistically significant.21
    Figure 4 shows the joint distribution of the original and final choices for rounds 5 through 8,
pooling over all four treatments. The figure consists of five panels with five bars each. There is one
panel for each possible type of the original choice, which is indicated along the top of the figure.
Within each group, there is one bar for each possible type of the final choice, as indicated by the
label. Types of choices are displayed in the same order as in Figure 1, both for original and final
choices. Frequencies are expressed as percentages of the total number of round 5-8 original-final
choice pairs, so it is easier to see which patterns are most prevalent. The figure reveals that the most
common original-final choice pair, by a wide margin, is an ex ante equalizing allocation followed by
a revision to an ex post equalizing allocation (44.3% of observations). The second most common
choice pair, also by a wide margin, involves resolute ex ante fairness: the subject chooses the ex
ante equalizing allocation at the outset and declines to revise it (17.2%).
    These patterns are essentially the same for all four treatments, regardless of the framing expe-
rienced in the first four rounds. Thus, the predominance of the main pattern– initial ex ante fair
choices followed by ex post fair revisions – is undiminished when subjects gain experience with the
tension between the ex ante and ex post perspectives.

4.4    Subjects’ explanations for choice reversals

A non-incentivized survey at the end of our experiment included two open-response questions
designed to shed some light on motives and reasoning: “What factors did you consider when making
  21
     We fail to reject the hypothesis that revision behavior depends on treatment (p = 0.88). Once again, the failure
to reject reflects the similarity of the distributions rather than low power.




                                                         15
your initial allocation decisions?” and “What factors did you consider when deciding whether to
revise your initial allocations?” Virtually all subjects who switched from ex ante fairness to ex post
fairness explained that, in both settings, they were trying to equalize the chances of winning. For
example, one subject wrote as follows: “When I knew my ticket was chosen, I reallocated the tickets
to ensure both households had an equal opportunity.” Many articulated the same simple rule or
criterion for both settings, in some cases using precisely the same words, such as “Equal chance
between the two householders,” “Fa[i]rness; equal probability,” and “I consider equality.” None of
our subjects commented on the tension between their ex ante and ex post choices. On the contrary,
some of them explicitly stated that they saw their revision as following the same principles as their
initial allocation. For example, one subject explained their revision as follows: “I used the same
logic as I did before, giving the indistinguishable households equal chances of winning.” Another
wrote: “Same thing as the first time. I wanted to make the lottery fair so both households had
an equal chance of winning the lottery.” A third responded: “Same as above. To even out the
odds for both families if my ticket was chosen.” Shorter answers concerning the logic of a revision
included “Same as before” and “Same as above.”
       These subjective responses point toward the mechanical application of a simple deontological
rule of the type hypothesized in Section 2.2.1. We readily acknowledge the limitations of this type
of survey evidence and acknowledge that it is weak when evaluated in isolation. However, when
considered alongside the behavioral patterns documented in Sections 5 and 6, the survey responses
help to complete the picture.

4.5       Strictness of allocation preferences

It is important to verify that the patterns documented in the previous subsections reflect strict
preferences rather than the arbitrary resolution of indifference. To this end, we added treatments
in which subjects performed one of the following three modified decision tasks:

       Ex ante allocations with incentivized redistributions. After a subject chooses an alloca-
       tion in the ex ante frame, we present her with an unanticipated opportunity to enlarge the prize
       by reallocating all of her tickets to the household she treated less favorably. For example, if the
       subject chose to give 8 tickets to Household A and 2 tickets to Household B, the alternative
       would allocate all 10 tickets to Household B while increasing the prize from $10 to $(10 + x),
       where x ∈ {0.10, 0.50, 1, 2, 5}.22 Subjects make decisions for all five values of x. This modified
       task, AS , allows us to evaluate the strictness of preferences for the initial allocation. We incen-
       tivize the reallocation by adjusting the size of the prize rather than through payments to the
  22
   If the subject initially divides the tickets equally, the alternative allocates all tickets to a randomly selected
household in return for enlarging the prize.




                                                         16
    subject in order to avoid introducing a confounding factor (variation in the degree of altruism
    across subjects).

    Ex ante allocations with surprise ex post revisions, plus incentivized redistributions.
    After a subject chooses an allocation in the ex ante frame, she learns whether the winning ticket
    is one of hers, and then receives an unanticipated chance to revise her allocation, as in the AR
    task. We then present her with an unanticipated opportunity to enlarge the prize (as in the AS
    task) by reallocating all her tickets to the household she treated less favorably. This modified
    task, ARS , allows us to evaluate the strictness of preferences for the final allocation.

    Ex ante allocations with surprise ex post revisions, plus incentives to abandon
    the revisions. After a subject chooses an allocation in the ex ante frame, she learns whether
    the winning ticket is one of hers, and then receives an unanticipated chance to revise her
    allocation, as in the AR task. We then present her with choices between her revised ticket
    allocation and a prize of $10, and her initial ticket allocation and a prize of $(10 − x), where x ∈
    {0.10, 0.50, 1, 2, 5}. This modified task, ARI . allows us to evaluate the strictness of preference
    for the revised allocation over the initial allocation.

    As detailed in Table 4, we fielded one treatment for each type of task. Because these are
relatively time-consuming tasks, we limited these treatments to four rounds. We informed subjects
at the outset that we would implement their decision for one randomly chosen task and value of x.
    When facing a small (10 cent) incentive, subjects were unwilling to abandon their chosen al-
locations in 75% of AS tasks, 67% of ARS tasks, and 56% of ARI tasks. Increasing x to $0.50
produced only modest declines in these percentages. For the AS and ARS tasks, the reluctance
to switch remained high even with much larger incentives. For example, in the 4AS treatment,
subjects declined a $5 bonus nearly half (47%) of the time. Subjects may have exhibited weaker
preferences in the 4ARI treatment because the alternative – their initial allocations (usually 50-50)
– was generally less draconian, or because they were more averse to prize reductions than attracted
to increases. For complete results, see Figure 5.


5    Commitment Opportunities
In Section 2, we saw that consequential fairness preferences give rise to time inconsistency and, if
decision makers are sophisticated, to a demand for commitment. We also explained that a time-
consistent preference for implementing a simple and arguably appealing deontological rule can
produce the same pattern of seemingly inconsistent ex ante and ex post choices, but nevertheless
yields a strict preference for flexibility, so that the decision maker can respond to information in
accordance with her ethical principles. In this section, we distinguish between these classes of
theories by investigating whether a demand for commitment arises in the current context.

                                                    17
5.1       Experimental Design

To evaluate the demand for commitment, we introduce another variation of the allocation task:

       Ex ante decisions with commitment. After a subject chooses an allocation in the ex ante
       frame and confirms her choice (as in an ex ante task), we inform her that she will have an
       opportunity to reallocate her tickets after learning whether the winner is one of hers (but
       before learning who holds the winning ticket), unless she wishes to forgo that opportunity. At
       that point, she must express a preference for flexibility (“I definitely want the opportunity to
       revise”), a preference for commitment (“I definitely do not want the opportunity to revise”),
       or indifference (“I do not care about having an opportunity to revise”). If a subject expresses
       a preference for flexibility, she learns whether the winning ticket was one of the computer’s
       tickets or one of hers. In the latter case, she does not learn the number of the winning ticket,
       but receives an opportunity to reallocate her tickets (as in an ex post task). If a subject expresses
       a preference for commitment, she makes no other decisions. If a subject expresses indifference,
       we implement a 50-50 randomization between these two alternatives. We then select a ticket at
       random, which determines the winner. Subjects learn all these rules in advance.

       We implemented this variation of the allocation task in a treatment (4AR 4AC ) with 72 subjects.
During the first four rounds, subjects have opportunities to experience decision making in both the
ex ante and ex post frames, as well as to notice their own tendencies to make revisions.23 During the
final four rounds, they start by making ex ante decisions, but are given options to forgo subsequent
revision opportunities.
       As shown in Section 5.2, many subjects choose to make commitments, which mitigate the ten-
dency to shift from ex ante fair to ex post equalizing allocations. However, additional findings
presented in Subsection 5.3 lead us to conclude that the apparent demand for commitment exag-
gerates the prevalence of time-inconsistent consequentialism. As a group, those who are inclined to
switch from ex ante to ex post fairness actually avoid making commitments to a greater extent than
other subjects. Apparently, many of them prefer to have and to exercise the flexibility to switch.
That preference is consistent with the theory of naive deontological ethics discussed in Subsection
2.2.1.
  23
     In rounds 1-4 of treatment 4AR 4AC , subjects generally exhibited the same patterns observed in rounds 5-8 of
treatment 4A 4AR , documented in section 4. For instance, 60.4% of the original choices were ex ante fair, while only
10.4% were ex post fair, and subjects revised 65.3% of choices ex post when given the opportunity. Of the revised
choices, 69.1% were ex post equalizing, while only 1.1% were ex ante equalizing. We do not reject the equivalence
of initial (p = 0.37) or final (p = 0.78) behavior in rounds 1-4 of treatment 4AR 4AC and rounds 5-8 of treatment
4A 4AR (due to the similarity of the distributions rather than to the absence of statistical power).




                                                         18
5.2      Overall effects of commitment opportunities

In this subsection, we address three questions. First, do subjects choose to forgo future flexibility
when given the opportunity? Second, does the availability of these commitment opportunities
reduce the frequency of revisions? Third, does it change the distribution of final choices?
       Our first finding is that subjects choose commitment and flexibility with reasonably high fre-
quency. They expressed a strict preference for commitment 40.6% of the time, a strict preference
for flexibility 30.2% of the time, and indifference 29.2% of the time. These frequencies do not vary
systematically across rounds.
       Making a commitment does not necessarily change the outcome. For example, those with
no inclination to revise may opt for commitments to avoid the inconvenience of reiterating their
choices. Despite that possibility, our second finding is that commitment opportunities significantly
reduce the frequency of revisions. Subjects revised only 36.8% of decisions in the last four rounds of
4AR 4AC ,24 which is a little more than half of the comparable frequencies from the first four rounds
of the same treatment (65.3%) and the last four rounds of treatment 4A 4AR (68.3%); moreover,
these differences are statistically significant (p < 0.001 in both cases).25
       Our third finding is that commitment opportunities significantly change the distribution of final
choices. Comparing the distributions of the original allocations, we see very little difference between
the first four rounds and the last four rounds of treatment 4AR 4AC .26 In contrast, there are striking
and statistically significant differences between the distributions of final outcomes (p = 0.03).
       Under the hypothesis that our subjects are fair consequentialists who seek commitments to
mitigate time inconsistency, we would expect the frequency of ex ante fair allocations to be higher,
and that of ex post equalizing allocations to be lower, with commitments. That is indeed what
we find: the frequency of ex ante equalizing allocations is 11 percentage points higher (49.0% vs.
37.8%) in the last four rounds (with commitment) than in the first four (without commitment), and
the frequency of ex post fair allocations is about 8 percentage points lower (24.0% versus 32.3%).
       A closer look at the joint distribution of initial and final choices confirms that commitment
opportunities mostly suppress migration from ex ante to ex post fair choices. Resolute ex ante
behavior increases from 16.7% to 35.4%, while revisions from ex ante to ex post fairness decrease
from 36.8% to 17.4%.27
  24
      For much of the analysis in this section, including the calculation of this figure, we focused on the tasks that the
subject would have been allowed to revise if she had chosen flexibility.
   25
      Similarly, 51.4% of subjects revised at least one decision in the last four rounds of 4AR 4AC , compared with
80.6% in the first four rounds of the same treatment and 78.9% in the last four rounds of treatment 4A 4AR ; these
differences are also statistically significant (p < 0.001 in both cases).
   26
      In fact, we do not reject the hypothesis that these two distributions are identical (p = 0.43). This finding reflects
the similarity between the distributions rather than the lack of statistical power.
   27
      The fractions of individuals choosing and sticking with three of the other four options also decline, but the
changes are modest by comparison. As we discuss in Appendix B, offering commitment also suppresses migration
from ex ante equalizing allocations to ex post equalizing allocations among subjects whose choices were consistent



                                                            19
5.3     Understanding the demand for flexibility and commitment

We have seen that subjects make commitments with high frequency, and that these commitments
reduce the frequency of revisions, primarily from ex ante to ex post equalizing allocations. Moreover,
it is also the case that many subjects opt for flexibility and then revise their allocations. How can
we account for both findings?
    One possibility is that the theories discussed in Section 2 are correct but the population is
heterogeneous. Under this view, one attributes the preference for, and effects of, commitment
to time inconsistency among sophisticated subjects with consequential non-EU preferences, and
the preference for flexibility and switching to subjects who embrace a naive deontological ethic.
However, there are other possibilities. In principle, naiveté (lack of self-awareness) among time-
inconsistent subjects could explain why some subjects maintain flexibility and then revise their
allocations, and experimenter demand effects could account for all of these observations.28
    In this subsection, we present a series of findings that cast additional light on subjects’ reasons
for making or not making commitments. These findings speak to two questions. First, which sub-
groups exhibit the greatest demand for commitment? Second, what do subjects do with flexibility
when they intentionally retain it?

5.3.1    Which subgroups exhibit the greatest demand for commitment?

If the primary purpose of commitments is to impede undesired revisions from ex ante fair to ex
post equalizing allocations, then the demand for commitment should be greater among subjects
who choose initial allocations that entail a degree of ex ante fairness, and especially among those
who then tend to switch to ex post equalizing allocations when no commitments are allowed. In
contrast, if migration from ex ante fair to ex post fair allocations reflects a naive deontological
ethic, those same groups should exhibit a greater demand for flexibility. As we explain next, the
evidence points to the latter hypothesis.
    First, we find that the demand for commitment is lower, and the demand for flexibility higher,
when subjects choose allocations they are more likely to revise (specifically, ones that entail a
degree of ex ante fairness). When subjects started out by selecting the ex post fair allocation, the
frequency with which they chose commitment was roughly three times as high as that with which
they chose flexibility (52.6% vs. 15.8%). In contrast, when subjects started out by selecting the
ex ante fair option, the frequency with which they chose commitment was only slightly larger than
that with which they chose flexibility (42.4% vs. 33.7%).29
across rounds.
   28
      See section B.3 of the appendix for more discussion of these points.
   29
      When they started out by selecting reinforcement (the only other non-offsetting category), the relative prevalence
of commitment choices (41.8% vs. 18.6%) was nearly as large as when they selected the ex post fair allocation. When
they started out by choosing either an overcompensating or mixed allocation, the relative frequency of a preference



                                                          20
    Second, we find that the demand for commitment is lower, and the demand for flexibility higher,
among subjects who exhibit a greater tendency to migrate from ex ante fair to ex post equalizing
allocations when no commitments are allowed. Recall that every subject had two opportunities to
revise initial allocations during the first four rounds, and no opportunities to make commitments.
In Figure 6, we have divided the subjects into six groups according to the patterns of their initial
choices and revisions during those rounds. For each group, we display the frequencies with which
those subjects expressed a preference for flexibility, a preference for commitment, and indifference
during the last four rounds. Those who revised twice in the first four rounds, always from the
ex ante equalizing allocation to the ex post equalizing allocation, opted for flexibility more than
50% of the time and for commitment only 17% of the time. In sharp contrast, those who never
revised in the first four rounds opted for commitment more than 65% of the time and for flexibility
only 12% of the time. More generally, the figure establishes that the demand for flexibility was
concentrated among those who revised more frequently in the first four rounds, while the demand
for commitment was concentrated among those who revised less frequently. The differences between
these frequencies are statistically significant (p = 0.027).
    Relatedly, we show in Appendix B.3 that those who chose flexibility and then made revisions
likely understood their propensity to revise, because they had frequently revised allocations in the
first four rounds. Consequently, the tendency to retain and then use flexibility does not appear to
flow from naive or uniformed decision making.

5.3.2    How do subjects exercise flexibility when they intentionally retain it?

If the primary purpose of commitments is to impede undesired revisions from ex ante fair to ex post
equalizing allocations (as implied by fair consequentialism), then we would expect to find that the
subjects who opt for flexibility exhibit relatively low rates of revision and migration from ex ante
fair to ex post fair allocations. In contrast, if migration from ex ante fair to ex post fair allocations
reflects the consistent application of a naive deontological ethic, that pattern should be particularly
prevalent among those who affirmatively choose flexibility. As we explain next, the evidence again
points to the latter hypothesis.30
    First, we find that, in tasks with commitment options, the revision rate is exceptionally high
among those who opt for flexibility. Overall, subjects revised 85.4% of decisions in tasks where
they chose flexibility over commitment. Significantly, that figure is higher, not lower, than the
comparable figures for the first four rounds (65.3%), and for the last four rounds of treatment
4A 4AR (68.3%).
for commitment (20.0% vs. 40.0%, and 15.0% vs 45.0%, respectively) was even lower than when they chose the ex
ante fair allocation.
  30
     Here we acknowledge that experimenter demand effects may establish a baseline frequency for revisions. However,
that possibility does not explain the specific observation that revisions by those that choose flexibility tend to yield
ex post fair outcomes. Closer examination of revisions allows us to differentiate between the hypotheses of interest.


                                                          21
   Second, we find that those who opt for flexibility are disproportionately inclined to migrate from
ex ante fair to ex post equalizing allocations. Focusing on the migration patterns for those who
affirmatively retained the flexibility to revise, 66.7% of the original choices were ex ante fair, and of
those, 80.8% were revised to ex post fair choices. Thus, migration from ex ante to ex post fairness
predominates among uncommitted choices: it accounts for 51.2% of the choice pairs. This pattern
suggests that many of those who migrate from ex ante fair to ex post fair choices actually prefer
the flexibility to migrate. Focusing on those who said they were indifferent between commitment
and flexibility, only 4.8% of the choice pairs exhibited migration from ex ante to ex post fairness,
and the most common pattern was to select the ex ante fair allocation and stick with it. This
contrast again suggests that those who intentionally avoid commitments affirmatively value the
ability to switch from an ex ante fair choice to an ex post fair one, and have no desire to preclude
this migration.

5.4   Strictness of preferences for commitment and flexibility

It is once again important to verify that the patterns documented in the previous subsections reflect
strict preferences rather than the arbitrary resolution of indifference. To this end, we added another
type of decision task:

   Ex ante allocations with incentivized commitment. This task adds an additional stage
   to task AC . For those choosing flexibility, we ask whether they would be willing instead to
   commit to their original choice if we increased the total prize from $10 to $(10 + x), where
   x ∈ (0.25, 0.50, 1, 2.50, 5). Similarly, for those choosing commitment, we ask whether they would
   be willing instead to retain flexibility if we increased the total prize by the same amounts. This
   modified task, ACS , allows us to evaluate the strictness of preference for commitment and
   flexibility.

   We implemented this variation of the allocation task in a treatment (4AR 4ACS ) with 79 sub-
jects. Similar to other treatments, 69% of initial choices in rounds 1-8 were ex ante equalizing, and
75% of revisions in rounds 1-4 were ex post equalizing. In rounds 5-8, subjects chose flexibility
34% of the time, commitment 36% of the time, and indifference 30% of the time. We find that
preferences for commitment and flexibility are typically strict, in that roughly 80% of subjects are
unwilling to switch for the smallest prize bonus ($0.25). Also, the demand for flexibility is more
robust among those who revised from the ex ante fair to the ex post equalizing allocation at least
once in the first four rounds, while the demand for commitment is more robust among those who
did not make this revision. See Figure 7 for complete results.




                                                   22
6       Contingent planning
In Section 2, we explained that someone who follows the hypothesized naive deontological ethic will
reaffirm her desire to switch to the ex post fair allocation when asked to specify a contingent plan for
her revision prior to learning any information about the realization. In contrast, a time-inconsistent
consequentialist with strict fairness preferences will choose a contingent plan that reiterates her ex
ante choice. Thus, to test between these theories, we examine another variation of the allocation
task:

    Ex ante allocations with planned ex post revisions. The subject allocates her tickets im-
    mediately after learning the computer’s allocation, without receiving any other information. As
    in an ex ante decision, we ask her to confirm or revise it. Later on, once all initial allocations
    have been entered, we revisit each allocation problem again. We explain that the participant
    will soon learn whether the winning ticket is one of hers, and we ask her to provide us with
    instructions for that contingency. She may re-enter her initial allocation, or she may provide
    a revised allocation. Aside from committing to revisions before rather than after the receipt
    of information, this task, labeled AP , is identical to task AR . It allows us to evaluate whether
    subjects lock in their ex ante or ex post objectives when explicitly adopting contingent plans.

    In this task, a time-inconsistent consequentialist will always choose a plan that delivers the same
outcome as the ex ante task (task A) – typically ex ante fairness. Indeed, from a consequentialist
perspective, tasks A and AP are equivalent, because the initial ticket allocation already specifies a
fully contingent plan (“if this ticket is the winner then this household will receive the prize”). In
contrast, if a subject implements the naive deontological ethic as we have hypothesized, she will
implement a plan that delivers the same outcome as the ex post task – typically ex post fairness.
From her perspective, the difference in framing makes the tasks A and AP non-equivalent.
    We implemented this variation of the allocation task in a treatment (4A 4AP ) with 46 sub-
jects. Subjects first made four decisions with ex ante framing, followed by four tasks with planned
revisions.
    The results are shown in Figure 8, which displays the marginal distributions of original and
planned revisions during the final four rounds of treatment 4A 4AP . Similar to other treatments, a
majority of ex ante choices were ex ante equalizing.31 In contrast, a majority of the contingent plans
are ex post equalizing.32 Overall, there is a striking similarity between Figure 8 and the first two
  31
     In the last four ex-ante decisions that came before contingent planning decisions, 66% (122) of decisions were ex
ante equalizing, compared to 66% (190/284) of initial decisions in the last four rounds of 4A 4AR (p = 0.93).
  32
     Specifically, 57% of revised allocations were ex post equalizing, while just 16% were ex ante equalizing. The
comparable frequencies in rounds 5 through 8 of treatment 4A 4AR were 53% and 15%, respectively. Altogether,
62% of allocations were revised from ex ante equalizing to ex post equalizing in the contingent planning tasks,
compared to 65% in the final four rounds of 4A 4AR (p = 0.99).



                                                         23
panels of Figure 3, which shows the original and final choices in the last four rounds of Treatment
4A 4AR . Many subjects choose an initial allocation that is ex ante fair, but instruct us to reallocate
their tickets evenly if it turns out that the winning ticket is one of theirs. The similarity between
the distributions of planned revisions and revised choices indicates that subjects plan ex ante to
make the same selections they would prefer ex post. This pattern is at odds with the hypothesis
of time-inconsistent consequentialism, but confirms the hypothesis of naive deontological ethics.


7       Conclusions
In this paper, we have explored experimentally how people think about fairness in settings where
there is a tension between ex ante and ex post perspectives. We demonstrated that most people
robustly pursue ex ante fairness in the ex ante position and ex post fairness in the ex post position.
Most importantly, however, when we reveal information that converts an ex ante frame into an ex
post frame, subjects deliberately switch from ex ante fair choices to ex post fair choices, despite
the fact that these revisions make the final allocation clearly unfair from an ex ante perspective.
    We have considered two classes of explanations for this pattern. The first holds that our
subjects are fair consequentialists, and that switching reflects time inconsistency that emerges
naturally from the conflict between the ex ante and ex post perspectives. The second depicts
decision makers as having time-consistent preferences for applying naive deontological principles,
even though a consequentialist would deem their implications time-inconsistent. In particular, a
rule that prescribes egalitarian treatment of indistinguishable parties will likewise produce ex ante
fair allocations for actions executed ex ante and ex post fair allocations for actions executed ex
post.
    How can we tell if we are observing undesired time inconsistency? We give people the chance to
learn they are time inconsistent and offer them ex ante commitment opportunities. How can we tell
if we are observing deliberate and therefore time-consistent desires to follow a simple deontological
rule? After giving them some experience, we ask them to specify fully contingent plans. While a
modest demand for commitment indicates some time-inconsistent consequentialism, the weight of
the evidence points to naive deontological ethics.
    These findings have potentially important implications for public policy. The tension between
concerns for equality of opportunity (a notion of ex ante fairness) and equality of outcomes (a
notion of ex post fairness) is evident in many public policy debates. Our analysis implies that
notions of fairness will tend to evolve systematically as information concerning outcomes progres-
sively emerges. As a result, citizens who care about fairness may end up supporting policies that
undermine the consequential implications of their original positions.
    As an example, consider the question of whether the government should permit health insurance
companies to account for preexisting conditions when setting premiums. Ex ante fairness requires


                                                  24
only that everyone has the opportunity to purchase fairly priced insurance prior to developing any
medical condition. Under that policy, some who initially decide against insurance will subsequently
develop conditions that imply elevated health risks, at which point insurance companies may only
be willing to provide coverage at prohibitive rates. Ex post fairness may then argue for rules
that make insurance affordable, for example by prohibiting underwriting based on preexisting
conditions. Unfortunately, that policy discourages people from purchasing insurance ex ante and
thereby exposes insurance companies to adverse selection, which renders these markets less efficient.
Similar considerations arise in the context of social insurance. For instance, concerns over ex post
fairness towards victims of natural disasters may account for the U.S. government’s heavy reliance
on ex post disaster relief (i.e., through FEMA), which undermines ex ante insurance and risk
minimization.
      On a more conceptual level, one can think of this paper as a positive investigation of normative
ethics. We do not attempt to derive criteria for judging whether a choice is ethical. Instead, our
research sheds light on the criteria people actually use. It points toward a deontological perspective,
wherein people judge the morality of an action non-consequentially, according to its consistency with
ethical rules. Whether the judgments we identify resonate with a particular flavor of deontology
(such as Kantianism) is an interesting question, but one that ventures beyond the more pragmatic
objectives of the current study.
      Our findings raise other important questions that are worth consideration in future research.
For example, while we have attempted to distinguish between two broad classes of explanations
for the tendency to switch between ex ante and ex post perspectives on fairness, much remains
unclear about the particular structure of preferences. As we have noted, an objective function of
the form W (EUA , EUB ), which captures concern for the distribution of expected utility, can give
rise to a preference for equal division of lottery tickets, but so can other specifications. Consider,
for example, the possibility that decision makers employ probability weighting, an assumption
for which there is substantial precedent in the literature on risk and uncertainty (for example,
Kahneman and Tversky (1979)). In the context of our split-the-tickets task, we would write the
objective function as

                            π (pA ) E W UAW , UBL          + π (1 − pA ) W UAL , UBW
                                                                                     
                                                                                            .

A preference for equal division of tickets emerges under the assumptions of symmetry and concavity
of π. While the implications of these two preference specifications are essentially indistinguishable
for split-the-tickets tasks, they diverge sharply in related contexts. We refer the interested reader
to Appendix A, where we demonstrate that it is possible to differentiate these models by examining
a related class of decision tasks.33
 33
      In Appendix A, we describe a split-the-prize task, in which we specify an arbitrary allocation of a fixed dollar



                                                            25
    Another important question is whether those practicing the simple deontological ethic are philo-
sophically naive or cognitively naive. The hypothesis of cognitive naiveté encompasses the possibil-
ity that people may misapply their underlying ethical principles in ex ante and/or ex post settings
because they have difficulty reasoning out the full implications of their choices. For example, to
understand the consequences of choices in our experiment, subjects must engage in contingent
reasoning, and also reduce a compound lottery. On the one hand, prior research has shown that
people sometimes find these tasks challenging.34 On the other hand, the close correspondence
between contingent plans and ex post choices suggests that subjects had a strong grasp of the
relevant contingency in this instance. Moreover, in Appendix A, we show that qualitatively similar
patterns arise with a prize-splitting (as opposed to ticket-splitting) task, for which the structure of
contingencies is even simpler and compound lotteries are avoided. While this finding suggests that
our results are at least partly attributable to philosophical rather than cognitive naiveté, further
investigation of this question is clearly warranted.
    It is also important to know whether the robustness with which people switch between ex ante
and ex post fairness reflects the habitual application of a familiar ethical rule, or the thoughtful
application of a coherent value system. Would they continue to migrate freely among these per-
spectives if they had a direct stake in the outcome, or would they rationalize a self-serving ethical
perspective? Would a particular perspective become more compelling if one of the recipient house-
holds were arguably more deserving? Do political beliefs and other socioeconomic factors predict
the mix of preference types? Investigating these and other important questions raised by this study
will, we hope, contribute to a deeper and more complete understanding of social preferences.




prize between the two parties, and the decision maker selects an alternate allocation. A coin flip determines whether
we implement the fixed or chosen allocation. Each subject chooses their allocation ex ante, but can revise it ex
post upon learning that the coin flip has selectedit. In this setting, the implications   of the two preference formula-
                                           W    L                         L    W
                                                                                 
tions, W (EUA , EUB ) and π (pA ) E W UA     , UB    + π (1 − pA ) W UA     , UB    differ sharply. Additional treatments
discussed in the appendix suggest that the population may include individuals with both types of preferences.
   34
      Esponda and Vespa (2014) document failures involving contingent reasoning. Harrison et al. (2015) find that
people have difficulty reducing compound lotteries in some contexts but not in others.


                                                           26
References
Arun Agrawal. Indigenous knowledge and the politics of classification. International Social Science
  Journal, 54(173):287–297, 2002.

James Andreoni and B. Douglas Bernheim. Social image and the 50–50 norm: A theoretical and
  experimental analysis of audience effects. Econometrica, 77(5):1607–1636, September 2009.

James Andreoni and John Miller. Giving according to garp: An experimental test of the consistency
  of preferences for altruism. Econometrica, 70(2):737–753, 2002.

James Andreoni, Paul M. Brown, and Lise Vesterlund. What makes an allocation fair? some
  experimental evidence. Games and Economic Behavior, 40(1):1–24, 2002.

James Andreoni, Marco Castillo, and Ragan Petrie. What do bargainers’ preferences look like?
  experiments with a convex ultimatum game. American Economic Review, 93(3):672–685, 2003.

B. Douglas Bernheim and Sergei Severinov. Bequests as signals: An explanation for the equal
  division puzzle. Journal of Political Economy, 111(4):733–764, 2003.

David E. Bloom. Empirical models of arbitrator behavior under conventional arbitration. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 68(4):578–585, 1986.

Iris Bohnet and Bruno S. Frey. Social distance and other-regarding behavior in dictator games:
  Comment. American Economic Review, 89(1):335–339, 1999.

Gary E. Bolton and Axel Ockenfels. Erc: A theory of equity, reciprocity, and competition. The
  American Economic Review, 90(1):166–193, 2000.

Gary E. Bolton, Jordi Brandts, and Axel Ockenfels. Fair procedures: Evidence from games involving
  lotteries. Economic Journal, 115(506):1054–1076, October 2005.

J. Michelle Brock, Andreas Lange, and Erkut Y Ozbay. Dictating the risk: Experimental evidence
  on giving in risky environments. The American Economic Review, 103(1):415–437, 2013.

Colin F. Camerer. Progress in behavioral game theory. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(4):
  167–188, 1997.

Alexander W. Cappelen, James Konow, Erik O. Sorensen, and Bertil Tungodden. Just luck: An
  experimental study of risk-taking and fairness. American Economic Review, 103(4):1398–1413,
  June 2013.

Gary Charness and Matthew Rabin. Understanding social preferences with simple tests. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3):817–869, August 2002.

                                                27
Stephen Coate. Altruism, the samaritan’s dilemma, and government transfer policy. The American
  Economic Review, pages 46–57, 1995.

Sudipto Dasgupta and Zhigang Tao. Incomplete contracts, ownership rights, and the optimality of
  equity joint ventures. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 37(4):391–413, 1998.

M. De Weaver and J. Roumasset. Risk aversion as effort incentive: A correction and prima facie
  test of the moral hazard theory of share tenancy. Economics Bulletin, 15:1–16, 2002.

Peter A. Diamond. The role of a stock market in a general equilibrium model with technological
  uncertainty. The American Economic Review, pages 759–776, 1967.

Ignacio Esponda and Emanuel Vespa. Hypothetical thinking and information extraction in the
  laboratory. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 6(4):180–202, November 2014.

Ernst Fehr and Klaus M. Schmidt. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3):817–868, August 1999.

Robert Forsythe, Joel L. Horowitz, N.E. Savin, and Martin Sefton. Fairness in simple bargaining
  experiments. Games and Economic Behavior, 6(3):347 – 369, 1994.

Drew Fudenberg and David K. Levine. Fairness, risk preferences and independence: Impossibility
  theorems. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 81(2):606–612, 2012.

Glenn W. Harrison, Jimmy Martı́nez-Correa, and J. Todd Swarthout. Reduction of compound
  lotteries with objective probabilities: Theory and evidence. Journal of Economic Behavior and
  Organization, 119:32 – 55, 2015. ISSN 0167-2681. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2015.07.
  012. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167268115002036.

John C. Harsanyi. Cardinal welfare, individualistic ethics, and interpersonal comparisons of welfare.
  J. Polit. Econ, 63, 1955.

Robert Hauswald and Ulrich Hege. Ownership and control in joint ventures: Theory and evidence.
  In Centre for Economic Policy Research, 2003.

Elizabeth Hoffman, Kevin A. McCabe, and Vernon L. Smith. On expectations and the monetary
  stakes in ultimatum games. International Journal of Game Theory, 25(3):289–301, 1996.

Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econo-
  metrica, 47(2):263–291, March 1979.

Edi Karni, Tim Salmon, and Barry Sopher. Individual sense of fairness: an experimental study.
  Experimental Economics, 11(2):174–189, 2008.

                                                 28
Philipp Kircher, Sandra Ludwig, and Alvaro Sandroni. On the difference between social and private
  goods. The BE Journal of Theoretical Economics, 13(1), 2013.

Michal Krawczyk and Fabrice Le Lec. ‘give me a chance!’an experiment in social decision under
  risk. Experimental economics, 13(4):500–511, 2010.

Mark J. Machina. Dynamic consistency and non-expected utility models of choice under uncertainty.
  Journal of Economic Literature, pages 1622–1668, 1989.

Harry M. Markowitz. Portfolio selection: efficient diversification of investments, volume 16. Yale
  University Press, 1968.

Edward F. McClennen. Justice and the problem of stability. Philosophy & Public Affairs, pages
  3–30, 1989.

Paul L. Menchik. Primogeniture, equal sharing, and the u.s. distribution of wealth. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 94(2):299–316, 1980.

Paul L. Menchik. Modelling the Accumulation and Distribution of Wealth, chapter Unequal Estate
  Division: Is It Altruism, Reverse Bequests, or Simply Noise? Oxford University Press, 1988.

Matthew Rabin. Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics. The American Economic
  Review, 83(5):1281–1302, 1993.

Howard Raiffa. Decision Analysis Intyroductory Lectures On Choices Under Uncertanity. Adison-
  Wesley, 1968.

Kota Saito. Social preferences under risk: Equality of opportunity versus equality of outcome. The
  American Economic Review, 103(7):3084–3101, 2013.

Walter Sinnott-Armstrong.      Consequentialism, 2015.     URL https://plato.stanford.edu/
  entries/consequentialism/#WhaCon.

Stefan T. Trautmann and Gijs van de Kuilen. Process fairness, outcome fairness, and dynamic
  consistency: Experimental evidence for risk and ambiguity. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 53
  (2):75–88, Dec 2016.

Stefan T. Trautmann and Peter P. Wakker. Process fairness and dynamic consistency. Economics
  Letters, 109(3):187–189, December 2010.

Reinhilde Veugelers and Katrien Kesteloot. Bargained shares in joint ventures among asymmetric
  partners: Is the matthew effect catalyzing? Journal of Economics, 64(1):23–51, 1996.

Mark O. Wilhelm. Bequest behavior and the effect of heirs’ earnings: Testing the altruistic model
  of bequests. The American Economic Review, 86(4):874–892, 1996.

                                               29
                                    Table 1: Illustration of allocation categories.


   Computer:                              (8, 2)

      Subject:   (0, 10)   (1, 9)         (2, 8)   (3, 7)   (4, 6)       (5, 5)   (6, 4)   (7, 3)     (8, 2)   (9, 1)   (10, 0)

                 |   {z      }        |  {z }      |    {z      }    |  {z }      |                     {z                   }
    Category:       Over-              Ex ante         Mixed          Ex post                       Reinforcing
                 compensating         equalizing                     equalizing


Notes: For this example, we assume the computer assigned eight tickets to household A. We order and categorize
choices according to the number of tickets the subject allocates to household A. To equalize probabilities ex ante, the
subject would allocate two tickets to household A and 8 to B. To equalize probabilities ex post, the subject would
allocate five tickets to each household. Other possible allocations fall into one of three ranges: overcompensating,
mixed, and reinforcing.




                                                               30
                             Table 2: Main treatments

Treatment   Rounds 1&2   Rounds 3&4   Rounds 5-8                        Number of subjects
4A 4AR      Ex-ante      Ex-ante      Ex-ante   w/surprise   revision   71
4P 4AR      Ex-post      Ex-post      Ex-ante   w/surprise   revision   72
2A2P 4AR    Ex-ante      Ex-post      Ex-ante   w/surprise   revision   48
2P2A 4AR    Ex-post      Ex-ante      Ex-ante   w/surprise   revision   48




                                       31
Table 3: Fixed allocation of computer’s tickets, by round

                                         Round
                          1     2   3    4   5   6   7   8
 Tickets to household A   7     2   10   1   8   3   9   0
 Tickets to household B   3     8   0    9   2   7   1   10




                           32
                Table 4: Strictness of allocation preference treatments.

Treatment   Rounds 1-4                                           Number of subjects
4AS         Ex-ante w/incentivized redist                        72
4ARS        Ex-ante w/surprise revision & incentivized redist    70
4ARI        Ex-ante w/surprise revision & incentive to abandon   55




                                          33
                                               Panel A: Ex Ante Frame                                                              Panel B: Ex Post Frame

             0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                            Consistency
 Frequency




             0.4                                                                                                                                                                                0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.75
             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                1



             0.0
                   Overcompensating



                                         Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                         Overcompensating



                                                                                                                            Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                      Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                         Ex Post Equalizing
                                                                                           Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                              Reinforcing
                                                              Mixed




                                                                                                                                                 Mixed
                                                                                           Choice category

                                      Figure 1: Distributions of initial choices conditional on initial framing

Notes: Panel A is based on the first four rounds of treatment 4A 4AR (284 observations). Panel B is based on the
first four rounds of treatment 4P 4AR (144 observations). Shading indicates the extent to which the choices in a given
category were made by subjects whose decisions fell into that category every round (darkest shading), three-quarters
of the rounds, half of the rounds, or one-quarter of the rounds (lightest shading).




                                                                                                         34
                                                   Rounds 1−2                                                                          Rounds 3−4                                                                         Rounds 5−8
             0.8
                     EA                                                                                                                                                      EP             EA
             0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2A2P_4AR
             0.4

             0.2

             0.0
             0.8
                                                                                         EP             EA                                                                                  EA
             0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2P2A_4AR
             0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Consistency
             0.2
 Frequency




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.25
             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
             0.8
                     EA                                                                                 EA                                                                                  EA                                                                                              0.75
             0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4A_4AR
             0.4

             0.2

             0.0
             0.8
                                                                                         EP                                                                                  EP             EA
             0.6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4P_4AR
             0.4

             0.2

             0.0
                   Overcompensating

                                      Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                      Overcompensating

                                                                                                                          Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                          Overcompensating

                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                   Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                       Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ex Post Equalizing
                                                                                        Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                            Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reinforcing
                                                           Mixed




                                                                                                                                               Mixed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mixed




                                                                                                                         Choice category

                     Figure 2: Distributions of choices in treatments with changing decision frames.

Notes: Rows 1 and 2 are based on rounds 1-8 of treatment 2A2P 4AR (48 subjects) and 2P2A 4AR (48 subjects),
respectively. Rows 3 and 4 are based on rounds 1-8 of treatment 4A 4AR (71 subjects) and 4P 4AR (72 subjects),
respectively. Results for rounds 5-8 reflect original choices, not revisions.




                                                                                                                                                        35
                                                            Initial                                                                              Final                                                          Final (changes only)
            0.8



            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Consistency
Frequency




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.25
            0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.75

            0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1



            0.0
                  Overcompensating


                                       Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                         Overcompensating


                                                                                                                            Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                            Overcompensating


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                      Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                         Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ex Post Equalizing
                                                                                           Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                              Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Reinforcing
                                                            Mixed




                                                                                                                                                 Mixed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mixed




                                                                                                                               Choice category



                                                              Figure 3: Marginal distributions of original and final choices.

                                     Notes: This figure is based on the final four rounds of treatment 4A 4AR (284 observations).




                                                                                                                                                         36
                                     Overcompensating                                                                    Ex Ante Equalizing                                                                                       Mixed                                                         Ex Post Equalizing                                                                                      Reinforcing



            0.4




            0.3
Frequency




            0.2




            0.1




            0.0
                  Overcompensating

                                     Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                      Overcompensating

                                                                                                                         Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                         Overcompensating

                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Overcompensating

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Overcompensating

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                   Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                      Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ex Post Equalizing
                                                                                        Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                           Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reinforcing
                                                          Mixed




                                                                                                                                              Mixed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mixed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mixed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mixed
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Choice category




                                                                  Figure 4: Joint distribution of original and final (revised) choices.

Notes: This figure is based on the last four rounds of treatments 4A 4AR , 4P 4AR , 2A2P 4AR , and 2P2A 4AR (478
observations). The panel labels indicate the classification of the original allocations, while the labels of the bars
indicate the classification of the final allocation.




                                                                                                                                                                                                             37
          0.6
 Demand




                                                                                       Strictness of Final Allocation
                                                                                       Strictness of Initial Allocation

          0.4                                                                          Strictness of Initial vs Final Allocation




          0.2



                0      1            2            3             4           5
                       ‘Prize Amount Deviation From 10‘


                               Figure 5: Strictness of allocation preferences.

Notes: This figure is based on treatments 4AS , 4ARS , and 4ARI . For the first two treatments, the vertical axis
indicates the percentage of subjects not willing to redistribute their tickets in return for enlarging the prize by the
amount indicated on the horizontal axis. For treatment 4ARI , the vertical axis indicates the percentage of subjects
not willing to restore their initial allocation in return for preserving the prize instead of reducing it by the amount
indicated on the horizontal axis.




                                                          38
                                             Revised twice,
                                           always EA to EP
                                          22.2% of subjects


                                             Revised twice,
 Revision behavior in first four rounds




                                            never EA to EP
                                          15.3% of subjects


                                             Revised twice,
                                          one time EA to EP                                                         Committment Choice
                                          12.5% of subjects
                                                                                                                       Committment
                                                                                                                       Indifference
                                             Revised once,
                                            never EA to EP                                                             Flexibility
                                          13.9% of subjects


                                             Revised once,
                                           always EA to EP
                                          16.7% of subjects



                                             Never Revised
                                          19.4% of subjects


                                                              0.00   0.25         0.50         0.75          1.00
                                                                               Percentage



                                              Figure 6: Commitment choices by migration patterns during the first four rounds

Notes: Data is from treatment 4AR 4AC (72 subjects). Revision categories are based on behavior in the first four
rounds, while commitment choices are from the last four rounds. An allocation is classified as revised if the participant
changed the numerical allocation of tickets, even if this revision did not move them to a different choice category.




                                                                                    39
                       Committed                             Flexible




          0.75
 Demand




                                                                                          Never Revised EA to EP

          0.50                                                                            Revised EA to EP at least once
                                                                                          Revised EA to EP both times




          0.25




                 1      2     3     4      5        1        2     3     4     5
                            ‘Prize Amount Deviation From 10‘


                     Figure 7: Strength of preference for commitment and flexibility.

Notes: Data are from treatment 4AR 4ACS . Revision categories are based on behavior in the first four rounds, while
commitment choices are from the last four rounds.




                                                        40
                                                            Initial                                                                              Planned Revision


            0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Consistency
Frequency




            0.4                                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.75
            0.2                                                                                                                                                                                        1



            0.0
                   Overcompensating



                                       Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                         Overcompensating



                                                                                                                            Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                      Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                Ex Post Equalizing
                                                                                           Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                                     Reinforcing
                                                            Mixed




                                                                                                                                                       Mixed
                                                                                           Choice category



                                      Figure 8: Marginal distributions of original and planned revisions.

            Notes: This figure is based on the final four rounds of the contingent planning treatment (184 observations).




                                                                                                         41
                                Online Appendix to:

  When Fair Isn’t Fair: Understanding Choice Reversals Involving Social Preferences

                                    July 15, 2019

James Andreoni, Deniz Aydin, Blake Barton, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Jeffrey Naecker




                                         1
A     Differentiating between competing formulations of fairness pref-
      erences
A strict preference for interior allocations in split-the-tickets tasks can arise when utility is non-
linear in probabilities. In Section 2.1, we discussed one possibility: preferences may be defined
over the distribution of expected utility, W (EUA , EUB ). In Section 7, we mentioned an alternative
formulation involving probability weighting: preferences may take the form π (pA ) W UAW , UBL +
                                                                                                

π (1 − pA ) W UAL , UBW . Symmetric versions of both formulations can account for the tendency to
                       

equalize overall ticket shares in ex ante divide-the-ticket tasks, as well as for choice reversals (the
tendency for subjects to divide their own tickets equally in ex post divide-the-tickets tasks). Here
we discuss other implications of these competing formulations and test between them.

A.1    Theoretical considerations

We examine a new class of allocation tasks, in which we specify an arbitrary allocation of a fixed
dollar prize between the two parties, and the decision maker selects an alternate allocation. A coin
flip determines whether we implement the fixed or chosen allocation. Each subject chooses their
allocation ex ante, but can revise it ex post upon learning that the coin flip has selected it.
    Even though the implications of the two preference formulations mentioned above are indistin-
guishable for divide-the-tickets tasks, they differ sharply for these “divide-the-prize” tasks. It is
easy to verify that, with probability weighting, ex ante and ex post choices must be identical: in
each case, the subject should choose her allocation to maximize W (UA , UB ). Hence there are no
choice reversals, and the chosen allocation is completely independent of the fixed allocation. In
symmetric settings, the subject divides the prize equally in both frames. In contrast, preferences
over the distribution of expected utility ordinarily give rise to partial offset of the fixed allocation
in the ex ante frame, and hence to choice reversals when moving from the ex ante frame to the ex
post frame.
    Let x and y denote the fractions of the prize given to household A in the subject’s allocation
and the fixed allocation, respectively. Assuming the decision maker’s preferences are defined over
the distribution of expected utility, we can write her utility as follows:
                                                                           
                                1         1              1              1
                   V (L) = W       u(y) + u(x) + W         u(1 − y) + u(1 − x)
                                2         2              2              2

The first-order condition is:
                                                                  
                  0 1         1     0        0 1            1
               W       u(y) + u(x) u (x) = W      u(1 − y) + u(1 − x) u0 (1 − x)
                     2        2                 2           2

Assuming concavity of w and u, this expression characterizes the optimum, x∗ (y), subject to corner
constraints.

                                                   2
    First consider the case of y = 0.5. It is immediate from the first-order condition that x∗ (0.5) =
0.5.
    Now suppose y > 0.5. Evaluating the derivative of the objective function at x = 1 − y, we have
                                                      
                 dV          1 0 1           1
                                      u(y) + u(1 − y) u0 (1 − y) − u0 (y) > 0
                                                                          
                          = W
                 dx x=1−y    2      2        2

Thus, x∗ (y) > 1 − y. Evaluating the derivate of the objective function at x = 0.5, we have
                                                                       
          dV             0 1        1              0 1             1
                    = W       u(y) + u(0.5) − W         u(1 − y) + u(0.5) u0 (0.5) < 0
           dx x=0.5         2       2                 2            2

Thus, x∗ (y) < 0.5. Plainly, x∗ (y) ∈ (1 − y, 0.5) implies partial offset.
    To understand the role of the curvature of W in determining the degree of offset, consider the
                                           z 1−α
isoelastic specification, W (z) =          1−α .   To ensure that the decision maker’s objective is well-defined,
assume also that u : R+ → R+ . For any given value of α, we will write the optimum as x∗ (y, α).
Consider two values of α, α0 < α00 .               For α0 , we can write the derivative of utility, evaluated at
x∗ (y, α0 ), as
                                                                             !1−α0                                
                                               1
                                                      + 21 u(x∗ (y, α0 ))                     u0 (1 − x∗ (y, α0 )) 
                                                                                                                 
         dV                                    2 u(y)
                                  =                                                  −
         dx   x=x∗ (y,α0 ),α=α0
                                           1             1          ∗
                                           2 u(1 − y) + 2 u(1 − x (y, α ))
                                                                          0                      u0 (x∗ (y, α0 ))

                                                              1−α0
                                  1           1       ∗     0
                          ×         u(1 − y) + u(1 − x (y, α ))      u0 (x∗ (y, α0 )) = 0
                                  2           2
For the first-order condition to hold, the first term must be zero. Now consider the same derivative
evaluated at x = x∗ (y, α0 ), but for α00 rather than α0 :
                                                                  !1−α00                        
                                        1        1    ∗      0
                                          u(y) + 2 u(x (y, α ))              0         ∗       0
                                                                                                 
       dV                                                                   u (1 − x (y, α )) 
                             = 1 2                                      −
       dx x=x∗ (y,α0 ),α=α00                     1         ∗    0
                                   2 u(1 − y) + 2 u(1 − x (y, α ))
                                                                               u0 (x∗ (y, α0 ))

                                                                  1−α00
                                      1           1       ∗     0
                              ×         u(1 − y) + u(1 − x (y, α ))       u0 (x∗ (y, α0 ))
                                      2           2
Notice that the expression after the bracketed term is strictly positive.                          Thus the sign of this
derivative depends entirely on the bracketed term. Because we have already established that the
decision maker partially offsets the fixed allocation, we know that
                                                1
                                                2 u(y) + 12 u(x∗ (y, α0 ))
                                            1             1          ∗     0
                                                                             >1
                                            2 u(1 − y) + 2 u(1 − x (y, α ))

Furthermore, with K > 1, we have
                                               d 1−α
                                                 K   = −K 1−α ln K < 0
                                              dα

                                                             3
Therefore,
                                                    !1−α00                                          !1−α0
                    1
                    2 u(y)+ 21 u(x∗ (y, α0 ))                        1
                                                                     2 u(y) + 21 u(x∗ (y, α0 ))
               1             1          ∗     0
                                                             <   1            1           ∗     0
                                                                                                            ,
               2 u(1 − y) + 2 u(1 − x (y, α ))                   2 u(1 − y) + 2 u(1 − x (y, α ))

                         dV
which means that         dx x=x∗ (y,α0 ),α=α00   < 0. From the concavity of the objective function, we then
know that      x (y, α ) < x∗ (y, α0 ). It
                ∗     00                         follows that the optimum involves a greater degree of offset
with   α00   than with   α0 .
    In the case of lexicographic preferences, the decision maker’s utility becomes
                                                                            
                                      1        1      1            1
                        V (L) = min     u(y) + u(x), u(1 − y) + u(1 − x)
                                      2        2      2            2

Trivially, x∗ (y) = 1 − y is then the best choice because it equates the two arguments; hence we
                                                                      z 1−α
obtain full offset. For the isoelastic specification w(z) =           1−α ,   we obtain the lexicographic case in
the limit as α → ∞.

A.2       Experimental implementation

In our experimental split-the-prize tasks, the final division of a $10 prize between households A
and B is governed by one of two allocations. The first of these is fixed in advance and varies from
task to task; we call this the “computer’s” dollar allocation. The subject chooses the alternative
allocation. We select one of these two allocations at random and implement it; each is equally
likely.
    We examine both ex ante and ex post versions of the split-the-prize task. The subject learns
the computer’s allocation at the outset of both versions. In the ex ante version, she chooses her
allocation immediately thereafter. In the ex post version, she makes that choice only if she first
learns that we will implement her allocation. Details are otherwise the same as for the split-the-
tickets task. We implemented a 4A 4AR treatment involving split-the-prize allocation tasks with
61 subjects.

A.3       Results

Figure C.1 shows the distribution of choices for rounds 1-4 (panel A), as well as the marginal
distributions of the original and final choices (panels B and C, respectively) for rounds 5-8. For the
moment, we will focus on the ex ante choices (panels A and B), and return to the revisions (panel C)
below. Notice that, when subjects choose ex ante, the most common type of allocation is ex ante fair.
The tendency to make ex ante fair choices with ex ante framing is not quite as pronounced as with
divide-the-tickets tasks, but it is still readily evident. Significantly, the somewhat lower frequency of
ex ante fair choices with ex ante framing in divide-the-prize tasks (compared with divide-the-tickets
tasks) goes hand-in-hand with a somewhat higher frequency of ex post equalizing allocations. This

                                                             4
pattern is expected in light of the theoretical considerations discussed in Section A.1: subjects with
probability-weighted preferences will prefer ex post equalizing allocations regardless of whether
they make their decisions ex ante or ex post.
    Significantly, revisions were common in rounds 5-8 of this treatment. Overall, 42.6% of choices
were revised, and 55.7% of subjects revised at least one choice. Furthermore, the vast majority of
revisions (73.1%) involved migration to ex post equalizing allocations, just as with divide-the-tickets
tasks.
    Figure C.2 displays the joint distribution of the original and final choices for rounds 5-8. Al-
though migration from ex ante fair to ex post fair choices is not quite as common as for divide-the-
tickets tasks, it remains the most common pattern (26.2% of tasks). Significantly, in this case it is
tied with a time-consistent pattern: selecting and sticking with the ex post equalizing allocation.
The prevalence of time-consistent ex post fair choices is expected in light of our observations con-
cerning the implications of preferences with probability weighting. The next three most common
patterns are also time-consistent. In 13.9% of tasks, subjects made and resolutely stuck to mixed
allocations. This pattern was relatively rare in divide-the-tickets tasks; apparently, the divide-the-
prize setting is more conducive to reconciling the conflict between ex ante and ex post fairness
by adopting and resolutely sticking to a compromise standard. In 13.1% of tasks, subjects made
and stuck to choices that reinforced the computer’s allocation, and in 9.0% of tasks, they selected
and stuck to the ex ante equalizing allocation. The latter two frequencies are comparable to those
observed in the context of divide-the-tickets tasks.
    All of the results reported in this section are therefore qualitatively similar to their counterparts
for split-the-tickets tasks. The patterns of interest are somewhat less striking, but this difference
is expected given that, according to theory, choice reversals should emerge for a smaller class of
preferences with split-the-prize tasks than with split-the-tickets tasks.


B        Additional data analyses
B.1      Further analyses of basic framing effects

Stability of choices across rounds          In general we found no evidence of systematic changes
in behavior across rounds in which subjects encountered similar tasks. Figure C.3 shows the
distributions over choice categories for the first four rounds of treatments 4A 4AR and 4P 4AR .

Formal tests involving figure 2 Formal statistical tests confirm the lessons that emerge from
a visual inspection of Figure 2. First, the samples are comparable: we do not reject equality of the
round 1-2 distributions of treatments 2A2P 4AR and 4A 4AR (p = 0.21); likewise, we do not reject
equality of the round 1-2 distributions of treatments 2P2A 4AR and 4P 4AR (p = 0.64). Second,
subjects do not simply adopt an initial perspective and adhere to it in all subsequent rounds, even

                                                   5
when the decision frame changes: we reject the equality of the round 1-2 and round 3-4 distributions
of treatment 2A2P 4AR (p < 0.001), and similarly for treatment 2P2A 4AR (p < 0.001). Third,
initial exposure to the ex ante perspective does not systematically affect the subsequent proclivity
to adopt the ex post perspective when the task involves ex post framing: we do not reject equality
of the round 3-4 distributions for 2A2P 4AR and 4P 4AR (p = 0.38). Fourth, initial exposure to
the ex post perspective does not systematically affect the subsequent proclivity to adopt the ex
ante perspective when the task involves ex ante framing: we do not reject equality of the round
3-4 distributions for 2P2A 4AR and 4A 4AR (p = 0.93), nor do we reject equality of the round
5-8 distributions (p = 0.42). Finally, moving back and forth between multiple perspectives does
not systematically affect the subsequent proclivity to adopt the ex ante perspective when the task
involves ex ante framing: we do not reject equality of the round 5-8 distributions for 2A2P 4AR
and 4A 4AR (p = 0.80). Each of these failures to reject a hypothesis results from the similarity of
the distributions rather than the absence of statistical power.

The effect of extended exposure to ex post framing on ex ante choices                  Having shown
that exposure to one frame does not influence choices in the alternative frame, we next ask whether
the same is true of extended exposure. To this end, we examine choices made in the 4P 4AR
treatment.   Figure C.4 displays the unrevised choice distributions for rounds 5-8, during which
subjects perform tasks with ex ante framing after experiencing four rounds with ex post framing.
(Recall that Figure 1, panel B, exhibits the round 1-4 choice distribution for this treatment.) As
in Figure 1, panel A, choices are predominantly ex ante fair. We reject equality of the round 1-4
and round 5-8 distributions (p < 0.001), which tells us that subjects do not simply adhere to their
initial perspective once the decision frame changes, even after four rounds of reinforcement. We
also fail to reject equality of the round 5-8 distributions for the 4P 4AR and 4A 4AR treatments
(p = 0.33). The frequency of ex post fair choices is actually lower (5.9% vs. 8.1%), and that of ex
ante fair choices higher (77.4% versus 63.7%), in figure C.4 than in panel A of figure 1. This pattern
is precisely opposite what one would expect if initial perspectives on fairness were persistent. Thus,
we find no support for the persistence hypothesis.

B.2    Further analyses of revisions

The distribution of revision types Focusing just on decisions that were revised, we can use-
fully classify them according to whether the subject switched to a 50-50 division of his or her own
tickets (ex post fairness), moved part of the way toward 50-50, moved past 50-50, or moved away
from 50-50. The first panel of Figure C.5 shows the distribution of revisions across these categories
in the last four rounds of treatment 4A 4AR .
   The next three panels of C.5 are analogous to the first except they pertain to treatments


                                                  6
2A2P 4AR , 2P2A 4AR , and 4P 4AR . All are qualitatively similar, in that revisions predominantly
lead to ex post equalizing allocations. For the first and third of these treatments, we cannot reject
the hypotheses that each of these distributions is the same as for 4A 4AR (p = 0.47 and 0.43,
respectively). In each case the failure to reject reflects the similarity of the distributions rather
than low statistical power. For the treatment 2A2P 4AR , we do reject the hypothesis that the
distributions are the same (p < 0.001).
   The final panel of Figure C.5 focuses on the decisions that were revised in the last four rounds
of the split-the-prize sessions, and groups them into the same four categories used for this purpose
with respect to split-the-tickets tasks. Notice that the vast majority of those who revised (73.1%)
migrated to ex post equalizing allocations, just as with divide-the-tickets tasks.

Marginal distributions of final (revised) choices for various treatments               Figure C.6 ex-
hibits the marginal distributions of final (revised) choices during the last four rounds of treatments
2A2P 4AR , 2P2A 4AR , or 4P 4AR . The panels of this figure are analogous to the second panel of
Figure 3, which pertains to treatment 4A 4AR . We see that final allocations are predominantly
ex post fair in all three treatments. Moreover, we cannot reject the hypotheses that the distribu-
tions for any of these treatments, 2A2P 4AR , 2P2A 4AR , or 4P 4AR , are the same as for 4A 4AR
(p = 0.50, 0.15, and 0.46, respectively). The failure to reject reflects the similarity of the distri-
butions rather than a lack of statistical power. Recall from Figures 2 and C.4 that the original
(unrevised) choices for these same rounds were predominantly ex ante fair. Thus we see striking
choice reversals from the ex ante to the ex post perspective in all of these settings, just as in
treatment 4A 4AR .

B.3    Further analyses of choices between commitment and flexibility

Commitment choices by round            As seen in Figure C.7, the frequencies with which subjects
express preferences for commitment or flexibility in rounds 5-8 of treatment 4AR 4AC do not vary
systematically across rounds.

Commitment choices by category of initial allocation               Figure C.8 divides the allocation
tasks performed in rounds 5-8 of treatment   4AR   4AC   into five categories based on the type of the
subject’s original selection, and plots the distribution of commitment choices for each. As noted
in the text, the propensity to commit is lower relative to the propensity to retain flexibility when
subjects select initial allocations that are more vulnerable to revision.

Is naive time inconsistency a plausible explanation for decisions involving commitment
and flexibility? The same patterns discussed above imply that those who committed themselves
to ex ante equalizing allocations in the last four rounds likely observed few if any choice reversals

                                                   7
in the first four rounds, while those who retained flexibility likely observed many such reversals.
Altogether, during the last four rounds, we observed the “initial ex ante fair & commitment”
pattern in 73 tasks involving 32 subjects, and the “initial ex ante fair & no commitment & revised
ex post fair” pattern in 25 tasks involving 17 subjects. (Because subjects have the opportunity to
revise only half the time when electing flexibility, the task counts – 73 and 25 – are not directly
comparable.) Focusing on the first group of tasks (in which the subject opted for commitment),
in 15.1% of those cases the same subject always migrated from ex ante fair to ex post equalizing
allocations when given the opportunity during the first four rounds, and in 41.1% of those cases did
so at least once. Focusing on the second group of tasks (in which the subject opted for flexibility
and then switched), the corresponding figures are considerably higher: in 60% of those cases the
same subject always migrated from ex ante fair to ex post equalizing allocations when given the
opportunity during the first four rounds, and in 92% of cases did so at least once. Accordingly, those
preserving the flexibility to migrate from ex ante fair to ex post fair allocations likely understood
and anticipated their inclination to do so, and those choosing commitment likely understood their
disinclination to make revisions.

The role of experimenter demand effects To illustrate the potential role of experimenter
demand effects, imagine that, when faced with two consequential alternatives and an option to
express indifference, subjects feel they are expected to choose one of the former. Suppose this
causes them to make commitments in a significant fraction of allocation tasks – say 40% of them,
selected at random. As ex ante choices are predominantly ex ante fair, and revisions predominantly
lead to ex post fairness, the most visible impact of the hypothesized demand effect would be an
increase in the fraction of ex ante equalizing allocations, and a decrease in the fraction of ex post
equalizing allocations, among final outcomes. That is of course precisely what we documented in
the text. A similar experimenter demand effect could likewise explain why other subjects retain
flexibility, but this effect would not account for subsequent switching unless one posits a second
demand effect (specifically, that offering people the opportunity to revise induces them to do so).
We designed the revision protocol to minimize that possibility, but it still merits consideration.
Moreover, even if experimenter demand effects establish baseline frequencies with which subjects
opt for commitment and flexibility, our theories of fairness remain testable because they imply
different patterns of deviations from the baseline.

B.4     Fingerprint Analyses
B.4.1    Fingerprints for initial choices in divide-the-tickets tasks

An important feature of our experimental design is that the allocation of the computer’s tickets
varies from one round to the next. Accordingly, the choices of an ex ante fair subject should


                                                  8
vary in a recognizable and distinctive manner across rounds, while the choices of an ex post fair
subject should remain fixed. We exhibit these patterns in the two panels of Figure C.9, which plot
the number of the subject’s tickets given to recipient B, by round. The dashed and dotted lines
correspond, respectively, to the “fingerprints” of an ex ante fair subject, and of an ex post fair
subject. Panel A superimposes a black line representing the average choices made with ex ante
framing in the first four rounds of treatment 4A 4AR ; panel B does the same for choices made with
ex post framing in the first four rounds of treatment 4P 4AR .
   Notice that the actual choices resemble the ex ante fingerprint much more closely when the
initial tasks involve ex ante rather than ex post framing. In the latter case, the black line is much
flatter. To quantify this difference, we estimated simple regressions of the chosen split on a constant
and the computer’s split, separately for the two treatments, clustering observations at the subject
level. For an ex ante fair subject, the coefficient of the computer’s split would be -1; for an ex post
fair subject, it would be 0. In fact, we find that it is −0.63 (s.e. = 0.06) for choices made with ex
ante framing, and −0.29 (s.e. = 0.06) for choices made with ex post framing. We decisively reject
the hypothesis that these coefficients are the same (p < 0.001).
   The absence of a persistent perspective on fairness that survives changes in the decision frame
is also evident from comparisons between the pattern of average allocations across rounds and the
“fingerprints” associated with ex ante and ex post fairness. The various panels of Figure C.10
display these fingerprints, along with average allocations in each of the last four rounds of the
following treatments: 4A 4AR (panel A), 4P 4AR (panel B), 2A2P 4AR (panel C), and 2P2A 4AR
(panel D). In every instance, actual choices resemble the ex ante fair fingerprint much more closely
than the ex post fair fingerprint. As in section 4, we quantify this similarity by estimating simple
regressions of the chosen split on a constant and the computer’s split, clustering observations at the
subject level. The coefficient of the computer’s split is −0.61 (s.e. = 0.08) for treatment 4A 4AR ,
−0.79 (s.e. = 0.06) for treatment 4P 4AR , −0.69 (s.e. = 0.08) for treatment 2A2P 4AR , and −0.60
(s.e. = 0.09) for treatment 2P2A 4AR . We do not reject equality of these coefficients (p = 0.14),
and there is certainly no indication that previous exposure to the ex post perspective pushes the
coefficient away from -1 (the ex ante fair benchmark) and toward 0 (the ex post fair benchmark).

B.4.2    Fingerprints for revisions in divide-the-tickets tasks

The dramatic effect of revisions is evident from comparisons between the pattern of average al-
locations across rounds (both before and after revisions) and the “fingerprints” associated with
ex ante and ex post fairness. Figure C.11 replicates C.10, except that we have added a line for
the revised choices. We focus first on the bottom left panel, referring to treatment 4A 4AR . The
average revised choices closely resemble the benchmark for ex post fairness in rounds 5-7, and are
nearly insensitive to the computer’s initial distribution. In round 8, the final choice moves a bit in


                                                  9
the direction of the ex ante equalizing allocation, but to a much smaller extent than the original
(unrevised) choice. As above, we quantify the similarity to the benchmarks by estimating simple
regressions of the chosen split on a constant and the computer’s split, clustering observations at
the subject level. The coefficient of the computer’s split, −0.08 (s.e. = 0.07), is not significantly
different from zero, again a reflection of the fact that the ex post perspective predominantly governs
revisions.
   The remaining panels compare the fingerprint patterns of average allocations across rounds
5-8 (both before and after revisions) for treatments 2A2P 4AR , 2P2A 4AR , and 4P 4AR . We see
qualitatively similar patterns: the initial choices track the ex ante fair fingerprint fairly closely, while
the lines for the final (revised) allocations are flatter, more closely resembling the ex post fingerprint.
As before, we quantify the similarity to the benchmarks by estimating simple regressions of the
chosen split on a constant and the computer’s split, clustering observations at the subject level.
Focusing on final choices, the coefficient of the computer’s split is 0.02 (s.e. = 0.07) for treatment
2A2P 4AR , −0.27 (s.e. = 0.08) for treatment 2P2A 4AR , and −0.17 (s.e. = 0.06) for treatment
4P 4AR . All of these coefficients are much further from the ex ante benchmark (-1) and closer to
the ex post benchmark (0) than the corresponding coefficients for the original choices.

B.4.3    Fingerprints for split-the-prize tasks

Figure C.12 pertains to the split-the-prize treatment. It compares the patterns of the average
allocations for rounds 1-4, as well as the original and final allocations for rounds 5-8, with the
“fingerprints” associated with ex ante and ex post fairness; it is analogous to figures C.9 and C.11.
The average ex ante choices resemble the ex ante fair benchmark, except that responses to the
computer’s allocation are dampened. Revisions in rounds 5-8 flatten the line further, moving it
toward the ex post fair benchmark. As before, we quantify the similarity to the benchmarks by
estimating simple regressions of the chosen split on a constant and the computer’s split, clustering
observations at the subject level. The coeffi:cient of the computer’s split is −0.54 (s.e. = 0.06) for
ex ante decisions in the first four rounds, −0.37 (s.e. = 0.07) for ex ante decisions in the last four
rounds, and −0.06 (s.e. = 0.05) for revised decisions in the last four rounds.

B.5     Consistent choosers

A closer look at the data reveals that some subjects make the same type of choice in every round,
while others move around between categories. As noted in the main text, consistency across rounds
could be an indication of the seriousness and deliberateness with which subjects approached the
tasks and acted on coherent decision principles. Accordingly, it is important to determine whether
the documented patterns are attributable to subjects who choose consistently, or to those whose
categorical choices vary across rounds. It is particularly important to ask this question with respect


                                                    10
to our findings concerning revisions, because consistent choosers may be devoted to particular
perspectives, and consequently less likely to change their minds as a result of changes in framing.

Basic framing effects In the first four rounds of 4A 4AR , 39.4% of the subjects (28 of 71)
made the same type of choice in every round. In every case, the choices were ex ante fair. The
degree of stability increased in rounds 5 through 8, perhaps because subjects arrived at coherent
principles with experience. Specifically, 60.6% of the subjects (43 of 71) made the same type of
choice in each of the last four rounds, and in 93.0% of those cases (40 of 43), the choices were ex
ante fair. Turning next to the first four rounds of 4P 4AR , it is important to bear in mind that
each subject made two decisions rather than four. Overall, 48.6% of subjects (35 of 72) made the
same type of choice in both of those rounds. Of those, 60.0% (21) chose the ex post fair option,
which is considerably higher than the overall frequency for this treatment (shown in panel B of
Figure 1), and only 28.6% (10) chose the ex ante fair option, which is noticeably lower than the
overall frequency. Accordingly, we conclude that the differences between the distributions exhibited
in Figure 1 are primarily attributable to consistent choosers.
   The tendency for people to make ex ante fair choices even after being exposed to the ex post
perspective is even more evident if one restricts attention to consistent decision makers. Two-thirds
of subjects participating in the 4P 4AR treatment displayed consistency in rounds 5-8, in the sense
that they made the same type of choice in every round. We cannot reject the hypothesis that this
fraction is the same as for rounds 5-8 of treatment 4A 4AR (p = 0.45). Of the consistent choosers,
all but two chose the ex ante fair alternative in every round. Analyses of consistent choosers in
rounds 5-8 of treatments 2A2P 4AR and 2P2A 4AR yield similar conclusions.

Revisions    We divided subjects from the 4A 4AR treatment into two groups: consistent choosers
(those whose original decision fell into the same category in at least 7 of the 8 rounds), and in-
consistent choosers (all others). Notably, most of these subjects (52%) were consistent choosers.
Several patterns merit emphasis. First, all but one (99.3%) of the original choices made by con-
sistent choosers in rounds 5-8 were ex ante fair. Second, the frequency of revisions was actually
higher for consistent choosers (77.0% of their choices) than for inconsistent choosers (58.8% of
their choices). Thus, consistency across rounds does not translate into consistency across decision
frames. Third, for this group, roughly two-thirds of choice pairs (64.9%) involved an original ex
ante equalizing allocation, followed by a revision to an ex post equalizing allocation. Thus, consis-
tent choosers manifest the pattern of interest to an even greater extent than the general subject
population. Interestingly, nearly a quarter of choice pairs (23.0%) made by consistent choosers were
time consistent: these subjects exhibited resolute non-EU preferences by making and sticking to
ex ante equalizing allocations. Roughly one in ten choice pairs entailed revisions that compensated
for bad luck, in that the subject switched from an ex ante equalizing allocation to a reinforcing

                                                 11
one. In the remaining choice pair, the subject switched from an ex ante equalizing allocation to
overcompensating. We conclude that choice reversals are especially prevalent for the 52% of our
subjects who are consistent choosers.

Commitment versus flexibility           For 36 of the 72 subjects in the 4AR 4AC treatment, original
choices fell into the same category throughout rounds 5-8; in 30 of these cases, the initial allocations
were ex ante fair. Two of these subjects consistently selected reinforcing allocations, and four
consistently opted for ex post fairness. We will call these the “consistent” subjects, and we will call
the remaining 36 subjects “inconsistent.” The preference for commitment is somewhat stronger for
consistent subjects, who committed themselves in 52.1% of tasks and retained flexibility in 27.1%,
while the inconsistent subjects committed themselves in 29.2% of tasks and retained flexibility in
33.3%; see figure C.13.
    Figure C.14 exhibits distributions of final choices for consistent subjects who started out by
choosing the ex ante fair allocation. (We do not display the rest of the joint distribution because
consistent subjects started out by making other types of choices so infrequently.) Panel A pertains
to rounds 1-4 of treatment 4AR 4AC , and panel B to rounds 5-8. In each case, we define a subject
as consistent or inconsistent based on their behavior within the indicated rounds. There were 29
consistent subjects in rounds 1-4, and 36 in rounds 5-8. 21 of these were the same subjects. 25
consistent subjects always chose the ex ante equalizing allocation in rounds 1-4, and 30 did so in
rounds 5-8. 20 of these were the same subjects. Here we see a nearly 30 percentage point increase
in the frequency of final ex ante equalizing allocations, from 32.0% in the first four rounds (without
commitment), to 61.7% in the last four rounds (with commitment), and a 27 percentage point
decline in the frequency of final ex post equalizing allocations (62.0% versus 35.0%). Thus, among
consistent subjects, offering commitment suppresses migration from ex ante equalizing allocations
to ex post equalizing allocations.


C     Experiment Details
C.1    Treatment Balance

Assignment to treatments was performed at the sessions level. The treatments were run at the
following times:

    • November 2013: 4A 4AR (both split-the-tickets and split-the-prize)

    • March 2014: 4P 4AR , 2A2P 4AR , 2P2A 4AR , 4AR 4AC

    • December 2015: 4AS , 4ARS

    • May 2017: 4ARI , 4AR 4ACS , 4A 4AP

                                                  12
   One may naturally be concerned that the subjects differ systematically across treatments. To
address this concern, we provide Table C.1, which gives several key demographics for each treat-
ment. In addition to average age and fraction female, we provide the fraction of subjects who
indicated their political stance as “somewhat liberal” or “strongly liberal.” To test for balance,
we regress each of these demographic variables on a full set of treatment dummies and examine
the F -statistic for each regression. We find that gender and political stance do not vary signifi-
cantly across treatments (p = 0.61 and p = 0.15, respectively). We find that age does vary across
treatments (p = 0.01).

C.2    Screenshots of Instructions and Interfaces




                                                13
Table C.1: Balance table showing average age and percent female in each treatment.

      Treatment            Average Age         Fraction Female   Fraction Liberal
      2A2P 4AR                     20.7                   0.60              0.46
      2P2A 4AR                     20.2                   0.50              0.33
      4A 4AR                       19.8                   0.61              0.48
      4A 4AR Dollars               20.0                   0.59              0.34
      4AR Plan                     20.1                   0.72              0.35
      4AR StrFin                   19.6                   0.51              0.34
      4AR StriInitFin              20.3                   0.60              0.47
      4AR StrInit                  19.2                   0.57              0.53
      4AR 4AC                      20.1                   0.58              0.44
      4AR 4AC StrComm              20.5                   0.63              0.46
      4P 4AR                       20.3                   0.53              0.32




                                          14
                            Panel A: Distribution of choices, Rounds 1−4                                    Panel B: Distribution of original choices, Rounds 5−8
            0.6




            0.4




            0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                 Consistency
Frequency




            0.0                                                                                                                                                                                      0.25
                                                                                                              Overcompensating



                                                                                                                                 Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                              Ex Post Equalizing
                  Panel C: Distribution of final choices, Rounds 5−8                                                                                                                                 0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                   Reinforcing
            0.6                                                                                                                                                                                      0.75



                                                                                                                                                      Mixed
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1

            0.4




            0.2




            0.0
                   Overcompensating



                                           Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                         Ex Post Equalizing



                                                                                              Reinforcing
                                                                 Mixed




                                                                                              Choice category



                                                            Figure C.1: Distributions of choices in divide-the-prize tasks

                                      This figure is based on treatment 4A 4AR with divide-the-prize tasks (61 participants).




                                                                                                              15
                                                                                      Figure C.2: Joint distribution of original and final (revised) choices during the final four rounds


                                                                                                                                                                                            Notes: This figure is based on the final four rounds of treatment 4A 4AR with divide-the-prize tasks (244 observations).




                                                  Reinforcing
                                               Ex Post Equalizing
Reinforcing




                                                     Mixed
                                               Ex Ante Equalizing
                                               Overcompensating
                                                  Reinforcing
Ex Post Equalizing




                                               Ex Post Equalizing
                                                     Mixed
                                               Ex Ante Equalizing
                                               Overcompensating
                                                  Reinforcing
                                                                    Choice category


                                               Ex Post Equalizing
Mixed




                                                     Mixed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                               Ex Ante Equalizing
                                               Overcompensating
                                                  Reinforcing
Ex Ante Equalizing




                                               Ex Post Equalizing
                                                     Mixed
                                               Ex Ante Equalizing
                                               Overcompensating




                                                                                      of treatment 4A 4AR
                                                  Reinforcing
Overcompensating




                                               Ex Post Equalizing
                                                     Mixed
                                               Ex Ante Equalizing
                                               Overcompensating



                     0.2




                                   0.1




                                         0.0
                           Frequency
                                                                                                                 Figure C.3: Choice category frequencies in each of the first four rounds of treatments 4A 4AR
                 Consistency
                                 0.25


                                                0.75
                                         0.5


                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Notes: This figure is based on treatment 4A 4AR (71 participants) and 4P 4AR (72 participants).




          4A_4AR                                       4P_4AR
                                                                             Reinforcing
                                                                          Ex Post Equalizing
4




                                                                                Mixed
                                                                          Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                          Overcompensating
                                                                             Reinforcing
                                                                          Ex Post Equalizing
3




                                                                                Mixed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                          Ex Ante Equalizing   Choice category
                                                                          Overcompensating
                                                                             Reinforcing
                                                                          Ex Post Equalizing
2




                                                                                Mixed
                                                                          Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                          Overcompensating
                                                                             Reinforcing
                                                                          Ex Post Equalizing
1




                                                                                Mixed




                                                                                                                 and 4P 4AR .
                                                                          Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                          Overcompensating
    0.6

           0.4

                           0.2

                                        0.0

                                               0.6

                                                        0.4

                                                              0.2

                                                                    0.0
                               Frequency
            0.8



            0.6
                                                                                                                             Consistency
Frequency




                                                                                                                                 0.25
            0.4                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                 0.75
                                                                                                                                 1
            0.2



            0.0
                  Overcompensating




                                                   Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                          Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                               Reinforcing
                                                                             Mixed

                                                                        Choice category



Figure C.4: Distributions of choices for tasks with ex ante framing after extended exposure to ex
post framing

                                     Notes: This figure is based on rounds 5-8 of treatment 4P 4AR (72 subjects).




                                                                                     18
               4A_4AR        4P_4AR          2A2P_4AR          2P2A_4AR      4A_4AR Dollars




        0.75



                                                                                               RevisionType
                                                                                                   Away from 50−50
        0.50
 Mean




                                                                                                   Past 50−50
                                                                                                   To 50−50
                                                                                                   Towards 50−50
        0.25




        0.00

                                           RevisionType



   Figure C.5: Distribution of revision types during the final four rounds of various treatments

Notes: This figure is based on the final four rounds of the indicated treatments, in which there were (respectively)
97, 67, 51, 100, and 52 revisions.




                                                          19
                                                          2A2P_4AR                                                                              2P2A_4AR                                                                              4P_4AR

            0.6
Frequency




            0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Consistency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
            0.2




            0.0
                  Overcompensating


                                     Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                        Overcompensating


                                                                                                                           Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                              Overcompensating


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                     Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                           Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ex Post Equalizing
                                                                                          Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                                Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Reinforcing
                                                            Mixed




                                                                                                                                                  Mixed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mixed
                                                                                                                              Choice category



Figure C.6: Marginal distributions of final (revised) choices during the final four rounds of various
treatments

Notes: This figure is based on the final four rounds of the indicated treatments, in which there were 48, 48, and 72
subjects, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                          20
        8
                                                                                                 Committment Choice
Round


        7                                                                                            Committment

        6                                                                                            Flexibility
                                                                                                     Indifference
        5

            0.00               0.25               0.50               0.75               1.00
                                              Percentage



                                      Figure C.7: Commitment choices by round

                   Note: This figure is based on the final four rounds of treatment 4AR 4AC (72 subjects).




                                                             21
                           Reinforcing
 Initial Category
                                                                                                   Committment Choice
                    Ex Post Equalizing
                                                                                                         Committment
                                Mixed
                                                                                                         Flexibility
                    Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                                                                         Indifference
                    Overcompensating

                                          0.00         0.25        0.50         0.75        1.00
                                                                Percentage



                                         Figure C.8: Commitment choices by category of original choice

Note: This figure is based on the final four rounds of treatment 4AR 4AC (72 subjects). The distributions are based
on 172 ex ante fair choices, 20 partially offsetting choices, 15 overcompensating choices, 38 ex post fair choices, and
43 reinforcing choices.




                                                                      22
                                                          4A_4AR
                      10.0


                       7.5


                       5.0
 Tickets given to B




                       2.5
                                                                                                   Allocation
                                                                                                       Actual Average
                                                          4P_4AR
                                                                                                       Ex Post Fair
                      10.0
                                                                                                       Ex Ante Fair


                       7.5


                       5.0


                       2.5


                             1                    2                     3                   4
                                                          Round



                             Figure C.9: Allocations for those performing initial tasks in a single frame

Notes: Panel A is based on the first four rounds of treatment 4A 4AR (71 observations per round). Panel B is based
on the first four rounds of treatment 4P 4AR (36 observations per round).




                                                                   23
                                    2A2P_4AR                         2P2A_4AR



                      7.5


                      5.0


                      2.5
 Tickets given to B




                                                                                                Allocation
                      0.0
                                                                                                    Actual Average
                                    4A_4AR                           4P_4AR
                                                                                                    Ex Post Fair
                                                                                                    Ex Ante Fair
                      7.5


                      5.0


                      2.5


                      0.0
                            5   6              7   8   5         6              7        8
                                                   Round



Figure C.10: Allocations for those performing tasks in the ex ante frame after varying degrees of
exposure to the ex post frame

Notes: Panel A is based on 71 subjects, panel B on 72 subjects, panel C on 48 subjects, and panel D on 48 subjects.




                                                           24
                                            2A2P_4AR                             2P2A_4AR



                     7.5


                     5.0


                     2.5
Tickets given to B




                                                                                                        Allocation
                     0.0                                                                                    Final

                                            4A_4AR                               4P_4AR                     Original
                                                                                                            Ex Post Fair
                                                                                                            Ex Ante Fair
                     7.5


                     5.0


                     2.5


                     0.0
                             5          6              7     8    5          6              7      8
                                                             Round



                           Figure C.11: Original and final allocations in rounds 5-8 of the indicated treatments.

Notes: This figure is based on the final four rounds of treatment 4A 4AR (71 subjects), 4P 4AR (72 subjects),
2A2P 4AR (48 subjects), and 2P2A 4AR (48 subjects).




                                                                      25
                     10.0




                      7.5
Tickets given to B




                                                                                                                    Allocation
                                                                                                                        Final
                      5.0                                                                                               Original
                                                                                                                        Ex Post Fair
                                                                                                                        Ex Ante Fair



                      2.5




                      0.0

                                        2                      4                     6                     8
                                                                   Round



Figure C.12: Original and final allocations for all rounds of treatment 4A 4AR with divide-the-
prize tasks

                            Notes: This figure is based on treatment 4A 4AR with divide-the-prize tasks (61 participants).




                                                                           26
 Consistent Chooser




                      TRUE                                                                    Committment Choice
                                                                                                 Committment
                                                                                                 Flexibility
                      FALSE                                                                      Indifference


                              0.00         0.25           0.50           0.75          1.00
                                                       Percentage



                              Figure C.13: Commitment choices for consistent and inconsistent subjects

Note: This figure is based on the final four rounds of treatment 4AR 4AC (72 subjects, 36 of whom were consistent,
and 36 of whom were inconsistent).




                                                                    27
                                                 Rounds 1−4                                                                            Rounds 5−8

             0.6
 Frequency




             0.4




             0.2




             0.0
                    Ex Ante Equalizing




                                                                                                          Ex Ante Equalizing
                                                          Ex Post Equalizing




                                                                                                                                                Ex Post Equalizing
                                                                               Reinforcing




                                                                                                                                                                     Reinforcing
                                         Mixed




                                                                                                                               Mixed
                                                                                             Choice category



              Figure C.14: Distribution of final choices of consistent subjects for treatment 4AR 4AC

Note: This figure is based on consistently initially fully offsetting subjects in treatment 4AR 4AC (25 in rounds 1-4
and 30 in rounds 5-8).




                                                                                                28
Figure C.15: Page 1 of instructions for treatment 4A 4AR .
                           29
Figure C.16: Page 2 of instructions for treatment 4A 4AR .




                           30
Figure C.17: Page 3 of instructions for treatment 4A 4AR .




                           31
Figure C.18: Typical display of households.




                    32
Figure C.19: Ex ante task interface.


                33
Figure C.20: Ex post task interface.




                34
Figure C.21: Confirmation screen shown after all tasks.




                          35
Figure C.22: Surprise revision of an ex ante task.




                       36
Figure C.23: Commitment instructions.

                 37
Figure C.24: Commitment instructions continued.




                      38
Figure C.25: Commitment interface.




               39
Figure C.26: Planned revision task.




                40
Figure C.27: Incentivized commitment task instructions.




                          41
Figure C.28: Typical incentivized commitment task interface.




                            42
