NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HETEROGENEITY IN EXPECTATIONS, RISK TOLERANCE, AND HOUSEHOLD STOCK SHARES:
THE ATTENUATION PUZZLE
John Ameriks
Gábor Kézdi
Minjoon Lee
Matthew D. Shapiro
Working Paper 25269
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25269

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

This research is supported by a program project grant from the National Institute on Aging P01AG026571. The Vanguard Group Inc. supported the data collection through the VRI (Vanguard
Research Initiative). Vanguard’s Client Insight Group and IPSOS SA were responsible for
implementing the VRI survey and provided substantial input into its design. Andrew Caplin is a
co-principal investigator of the VRI. We gratefully acknowledge his collaboration. The design of
the VRI benefited from the collaboration and assistance of Joseph Briggs, Wandi Bruine de
Bruin, Alycia Chin, Mi Luo, Brooke Helppie McFall, Ann Rodgers, and Christopher Tonetti as
part of the program project, from Annette Bonner (Vanguard), and Wendy O’Connell (IPSOS
SA). We are grateful to Stefan Nagel and Isacco Piccioni for comments on an earlier draft. The
views expressed here are those of the authors and not those of their respective institutions. For
documentation of the VRI, including a dynamic link to the survey instrument, see http://ebpprojects.isr.umich.edu/VRI/. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by John Ameriks, Gábor Kézdi, Minjoon Lee, and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneity in Expectations, Risk Tolerance, and Household Stock Shares: The Attenuation
Puzzle
John Ameriks, Gábor Kézdi, Minjoon Lee, and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 25269
November 2018
JEL No. C83,D81,D84,G11
ABSTRACT
This paper jointly estimates the relationship between stock share and expectations and risk
preferences. The survey allows individual-level, quantitative estimates of risk tolerance and of the
perceived mean and variance of stock returns. These estimates have economically and statistically
significant association for the distribution of stock shares with relative magnitudes in proportion
with the predictions of theories. Incorporating survey measurement error in the estimation model
increases the estimated associations twofold, but they are still substantially attenuated being only
about 5 percent of what benchmark finance theories predict. Because of the careful attention in
the estimation to measurement error, the attenuation likely arises from economic behavior rather
than errors in variables.
John Ameriks
The Vanguard Group, Inc.
PO Box 2600, MS V36
Valley Forge PA 19482
john_ameriks@vanguard.com
Gábor Kézdi
Survey Research Center
Univeristy of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
gabor.kezdi@gmail.com

Minjoon Lee
Department of Economics
Carleton University
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6
Canada
minjoon.lee@carleton.ca
Matthew D. Shapiro
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan St
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
shapiro@umich.edu

Documentation and survey instrument is available at http://ebp-projects.isr.umich.edu/VRI/
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25269

The source of heterogeneity in portfolio choices is an important question for household finance
(Campbell, 2006). Theories, such as consumption CAPM, predict that the share of risky assets
should be positively related to their expected returns, negatively related to their risk, and
positively related to investors’ risk tolerance. These theories also have quantitative implications
for the magnitudes of those relations. This paper assesses those implications by estimating how
heterogeneity in preferences and beliefs explain heterogeneity in household portfolios.
In this paper we take a systematic attempt at quantitatively evaluating the implications of
benchmark financial theories by using better data and more careful statistical modeling. We build
a structural maximum likelihood model to estimate jointly quantitative measures of risk tolerance
and the perceived mean and variance of stock returns from high-quality survey data while taking
survey measurement error into account. We estimate their association with household stock
shares at the intensive margin. Our approach is made possible by new data on portfolio
composition for a large enough sample of stockholding households, combined with appropriate
measures of preferences and beliefs. Our data set was created by the Vanguard Research
Initiative (VRI) that combines administrative account data and survey responses for a large
sample of Vanguard account holders. The VRI has multiple features that make it especially wellsuited for estimation of the sources of heterogeneity in stock holdings.
Section I summarizes related literature and discusses how our approach improves upon
previous analyses. Section II describes the VRI sample and the measurements of assets and
stock share. Section III describes how we measure preferences and beliefs. To get individualspecific estimates of preference parameters, we use a modification of the Barsky, Juster,
Kimball, and Shapiro (1997) approach of eliciting risk tolerance from hypothetical gambles over
permanent income. To get individual-specific estimates of the moments of the perceived

distribution of returns, we use both the Manski (2004) approach of eliciting points in the CDF of
perceived returns together with individuals’ estimates of expected returns.
Survey measures of preferences have considerable external validity (i.e., that preference
parameters explain a wide range of behaviors) and internal validity (i.e., test-retest validation and
consistence across different measures). See Barsky, Juster, Kimball, and Shapiro (1997),
Kimball, Sahm, and Shapiro (2008), Ameriks, Caplin, Laufer, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011),
Dohmen, Falk, Huffman and Sunde (2010), Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, Sunde, Schupp, and
Wagner (2011), and Josef, Richter, Samanez-Larkin, Wagner, Hertwig, and Mata (2016) for
evidence both of external and internal validity. Recent evidence suggests survey measures of risk
preferences show more stability than measures based on small-stakes lottery experiments
(Lönnqvist, Verkasalo, Walkowitz and Wichardt, 2015). Similarly, probabilistic measures of
expectations have predictive validity (Hurd, 2009). See Manski (2017) for a summary of
progresses made in eliciting subjective expectations on macroeconomic variables including
equity returns. Carroll (2017) also stresses the role of expectations in explaining macroeconomic
fluctuations and hence the importance of correctly measuring them and understanding their
formation. This paper is the first attempt to measure both preferences and expectations and to use
them jointly to explain portfolio choices.
Like many survey measures, preference and expectations are subject to response error.
This paper uses a unified procedure accounting for response error to produce unbiased estimates
of the subjective variables for both preferences and beliefs. Section IV combines these estimates
to explain the cross-section of stock shares. We find that the stock share is positively related to
the individuals’ perceived expected stock returns, is negatively related to their perceived
standard deviation of the returns, and is positively related to their risk tolerance. These

2

relationships are economically and statistically significant, they are robust across various
specifications, and they are substantially larger in magnitude than corresponding estimates that
do not take care of measurement error in the survey answers.
At the same time, the estimated associations are only about 5 percent of what benchmark
theories predict. Some features of our estimates are in line with those implications: the signs and
also the relative magnitudes of the estimated coefficients conform to the predictions of theories.
They are substantially smaller in magnitude, though, a finding that we call the “attenuation
puzzle.” The empirical method advanced by this paper addresses measurement error in survey
measures of preferences and beliefs, so it establishes that this attenuation reflects actual gap
between benchmark portfolio choice theories and individuals’ behavior.

I. Relationship to the Literature
Several papers estimated associations of household portfolio compositions with various measures
of beliefs and preferences. Not all of them yield results that can be weighed against the
quantitative predictions of finance theories. The results of those that do allow for such
comparisons suggest that beliefs and preferences, as measured by the data, are related to
household portfolios indeed, but those relations are substantially weaker than what benchmark
finance theories would suggest. Most studies analyzed associations at the extensive margin, i.e.,
whether households hold any stocks, primarily due to constraints on sample size. Yet theories
have the starkest quantitative predictions at the intensive margin, i.e., the share of stocks in the
portfolio of stockholders. Most studies either examine the role of beliefs or preferences but not
both.

3

Vissing-Jorgensen (2003), Glaser and Weber (2005), Hurd, van Rooij and Winter
(2011), Hudomiet, Kezdi and Willis (2011), Amromin and Sharpe (2012), Hoffman, Post and
Pennings (2013), and Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2018) focus on expectations and show that
people with more optimistic expectations about future stock returns are more likely to hold
stocks. Barsky, Juster, Kimball and Shapiro (1997), Dohmen, Falk, Huffman and Sunde (2010),
Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, Sunde, Schupp, and Wagner (2011) and Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales
(2018) show that more risk tolerant individuals are more likely to hold stocks. Dominitz and
Manski (2007) and Hurd, Rooij and Winter (2011) show that individuals with higher levels of
stock market expectations and lower perceived risk are more likely to hold stocks. Kimball,
Sahm and Shapiro (2008) model the intensive margin. Kezdi and Willis (2011) and Dimmock,
Kouwenberg, Mitchell and Peijnenburg (2016) combine the extensive and intensive margins in
Tobit-type models and establish associations with risk tolerance, expectations and ambiguity
aversion, respectively. Weber, Weber and Nosic (2013) show that individual measures of risk
tolerance and expectations predict the share of stocks respondents invest in a hypothetical
financial portfolio but they do not consider beliefs. Hoffmann, Post and Pennings (2013) and
Merkle and Weber (2011) analyze the role of expectations and risk tolerance in trading behavior
of individual investors rather than the share of stocks in household portfolios. Brunnermeier and
Nagel (2008) conclude that understanding the determinants of the share of stocks in the portfolio
of stock market participants is very difficult.
Several related studies investigated the role of wealth and past experiences in household
portfolios. See, for example, Vissing-Jorgensen (2003), Greenwood and Nagel (2009), Seru,
Shumway and Stoffman (2010), Malmendier and Nagel (2011), Calvet and Sodini (2014).
Another literature focuses on the role of preferences and beliefs in other household decisions.

4

Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) and Armona, Fuster and Zafar (2016) examine the role of
expectations on the housing market, while Bruine de Bruin, Manski, Topa, and van der Klaauw
(2011), Armantier, Bruine de Bruin, Potter, Topa, van der Klaauw, and Zafar (2013),
Malmendier and Nagel (2016), and Botsch and Malmendier (2017) investigate inflation
expectations.
Our approach improves on the previous literature in multiple ways. First, the VRI sample
is a large sample of stock holders. Despite being drawn from the account holders of a single
company, the characteristics of the sample are broadly representative of the targeted population
of households with non-negligible financial assets. Unlike most studies that focus on the
extensive margin for stock holdings, this sample allows for meaningful inferences about the
intensive margin of portfolio choice.
Second, the VRI survey includes batteries of questions that we purposely designed to
produce estimates of preference and belief parameters that should help to explain the crosssectional distribution of portfolio choices. These survey questions yield quantitative estimates of
individual-level moments of subjective returns distribution and of individual-level values of
preference parameters. These estimates can then be related to portfolio decisions in ways that are
quantitatively interpretable relative to benchmark economic models.
Third, the design of the VRI allows careful consideration of response errors along a
variety of dimensions. These include errors in measuring stock shares in both survey and
administrative account data and errors in eliciting preferences and expectations from survey
responses. Few studies take survey measurement error into account in their estimation procedure.
Yet there is strong evidence that survey measures of preferences and beliefs are subject to
substantial response error leading to potentially severe attenuation bias (Kimball, Sahm and

5

Shapiro, 2008; Kezdi and Willis, 2011). These limitations may be in part responsible for why
estimated associations in the literature are so much smaller than what finance theories would
predict.
These features—a large, broadly representative sample of stockholders together with
quantitative measurements of the potential sources of heterogeneity in stockholding—make the
VRI a unique platform for understanding why different households make different portfolio
choices.

II. VRI Data and Stock Share Measurement
A. VRI sample and wealth measurement
The Vanguard Research Initiative (VRI) consists of linked survey and administrative data of
account holders who have non-negligible financial assets at Vanguard, are at least 55 years old,
and use the internet to access their Vanguard accounts. This last requirement is necessary
because the VRI is an internet survey. The VRI is an individual level survey, but it includes
questions about household-level wealth and income as well as questions about spouses’ or
partners’ demographics and labor supply. The survey oversampled older account holders and
singles. The VRI draws respondents from two lines of business—individual account holders and
employer-sponsored account holders. The employer-sponsored are enrolled at Vanguard through
401(k) or similar defined-contribution accounts. While both individual and employer-sponsored
account holders are selected via ownership of a Vanguard account, the selection into individual
and employer-sponsored accounts is presumably quite different. We will present separate
estimates to get a sense of whether selection matters for our results. See Appendix A for more
details on the VRI surveys and sample.

6

There are features of the VRI that make it well-suited for this analysis. First, it has a new
approach to wealth and portfolio measurement. Second, it provides a larger sample of
respondents with relevant levels of assets and stock holding compared to leading surveys such as
the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Third,
demographics of the VRI are nonetheless comparable to those with similar asset levels in the
HRS and SCF.
The VRI survey measure of wealth is based on a comprehensive account-by-account
approach. The survey first asked about types of accounts respondents have (e.g. IRA, checking,
money market funds) and the number each type of account held by the respondent or her spouse.
For each account they indicated owning, the respondents were asked to provide the balance as
well as the share of stock-market assets. When finished with all accounts, respondents were
presented a summary table consolidating their responses and were invited to make corrections, if
any. Measuring wealth and stock shares account by account matches the way respondents keep
track of their own wealth, and it does not require them to sum balances across accounts to
provide total figures for asset categories that are familiar to economists but less so to survey
respondents. In contrast, the HRS and SCF—other leading surveys with state of the art wealth
measurement—use account-by-account approaches but only for selected sets of account types.
Item non-response in the wealth section of the VRI affects less than 1 percent of the
observations.
Table 1 compares the VRI sample to the HRS and SCF. The HRS and SCF are nationally
representative samples (of those above age 50 in the case of the HRS). Table 1 compares the VRI
sample to the subsample of the HRS and SCF after imposing restrictions similar to VRI
eligibility: being at least 55 years old, having access to internet at home, and having at least

7

$10,000 financial wealth. The number of respondents in Survey 1 is substantially larger than the
VRI-eligible subsample of the HRS and the SCF. The difference in the number of respondents in
stock-holding households is even larger: the comparable samples have slightly over 1,000 stockholding households in the SCF and slightly over 2,000 in the HRS; the entire VRI sample has
more than 8,000 stock holders and the sample used in our analysis (those who completed all the
first three VRI surveys, see below) has more than 4,000.
Table 1. Sample Means: VRI, HRS, and SCF
VRI
HRS
SCF
Entire
Analysis
VRI-eligible subsample
sample
sample
Household-level variables
Number of households
8,950
4,414
3,684
1,275
Number of stockholding households
8,636
4,323
2,356
1,216
Average financial wealth ($’000)
1,207
1,148
578
970
Average total wealth ($’000)
1,589
1,551
804
1,764
Average stock share among
0.56
0.56
0.55
0.46
stockholders
Respondent-level variables
Married
0.67
0.68
0.70
0.71
Male
0.64
0.65
0.56
0.79
Age
67.8
67.8
64.9
64.1
0.30
0.26
0.51
0.45
Less than college degree
0.32
0.33
0.23
0.27
College degree but not more
0.38
0.41
0.26
0.28
Post-college degree
Retired
0.56
0.60
0.53
0.34
Notes: For the HRS and SCF, the VRI-eligible subsamples are those who are not younger than 55, have
access to the internet at home, and have at least $10,000 in non-transactional accounts. Respondent-level
variables for the HRS refer to the financial respondents; for the SCF they refer to the household heads.
Variables in the VRI measured in 2013; HRS and SCF are from 2012 and 2013, respectively.
Respondent-level variables are {0,1} binary variables except for age. Summary statistics of the wealth
measures are shown in Table A1 in the Appendix. Table A2 in the Appendix shows the summary
statistics of the variables we use as controls in our analysis, together with the definition of those variables.
For more detailed comparisons with the HRS and SCF sample as well as for the effectiveness of the
account-by-account approach in producing unbiased estimates of assets with low response error, see
Ameriks, Caplin, Lee, Shapiro and Tonetti (2014).

The demographic composition of the VRI sample is broadly similar to the parallel
subsamples of the HRS and the SCF. Average total wealth and average financial wealth in the

8

VRI are close to corresponding estimates from the SCF; the HRS averages are lower. The
average stock share in financial wealth among stock holders is very similar in the VRI and the
HRS; the SCF estimates are somewhat smaller. VRI respondents are slightly less likely to be
married, and they are somewhat older, more educated and more likely to be retired. The
differences in marital status, age and retirement are largely due to the fact that the VRI
oversampled older individuals and singles. 65 percent of the VRI sample is male, compared to 79
percent in the SCF and 56 percent in the HRS. Within households, men are overrepresented as
respondents: account holders in the VRI, financial respondents in the HRS, and household heads
in the SCF.
B. Measuring stock shares
Our analysis focuses on the share of stock-market-based assets in total financial wealth.
Specifying stock share in financial wealth is standard in the literature. Alternative measures may
include housing wealth and human capital wealth in the denominator. We include such wealth
items as control variables in the analysis and show that their inclusion leads to very similar
results for the parameters of interest. We also show that our main findings are robust to
including housing wealth as either risky or safe assets in the risky asset share calculation.
The VRI asks individual the share of stock held in each account. The stock share in
financial wealth is the weighted average of the stock shares of the accounts. Respondents who
did not answer all of the account-by-account stock share questions were asked the overall stock
share of their financial portfolio. Ninety-five percent of respondents answered all the account-byaccount stock share questions; the distribution of stock share is very similar across the two
groups.

9

The VRI account data also allow us to calculate stock share using the administrative
records, but of course only for assets held at Vanguard. Appendix A compares the survey and
administrative measures of the stock share. Appendix B also presents the empirical results using
the administrative stock share as the dependent variable. Individuals might hold stocks
disproportionately at one provider or another, so there is no reason to expect portfolio theories to
obtain for holding at each provider. Yet, despite the fact that individuals at sample tend to have a
higher stock share at Vanguard, the results using the administrative share are quite similar to
those using the survey share.

III. Measuring Preferences and Expectations
A. Measuring risk tolerance
Survey 2 of the VRI included Strategic Survey Questions (SSQs) that ask respondents to make
choices between hypothetical financial products under hypothetical situations. In this paper, we
use the VRI’s risk tolerance questions that pose gambles over consumption. These are based on
the questions used in Barsky, Juster, Kimball, and Shapiro (1997) and Kimball, Sahm, and
Shapiro (2008) that are implemented in the HRS. The VRI risk tolerance questions are refined
relative to those in the HRS to be more specific about the economic setting and to ask about
consumption rather than income gambles. The HRS uses lifetime income rather than
consumption because when the HRS questions were crafted, there was a concern that
consumption was too abstract a concept to implement in the survey. The VRI approach frames
the question in terms of consumption, the economically more-relevant flow. Earlier successes
with the SSQ approach suggest that it is possible to elicit the more precisely model-relevant

10

measure using a survey instrument that has both more detailed scenarios and comprehension
tests.
The VRI SSQs ask about preference between the following two options:
•

Having a certain level of consumption;

•

Having double that level of consumption or having it fall by x% with a 50-50 chance.

The question then alters the downside risk x and repeats the question in order to partition
respondents into risk tolerance groups. There are some other differences between the VRI and
HRS questions. In the VRI, the same question is asked with two different levels of guaranteed
consumption for the safe option. Having two consumption treatments in this survey provides a
test-retest measurement that is instrumental for separating true preference heterogeneity from
survey response error. In contrast, Kimball, Sahm, and Shapiro (2008) relies on variation across
multiple survey waves, which assumes time-invariant preferences, an assumption not needed in
this paper. Additionally, using two different levels of guaranteed consumption allows
identification of non-homothetic preferences. The VRI questions are more specific about the
hypothetical situations to better assure that structural preference parameter estimates are
independent from respondents’ economic, health, and family conditions. Table A3 in Appendix
A gives the exact wording of the risk tolerance question in the VRI.
The question is asked for two different levels of riskless consumption, $100K and $50K
per year, and downside risks of 1/10, 1/5, 1/3, 1/2, and 3/4. Table 2 shows the distribution of the
answers to the two questions. Most respondents have low tolerance for risk. About half of the
respondents chose the first two categories, indicating that they would not accept a risk of more
than 20% drop in their consumption to take a chance to double their consumption. Only a small
fraction chose the last two categories with a risk of more than a 50% drop. Overall, the

11

distribution is similar to the distribution of the answers to a similar question in the HRS except
that the fraction of respondents in the two extreme categories (0-10% and 75-100%) is slightly
lower in the VRI (see Kimball, Sahm, and Shapiro, 2008 for the HRS). The table also shows that
more respondents fall into the lower risk categories when riskless consumption is $50,000
instead of $100,000. We handle this increase in relative risk tolerance by positing a utility
function with a subsistence level of consumption.
Following Barsky, Juster, Kimball, and Shapiro (1997) and Kimball, Sahm and Shapiro
(2008), we use the multiple responses to identify the heterogeneity of the preference parameter
and survey response errors. Estimation of a cardinal risk tolerance parameter requires specifying
a utility function. We assume that the flow utility function is a generalization of CRRA with a
subsistence level of consumption

(c +  )1−1/i
ui (c) =
,
1 − 1/ i

(1)

where subscript i denotes heterogeneity across individuals, c is consumption, the negative of κ is
the subsistence level of consumption, assumed to be the same for all individuals, and θ is the risk
tolerance parameter. To allow for heterogeneity in both θ and κ and to allow for survey response
errors, we would need at least three responses for each respondent; the VRI asked only two.
Therefore, we allow for heterogeneity only in θ. We do allow κ to be a function of observed
covariates in specifications using those covariates (see Section IIIC). Appendix Tables B3, B4
and B10 show that the main results are almost the same when we use a CRRA utility function
(i.e., setting κ=0) as in Kimball, Sahm and Shapiro (2008), except that the estimated risk
tolerance parameter is lower.

12

Table 2. Risk Tolerance: Distribution of Responses to SSQ
Response
Downside risk
Percent of answers
riskless consumption riskless consumption
category accepted rejected
$100K
$50K
1
none
1/10
23
28
2
1/10
1/5
26
34
3
1/5
1/3
26
26
4
1/3
1/2
13
9
5
1/2
3/4
10
3
6
3/4
none
2
1
Total
100
100
Notes: Choice between two plans. Plan A guarantees $c consumption next year. Plan B:
doubles $c with 50% chance and cuts it by a fraction x with 50% chance. $c=100K or
50K, shown in the two columns; the x values are shown in second and third columns. 4414
observations.

For this utility function, relative risk tolerance (RRTi) is
RRTi = i

c +
 i ,
c

where the risk tolerance parameter  i is relative risk tolerance in the  = 0 case. Empirically, the
coefficient of risk tolerance is very close to what is implied by  i , as the level of average wealth
(Table 1) and annual income before retirement ($90,000) are substantially larger than our
estimate of − . At levels of consumption implied by the average before-retirement income, the
difference is less than 20%, and its variation between individuals is small. See Appendix Figure
B1 for the relationship of relative risk tolerance and θ as a function of consumption.
To parameterize the heterogeneity of the risk tolerance parameter, we assume that the
parameter is distributed lognormally in the population according to

log(i ) =  + u i , u i ~ N (0, u2 ).
We model the measurement error as a log additive term to the parameter, such that

13

(2)

log(ij ) = log(i ) +  ij

for j = 1, 2
(3)

 ij ~ N (0, 2 j )
where  i is the true risk tolerance parameter for individual i,

  ij is measurement error, and  ij

is the error-ridden risk tolerance parameter that provides the basis for individual i’s response to
the jth question (c=$100,000 for j=1 and c=$50,000 for j=2). Thus, in answering question j given
the level of resource c and risk x that are associated with the risky gamble, the respondent
compares
1−1/ij

(c +  )
1 − 1/ ij

1−1/ij

(2c +  )
vs. 0.5
1 − 1/ ij

1−1/ij

((1 − x)c +  )
+ 0.5
1 − 1/ ij

(4)

to determine whether to accept the risky gamble or not. Equation (4) translates each response
category in Table 2 into an interval of  ij . This approach generalizes that of Kimball, Sahm, and
Shapiro (2008) by allowing for non-homothetic preferences. (Ameriks, Briggs, Caplin, Shapiro,
and Tonetti (2018) also exploits multiple responses within survey to identify individual level
preference parameters for relating to decisions about long-term care and bequest. Ameriks,
Briggs, Caplin, Shapiro, and Tonetti (2017) estimates the same parameters for a representative
agent using a method-of-moments approach.) We carried out the estimation procedure jointly
for risk tolerance and stock market expectations, so will defer discussion of estimation until
Section IIIC below.
B. Measuring beliefs about stock returns
Survey 3 of the VRI asked about beliefs about the one-year return of the U.S. stock market,
represented by a stock market index such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA).
Respondents had to answer three questions: the expected return on the stock market in the 12
months following the interview (m); the percent chance that the stock market will be higher in 12

14

months following the interview (p0) and the percent chance that it will be at least 20% higher
(p20). The exact wording of the questions is in Table A4 in the Appendix. (Bruine de Bruin,
Manski, Topa, and van der Klaauw (2011) and Armantier, Bruine de Bruin, Potter, Topa, van der
Klaauw, and Zafar (2013) examine the reliability of the percent chance questions for inflation as
well as how they relate to questions about point expectations of inflation.)
Answers to the expected value questions were constrained to be integers. Answers to the
percent chance questions were constrained to be 5 point increments between 0 and 15 and
between 85 and 100, and they were constrained to be 10 point increments between 15 and 85 (the
set {0,5,10,15,25,35,45,55,65,75,85,90,95,100} ). Answers to percent chance questions tend to
be rounded to the nearest ten when they are not constrained, with an especially large fraction
answering 50 percent (Hurd, 2009). The VRI survey instrument requires people to round to other
values; in particular, they cannot give 50 percent probabilities. It also allows for finer rounding at
the tails, in line with the findings of Manski and Molinari (2010). The survey also requires that
p20  p0 . Respondents whose initial answer to p20 violated this constraint are reminded of the

constraint by the survey software and asked for a new reply to either p0 or p20 (or both). The
survey imposes no constraints on m versus p0 and p20. (A randomly selected half of the
respondents received the m question first, followed by p0 and p20, while the other half received
p0 and p20 first, followed by m. The distribution of the responses is slightly different across the
two sequences. Nevertheless, we find similar relationships between the belief measures and
portfolio choice from the two sequence groups.)
Table 3 shows the summary statistics of the answers to the questions about the
distribution of stock market returns. The survey responses for expected returns (m) are
distributed around the historical average of 4 to 7 percent depending on sample period, and their

15

dispersion is moderate. In contrast, most answers to the probability questions are lower than the
historical probabilities, and they have substantial heterogeneity. (Individuals may use different
sample windows for inferring expected returns, see Malmendier and Nagel, 2011. The table
shows some different windows for realized returns. Average returns are quite variable owing to
the well-known problem of estimating the expected return on the market.) A non-negligible
fraction of the respondents gave a positive number to the expected return question (m) and a less
than 50 percent chance answer to the probability of a positive return (p0). Taken together these
answer patterns are consistent with many individuals implicitly applying a positive threshold
when they answer the p0 question (by thinking that the stock market goes up only if it goes up by
at least some positive amount). Glaser, Langer, Reynders and Weber (2007) document a similar
pattern when they compare stock market expectations elicited in terms of returns versus prices.
They label the phenomenon as “framing effect,” and our explanation can be viewed as a source
of such a framing effect. Note that, although skewed returns could explain the phenomenon we
observe, it is an unlikely explanation. The combination mi>0 and p0i<0.5 would correspond to
long positive tails, implying mean above the median and infrequent large gains. This skewedness
is the opposite of what one would expect from a “black swan” theory of infrequent stock market
crashes.

16

Table 3. Stock Market Returns: Survey Responses versus Historical Statistics
Historical statistics
Survey answers
th
th
25
75
195919951995Mean
Median
pctile
pctile
2014
2014
2009
m
0.06
0.04
0.06
0.10
0.04
0.07
0.05
p0
0.51
0.25
0.55
0.75
0.58
0.65
0.53
p20 0.15
0.05
0.15
0.25
0.18
0.25
0.27

20102014
0.13
1.00
0.20

Notes: m is expected one-year ahead returns of the stock market index DJIA; p0 is the probability that the
DJIA would be higher a year from the date of the interview; p20 is the probability that it would be higher
by at least 20%. Historical statistics computed from yearly relative returns of the Dow Jones Industrial
Average (year on year changes divided by base year value, first days of July in each year), deflated using
the PCE chain price index (available beginning in 1959). Historical average values shown for m; the
fraction of years when positive or greater than 0.2 are shown for p0 and p20. 4414 observations.

In order to use our data more efficiently and in a way that is more informative from a
theoretical point of view we map the three survey responses, m, p0, and p20 into a perceived
returns distribution. The procedure closely parallels that for the risk tolerance questions: the
survey responses are based on individual beliefs drawn from a distribution plus survey response
error. We assume that individual i believes that yearly returns follow a lognormal distribution
with individual-specific mean and standard deviation of log stock returns of μi and σi. Similar to
how we handle the cross-sectional distribution of the risk tolerance parameter, these parameters
are drawn across individuals as

i =  + u  i
,
 i =  + u i

  0   u2
 ui 
  ~ N    , 
 u i 
0  .

  uu  
  .
u2


(5)

Individuals answer the survey questions m, p0 and p20 based on their beliefs, but their answers
contain survey noise, that is, measurement error specific to the survey situation. Using the
structure of the survey questions on expected returns and the two points of the probability
distribution, applying the assumption of lognormal returns, and adding survey response error
yields

mi = i +  mi ,  mi ~ N (0, 2m )
17

(6)

i
+  0i ),  0i ~ N ( , 2p )
i

(7)

i − 0.2
+  20i ),  20i ~ N (0, 2p )
i

(8)

p0i = (

p20i = (

where mi , p0i , and p20i are the error-ridden latent variables that determine survey responses.
Survey error is assumed to be independent across the three answers, with mean zero except for
p0 where its mean is  , which allows for the documented gaps between m and p0. An
interpretation of  is that, on average, respondents answer the question about positive returns
(p0) as if they had some positive threshold in mind instead of zero (  ( − /  i ) ,   0 ). The
survey responses are transformed versions of latent variables mi , p0i , and p20i because of
rounding. Recall that the VRI probability scale is for rounded responses. Similarly, as discussed
above, the risk tolerance questions yield discrete responses. In the following subsection we
discuss how our estimation procedure handles this issue.
C. Joint estimation of heterogeneity in stock market expectations and risk tolerance
Given the models of heterogeneity in preferences and beliefs (equations (2) and (5)) and the
structural interpretation of the survey questions together with the additive survey response errors
((3), (4), (6), (7) and (8)), we can now move to estimation of the model. The parameters to be
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
estimated are   { ,  ,  , u , u , u ,  ,  ,  1,  2 ,  m ,  p } . We allow for  ,  ,

 , and  to vary with covariates. Additionally, we allow the beliefs about returns to be
correlated with risk preference, so the covariates of  and

 include the latent  i .

Note that the variables mi , p0i , and p20i in (6), (7), and (8) are before rounding. Actual
survey response mi is a rounded version of mi as mi is restricted to take an integer value.

18

Survey responses p0i and p20i are to take a value from the set
{0,5,10,15,25,35,…,75,85,90,95,100}, we assume that p0i and p20i are rounded to the closest
values allowed for each response. Also note that the survey does not allow for p20i to be larger
than p0i . Hence when we observe p20i = p0i , we consider the possibility that the survey
response error actually generated p20i  p0i but after imposing the constraint we observe the
equality in the actual responses. Together with interval responses, these formulae tell the range
of survey response error terms that generate the responses of individual i that we observe, given

i ,  i , and  i .
Let Z i be the set of responses from respondent i to the five questions used for the
estimation and [ kilow (i ,  i ,i | Zi ),  kihigh (i ,  i ,i | Zi )] (for k = 1 ,2 , m, p0 ,and p20 ) be the range
of survey responses error term that is consistent with the observed response for each question
given the latent preference and belief parameters, calculated from (3), (4), and (6)-(8). Then the
individual likelihood function for respondent i is calculated as:

 

Li ( | Z i ) =

 

− 0 0

[ (

(



[ (

k = 1, 2, m ,20

 kihigh ( i ,  i ,i | Zi )
 low ( i ,  i ,i | Zi )
) − ( ki
)] 
 k
 k

 0high
 low (  ,  , | Z ) −
i ( i ,  i ,  i | Z i ) −
) −  ( 0i i i i i
)] 
 0
 0

logi − 

u

(9)

) f ( i ,  i )di d i d i ,

where  ( ) and ( ) are the PDF and CDF of the standard univariate normal distribution and
  +    i 
f ( , ) is the PDF of a bivariate normal distribution with the mean vector 
 and the
  +   i 

19

2
covariance matrix  u
 .

 uu 
 . (The specification
u2


  +    i 

 means that estimates of
  +   i 

 and  are for  i =0. However, the estimated parameters   and  are small in magnitude
so that this affects only the third digits of the  and

 estimates throughout the estimated

distribution of  i . Also note that, for technical purposes, we left-truncate the distribution of  i
at zero. Under the estimated parameters the chance of  i being less than zero in the nontruncated distribution is essentially zero, so this is an innocuous assumption.   and 
capture potential dependence of the belief parameters on the preference parameter.)
Then the overall likelihood function is obtained as:
L( | Z ) = i Li ( | Zi ) .

We calculate Li ( | Zi ) using the Gaussian quadrature approximation. See Appendix C
for the detailed algorithm.
Table 4. Distribution of Preferences and Beliefs
Standard
Mean
25th pctile Median 75th pctile
deviation
Preferences
i
Risk tolerance parameter
Subsistence consumption
−κ
Beliefs
Mean of return
μi
Standard deviation of return σi

0.41
17,000

0.33

0.20

0.32

0.50

0.06
0.12

0.06
0.03

0.02
0.10

0.06
0.12

0.10
0.14

Notes: Statistics are calculated from the estimated parameters in Table B1; see the notes to Table
B1 for more detail. The summary statistics in this table are from estimates without covariates.
The estimation model constrains  to be constant across individuals. Appendix Table B2 reports
the estimates of the statistical model with covariates.

Table 4 shows key estimated statistics of the distribution of preferences and beliefs based
on the estimated statistical model of preferences, beliefs, and response error. Table B1 in the
appendix shows the estimates of the underlying parameters of the model. The subsistence level

20

of consumption (−κ) is estimated to be $17,000. The negative value of κ generates decreasing
relative risk aversion as in the basic/luxury good model of Wachter and Yogo (2010). The design
of the SSQ does not allow heterogeneity in κ to be readily identified, although it tightly identifies
its mean. The estimated mean of the risk tolerance parameter (θ) implies low risk tolerance on
average. A respondent with the mean level of θ and κ has relative risk tolerance 0.34 (relative
risk aversion 2.9) when the consumption level is $100,000. In terms of the SSQ question, she
would be indifferent between a fixed consumption of $100,000 and the 50-50 gamble of
doubling that consumption and losing 20 percent. There is a considerable heterogeneity in risk
tolerance. At the 25th percentile of risk tolerance parameter, the point of indifference is the
downside risk of losing 13 percent; at the 75th percentile the point of indifference is the
downside risk of losing 29 percent. These numbers indicate higher levels of risk tolerance than in
a representative sample of Americans older than 50 years of age. Kimball, Sahm and Shapiro
(2008) estimate the corresponding risk tolerance percentiles (25th, 50th and 75th) to imply
indifference to 7, 12 and 20 percent of downside risk, respectively.
Beliefs about mean stock returns are in line with historical mean returns, on average.
Beliefs about standard deviation are slightly lower than the historical value of 0.16.
Heterogeneity in perceived mean returns (μ) is substantial, with the lowest 25 percent believing
expected returns to be 2 percent or less and the top 25 percent believing 10 percent or more. At
the same time, estimated heterogeneity in the perceived standard deviation of stock returns (σ) is
small, perhaps because it is easier for people to estimate the second moment of the returns
distribution than the first moment, as pointed out by Merton (1980).
According to our estimates heterogeneity in preferences and beliefs are weakly related.
More risk tolerant respondents believe that stock returns are slightly higher, but we don’t find

21

association of risk tolerance and beliefs about the standard deviation of returns. Beliefs about the
mean and the standard deviation of returns are weakly positively correlated. Preferences and
beliefs are significantly related to observable right hand side variables in our sample (Table B2
in the Appendix). However, when interpreting these associations, one has to keep in mind that
the VRI sample is selected on wealth and stock ownership. For example, sample selection may
explain the negative correlation of wealth and stock market expectations. Almost all households
in the VRI sample have nonzero stockholding. With fixed costs of stock market participation
wealth should matter at the extensive margin on top of expectations. As a result, we expect
wealthier stockholders to have lower expected returns than less wealthy stockholders.
Based on the estimated distribution summarized in Table 4, 17 percent of the population
expects negative stock returns. As we will see, this part of the population holds less stock than on
average, but still has substantial stock market exposure. Symmetrically, 17 percent expect returns
to be larger than 12 percent, rates of return that should make people hold the vast majority of
their wealth in stocks given the distribution of risk and risk preferences. Though this part of the
population holds more stock than on average, very high stock shares are uncommon. Taken
together, these facts suggest that expectations are correlated with stock shares in an attenuated
fashion, a finding that our analysis will verify in the next section.
The Table 4 results take into account substantial estimated survey noise. The parameters
of the survey noise distributions are presented in Appendix Table B1. To understand the
magnitude of noise, consider the differences in terms of the survey responses of individuals with
the estimated averages of latent preferences and beliefs, one without measurement error and one
with a positive standard deviation unit shock of measurement error. A one standard deviation
unit measurement error in the first risk tolerance SSQ would make the survey response imply a

22

point of indifference of a 38% drop of consumption instead of the 20% implied by an error-free
answer. A one standard deviation unit measurement error in the second risk tolerance SSQ would
make the response imply an indifference point of 27% instead of 17%. One standard deviation
unit measurement error in the response to the expected stock returns question would result in a
response of 14% instead of 6%; one standard deviation unit measurement error in the stock
market probability answers would change p0 responses to 67% from 48% and p20 responses to
25% from 12%. The estimated bias of the measurement error in the p0 response (ψ) suggests
that, on average, people think of positive gains only when they exceed 4 percent when answering
the p0 question. Allowing for covariates (Appendix Table B2), ψ is estimated to be substantially
less negative among more educated and wealthier people, indicating that their threshold value is
closer to the nominal threshold zero.
D. Estimating individual-specific cardinal proxies of risk tolerance and beliefs
In the previous sections, we show how to separately identify the true heterogeneity in
preferences and beliefs and the survey response errors in the survey measures of them. In this
subsection, we explain how we construct the individual-specific belief and preference parameters
based on those estimates that are immune from the standard effects of using generated
regressors.
1. Constructing individual-specific preference and belief parameters
Using the estimation results we calculate individual-specific proxy variables ˆ i , ˆ i and ˆi .
These proxies are the expected values of the corresponding latent variables: the individualspecific expected value and standard deviation of the distribution of stock market returns
perceived by the individual ( i ,  i ) , and the individual-specific latent risk tolerance parameter

(i ) . They are expected values conditional on the individual's responses to the survey questions
23

on stock market returns ( mi , p0i , p20i ) and to the SSQ’s with the two hypothetical gambles. To
get these expected value of the latent individual-specific parameters conditional on the survey
response and the statistical model, there are two steps. First, the distribution of the latent
variables conditional on the observed responses can be obtained from the likelihood function
using Bayes’ theorem. Second, integrating out this function yields the individual-specific proxy

ˆ  {ˆ , ˆ ,ˆ } ) as the conditional expectations of the latent variables given the
variables ( 
i
i
i
i
observed survey responses. To be more specific, they are calculated as:

ˆ  E[ | ˆ , Z ] =

i
i
i

1

ˆ
Li ( | Z i )

 



  i

− 0 0



[ (

k = 1, 2, m ,20

 kihigh ( i ,  i ,i | Zi )
 low ( i ,  i ,i | Zi )
) −  ( ki
)] 
ˆ k
ˆ k

ˆ
 0high
 0low
(  ,  , | Z ) −ˆ
i (  i ,  i ,  i | Z i ) −
[ (
) − ( i i i i i
)] 
ˆ 0
ˆ 0

(

(10)

logi − ˆ
) f (i ,  i )di d i d i ,
ˆ u

ˆ | Z ) is the individual likelihood function (calculated from equation (9)) evaluated
where Li (
i
under the estimated parameters. We use the same numerical approximation used in the
estimation for this calculation. See Appendix C for details.
2. Using individual-specific preference and belief parameters in regressions
Our aim is to use the survey-based estimates of individual-specific parameters to explain
heterogeneity in portfolio choice. In contrast with classical measurement error that is
uncorrelated with true values but correlated with measured values, the error in the proxy
variables is the error of optimal prediction, which is uncorrelated with measured values. Thus,
when entered on the right-hand-side of linear regressions, this type of non-classical measurement

24

error does not induce attenuation bias in the regression coefficients of these proxy variables (see
Kimball, Sahm and Shapiro, 2008).
When the regressions include other covariates as well the OLS estimates are unbiased if
the proxies are estimated conditional on those covariates, too. We therefore estimate two sets of
proxies. The first set is conditional on the survey answers to the risk tolerance and the stock
market belief questions only. The second set is conditional on other covariates as well. We use
the second set of proxy estimates as right-hand-side variables in regressions that also include
those covariates. In the next section, we present such regressions to explain portfolio behavior
based on our estimates of preferences and beliefs.

IV. Explaining Heterogeneity in Portfolio Choice
A. Stock share and answers to survey questions
Before turning to the regressions based on our structural estimates of the latent preferences and
beliefs, we investigate the relationship between the stock share of household portfolios and the
raw survey responses. Figure 1 shows non-parametric regressions of the stock share in total
financial assets on the survey answers to expected stock market returns (mi), the average between
the probability that the stock market would go up and that of an increase of 20 percent or more

(( p0i + p 20i ) / 2) , the difference between those two (p0i – p20i), and the answer to the risk
tolerance question with income level $100,000. (Figure B2 in Appendix B shows the analogous
non-parametric regression results on p0i and p20i separately.)

25

Figure 1. Stock Share versus Raw Survey Responses
A

B

C

D

The results indicate a positive relationship between the stock share of household
portfolios and expected stock market returns (mi) and the mean of the two probability responses

(( p0i + p 20i ) / 2) . The stock share is also positively related to the difference between the
responses to the probability questions (p0i – p20i), suggesting a negative relationship with
perceived risk of stock returns. Finally, the stock share is monotonically positively related to the
answers to the risk tolerance question except for the last categories that has relatively few
responses, suggesting a monotonic positive relationship with risk tolerance. Hence, the

26

relationship between the raw survey responses and the stock share has the direction benchmark
theories of portfolio choice would suggest.
We also estimate linear regressions with the survey measure and the administrative
measure of stock share as alternative left-hand-side variables and the same right-hand-side
variables entered with and without the control variables that include detailed measures of
demographics, education, employment, income, wealth, as well as background risks of long-term
care and longevity. The results are included in Tables B5 and B6 in the Appendix. The results
imply similar relationships of stock share with the survey answers with or without the control
variables. The magnitudes of the associations are difficult to interpret because not all measures
have a cardinal interpretation and because of the presence of survey noise. These problems are
addressed in the next section.
B. Stock share and cardinal proxies of expectations and risk tolerance
Our more structural analysis has two goals. First, it relates the stock share of household
portfolios to cross-sectional heterogeneity in preferences and expectations in a way that is related
to portfolio choice theory thus making magnitudes easier to interpret. Second, it aims at
incorporating survey noise in the estimation thus reducing its effect on the estimated magnitudes.
This is a structural analysis in the sense that it makes use of additional assumptions in order to
relate stock shares to heterogeneity in latent preferences and expectations. The analysis is still
reduced form in the sense that it aims at uncovering associations without claims for causality.
Nonetheless, since the explanatory variables are proxies that have cardinal interpretations
relevant for economic theories, they potentially convey much more information than the
relationship of raw survey responses to economic outcomes.
Start from a general function of the solution of optimal stock share

27

si* = s* ( i ,  i ,i ,  ; xi , ui )

(11)

where μi and σi are the beliefs of person i about the mean and the standard deviation of one-yearahead stock returns, θi is the risk tolerance parameter, xi is a vector of wealth, demographic
variables and other risk factors that are measured in our data, and ui combines all unobservables.
We assume that unobservables are independent of observables.
The relative deviation of s* around its mean value is related to relative deviations of the
other variables around their mean values, holding values of xi constant by

si* − s*
s*

  0 + 1

i − 
 −
 −
+ 2 i
+ 3 i
+  4 ' xi + ui .




(12)

The coefficients approximate the first derivatives of the function around the mean values, with

1 = s* /  ,  2 = s* /  and 3 = s * /  , where the tilde denote relative differences from
mean values. This approximation is a way of log-linearizing the function that allows
observations with nonpositive values of some of the variables, which is relevant for μi in our
case. We linearize about the risk tolerance parameter rather than relative risk tolerance to avoid
the ambiguity that relative risk tolerance depends on the level of consumption.
We estimate (12) using the observed stock share

si to approximate the target stock share

si* and the individual proxies ̂i , ̂ i , and ˆi approximating the latent variables i ,  i , and  i
as described earlier. We estimate the equation by OLS both with and without covariates. (We do
not use a Tobit-type procedure to account for the truncation at 0 and 1 because there are very few
observations (less than 2 percent of the sample) at these boundaries.) When we control for
covariates in the stock share equation, we enter the structural parameters that were estimated
conditional on the same covariates. Kimball, Sahm, and Shapiro (2008) show that it is necessary

28

to construct the proxies conditional on the same covariates as included in the main regression to
deliver unbiased coefficient estimates. As the proxies are generated regressors, we estimated the
standard errors by bootstrapping the entire estimation procedure including the structural
estimation of the model underlying the proxies. We estimated two versions of each regression:
one with the survey measure of the share of stocks in total financial wealth on the left hand side
and one with the administrative measure of stock share in wealth held at Vanguard. The main
results using the survey measure of stock shares are in Table 5.
The estimates show that the share of stocks is positively related to the perceived mean of
stock market returns, negatively related to the perceived standard deviation of stock market
returns, and positively related to the risk tolerance parameter. The estimated coefficients are
precisely estimated for the expected return ( ̂i ) and risk tolerance ( ˆi ) variables and somewhat
less precisely estimated for the standard deviation of returns ( ̂ i ). The coefficients are very
similar whether we enter them with or without the covariates. The results are similar using the
administrative measure of stock shares as the dependent variable except for smaller and less
precise estimates for risk tolerance (see Appendix Table B7).

29

Table 5. Stock Shares versus Cardinal Proxies for Preferences and Beliefs
Optimal Proxies
Expected return
Perceived standard deviation
Risk tolerance parameter
constant
covariates
R2
N

0.058
(0.010)
-0.093
(0.046)
0.034
(0.009)
-0.001
(0.008)
N
0.019
4414

0.055
(0.009)
-0.083
(0.051)
0.033
(0.010)
1.136
(0.649)
Y
0.045
4414

Error-Ridden
Proxies
0.017
0.020
(0.004)
(0.004)
-0.029
-0.019
(0.006)
(0.007)
0.021
0.020
(0.005)
(0.005)
-0.001
1.120
(0.007)
(0.565)
N
Y
0.013
0.039
4414
4414

Notes: Stock share in total financial wealth (survey measure) are regressed on proxies for the expected stock returns,
perceived standard deviation of stock returns, and the risk tolerance parameter. For the first two columns, righthand-side variables are the optimal cardinal proxies ( ̂ i , ˆ i , and ˆi ) calculated from (10). For the next two
columns with the error-ridden proxies, the right-hand-side variables are the raw survey answers to the stock market
expectation question (mi), a crude transformation of the probability answers to approximate perceived risk defined as

 i = 0.2 (  ( p ) −  ( p ) ) , and the median value of the CRRA risk tolerance parameter that corresponds to the
−1

−1

0i

20 i

answers to the first set of the risk tolerance questions (  set to zero). (The parameter  i is not defined if the
denominator is zero so we imputed 0.2 for the denominator for such observations to obtain  i = 1 , which is larger
than the maximum of the non-imputed values. This imputation affects less than 10% of the observations. Alternative
imputations that replace the denominator with other values yield very similar estimates.) All variables are expressed
as relative differences normalized to their mean values (as specified in equation (12)). Control variables: married,
male, age, whether respondent comes from the employer-sponsored subsample, education (below college; college;
MBA; PhD, other higher degree); log financial wealth, log wage, dummy for owning a house, log annuity income
(Social Security and DB pensions) for retired, log expected annuity income for non-retired; dummy for retired, log
home stock; subjective probability of needing long-term care, and longevity expectations. Bootstrap standard errors
in parentheses. See Appendix Tables B8 and B9 for full results including coefficients of covariates.

According to the point estimates, a one percent higher perceived mean is associated with
one twentieth of a percent higher stock share; a one percent higher perceived standard deviation
is associated with around one tenth of a percent lower stock share; and a one percent higher risk
tolerance parameter is associated with one thirtieth of a percent higher stock share. Converting
the relative magnitudes to absolute ones, our estimates imply that for the stock share to be higher
by 1 percentage point expected returns need to be higher by 2.1 percentage points, the perceived

30

standard deviation needs to be lower by 2.4 percentage points, or the risk tolerance parameter
needs to be higher by 0.24.
Comparing our estimates to the literature is not straightforward as most papers do not
have cardinal proxies for the expectations and risk tolerance variables, and those that do estimate
functional forms that are different from ours. Wherever we can make the comparison we find
magnitudes that are very similar to our estimates. The closest to our specification are the
estimates of Amromin and Sharpe (2012). On a sample of stockholders with positive expected
returns they regress the log of the stock share on the log of their proxies of μ and σ. Their point
estimates are +0.04 and -0.11, respectively. These magnitudes are very close to ours. The results
of the Tobit model of Vissing-Jorgensen (2003), estimated on a sample of investors, imply that
one percentage point higher returns expectations are associated with about 0.5 percentage point
higher equity share. Kezdi and Willis (2011) estimate a coefficient of 0.3 in a truncated
regression model estimated on a representative sample with stock shares on the left hand-side.
Our log-linearized estimates imply that, around its mean, a one point difference in μ is associated
with a 0.45 percentage point difference in stock shares. In a Tobit model of stock shares that
combines the extensive and intensive margins Kimball, Sahm and Shapiro (2008) find a small
magnitude for the association with the cardinal proxy of risk tolerance.
The columns labeled “error-ridden proxies” in Table 5 show results of analogous
estimations that do not account for measurement error in the survey answers. Instead of the
cardinal proxies ˆi , ˆi ,ˆi , these regressions include the raw survey answers to the stock market
expectation question (mi), a crude transformation of the probability answers to approximate
perceived risk, and the median value of the CRRA risk tolerance parameter that corresponds to
the answers to the first set of the risk tolerance questions. (See note to Table 5 for the precise

31

definitions of these error-ridden proxies.) The coefficient estimates are qualitatively similar to
the baseline results reported in column (1) and (2) of Table 5, but the magnitudes are
considerably attenuated. The absolute values of the point estimates are one third to one half of
the baseline estimates. These results are consistent with substantial measurement error in the raw
survey answers. They show the importance of taking into account measurement error in the
construction of the proxies and in using them in econometric models.
C. Alternative samples and specifications
The findings are similar for different subsamples and specifications. Appendix Tables B11 –
B18 present complete results. This section discusses them briefly.
Our sample is drawn from two groups of Vanguard clients: those with employersponsored plans and those with individual accounts. We can gain insight into whether the
selection of being a Vanguard customer affects the results. For employer-sponsored plans, the
employer selected Vanguard. For individual accounts, the individual selected Vanguard. Selfselection on unobserved attributes is arguably substantially less severe for the employersponsored sample. Appendix Tables B11 and B12 show estimates of the same regression as the
first two columns of Table 5. Estimated coefficients are quite similar across sample suggesting
that individual-level selection of Vanguard is not driving the results.
Appendix Tables B13 and B14 show results for individuals with at least 50 or 70 percent
of their financial wealth at Vanguard. These individuals are more selected toward Vanguard, but
also may have better measurements owing to higher engagement with Vanguard or having
accounts spread over fewer providers. The results are again similar.
Appendix Table B15 shows results for individuals who have some directly-held stock.
This subsample result is again similar. Appendix Table B16 shows results by education levels.

32

In the survey data, MBAs show less attenuation with respect to expected returns. There are no
other differences by education.
Appendix Table B17 shows that the results are similar even if we include housing wealth
either as a safe asset or as a risky asset in the calculation of the share of risky assets.
Finally, the columns labeled “Administrative stock share” in Appendix B show the
results for using the fraction of stocks in assets held at Vanguard using the administrative
account measure. The results in the text (and those in Appendix B labeled “Survey stock share”)
use the stock share of all assets from the survey response. In brief, there is little difference in the
results across the measures of stock shares. Appendix Table B18 confirms that the difference
between the two stock share measures is not correlated with the estimated beliefs and only
marginally correlated with the estimated preferences.
D. Interpreting the magnitudes: The Attenuation Puzzle
How might one evaluate the estimates relative to an economic model? The simplest model of
Merton (1969) with CRRA utility would imply that the coefficient on log μ should be 1, the
coefficient on log σ should be -2, and the coefficient on log θ should be 1 again. The same
implications hold if we modify the utility function in the Merton model to incorporate the
subsistence level of consumption as in equation (1) above, or if we include deterministic labor
income (Merton, 1971). The Merton model is based on strong assumptions: it requires
continuous rebalancing, no background risk, and it allows for unlimited leverage and short sales.
We therefore investigate whether adding these realistic features would move the predictions of
the benchmark model more in line with what we observe in the data. Appendix D has an analysis
of a more realistic lifecycle model. It shows, for the purposes of the cross-section regression
explaining portfolio choice, the Merton model is a very good approximation.

33

The relative magnitudes of the estimated coefficients reported in Table 5 are remarkably
close to these theoretical implications of the Merton benchmark. In the regressions on the survey
measure of stock share, the coefficient on the (approximately log-linearized) expected value and
risk tolerance proxies are close to each other, and the coefficient on the standard deviation proxy
is close to be negative two times their magnitudes. At the same time, the magnitudes are much
smaller than in the benchmark model: each estimate is about one twentieth of what a simple
theory implies.
In principle, the attenuation bias may arise from classical errors in variables on the right
hand-side or appropriate non-classical errors in the left hand-side variable. Recall that our
measures of beliefs and preferences already take care of substantial survey noise that arise from
noisy responses conditional on the latent variables. While it is of course possible for those latent
variables to exhibit additional noise, due to, for example, mood effects, that noise would have to
be extremely large for the observed attenuation. The magnitude of the attenuation and its similar
strength across the coefficients call for an explanation beyond these measurement issues.
We can represent the substantially attenuated association of stock holding with beliefs
and preferences by expressing observed stock shares as a linear combination of the individual
optimum si* and the average stock share s plus additional heterogeneity

si =  si* ( i ,  i ,  i ) + (1 −  ) s + vi

(13)

where λ is the weight on the individual optimum given beliefs and preferences, (1- λ) is the
weight on the average stock share, and vi is heterogeneity in stock shares due to other factors.
This model can be viewed as a simple statistical representation of the attenuation. It can also be
interpreted as a behavioral model, in which investors consider the possibility that everyone else
may choose the average stock share even if their own beliefs and preferences imply a different

34

choice, and their decision combines the two. Such behavior could also account for the finding
we discussed earlier that those who report negative expected returns in the survey continue to
hold stock and those who are very optimistic do not have extreme exposure to the stock market.
Expressing equation (13) in deviations from averages, denoting the coefficients of the
log-linearized optimal stock share by  0 and decomposing heterogeneity due to other factors
into observed and unobserved parts yields

si − s
 −
 −
 −
 0 + 10 i
+ 20 i
+ 30 i
+ 4' xi + ui .
s




(14)

This is a constrained version of equation (12), with the Merton solution implying 10 = 1 ,
0
 20 = −2 , and 3 = 1 .

Table 6. Observed Stock Shares versus Theoretically-Warranted Index of Expectations and
Preferences
λ
0.046
0.045
(0.006)
(0.006)
covariates
N
Y
2
R
0.017
0.044
N
4414
4414
p-value of Wald test
0.240
0.258
on restriction
Notes: Regression results from equation (12) imposing 1 = 1 ,  2 = −2 , and 3 = 1 .
Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses.
0

0

0

We estimate the constrained versions of each unconstrained regression presented in Table
5. Table 6 shows the results. The estimated λ is around 0.05. The proportionality restriction holds
reasonably well in the data as one would expect from inspection of the results in Table 5. (The
Wald test does not reject the null of proportionality.) These results imply that the theoreticallywarranted index expressed in equation (14) that gives a weight of one for expected return

35

 −
i − 
 −
, and one for risk tolerance i
, negative two for expected standard deviation i



does explain heterogeneity in stock returns, but with strong attenuation.

V. Conclusion
This paper uses a distinctive measurement and analytic strategy that combines high-quality
measurement of portfolio shares, preferences about risk, and beliefs about returns in an attempt
to explain heterogeneity in the composition of household portfolios. The approach uses
purposely-constructed measures to elicit measures of preferences and beliefs that have
quantitative interpretations. This paper does find that risk preference and moments of the
subjective returns distribution—both mean and variance—do have a role in understanding why
portfolio choices differ. Relative to each other, the magnitudes of the coefficients on expected
returns, perceived risk, and risk tolerance are in proportion with the predictions of benchmark
theories. That the survey measures of preference and belief do align with portfolio choices
provides external validation of our approach to measuring them.
The size of the estimated associations of the risk and belief parameters is, nonetheless,
substantially smaller in magnitude than benchmark theories would suggest. We call this finding
the “attenuation puzzle.” Our methods produce risk and belief parameters that measure the
precise, quantitative variables that should explain portfolio choice. Moreover, the statistical
procedure deals with measurement error in these parameters, which is one most obvious source
of such attenuation. Hence, the attenuation cannot be dismissed because the measures of
preference and belief are only loosely related to what people have in mind when choosing their
portfolio.

36

Instead, the attenuation puzzle exists because people behave in ways that deviate
substantially from what standard finance theories prescribe. Those theories say that people
should react strongly to their preferences and beliefs. For example, changes in their beliefs
should lead to a substantial reallocation of their portfolios, possibly with frequent transactions.
Moreover, many people with mild risk aversion should hold levered portfolios (see, for example,
Ayres and Nalebuff, 2010). All of these prescriptions run counter to standard household finance
advice, most of which suggest buy and hold strategies of portfolios with stocks between zero and
100 percent. Typical life cycle funds offer those kinds of portfolios, too, and none of the more
extreme ones standard finance theories imply for many investors. Perhaps the way to make sense
of the attenuation puzzle is to recognize that people do react to their own preferences and beliefs
when choosing their investment portfolios, but that reaction is greatly damped because of the
advice they receive (either from their advisors or from their peers; see Arrondel, Calvo-Pardo,
Giannitsarou and Haliassos, 2017, for the effect of peers on portfolio choice) and the products
offered, combined with limited attention to their own portfolios, strong inertia in portfolio, and
sensitive beliefs.

37

References
Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher
Tonetti (2017): “Long-Term-Care Utility and Late-in-Life Saving,” Vanguard Research
Initiative Working Paper.
Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher
Tonetti (2018): “The Long-Term-Care Insurance Puzzle: Modeling and Measurement”,
Vanguard Research Initiative Working Paper.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (2011): “The
Joy of Giving or Assisted Living? Using Strategic Surveys to Separate Public Care
Aversion from Bequest Motives,” Journal of Finance, 66(2), pages 519–561.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher
Tonetti (2014): “The Wealth of Wealthholders,” Vanguard Research Initiative Working
Paper.
Amromin, Gene and Steven A. Sharpe (2012): “From the Horse’s Mouth: How do Investor
Expectations of Risk and Return Vary with Economic Conditions?” Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago Working Paper.
Armantier, Olivier, Wändi Bruine de Bruin, Simon Potter, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert van der
Klaauw, and Basit Zafar (2013): “Measuring Inflation Expectations,” Annual Review of
Economics, 5, 273-301.
Armona, Luis, Andreas Fuster, and Basit Zafar (2016): “Home Price Expectations and
Behavior: Evidence from a Randomized Information Experiment,” Review of Economic
Studies, forthcoming.
Arrondel, Luc, Hector Calvo-Pardo, Chryssi Giannitsarou, and Michael Haliassos (2017):
“Informative Social Interactions,” mimeo.
Ayres, Ian and Barry Nalebuff (2010): Lifecycle Investing: A New, Safe, and Audacious Way to
Improve the Performance of Your Retirement Portfolio. Basic Books.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro (1997):
“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the
Health and Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 537-579.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Yueren Ma, and Andrei Shleifer (2017): “Overreaction in
Macroeconomic Expectations,” mimeo.
Botsch, Matthew J. and Ulrike Malmendier (2017): “The Welfare Effects of Experienced
Inflation for Mortgage Choices,” mimeo.
Bruine de Bruin, Wändi, Charles F. Manski, Giorgio Topa, and Wilbert van der Klaauw
(2011): “Measuring Consumer Uncertainty about Future Inflation,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 26, 454–478.

38

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Stefan Nagel (2008): ”Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate TimeVarying Risk Aversion? Micro-Evidence on Individuals’ Asset Allocation,” American
Economic Review, 98, 713-736.
Campbell, John Y. (2006): “Household Finance,” Journal of Finance 61, 1553-1604.
Calvet, Laurent E. and Paolo Sodini (2014): “Twin Picks: Disentangling the Determinants
of Risk-Taking in Household Portfolios,” Journal of Finance 69(2), 867-906.
Carroll, Christopher D. (2017): “Heterogeneity, Macroeconomics, and Reality,” Keynote
Lecture, Sloan-Bank of England-Office of Financial Research Conference on
Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomics, Washington D.C., September 2017.
Dimmock, Stephen G., Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell and Kim Peijnenburg
(2016): “Ambiguity Aversion and Household Portfolio Choice: Empirical Evidence,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 119, 559-577.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde (2010): “Are Risk Aversion
and Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?” American Economic Review, 100, 1238–
1260.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, Jürgen Schupp, and Gert G.
Wagner (2011): “Individual risk attitudes: Measurement, determinants, and behavioral
consequences,” Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (3), 522-550.
Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F. Manski (2007): “Expected Equity Returns and Portfolio Choice:
Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study.” Journal of the European Economic
Association 5(2-3), 369-379.
Glaser, Markus and Martin Weber (2005): “September 11 and stock return expectations of
individual investors.” Review of Finance 9 (2), 243–279.
Glaser, Markus, T. Langer, J. Reynders and Martin Weber (2007): “Framing effects in stock
market forecasts: The difference between asking for prices and asking for returns.”
Review of Finance, 11, 325–357.
Greenwood, Robin and Stefan Nagel (2009): “Inexperienced Investors and Bubbles,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 93, 239-258.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2018): “Time Varying Risk Aversion,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 128, 403-421.
Hoffmann, Arvid O.I., Thomas Post and Joost M. E. Pennings (2013): “Individual investor
perceptions and behavior during the financial crisis,” Journal of Banking & Finance, 37,
60–74.
Hudomiet, Peter, Gabor Kezdi and Robert J. Willis (2011): “Stock Market Crash and
Expectations of American Households,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26, 393-415.
Hurd, Michael D. (2009): “Subjective Probabilities in Household Surveys,” Annual Review of
Economics, 1, 543-562.

39

Hurd, Michael D., Maarten van Rooij, and Joachim Winter (2011): “Stock Market
Expectations of Dutch Households,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26, 416-436.
Josef, Anika K., David Richter, Gregory R. Samanez-Larkin, Gert G. Wagner, Ralph
Hertwig, Rui Mata (2016): “Stability and Change in Risk-Taking Propensity Across the
Adult Life Span,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Advance online
publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000090.
Kezdi, Gabor and Robert J. Willis (2011): “Household Stock Market Beliefs and Learning,”
NBER Working Paper 17614.
Kimball, Miles S., Claudia R. Sahm, and Matthew D. Shapiro (2008): “Imputing Risk
Tolerance from Survey Responses,” Journal of American Statistical Association, 103,
1028-1038.
Lönnqvist, Jan-Erik, Markku Verkasalo, Gari Walkowitz, and Philipp C. Wichardt (2015):
“Measuring individual risk attitudes in the lab: Task or ask? An empirical comparison,”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization. 119, 254–266.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel (2011): “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic
Experiences Affect Risk-Taking?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 373-416.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel (2016): “Learning from Inflation Experiences,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131,53-87.
Manski, Charles F. (2004): “Measuring Expectations.” Econometrica, 72, 1329-1376.
Manski, Charles F. (2017): “Survey Measurement of Probabilistic Macroeconomic
Expectations: Progress and Promise,” NBER Macroeconomic Annual, 32, 411-471.
Manski, Charles F. and Francesca Molinari (2010): “Rounding Probabilistic Expectations in
Surveys.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 28(2), 219-231.
Merkle, Christoph and Martin Weber (2014): “Do investors put their money where their
mouth is? Stock market expectations and investing behavior,” Journal of Banking &
Finance, 46, 372–386.
Merton, Robert C. (1969): “Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: the ContinuousTime Case,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 51, 247-257.
Merton, Robert C. (1971): “Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-Time
Model,” Journal of Economic Theory, 3, 373-413.
Merton, Robert C. (1980): “On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market: an Exploratory
Investigation.” Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 323-361.
Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider (2009): “Momentum Traders in the Housing Market:
Survey Evidence and a Search Model,” American Economic Review, 99, 406-11
Seru, Amit, Tyler Shumway and Noah Stoffman (2010): “Learning By Trading,” Review of
Financial Studies, 23 (2): 705-739.

40

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette. (2003): “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does “Irrationality”
Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions,” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, 2003, 139-194.
Wachter, Jessica A. and Motohiro Yogo (2010): “Why Do Household Portfolio Shares Rise in
Wealth?” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 3929–3965.
Weber, Martin, Elke U. Weber, and Alen Nosic (2013): “Who takes risks when and why:
Determinants of changes in investor risk taking,” Review of Finance, 17(3), 847-883.

41

