NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEALTH AND THE WAGE:
CAUSE, EFFECT, BOTH, OR NEITHER? NEW EVIDENCE ON AN OLD QUESTION
Daniel Dench
Michael Grossman
Working Paper 25264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25264

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

This paper was presented at an IZA conference titled “Health and the Labor Market” in Bonn,
Germany, November 3-4, 2017. We would like to thank Solomon W. Polachek, Konstantinos
Tatsiramos, conference participants, and Ilene J. Grossman for helpful comments and
suggestions. The authors have no financial relationships to disclose that bear on the research in
the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Daniel Dench and Michael Grossman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Health and the Wage: Cause, Effect, Both, or Neither? New Evidence on an Old Question
Daniel Dench and Michael Grossman
NBER Working Paper No. 25264
November 2018
JEL No. I20,J24
ABSTRACT
We investigate two-way causality between health and the hourly wage by employing insights
from the human capital and compensating wage differential models, a panel formed from the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997, and dynamic panel estimation methods in this
investigation. We uncover a causal relationship between two of five measures of health and the
wage in which a reduction in health leads to an increase in the wage rate but find no evidence of a
causal relationship running from the wage rate to health. The former result is consistent with a
framework in which a large amount of effort in one period is required to obtain promotions and
the wage increases that accompany them in subsequent periods. That effort may cause reductions
in health and result in a negative effect of health in the previous period on the current period
wage. The finding also is consistent with a model in which investments in career advancement
compete with investments in health for time—the ultimate scarce resource. The lack of a causal
effect of the wage on health may suggest that forces that go in opposite directions in the human
capital and compensating wage differential models offset each other.

Daniel Dench
The Graduate Center, CUNY
365 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10016
ddench@gradcenter.cuny.edu
Michael Grossman
National Bureau of Economic Research
5 Hanover Square, 16th Floor, Suite 1602
New York, NY 10004-2630
and City University of New York Graduate Center
and also IZA
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu

I. Introduction
Both the human capital model and the compensating wage differential model generate
relationships between health and the wage rate. In Grossman’s treatment of health as a form of
human capital, he draws a sharp distinction between health capital and other forms of human
capital, which he refers to as knowledge capital (Grossman 1972a, 1972b, 2000, 2017).
Investments in knowledge capital raise wage rates, while investments in health capital raise the
total amount of time available for market and household production in a given year and prolong
length of life. That treatment suggests, however, important complementarities between the two
forms of human capital. Returns to investments in knowledge are higher the more time that is
available for market and household production, especially if productivity in both sectors is
positively related to the stock of knowledge. Returns also are higher the longer are the number
of periods that the investor lives. Returns to investments in health are larger the greater is the
monetary value of the increase in healthy time and length of life. The wage rate of the investor is
the most direct measure of this monetary value. These complementarities suggest causality from
knowledge capital to health capital and from health capital to knowledge capital. 1
The compensating wage differential model, which dates to Adam Smith (1937), was
formalized in a seminal paper by Rosen (1974). 2 This model emphasizes that wage offers may

1
Despite these complementarities and the two-way causality they suggest, Grossman (1972a, 1972b) treats
knowledge capital as exogenous in his theoretical model of the demand for health. Galama and van Kippersluis
(2016) construct a rich theoretical model in which both types of capital are endogenous. Their model allows for a
complex and intriguing set of interactions and complementarities between health capital and knowledge capital. To
date, it has not been used as the basis of empirical work. In our view, attempts to specify and estimate this model
will be very rewarding.
2
For comprehensive reviews of this literature, see Rosen (1986) and Viscusi (1993, 2014). We use the term
compensating wage differentials to distinguish the negative health-wage relationships in a model with health-wage
tradeoffs from positive health-wage relationships due to complementarities in the human capital model. Of course,
the higher wages offered to the more educated be viewed as compensating them for the earnings they forego for
attending school for more years than their less educated colleagues. So our terminology, is simply a “short-hand”
way to distinguish between the two basic reasons for expecting relationships between health and the wage.

1

have to be adjusted upwards to compensate for health risks associated with specific jobs,
occupations, and industries. Thus, in stark contrast to the human capital model, it generates
negative relationships between health and the wage rate.
In this paper we use the hourly wage rate—the most comprehensive measure of the stock
of knowledge of investors who have completed training—and a number of measures of health to
investigate two-way causality between health and the wage. We do this in a panel formed from
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997. We employ dynamic panel models (for example,
Arellano 2003, Baltagi 2008) in this investigation. We employ plausible specifications in which
a change in health induces a change in the wage with a lag and in which a change in the wage
induces a change in health, also with a lag.
II. Background
A. Human Capital Model
Grossman and others who conducted empirical tests of his 1972 model of the demand for
health have not explored complementarities between health capital and knowledge capital just
outlined in detail (see Grossman 2000 for a discussion of empirical studies related to those in
Grossman 1972b). Instead, the approach in this empirical literature has been to treat both
schooling and wage rates as exogenous or more formally as predetermined variables that are not
correlated with the disturbance term in the health outcome equation. Separate estimates of the
effect of each have been obtained to explore the hypothesis that an increase in schooling can
increase the demand for health, with the wage rate held constant, because it raises the efficiency
with which health is produced, or because it changes the mix of inputs selected by the investor.
On the other hand, higher wage individuals demand more health, with schooling held constant,

2

because their monetary rates of return to investments in health exceed those of individuals with
lower wage rates. 3
In general, the research just mentioned finds positive effects of schooling and the wage
rate on a variety of correlates of good health. The question of whether some portion of these
effects reflects causality from health capital to knowledge capital is left open. In addition, the
possibility that an unobserved “third variable” causes both types of capital to vary in the same
direction is not addressed.
A rich empirical literature in health economics reviewed by Grossman (2006, 2015,
2017) addresses causality between correlates of knowledge capital and health capital in a
thorough manner. Studies in this literature employ years of formal schooling completed as the
measure of knowledge capital and a number of different correlates of better health. Much of the
emphasis is on the estimation of causal effects of more schooling on the health of the investor or
on her or his children. Some studies, however, seek to uncover causal effects of early
investments in the health, cognitive, and noncognitive development of children on later
outcomes.
Part of our contribution in this paper is grounded in the literature just discussed but takes
a somewhat different approach. Instead of measuring knowledge capital by completed
schooling, we measure it by the hourly wage rate. This is a better measure of knowledge capital
than schooling because it encompasses on-the-job training as well as schooling. In Ben-Porath’s
seminal contribution on investment in human capital over the life cycle (Ben-Porath 1967), he
defines earnings potential (the value of knowledge) as RK, where R is the rental price per unit of
human capital and K is the amount of that capital. As opposed to the literature on the

3

See below for qualifications of these predictions.

3

relationship between schooling and health, we employ an hourly version of RK. 4 And instead of
estimating only a health equation or only a knowledge (proxied by schooling) equation, we
estimate equations for both types of human capital.
Our approach is not an entirely new one. Grossman and Benham (1974), Grossman
(1976), and Lee (1982) estimate simultaneous-equations health-wage models in cross-sectional
data. These studies are motivated by considerations briefly mentioned in the introduction to this
paper. In that section we pointed out that returns to investments in health are larger the greater is
the marginal benefit of the increase in healthy time and length of life. The wage rate of the
investor is the most direct measure of these benefits. One necessary condition for the marginal
rate of return on the investment to rise is that the own time of the investor is not the only input in
the production function of investment in health. In that case, the percentage increase in the
marginal benefit of an investment exceeds the percentage increase in its marginal cost. A second
necessary condition that underlies the prediction of a positive wage coefficient in the health
demand function is that health is what Grossman (1972a, 1972b) terms a “pure investment
commodity” because it does not enter the utility function. The prediction becomes complicated
in a model in which health is both an investment commodity and a “consumption commodity” (a
commodity that enters the utility function directly) because one has to take account of how the
marginal cost of investment changes relative to the marginal costs of other household
commodities. 5 Even if the relative price of health rises, the resulting negative substitution effect
may be offset or more than offset by a positive income or wealth effect.

4

If forces in the compensating wage differential model are present, the wage rate no longer is the most
comprehensive measure of the stock of knowledge capital or more generally of the stock of human capital. See
Section II.B for more details.
5
These necessary conditions also are required to justify the predications made by Grossman and Benham (1974),
Grossman (1976), and Lee (1982) about the effects of an increase in years of formal schooling completed on health,
with the wage rate held constant.

4

Returns to investments in knowledge are higher the more time that is available for market
and household production, especially if productivity in both sectors is related to the stock of
knowledge. Returns also are higher the longer are the number of periods that the investor lives.
While these factors typically are used to explain why better health may cause more schooling,
they also are relevant to investments in knowledge made after the completion of school.
Grossman (2006) summarizes evidence suggesting that students’ health influences their
productivity in school. Reasoning by analogy, should not adults’ health influence their
productivity in the labor market? For example, individuals who miss a significant amount of
time at work due to illness may lose the opportunity to advance by undergoing intensive
computer training. Ultimately, that may hinder their opportunities for promotion, result in lower
wage rates, and less facility with the use of computers in home production. More generally,
Mincer (1974) stresses that investment in on-the job training, measured by the total amount of
time spent in such an activity, plays a major role in the wage function in his seminal treatment of
that function. That variable is imperfectly measured in most datasets. To the extent that poor
health reduces the amount of time spent in the labor market and opportunities to invest in on-thejob training, past health may affect the current wage via its impact on past investment in that
training.
There is, however, a factor associated with on-the-job training that may result in a
negative effect of health on the wage, especially if lagged relationships are considered. Rosen
(1972) argues that on-the-job training is a joint product of hours of work and the existing stock
of human capital. In that case, investments in career advancement compete with investments in
health for time—the ultimate scarce resource. 6

6

Ben-Porath (1967) assumes that hours of work and hours allocated to investment in human capital are divisible
inputs. In either case investments in career advancement compete with investments in health for the own time of the

5

To explore bi-directional causality between health and the wage, Grossman and Benham
(1974) employ white males in the 1963 health interview survey conducted by the National
Opinion Research Center (NORC) and the Center for Health Administration Studies of the
University of Chicago. They measure health as an index formed from the first principal
component of the number of symptoms reported from a checklist of twenty common symptoms
and individuals’ self-evaluation of their general health as excellent, good, fair, or poor.
Grossman (1976) employs the National Bureau of Economic Research-Thorndike sample, which
contains data on high ability white males in 1968 and additional data in 1971. He employs the
self-rated health variable just defined and scaled so that it is proportional to the average number
of work-loss weeks due to illness of men in poor health relative to the average number of workloss weeks due to illness of men in each of the three other categories. Lee (1982) focuses on all
males in the National Longitudinal Survey of Men 1966. He uses a multiple indicator model in
which self-rated health and the presence of health conditions that affect the kind or amount of
work are indicators of the unobserved stock of health. Grossman and Benham (1974) and
Grossman (1976) obtain estimates by conventional two-stage least squares methods. Lee (1982)
applies maximum likelihood methods to a specification that incorporates a multiple indicator
model with measurement error and endogenous right-hand-side variables in each of the two
structural equations.
All three studies report positive and significant effects of increases in better health in the
wage equation. Grossman (1976) and Lee (1982) also find positive and significant wage
coefficients in the health equation, but Grossman and Benham’s (1974) coefficient is not

investor. Rosen’s assumption is more relevant to our extension of the compensating wage differential model in
Section II.B in which an increase in work hours and effort in one period have direct negative effects on health but
result in wage gains in subsequent periods.

6

significant. All three studies treat potentially endogenous variables as exogenous and impose
questionable exclusion restrictions. For example, years of formal schooling is exogenous in the
health and wage equations in all three studies. Grossman (1976) assumes that a correlate of
obesity and an indicator of job satisfaction are exogenous in the health equation and do not enter
the wage equation. He also excludes region and city size indicators from the health equation
while including them in the wage equation. Grossman and Benham (1974) and Lee (1982) also
employ this exclusion restriction. In addition, Lee includes an indicator variable for nonwhites
in the wage equation, while excluding it from the health equation. Grossman and Benham
assume that the length of time that has elapsed since the last physical examination is an
exogenous regressor in the health equation, while Lee assumes that assets are an exogenous
variable in that equation.
B. Compensating Wage Differential Model
In the compensating wage differential model, consumers tradeoff an increase in job risk,
reflected by the probability of a fatal or nonfatal accident or injury, in return for a higher wage
rate. Since the production of safety is costly, firms are willing to reduce the accident probability
only if they can offer a lower wage rate. Market equilibrium is determined by the point of
tangency between a given worker’s expected utility function and a given firm’s isoprofit curve.
Since firms and consumers differ, the connection of these points of tangency generates an
upward sloping function termed the equilibrium market wage-risk function or the hedonic wage
function. As discussed in detail by Rosen (1974, 1986) and Viscusi (1993, 2014), the complete
model consists of this function, a demand function for safety by consumers, and a supply
function of safety by firms.

7

For our purposes, the market equilibrium function is the most relevant one. Typically,
the wage is measured at the individual level, but the risks are injury or death rates at the
occupation or industry level. Extensive reviews of this literature are contained in Rosen (1986)
and Viscusi (1993, 2014). The finding that an increase in job risk is associated with an increase
in the wage is universal, once one controls for worker characteristics. Almost all of these studies
treat job risk as exogenous because they are imbedded in a model that views the equation that is
estimated as one that depicts market equilibrium. 7 The study by Kniesner, Viscusi, Woock, and
Ziliak (2012) is one exception. They use panel data for men ages 18 through 65 in the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics for the years 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001. Since they employ
a first-difference specification, most of the variation in fatality risk is due to job changes, which
may be caused by wage changes. Hence, they instrument the first difference of the fatality risk
with lagged levels and differences of that variable.
We modify the compensating wage differential framework because our health measures
are specific to an individual rather than to an industry or occupation and because we examine the
health-wage relationship in a relatively young panel in which job changes are rare. Hence, a
person who accepts a relatively high wage offer in one period may incur a reduction in health in
a subsequent period because the offer he or she accepted was associated with health risks. That
suggests a negative effect of the lagged wage on current health.

7

Based on an estimation strategy proposed by Rosen (1974), a number of authors have estimated the demand
function or the supply function that complete the model. These estimates first compute marginal prices from the
market equilibrium equation and then treat it and safety as endogenous variables. For reviews of these studies and a
new estimation procedure that has not yet been implemented at the empirical level, see Ekeland, Heckman, and
Nesheim (2004) and Heckman, Matzkin, and Nesheim (2010).

8

On the other hand, the acquisition of a chronic condition that shortens life expectancy
may lead to an increase in effort in an attempt by the head of a household to provide for his or
her family, which may be associated with promotions and higher wages in future periods.
Moreover, suppose there is imperfect information about the effort requirements of a particular
job on the part of employees when they are hired and similar imperfect information about the
amount of effort new hirers are willing to exert on the part of employers. Also assume that
increases in effort have negative effects on health. Then employers have incentives to reward
workers who are willing to exert more effort in one period in terms of promotions and the wage
increases that accompany them in subsequent periods. Along the same lines, employees have
incentives to exert more effort in order to earn these wage gains.
The metaphor of “working oneself to death” is relevant here. Indeed, Inoue and Specia
(2017) describe the death of a thirty-one year old female journalist for Japan’s state-run TV
network from congestive heart failure in July 2013. She died after working 159 hours of
overtime during the previous month in order to cover two local elections in Tokyo. Her death,
termed karoshi or “death from overwork” by the Japanese, has been widely recognized since the
late 1980s in Japan. Cases first were reported among blue-collar workers, but they also have
occurred among white-collar executives.
Schreier (2017) describes another example of the negative effect of overwork on health.
Video game developers frequently experience what is termed a “crunch” or spike in work hours.
During the spike, which can last for weeks, they are required to work as many as 20 hours per
day and sleep at work. One such worker, who experienced the spike in order to fix bugs and add
features to the role-playing game “The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim,” experienced severe stomach

9

pains that required the individual to take a few weeks off from work. Another game developer
who experienced a crunch was temporarily unable to step out of his car.
C. Summary
Both the human capital model and the compensating wage differential model generate
relationships between health and the wage rate. In the pure investment component of the former
model, an increase in the wage causes health to increase as long as the own time of the investor
is not the only input in the health production function. This prediction becomes ambiguous in a
mixed consumption-investment model because the relative price of health may increase
substantially if its production is much more time intensive than the production of other
household commodities. In addition, in the human capital model an increase in health should
increase investments in knowledge and hence the wage after the completion of formal schooling
because more time is available for market and nonmarket production and because the number of
periods over which returns can be collected grows. That prediction becomes ambiguous,
however, if on-the-job training is a joint product of hours of work and competes for scarce time
with investments in health. On the other hand, the compensating differential model generates
negative causal effects from health to the wage and from the wage to health. Current period
reductions in health might have been avoided if a lower initial wage offer had been accepted.
Moreover, large amounts of effort in previous periods might result in reductions in health in that
period and in raises and promotions in the current period.
By implementing dynamic panel data models that allow lagged levels of health and the
wage to be specified as instruments for differences of right-hand side measures of these variables
on theoretical grounds, we relax the arbitrary identification assumptions in the studies by
Grossman and Benham (1974), Grossman (1976), and Lee (1982). By incorporating insights

10

from the compensating differential literature, we make a stronger case as to why there may be
relationships between health and the wage rate. At the same time, we justify why we are
somewhat agnostic about the signs of these relationships.
III. Specification of Structural Equations
Consider a panel of n individuals, all of whom have completed their formal schooling.
Let Wit be the wage rate or the log of that rate of the ith person in period or time t and Hit be a
measure of the health of that person defined such that it is a positive correlate of better health.
Omitting intercepts, period indicators, and period-varying observed exogenous variables, we
specify the wage and health equations as follows:
Wit = α1Hit-1 + α2Wit-1 + fi + uit

(1)

Hit = β1Wit-1 + β2Hit-1 + gi + vit.

(2)

In these equations fi and gi are unobserved fixed effects (effects that do not vary by period) and
uit and vit are unobserved effects that vary by period (unobserved time-varying effects).
Inclusion of unobserved fixed effects (fi and gi) and period-varying unobserved effects (uit and
vit) that may be correlated with each other and with the observed variables incorporates biases
due to such hard-to-measure ‘third variables” as time preference (for example, Fuchs 1982;
Grossman 2000).
We use equations (1) and (2) to examine the extent of two-way causality between health
and the wage rate just outlined and standard dynamic panel methods (for example, Arellano
2003; Arellano and Bond 1991; Arellano and Bover 1995; Baltagi 2008; Blundell and Bond
1998) to estimate them. First we take the first difference of each equation to eliminate the
period-invariant fixed effects:
(Wit - Wit-1) ≡ ∆Wit = α1(Hit-1 – Hit-2) + α2(Wit-1 – Wit-2) + (uit – uit-1)

11

(3)

(Hit - Hit-1) ≡ ∆Hit = β1(Wi-1t – Wit-2) + β2(Hit-1 – Hit-2) + (vit – vit-1).

(4)

Following standard practice in the dynamic panel methods literature, we assume that current
values of the wage and health are correlated with current and past values of disturbance terms but
not with future values. Given those assumptions, equations (3) and (4) cannot be estimated by
ordinary least squares. One consideration is that the lag of the first difference of the dependent
variable in each equation is correlated with the disturbance term in that equation. For example,
∆Wit-1 ≡ (Wit-1 – Wit-2) is correlated with ∆uit because Wit-1 is correlated with uit-1. Along the
same lines, the lagged first difference of health in equation (4) is correlated ∆vit. A second
consideration is that the lagged first difference of health in equation (3) and the lagged first
difference of the wage in equation (4) are correlated with the respective disturbance term in each
equation because uit-1 and vit-1 are correlated.
Given these considerations, we use the second lag of health (Ht-2) and longer lags of that
variable as instruments for the lag of the first difference of health at time t in estimating the two
equations. Those variables are not correlated with ∆uit or with ∆vit. For the same reason, we use
the second lag of the wage and longer lags of the wage as instruments for the lag of the first
difference of that variable at time t. 8
On theoretical and empirical grounds, we do not consider a model in which current health
enters the structural equation for the current wage and in which the current wage enters the

8

Both Ht-1 and Wt-1 are predetermined variables in equations (1) and (2) because they are correlated with past values
of the disturbance term in each equation but not with the current value of that term. Technically, since Hit-1 is a
predetermined variable, it is correlated with uit-2 and longer lags of the disturbance term but is not correlated with uit
and uit-1. Strictly speaking that assumes there would be no need to instrument for the lagged difference of health in
equation (3). Since, however, it is unrealistic to assume that uit-1 and vit-1 are uncorrelated, we treat the lagged of
difference of Hit in equation (3) in the same manner as we treat the lagged difference of Wit in that equation, and
instrument it with the second lag of Hit and longer lags. Along the same lines, we instrument the lagged wage in
equation (4) with the second lag of that variable and longer lags. Given that our panel contains only five
observations per person (see below), we cannot employ lags longer than one period in equations (1) and (2).

12

structural equation for current health. Theoretically, they incorporate the plausible assumption
that the causal effects (α1 and β1) occur with a lag. Our specification is consistent with the
notion of causality developed by Granger (1969) because it investigates, for example, whether
past health predicts the current wage with the past wage held constant. These cross-lagged
effects emerge for reasons specified in Section II. The lagged effects of the dependent variable
in each equation arise because the presence of rising marginal costs of investment imply that the
optimal stock of health and knowledge are reached gradually rather than instantaneously (Ehrlich
and Chuma 1990; Galama and van Kippersluis 2016).
Empirically, consider a model in which current health, for example, enters the structural
equation for the current wage [equation (1)] rather than the first lag of health. In that case, the
first difference of health (Hit – Hit-1) replaces the lag of the first difference of health (Ht-1 – Ht-2)
on the right-hand side of equation (3)—the equation for the first difference of the wage. The
problem here is that the first lag of health (Ht-1) cannot be used as an instrument for the first
difference of health because it is correlated with part of the disturbance term in that equation—
uit-1. So the second lag of health and longer lags are the valid set of instruments. But the second
lag of health simply is not a good predictor of the first difference of health in our data. The same
point holds for longer lags of health. If current health is treated as a predetermined variable the
same problem arises because we allow for the current values of the period-varying unobserved
effects in equations (1) and (2)—uit and vit, respectively, to be correlated with each other.
IV. Data and Measurement of Variables
Our panel data come from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97).
This is a sample of the United States population consisting of 8,984 individuals who were ages
12-16 as of December 31, 1996. Two subsamples make up the NLSY97 cohort. The first is a

13

nationally representative sample of 6,748 respondents. The second consists of 2,236
oversampled black non-Hispanics and Hispanics. The cohort was interviewed each year from
1997 through 2011 and every other year starting in 2013. Since the maximum number of health
measures are available in the period from 2007-2011, we limit our sample to individuals who
reported data in all five of those years, had completed their formal schooling by 2006, and were
in the labor force throughout that period. Our working data set contains 2,497 persons and
11,325 person-years. We have fewer than five observations for some individuals due to missing
information on key variables. There are, however, no significant differences between our
working data set and the larger sample. A majority of the sample range in age from 23 through
27 in 2007 and from 27 through 31 in 2011. 9
We employ six dependent variables: the log of the hourly wage rate and five alternative
measures of health. The wage rate itself is the one reported by the respondent on his or her fullor part-time job. If a respondent has a full-time and a part-time job, then the wage from the fulltime job is used. If he or she has multiple full-time jobs, the simple average of the full-time jobs
is used. If a respondent has multiple part-time jobs and no full-time jobs the simple average of
the part-time jobs is used.
The health measures are self-rated health, an indicator of whether health limits the kind
of work a respondent can do, an indicator of whether health limits the amount of work a
respondent can do, the number of times a respondent was injured or ill in the past year and not
treated by a physician or a nurse, and the number of times a respondent was injured or ill and
was treated by a physician or a nurse. We employ five measures of health to account for its
multidimensional nature. Moreover, some measures may be more relevant than others for

9

We do not employ the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 in this paper because it contains fewer health
measures than NLSY97, and the measures appear sporadically rather than on a continuous basis.

14

workers who differ by education, gender, type of occupation, and race/ethnicity. We explore this
issue after presenting our main results.
The last two health variables just specified range from zero through four or more. We
assign a value of four to the top-coded category. Except for self-rated health, all of these
measures are negative correlates of better health.
Self-rated health has five categories: excellent, very good, good, fair, and poor. We scale
this variable using a procedure developed by Grossman (1972b, 1976). He considers the number
of healthy work days (D) in a year as the output produced by health capital (H) and notes that
this output has a finite upper limit of 250 days under the assumption that individuals work five
days a week for fifty weeks. Then a plausible form of the production function of D is
D ≡ 250 – S = BH-C,

(5)

where S is the number of work-loss days due to illness or injury and B and C are positive
constants. Solve equation (5) for H to obtain
H = B1/CS-1/C.

(6)

Let SP, SF, SG, SV, and SE be mean work-loss of people in poor, fair, good, very good, and
excellent health, respectively. Grossman views health capital as a units-free measure in an index
number form with HP =1. Hence, HF/HP = (SP/SF)1/C, etcetera.
Work-loss days are not reported in NLSY97, but they are reported in the U.S. National
Health Interview Survey. We pool survey years 2005 through 2013 to obtain HF/HP = 2.01,
HG/HP = 4.33, HV/HP = 6.72, and HE/HP = 9.57. That series assumes that the unknown constant
C in equation (6) is equal to one. To relax that assumption, the natural logarithm of the scaled
self-rated health measure is the right-hand side variable in the estimation of equation of the wage
equation and the left-hand side variable in the estimation of the health equation. In the former

15

case, the regression coefficient and its standard errors are divided by 1/C, and in the latter case,
they are multiplied by C. Since C is an unknown constant, tests of significance are unaffected.
Means and standard deviations of the six dependent variables are contained in Table 1.
These summary statistics are not weighted to correct for the oversampling of minorities because
we estimate unweighted regressions in the next section. These estimates are very similar to
weighted regressions. In addition, we fit separate regressions for whites, black non-Hispanics,
and Hispanics after presenting our main results.
In addition to presenting the standard deviation of each variable in Table 1, we
decompose that measure into between- and within-person components. That decomposition is
important because our estimates would be biased if the within-person variation was small
relative to the between person variation (Blundell and Bond 1998). According to the table, that
decidedly is not the case. In almost all cases, the within component is at least as large as the
between component.
Table 2 contains key characteristics of our sample, including potential independent
variables. We do not control for observed time-invariant variables in the regressions because
these variables drop out when first differences are taken. As, however, just indicated, we do fit
separate models by race-ethnicity after we obtain our main results. We do the same for gender,
education, and occupation. We include survey year and age indicators (ten age indicators, with
age 22 the omitted category) in the health equations and survey year and potential experience
indicators (14 indicators with 0 the omitted category) in the wage equations. We omit the other
time-varying variables in Table 2 (married, spouse present; number of kids; own income
excluding earnings; and spouses’ income) because these variables are endogenous and because

16

we want to focus on the two key endogenous variables in our model. We note, however, that our
results are not affected when these variables are included and treated as exogenous.
Our estimates are limited to continuously employed workers. That raises a standard
selection issue because reductions in health could lead not only to effects on wages but also to
spells out of the labor force. Ideally, we would want to estimate an econometric model that both
deals with the simultaneity issue, as we do, and with the selection issue. One reason we have
chosen not to estimate a sample selection model is that this model is not highly credible without
theoretically-based exclusion restrictions. A second reason is that the three previous papers
(Grossman and Benham 1974; Grossman 1976; Lee 1981) that estimated simultaneous equations
health-wage models limited their estimates to workers in the labor force. We return to this issue
in discussing our key results.

V. Results
Arellano-Bond dynamic panel estimates of the generalized methods of moments (GMM)
first-differenced health and wage equations are contained in Tables 3 and 4, respectively. Since
there are five alternative health measures, five regressions are shown in each table. 10 Of the
maximum of five observations for each person, the first one is lost because of the inclusion of the
first lag of the wage and health in the specification of the structural level equations. The second
one is lost by taking first differences. Hence, a maximum of three observations remain: the first
difference as of 2009, the first difference as of 2010, and the first difference as of 2011. Missing
data can limit this number to one or two for some persons. That is why the number of
observations in Tables 3 and 4, which pertain to first differences of the dependent variables in

10

Estimates were obtained using the xtabond2 routine is Stata (Roodman 2009).

17

the regressions, are less than 7,497 person-years (2,497 persons * 3 observations per person). 11
The estimates in each table employ up to three lags of health and up to three lags of the
wage as instruments. In the first period (2009), the only available instruments are the second
lags of these two variables—their values as of 2007. In the second period (2010), the second and
third lags are available (values as of 2008 and 2007). In the third period (2011), all three lags are
available (values as of 2009, 2008, and 2007).
Blundell and Bond (1998) point out that the performance of the GMM first-difference
estimator has a large finite sample bias and poor precision when the autoregressive parameters
are relatively large and the number of time series observations is small. Lagged levels of the
series provide weak instruments for first differences in this case. They suggest using an
extended GMM estimator that employs lagged differences as instruments for equations in level
form, in addition to lagged levels as instruments for equations in difference form.
Before obtaining the estimates in Tables 3 and 4, we explored this issue by estimating an
exactly identified version of our model. In this version, there are only two instruments: the
second lag of health and the second lag of the wage. Since the equations are exactly identified,
the Arellano-Bond first difference procedure is identical to conventional two-stage least squares.
Following Blundell and Bond (1998), our evaluation is based on the first stage of the exactly
identified model. Consider the structural equations for Wit-1 and Hit-1. Subtract Wit-2 from each
side of the first equation, and subtract Hit-2 from each side of the second equation to obtain

11

Wit-1 – Wit-2 = α1Hit-2 + (α2 – 1)Wit-2 + fi + uit-1

(7)

Hit-1 – Hit-2 = β1Wit-2 + (β2 – 1) Hit-2 + gi + vit-1.

(8)

Note that the data in Table 1 pertain to variables in levels and include five observations per person in most cases.

18

Equations (7) and (8) constitute the first stage. Note that the fixed effects appear in the
equations, and the second lag of the wage and the second lag of the health are correlated with
those effects. But those two variables are not correlated with the disturbance terms in equations
(3) and (4), which are uit – uit-1 and vit – vit-1, respectively. In this sense, the second lags are valid
instruments.
Blundell and Bond show that parameter estimates of α2 -1 and β2 – 1 are inconsistent
because the second lags of the wage and health are correlated with the fixed effects. The biases
or inconsistencies are upwards towards zero and are particularly severe as α2 and β2 approach
one and/or if the variance in the fixed effect relative to the variance in the time-varying
disturbance term approaches infinity. In either case, an F-test of the significance of the two
instruments as a set should have a small value.
The relevant F-ratios are reported in the last two rows in Tables 3 and 4. In the former
table they range from 93.67 to 96.05 in the first-stage wage equation and from 163.50 to 851.2 in
the first-stage health equation. In Table 4, the corresponding range is from 81.12 to 84.06 in the
first-stage wage equation and from 154.30 to 749.50 in the first-stage health equation. Clearly,
these F-ratios are very large, and they reject the hypothesis that the instruments are weak.
Moreover, the coefficients of α2 -1 in the wage equation and β2 – 1 in the health equation are
nowhere near 0. The values of α2 -1 are all -0.40 in the first-stage wage equation (α2 = 0.60) and
range from -0.45 to -0.71 in the first-stage health equation (β2 ranges from 0.29 to 0.55) that
correspond to the F-ratios in Table 3. These values are almost the same in the first stage wage
regression and health regressions that correspond to the F-ratios in Table 4. In addition, as
shown in Table 1, the within-person variation in our outcomes is at least as large as the betweenperson variation in almost all cases. In short, there is little evidence that our estimates would be

19

improved by estimating the level equation. Since that procedure would greatly increase the
number of instruments, we do not pursue it. Finally, we note that the key coefficients of
interest—the cross effect of past health on the current wage (α1) and the cross effect of the past
wage on current health (β1) are very similar in the two-stage least squares model and in the
Arellano-Bond mode with up to three lags of the wage and health as instruments.
Turning to the estimated health equations in Table 3, one sees that the coefficients of β1
never are significant. In other words, we have no evidence that a change in last period’s wage
has an effect on health in this period. Why might that be the case? One explanation is that they
suggest effects that go in opposite directions in the human capital and compensating wage
differential models and that could offset each other. For example, in the human capital model,
the positive effect of the wage on health could be small or nonexistent if the share of the money
price of medical care and other goods purchased in the market in the marginal cost of health
production is small. In that case, the marginal rate of return to an investment in health would be
insignificant and might be swamped by substitution effects towards goods-intensive commodities
in a mixed investment-consumption framework. Alternatively, positive effects in the human
capital model might be offset by negative realizations of current period reductions in health by
persons who accepted a relatively high wage in a previous period to accept a job with a higher
than average expected health risk.
In Table 4, one sees that two of the five coefficients of α1 are statistically significant.
These are the ones associated with self-rated health and with the number of times a respondent
was injured or ill and not treated. Keep in mind that the self-rated health measure is a positive
correlate of better health so that both the negative coefficient of that variable and the positive
coefficient of the frequency of untreated injury or illness indicate that a reduction in past-year

20

health is associated with an increase in the current-year wage. This result is not consistent with
the notion that an increase in health after the completion of formal schooling should increase
further investments in knowledge via on-the-job training. It is consistent with one of our
extensions of the compensating wage differential model in which a large amount of effort in one
period is required to obtain promotions and the wage increases that accompany them in
subsequent periods. That effort may cause reductions in health and to a negative effect of health
in the previous period on the current period wage. The result also is consistent with a model in
which on-the-job training is a joint product of hours of work and competes for scarce time with
investments in health. 12
One explanation for why we find the results for injured or ill and not treated and not for
injured or ill and treated is that those treated contain two groups of individuals. The first group
has serious injuries that force them to miss work for some amount of time. This would cause
lower wage rates, possibly because they invest less in on-the-job training or have lower levels of
effort. The second group does not miss work and like the untreated group has higher levels of
effort that lead to higher wages. Note that while we employ a continuously employed sample, it
is not limited to workers who worked the same number of hours per year or the same number of
days or weeks per year in each period.
While we find some evidence that a reduction in health leads to an increase in the wage,
that evidence is limited to continuously employed workers. It might be weakened or even
reversed if we did not limit the sample to that group. For example, a worker who is forced to
leave the labor force due to poor health and then returns a year or two later may have a lower

12

In both Tables 3 and 4, the overidentification restrictions are accepted, and there is no evidence of second-order
serial correlation in the residuals. First-order serial correlation in the difference equation is to expected if, for
example, uit and uis (s ≠ t) are uncorrelated since the disturbance in the first difference equation at times t and t-1
share a common term (uit-1).

21

wage than an otherwise identical continuously employed worker due to a loss of experience and
on-the-job investment.
In Tables 5 and 6, we examine how the negative cross effects of past health on the current
wage vary by groups classified by education, gender, occupation, and race/ethnicity. We focus
on the two significant effects for the population at large because there are no cross effects of the
lagged wage on current health for these groups. In addition, the only significant lagged health
effects pertain to those involving self-rated health and the frequency of untreated illness or
injury. 13
In Table 5, we compare individuals with a high school education or less to those with
some college or more, males versus females, and workers in physically taxing versus mentally
taxing occupations. Our classification of occupations into physically or mentally demanding is
contained in Table A1 in the appendix. While the self-rated health status effect is not significant
for either education group, it is bigger for the more educated group, bigger for that group than for
the full sample, and significant at p < 0.16. On the other hand, the coefficient of the number of
times injured or ill and not treated, while positive and significant for both groups, is larger for the
less educated than for the more educated. One explanation of these results is that the less
educated tend to be employed in more risky and physically demanding blue-collar occupations,
while the more educated tend to be found in mentally demanding white-collar occupations.
Hence, higher levels of effort in a prior period require more physical labor on the part of the less
educated and result in untreated injuries or accidents in that group. On the other hand, these
higher levels make more mental demands on the more educated and result in reductions in their
self-rated health. In either case, compensating wage increases are realized in subsequent periods.

13

The estimates in Tables 5 and 6 include the lag of the first difference of the wage, but its coefficients are not
shown.

22

A similar picture emerges when females are compared to males. The four health
coefficients are negative and significant for both groups. But the self-rated health effect is larger
for females than for males, while the untreated injury or illness effect is larger for males. This is
consistent with greater prevalence of males in blue collar occupations.
The results by occupation give a considerable amount of credence to our interpretation.
The self-rated health effect is not significant for either occupation group. But it is bigger for the
one that we classify as mentally demanding, bigger for that group than for the full sample, and
significant at p < 0.12 despite a sample size that is smaller than any of the others in Table 5. On
the other hand, the untreated injury effect is larger in the physically demanding occupations than
in the mentally demanding ones or in any other group in Table 5 or in the full sample and is
significant at p < 0.01. A caveat here is that our classification of occupations into physically or
mentally demanding is somewhat arbitrary.
In Table 6, we compare white non-Hispanics, black non-Hispanics, and Hispanics. 14 The
self-rated health coefficient is negative and significant for whites but not for the other two
groups. Moreover, the magnitude of this coefficient is almost two and a half times as large as it
is in the pooled sample. While all three coefficients of untreated illness or injury measure are
positive and significant, they are bigger for black non-Hispanics and Hispanics than for whites.
While the black coefficient is estimated imprecisely, the Hispanic coefficient is significant, twice
as large as the white coefficient, and almost 70 percent larger than the black coefficient. Again,
these results are consistent with occupational patterns in which whites are more likely to have
white-collar jobs than minorities. The larger untreated illness and injury effect for Hispanics
compared to blacks also is consistent with surveys in which Hispanics are more likely to believe

14

We include the very small percentage of the sample who are in the other race, non-Hispanic category with whites.
Exclusion of them from the white sample does not alter our results.

23

in the efficacy of hard work than the population at large (for example, Taylor, Lopez, Martínez,
and Velasco 2012).
VI. Discussion
We uncover a causal relationship between two of five measures of health and the wage in
which a reduction in health leads to an increase in the wage rate in a panel of U.S. young adults
who had completed their formal schooling by 2006 and were continuously employed from that
year through 2011. There is no evidence of a causal relationship running from the wage rate to
health in this panel. The former result highlights the multidimensional nature of health. It is
consistent with an extension of the compensating wage differential model in which a large
amount of effort in one period is required to obtain promotions and the wage increases that
accompany them in subsequent periods. That effort may cause reductions in health and to a
negative effect of health in the previous period on the current period wage. In this framework,
employees have imperfect information about the effort requirements of a particular job when
they are hired, and employers have imperfect information about the amount of effort new hirers
are willing to exert. The result also is consistent with a model in which investments in career
advancement compete with investments in health for time—the ultimate scarce resource. The
latter result suggests that forces that go in opposite directions in the human capital and
compensating wage differential models may offset each other.
A good deal of caution is required in interpreting our findings and in extrapolating them
to the population at large. Clearly, the results pertain to a selected sample. The panel members
were at the early stages of their working careers during the period at issue and were continuously
employed during the Great Recession. The realization that many of their colleagues were
unemployed or could not find jobs may have caused them to increase their work effort, which

24

resulted in reductions in health but led to subsequent wage increases. This may be one subtle
factor in the findings in some studies that positive correlates of health rise in a recession (for
example, Ruhm 2000, 2003, 2005; Cutler, Huang, and Lleras-Muney 2016). Another
consideration is that the interpretation of our main result—that reductions in health cause
increases in the wage because these increases are associated with high levels of past effort—
needs to be investigated in detail.
We view the last item as a challenging one on an agenda for future research. Work effort
surely is related to hours of work, but the latter is not a perfect correlate of the former. In
addition, effort may have different effects in different industries and occupations and on different
measures of health as our results suggest. Finally, effort and hours of work surely are
endogenous variables. Hence, in the short and intermediate runs, priority should be given to
obtaining estimates in a longer panel than the one we have employed. That panel should contain
persons of all ages and should have the ability to examine how estimates differ in recessions
compared to expansions.

25

References
Arellano, Manuel. 2003. Panel Data Econometrics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond. 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data:
Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations.” Review of
Economic Studies 58(2): 277-297.
Arellano, Manuel, and Olympia Bover. 1995. “Another Look at the Instrumental Variable
Estimation of Error-Components Models.” Journal of Econometrics 68(1): 29-51.
Baltagi, Badi H. 2008. Econometric Analysis of Panel Data. Fourth Edition. Chichester,
United Kingdom: Wiley.
Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings.”
Journal of Political Economy 75(4, part 1): 352-365.
Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond. 1998. “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
Dynamic Panel Data Models.” Journal of Econometrics 87(1): 115-143.
Cutler, David M, Wei Huang, and Adriana Lleras Muney. 2016. “Economic Conditions and
Mortality: Evidence from 200 Years of Data.” Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 22690.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Hiroyuki Chuma. 1990. “A Model of the Demand for Longevity and the Value
of Life Extension.” Journal of Political Economy 98(4): 761-782.
Ekeland, Ivar, James J. Heckman, and Lars Nesheim. 2004. “Identification and Estimation of
Hedonic Models.” Journal of Political Economy 112(1, pt. 2): S60-S109.
Fuchs, Victor R. 1982. “Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study.” In Economic
Aspects of Health, ed. Victor R. Fuchs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 93-120.

26

Galama, Titus, and Hans van Kippersluis. 2016. “A Theory of Education, Health and
Longevity.” Presented at a conference entitled “Human Capital and Health Behavior.”
Gothenburg University, Sweden, May 19-20.
Granger, Clive W. J. 1969. “Investigating Causal Relationships by Econometric Models and
Cross-Spectral Methods.” Econometrica 37(3): 424-438.
Grossman, Michael. 1972a. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
Journal of Political Economy 80(2): 223-255.
Grossman, Michael. 1972b. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical
Investigation. New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Re-issued with a Forward from Björn Lindgren by Columbia
University Press, 2017.
Grossman, Michael. 1976. “The Correlation between Health and Schooling.” In Household
Production and Consumption, ed. Nestor E. Terleckyj. Studies in Income and Wealth,
Volume 40, by the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth. New York: Columbia
University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research: 147-211.
Grossman, Michael. 2000. “The Human Capital Model. In Handbook of Health Economics,
Volume 1A, ed. Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse. Amsterdam: NorthHolland, Elsevier Science: 347-408.
Grossman, Michael. 2006. “Education and Nonmarket Outcomes.” In Handbook of the
Economics of Education, Volume 1, ed. Eric Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam:
North-Holland, Elsevier Science: 577-633.
Grossman, Michael. 2015. “The Relationship between Health and Schooling: What’s New?”
Nordic Journal of Health Economics 3(1): 7-17.

27

Grossman, Michael. 2017. Determinants of Health: An Economic Perspective. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Grossman, Michael, and Lee Benham. 1974. “Health, Hours and Wages.” In The Economics of
Health and Medical Care, ed. Mark Perlman. London: The Macmillan Press: 205-233.
Heckman, James J., Rosa L. Matzkin, and Lars Nesheim. 2010. “Nonparametric Identification
and Estimation of Nonadditive Hedonic Models.” Econometrica 78(5): 1569-1591.
Inoue, Makiko, and Megan Specia. 2017. “Japan Confronts Latest Death From Overwork.”
New York Times October 6: A4.
Kniesner, Thomas J., W. Kip Viscusi, Christopher Woock, and James P. Ziliak. 2012. “The
Value of a Statistical Life: Evidence from Panel Data.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 94(1): 74-87.
Lee, Lung-Fei. 1982, “Health and the Wage: A Simultaneous Equation Model with Multiple
Discrete Indicators.” International Economic Review 23(1): 199-221.
Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia University
Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Roodman, David. 2009. “How to do xtabond2: An Introduction to Difference and System
GMM in Stata.” The Stata Journal 9(1): 86-136.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1972. “Learning and Experience in the Labor Market.” Journal of Human
Resources 7(3): 326-342.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition.” Journal of Political Economy 82(1): 34-55.

28

Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “The Theory of Equalizing Differences.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 1 ed. Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. Amsterdam: NorthHolland, Elsevier: 641-692.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health? The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115(2): 617–650.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2003. “Good Times Make You Sick.” Journal of Health Economics
22(4): 637–658.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2005. “Healthy Living in Hard Times.” Journal of Health Economics 24
(2): 341–363.
Schreier, Jason. 2017. “The ‘Crunch’ Problem in the Gaming Industry.” New York Times
October 26: A29.
Smith, Adam. 1937. An Inquiry into the Causes and Consequences of the Wealth of Nations, ed.
with an Introduction by Max Lerner. New York: Random House.
Taylor, Paul, Mark Hugo Lopez, Jessica Martínez, and Gabriel Velasco. 2012. “Hispanic
Trends: The American Experience.” Pew Research Center, April 4,
http://www.pewhispanic.org/2012/04/04/iii-the-american-experience/, last accessed
October 17, 2017.
Viscusi, W. Kip. 1993. “The Value of Risks to Life and Health.” Journal of Economic
Literature 31(4): 1912-1946.
Viscusi, W. Kip. 2014. “The Value of Individual and Societal Risks to Life and Health.” In
Handbook of the Economics of Risk and Uncertainty, Volume 1 ed. Mark Machina and
W. Kip Viscusi. Amsterdam: North-Holland, Elsevier Science: 385-450.

29

Table 1: Means and Within and Between S.D. of Endogenously Treated Variables
S.D.
S.D.
S.D.
Dependent Variable
Mean Overall
Between
Within
Person-years Respondents
Log Wage
2.66
0.62
0.52
0.34
11325
2497
Self-Rated Health
1.73
0.45
0.36
0.27
11324
2497
Limited in the Kind of Work
0.02
0.16
0.11
0.12
11315
2497
Limited in the Amount of Work
0.02
0.14
0.10
0.10
11319
2497
# of Time Injured or Ill and not Treated by a Doctor or
Nurse
0.74
1.19
0.84
0.86
11312
2497
# of Times Injured or Ill and Treated by a Doctor or
Nurse
0.51
0.97
0.67
0.71
11322
2497
Note: Sample includes respondents from 2007 to 2011 who have completed education and who are not missing a wave and are
included in regressions in Table 4. Results are almost identical when the sample is based on the regressions in Table 3. Wages are
based on current full-time or part-time jobs. Self-rated health is based on the question "In general, how is your health? Excellent,
Very Good, Good, Fair, or Poor?" scaled by the predicted work-loss days from NHIS which has the same question. Specifically, each
category is scaled as the natural log of each category’s predicted work-loss days relative to the poor category [e.g. ln(predicted poor
work-loss days/predicted Excellent work-loss days)), # of times injured or ill and not treated, and # of times injured or ill and treated
both range from 0 to 4+, where 4+ is a top code and is set equal to 4.

30

Table 2: Sample Characteristic Mean and S.D.
Variable
Mean
S.D.
Minimum Maximum
White
0.52
0.50
0.00
1
Black, Non-Hispanic
0.22
0.41
0.00
1
Hispanic
0.23
0.42
0.00
1
Other Race, Non-Hispanic
0.03
0.18
0.00
1
Female
0.43
0.49
0.00
1
High School or Less
0.56
0.50
0.00
1
Some College, Less than Bachelor's Degree
0.21
0.41
0.00
1
Bachelor's Degree or Higher
0.23
0.42
0.00
1
Age
27.04
1.96
22
32
Potential Experience in Years
6.21
2.83
0.01
14.00
Wave=2008
0.25
0.43
0.00
1.00
Wave=2009
0.27
0.44
0.00
1.00
Wave=2010
0.25
0.43
0.00
1.00
Wave=2011
0.23
0.42
0.00
1.00
Married and Spouse Present
0.34
0.47
0.00
1.00
Own Income Excluding Earnings
1294.15 8319.21
-6900
188417
Spouse's Income
14157.26 22880.66
0.00
250000
0.89
1.1
7
Number of Kids
0.00
Note: N=11,325

31

Table 3: Arellano-Bond Estimates of the Effects of Last Year's Health and Wage on This Year's Health

Lag Health
Lag Wage

Self-Rated
Health
0.0347
(0.0280)
-0.00994
(0.0207)
7121
0.148
0.223

Health Limits
Kind of Work
0.0519
(0.0508)
-0.00217
(0.0104)
7105
0.303
0.637

Health Limits
Amount of work
-0.00650
(0.0517)
0.0113
(0.00975)
7108
0.393
0.490

Number of Times
injured or Ill and
not Treated
0.0709***
(0.0223)
0.0148
(0.0498)
7092
0.0950
0.733

Number of Times
Injured or Ill and
Treated
0.142***
(0.0251)
0.000404
(0.0454)
7115
0.838
0.344

N
Hansen Overidentification P-Value
AB test for AR(2) P-Value
First Stage Wage Excluded
Instruments F-Stat
96.05
94.49
93.67
95.41
94.45
First Stage Heath Excluded
Instrument F-Stat
531.2
197.6
163.5
851.2
663.6
Note: * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Estimates based on Arellano-Bond using difference equations only. S.E. is clustered at the individual
level. We use a maximum lag length of 3, but results are not sensitive to lag length. Reported first stage F-statistics are based on first
stage regressions that are exactly identified with the second lag of the level of health and log wages used to predict the lag difference of
health and log wages. Exogenous controls include age and wave dummies, although results are not sensitive to inclusion or exclusion of
age. They are also not sensitive to inclusion or exclusion of marital status, number of kids, own income excluding earnings, and spouses’
income, treated exogenously.

32

Table 4: Arellano-Bond Estimates of the Effects of Last Year's Health and Wage on This Year's Wage
Number of
Health Limits Times Injured
Self-Rated
Health Limits Amount of
or Ill and not
Health
Kind of Work Work
Treated
Lag Wage
0.0955***
0.0955***
0.0928***
0.0931***
(0.0355)
(0.0351)
(0.0358)
(0.0350)
Lag Health
-0.0479*
-0.00231
-0.0276
0.0209**
(0.0289)
(0.0576)
(0.0723)
(0.00818)
N
6331
6323
6324
6318
Hansen Overidentification P-Value
0.727
0.793
0.554
0.514
AB test for AR(2) P-Value
0.383
0.385
0.378
0.354
First Stage Wage Excluded Instrument F-Stat 84.06
82.02
81.12
83.04
First Stage Heath Excluded Instrument F-Stat 481.0
179.5
154.3
749.5

Number of
Times Injured
or Ill and
Treated
0.0959***
(0.0351)
0.000995
(0.00959)
6331
0.736
0.386
82.36
605.8

Note: * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Estimates based on Arellano-Bond using difference equations only. S.E. is clustered at the individual level.
We use a maximum lag length of 3, but results are not sensitive to lag length. Reported first stage wage F-statistics are based on first stage
regressions that are exactly identified with the second lag of the level of health and log wages used to predict the lag difference of health and
log wages. Exogenous controls include potential experience and wave dummies, although results are not sensitive to inclusion or exclusion of
potential experience. They are also not sensitive to inclusion or exclusion of marital status, number of kids, own income excluding earnings’,
and spouses’ income, treated exogenously.

33

Table 5: Arellano-Bond Estimates of the effect of Last Year's Health on this Year's Wage by Education, Occupation, and Gender
Self-Rated Health

Lag
Health

High
School
or Less

Some
College
or More

Male

Female

Physical
Occ.

Mental
Occ.

-0.0239
(0.0388)

-0.056
(0.0400)

-0.0264
(0.0419)

-0.0815**
(0.0389)

-0.0379
(0.0366)

-0.0724
(0.0474)

Number of Times Injured or Ill and not Treated
High
Some
Physical
School or College Male
Female
Occ.
Less
or More
0.0253**
(0.0121)

0.0176*
(0.0101)

0.0238*
(0.0122)

0.0182*
(0.0105)

0.0301***
(0.0112)

Mental
Occ.
0.0053
(0.0101)

N
3468
2863
3657
2674
3969
1996
3459
2859
3650
2668
3961
1991
Note: * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Estimates based on Arellano-Bond using difference equations only. Coefficients of lag wage not shown. S.E. is
clustered at the individual level. We use a maximum lag length of 3, but results are not sensitive to lag length. Exogenous controls include potential
experience and wave dummies, although results are not sensitive to inclusion or exclusion of potential experience. They are also not sensitive to
inclusion or exclusion of marital status, number of kids, own income excluding earnings, and spouses’ income, treated exogenously.

34

Table 6: Arellano-Bond Estimates of the Effect of Last year's Health on This Year's Wage by
Race-Ethnicity
Self-Rated Health
Number of Times Injured or Ill and not Treated

Lag Health
N

White
-0.116***
(0.0422)
3546

Black
-0.0292
(0.0572)
1336

Hispanic
0.0474
(0.0484)
1449

White
0.0170*
(0.00985)
3459

Black
0.0210
(0.0224)
1334

Hispanic
0.0352*
(0.0197)
1448

Note: * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Estimates based on Arellano-Bond using difference equations only. Coefficients of
lag wage not shown. S.E. is clustered at the individual level. We use a maximum lag length of 3, but results are not
sensitive to lag length. Exogenous controls include potential experience and wave dummies, although results are not
sensitive to inclusion or exclusion of potential experience. They are also not sensitive to inclusion or exclusion of
marital status, number of kids, own income excluding earnings, and spouses’ income, treated exogenously.

35

Appendix
Appendix Table 1: Occupation Classification into Mentally and Physically Intensive Categories
Occupation Code: Broad Classification Category
Mental
10 TO 430: EXECUTIVE, ADMINISTRATIVE AND MANAGERIAL
X
500 TO 950: MANAGEMENT RELATED
X
1000 TO 1240: MATHEMATICAL AND COMPUTER SCIENTISTS
X
1300 TO 1530: ENGINEERS, ARCHITECTS, AND SURVEYORS
X
1540 TO 1560: ENGINEERING AND RELATED TECHNICIANS
X
1600 TO 1760: PHYSICAL SCIENTISTS
X
1800 TO 1860: SOCIAL SCIENTISTS AND RELATED WORKERS
X
1900 TO 1960: LIFE, PHYSICAL, AND SOCIAL SCIENCE TECHNICIANS
X
2000 TO 2060: COUNSELORS, SOCIAL, AND RELIGIOUS WORKERS
X
2100 TO 2150: LAWYERS, JUDGES, AND LEGAL SUPPORT WORKERS
X
2200 TO 2340: TEACHERS
X
2400 TO 2550: EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND LIBRARY WORKERS
X
2600 TO 2760: ENTERTAINERS AND PERFORMERS, SPORTS AND RELATED WORKERS
2800 TO 2960: MEDIA AND COMMUNICATION WORKERS
X
3000 TO 3260: HEALTH DIAGNOSIS AND TREATING PRACTITIONERS
X
3300 TO 3650: HEALTH CARE TECHNICAL AND SUPPORT
3700 TO 3950: PROTECTIVE SERVICE
4000 TO 4160: FOOD PREPARATIONS AND SERVING RELATED
4200 TO 4250: CLEANING AND BUILDING SERVICE
4300 TO 4430: ENTERTAINMENT ATTENDANTS AND RELATED WORKERS
4460: FUNERAL RELATED OCCUPATIONS
4500 TO 4650: PERSONAL CARE AND SERVICE WORKERS
4700 TO 4960: SALES AND RELATED WORKERS
X
5000 TO 5930: OFFICE AND ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT WORKERS
6000 TO 6130: FARMING, FISHING, AND FORESTRY
6200 TO 6940: CONSTRUCTION TRADES AND EXTRACTION WORKERS
7000 TO 7620: INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE, AND REPAIR WORKERS
7700 TO 7750: PRODUCTION AND OPERATING WORKERS
7800 TO 7850: FOOD PREPARATION
7900 TO 8960: SETTER, OPERATORS, AND TENDERS
9000 TO 9750: TRANSPORTATION AND MATERIAL MOVING WORKERS
Note: Unmarked categories are left out of the occupation splits in Table 5 because it is not obvious
how to classify them. Workers in the unmarked categories account for a very small number of
observations.

36

Physical

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

