                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         BORDER WALLS

                                            Treb Allen
                                       Cauê de Castro Dobbin
                                          Melanie Morten

                                        Working Paper 25267
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25267


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2018




We thank audiences at Stanford, UC Santa Cruz, USC, University of Connecticut, Princeton, Boston
University, MIT/Harvard, the UCLA/UCSD trade and development mini-conference, the 2018 Migration
and Development Conference, 2018 SED, the 2018 NBER Labor Studies Summer Institute, SITE,
and the CEGA faculty retreat for comments. We thank Ran Abramitzky, David Atkin, Sam Bazzi,
Kirill Borusyak, Levi Boxell, Michael Clemens, Rebecca Diamond, Pascaline Dupas, Christian Dustmann,
Liran Einav, Matthew Gentzkow, Gordon Hanson, Caroline Hoxby, Diego Jiménez, John Kennan,
Brian Kovak, Ethan Lewis, Ana Raquel Minian, Caylee O'Connor, Steve Redding, and Enrique Seira
for helpful comments. We are grateful to Julian Rodriguez at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Rodrigo
Garibay Aymes at the Department of Consular Affairs for generously assisting us with the Matricula
Consular database. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grants SES-1658838 (Allen) and SES-1753002 (Morten). Carlos Bustos, Stone Kalisa, Dante
Mangiaracina, and Yihang (Genna) Liu provided excellent research assistance. The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Treb Allen, Cauê de Castro Dobbin, and Melanie Morten. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Border Walls
Treb Allen, Cauê de Castro Dobbin, and Melanie Morten
NBER Working Paper No. 25267
November 2018, Revised February 2019
JEL No. F11,F22,J2,R23

                                            ABSTRACT

What are the economic impacts of a border wall between the United States and Mexico? We use detailed
data on bilateral ows of primarily unauthorized Mexican workers to the United States to estimate
how a substantial expansion of the border wall between the United States and Mexico from 2007 to
2010 affected migration. We use these effects to estimate a general equilibrium spatial model featuring
multiple labor types and quantify the economic impact of the wall expansion. At a construction cost
of approximately $7 per person in the United States, we estimate that the border wall expansion harmed
Mexican workers and high-skill U.S. workers, but benefited U.S. low-skill workers, who on average
achieved welfare gains equivalent to an increase in per capita income of $0.28 per year.


Treb Allen                                         Melanie Morten
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                  Stanford University
6106 Rockefeller Hall                              579 Serra Mall
Hanover, NH 03755                                  Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                           and NBER
treb@dartmouth.edu                                 memorten@stanford.edu

Cauê de Castro Dobbin
Stanford University
dobbin@stanford.edu
1    Introduction
What are the economic impacts of a border wall between the United States and Mexico?
While there exists a vigorous debate surrounding the issue, empirical evidence guiding the
debate has lagged behind. This is partly due to the difficulty of disentangling the many
mechanisms through which a border wall can affect the economy. The decision of whether
and where to migrate requires a trade-off comparing the costs and benefits of each possible
destination. While a border wall may directly increase the cost of migrating to certain
destinations, it also can affect the benefits of migrating, as the changing behavior of workers
can have general equilibrium effects on prices and wages in each destination. Moreover, these
impacts may differ across space depending on the underlying geography and costs associated
with the movement of goods and people.
    In this paper, we use new detailed data on migration flows of primarily unauthorized
workers between Mexican municipalities and U.S. counties to understand how a substantial
expansion of the border wall from 2007 to 2010 affected migration flows. We then develop a
general equilibrium spatial model where imperfectly substitutable workers of different nativ-
ities endogenously sort into labor markets that are separated by flexible trade and migration
frictions. We estimate the key model elasticities using a transparent estimation procedure
relying on the border wall expansion as the source of identification. We then use the frame-
work to quantify the welfare impact of the wall expansion for workers of different types and
in different labor markets. At a construction cost of approximately $7 per person in the
United States, we estimate that the border wall expansion harmed Mexican workers and
high-skill U.S. workers, but benefited U.S. low-skill workers, who achieved average steady
state gains equivalent to an increase in per capita income of $0.28 per year.
    The border wall expansion we study was a result of the Secure Fence Act of 2006, which
authorized the construction of reinforced fencing in California, Arizona, New Mexico, and
Texas. Between 2007 and 2010, 548 miles of wall were constructed along the 1,954-mile
U.S.-Mexico border, bringing the total fencing to 658 miles. Since unauthorized migrants
typically cross the border by foot (Massey, Durand, and Malone (2003)), the extension of the
wall altered the relative costs of migration across origin and destination pairs. We combine
this geographic variation with a confidental dataset of unauthorized migration flows between
municipalities in Mexico and counties in the U.S. (the confidential version of the Mexican
government’s Matrı́cula Consular (Consular ID card) database. Using these rich data, we
examine how the patterns of migration changed after the expansion of the border wall.
    The analysis is complicated by the fact that, at the same time the wall was being built,
the Great Recession occurred. One benefit of observing bilateral migration flows is that we


                                              2
can compare migration to a particular destination across different origins – some of which
were impacted by the border wall expansion and some of which were not. In this way, we can
control for shocks to a particular destination and, by similar logic, can control shocks to a
particular origin by comparing migration to different destinations. Borrowing this “gravity”
procedure (familiar from the trade literature, see e.g. Baldwin and Taglioni (2006) and Head
and Mayer (2013)), we find that the border wall expansion caused a decline in migration
flows: a 10% increase in the total travel time necessary to avoid the border wall resulted
in a 1.4% reduction in bilateral migration flows. This result is robust to accounting for the
response of border patrol enforcement, controlling for different types of border walls, and
instrumenting the location of the wall expansion using geographic predictors of where the
wall was built.
    While the estimates are precise, the effects are small: our estimated elasticity implies the
direct (partial equilibrium) impact of the Secure Fence Act was to reduce Mexico-to-U.S.
migration by 0.5% – about 64,000 migrants. However, this calculation abstracts from any
indirect (general equilibrium) impacts of the Secure Fence Act, including how it may change
the pattern of migration from a particular origin (which would be absorbed in the origin
fixed effect) or how it may impact the labor markets in the destination (which would be
absorbed in the destination fixed effect). To estimate the total impact of the Secure Fence
Act (including these indirect effects), we develop a general equilibrium spatial framework that
comprises multiple types of labor who vary in their skill level and nativity, who work in one
of many locations separated by both migration and trade frictions. Despite the many general
equilibrium forces, we are able to characterize the equilibrium of the model and develop a
new procedure that allows us to estimate the key structural parameters – the substitutability
of different types of labor, the trade elasticity, and the migration elasticities – from a set of
linear instrumental variables regressions, where the instruments are simply measures of the
extent to which the Secure Fence Act affected each location and the identifying assumptions
(exclusion restrictions) are equivalent to those of regressions typically run in the immigration
literature. By showing that these estimation methodologies pioneered in the immigration
literature can be applied in a general equilibrium context where labor markets are linked
through trade and migration, the paper offers a key methodological contribution that helps
to bridge the gap between the large immigration literature and the growing “quantitative
spatial” literature.
    Given our estimated parameters, we calculate the steady state economic impact of the
border wall expansion by holding the underlying geography (productivities, amenities, and
trade costs) constant at pre-expansion levels and increasing migration costs to match the
gravity estimates above. We estimate that the total impact of the border wall expansion


                                               3
including all general equilibrium adjustments was to reduce the (long-run) number of Mexican
workers residing in the United States by about 50,000 a decline of approximately 0.4%, or
about 14,000 fewer migrants prevented than the partial equilibrium direct estimates imply.
While the welfare impacts varied substantially across locations, on average both low-skill and
high-skill Mexican workers were made worse off by an equivalent decline in annual per capita
income of $0.81 and $1.82, respectively (driven primarily by the direct increase in the cost
of migrating). Driven primarily by a decline in the relative scarcity of high-skill labor, the
average high-skill U.S. worker was also harmed an amount equivalent to a decline in annual
income of $2.73. However, on average low-skill U.S. workers benefited by an equivalent of
$0.28 per year, as low-skill labor in the United States became more scarce. These figures do
not include the direct cost of wall construction, which is approximately $7 per person in the
United States.
    Finally, we calculate the steady state welfare impact of alternative (counterfactual) poli-
cies. First, we consider experiments that “fill in” some of the gaps in the wall to understand
if our small effects are driven by the fact that the wall only partially covers the U.S.-Mexico
border. We find no evidence of such nonlinearities: filling in half of the remaining gaps on
the border would reduce the number of Mexican migrants by 87,000 yet increase the eco-
nomic benefit to only $0.47 per low-skill U.S. worker. Second, we consider an experiment
that reduces the international trade costs between the United States and Mexico, which –
by reducing the relative wage gap in the two countries – reduces the incentive of migration.
We find that, like the border wall expansion, this reduction in trade costs also reduced the
number of Mexican workers in the United States. For example, a trade policy that reduced
the impact of distance on international trade flows one-quarter of the way toward the impact
of distance on domestic trade flows would have reduced the number of Mexican workers
residing in the United States by about 107,000. However, unlike the border wall expansion,
reducing trade costs results in large economic benefits for both U.S. and Mexican workers
by reducing the costs of goods, thereby increasing worker’s purchasing power. For example,
a 25% reduction in the additional international cost of distance would would yield a benefit
of equivalent to a $57.63 increase in income for each low-skill U.S. worker and even greater
gains for low-skill Mexican workers and high-skill workers of both nationalities.
    We should emphasize that there are several potential concerns about these results. First,
our primary measure of migration comes from the Matrı́cula Consular database. The unique
feature of the Matrı́cula database is that we see the origin muncipality of migrants who
live in the U.S. and so can study how the wall differentially affected migrants depending
on their exposure to it. This is in contrast to the ACS or Census which collects country,
but not region, of birth. However, since migrants choose whether or not to apply for an


                                              4
ID card, a natural concern is whether the choice to apply for an ID card is affected by the
wall. To address this concern, we first show that changes in the number of consular ID cards
correlate strongly with population counts of Mexican residents in both origin locations from
the Mexico Census and destination locations from the United States American Community
survey, and second, we show we find no evidence that the correlation between Census data
and the consular ID database depends on the concentration of the migrant network. We also
use alternative measures of migration to validate our finding that the wall changed migration
patterns, providing direct evidence from independently collected survey data that migrants’
choice of where to cross the border changed in response to the border wall expansion and
that the location of border apprehensions by the U.S. Border Patrol shifted away from the
newly walled portion of the border.
    A second concern is at the destination level (aggregating across all affected pairs) the
predicted effect of the wall on the stock of migrants is small and difficult to discern in the
population data. Our estimates suggest that the median location in the U.S. should receive
just 0.4% fewer migrants after the wall – a small impact relative to the large contemporaneous
shock of the Great Recession. Because of this, our estimated event studies of the effect of the
wall on migrant stocks have wide confidence intervals. Additionally, there is some evidence
that locations most impacted by the wall may have had different population trends prior to
the wall expansion. To help address concerns of potential pre-existing trends, we undertake
two robustness exercises when using our instrument to estimate the structural elasticities of
the model. First, we show that the estimated structural elasticities remain remarkably similar
after controlling for a number of covariates possibly correlated with exposure to the Secure
Fence Act including population trends, sectoral composition, distance to the border, and
changes in local housing values. We then show that counterfactual results are qualitatively
similar if we disregard our own structural estimates entirely and instead choose alternative
parameter constellations spanning the range of estimates from the literature: regardless of
the parameter values chosen, both border wall expansions and reductions in trade costs
always reduce Mexico to United States migration, reducing trade costs always substantially
increased the welfare of both U.S. and Mexican workers, and the border wall expansion
always causes welfare declines for most labor groups. Across all parameter constellations,
the average high-skill U.S. worker is never made better off from the Secure Fence Act and
the economic benefits for the average low-skill U.S. worker never exceeds an equivalent of
$2.32 per year.
    Our paper contributes to a number of strands of several literatures spanning the fields
of international trade, economic geography, and migration. First, the paper builds on the
growing quantitative spatial literature (see e.g., Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2015);


                                              5
Allen and Arkolakis (2014); Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018) and the excellent
reviews by Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2014) and Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017)).
Relative to existing papers in this literature, we make three contributions: (1) we incorporate
multiple types of imperfectly substitutable labor based on the nativity and skill level of the
worker into a model with both flexible trade and migration frictions;1 2) we provide condi-
tions for the existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium of a general class of spatial models
with arbitrarily many locations, types of spatial frictions, and imperfectly substitutable fac-
tors of production;2 and 3) we derive estimating equations for key structural parameters
that can be implemented simply via a series of instrumental variable regressions, creating
a link to the large existing immigration literature.3 However, we should also note that to
make our framework as transparent as possible, we omit several margins of possible interest:
we focus on the steady state economic impacts, abstracting from the dynamics shown to
be empirically important in other settings (see e.g. Dix-Carneiro (2014) and Dix-Carneiro
and Kovak (2017)) which have been previously incorporated in Desmet, Nagy, and Rossi-
Hansberg (2018), Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019), and Allen and Donaldson (2018); we
abstract from productivity and amenity externalities (see e.g. Allen and Arkolakis (2014)
and Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2015)); and we abstract from differences in indus-
trial composition (and, relatedly, input-output linkages) and across labor markets (see e.g.
Caliendo and Parro (2015)).
    Second, the paper contributes to the large literature examining the effect of immigration
on labor markets (see e.g., Card (2001); Borjas (2003); Ottaviano and Peri (2012); Borjas,
Grogger, and Hanson (2012); Llull (2017); Clemens, Lewis, and Postel (2018); and Dustmann,
Schönberg, and Stuhler (2016) for a recent review). Like many papers in this literature,
we estimate the local labor market effects of immigration using a shock to the relative
local labor supply – the expansion of the border wall – that is plausibly uncorrelated with
local fundamentals.4 Relative to this literature, we do so in a framework that explicitly
   1
     Two papers develop related models: Burstein, Hanson, Tian, and Vogel (2017) also construct a many-
location general equilibrium spatial model with multiple types of labor based on nativity, but do not allow
for bilateral costly migration between locations; Caliendo, Parro, Opromolla, and Sforza (2018) develop
a dynamic framework with workers of different skills and nativities, but assume that workers of different
nativities are perfect substitutes.
   2
     This theoretical result extends those of Allen, Arkolakis, and Li (2016), who only consider frameworks
where factors of production are combined with unit elasticity of substitution (i.e. Cobb-Douglas). In the
context of immigration, this extension is important, as the literature estimates much higher degrees of
substitutability between workers of different nativities.
   3
     Typically in the spatial literature, the estimation procedure relies on a method of moments (or simulated
method of moments) procedure; see e.g. Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2015). We leverage an inversion
result (Lemma 1, below) along with the block recursive nature of the equilibrium to implement the estimation
procedure through a set of instrumental variables regressions.
   4
     That the border wall has an impact on migration is consistent with several papers examining the impact



                                                      6
incorporates general equilibrium linkages between local labor markets through the movement
of both goods and factors. Reassuringly, our estimation procedure not only looks similar to
prior procedures that abstract from such linkages, it also relies upon the same identifying
assumptions.
    Third, this paper contributes to the large literature examining how the movement of
goods and the movement of people interact. Classic treatments of the topic include Mundell
(1957) and Markusen (1983), while more recent papers include Tombe and Zhu (2015) and
Morten and Oliveira (2018). Like these more recent papers, our framework takes no stand on
whether migration and trade are complements or substitutes – instead, the response of both
trade and migration to an underlying shock depends on the particulars of the underlying
geography. Relative to these papers, we incorporate imperfectly substitutable workers of
different types and nativities and allow their productivities and amenities to vary across
labor markets, allowing for richer responses to shocks.
    Finally, we note that the two recent papers Feigenberg (2017) and Caballero, Cadena,
and Kovak (2018) are closely related to our paper in terms of topic and data. Like Feigenberg
(2017), we estimate the impact of the Secure Fence Act on migration; however, unlike that
paper, by observing bilateral migration flows, our analysis allows us to separate the impact of
the border wall from other contemporaneous economic shocks in both origins and destinations
(e.g. Arizona’s anti-immigrant SB 1070 law, which required police to request documentation
from those suspected of being in the country illegally). Like Caballero, Cadena, and Kovak
(2018), we rely upon the Matrı́cula Consular database to observe migration flows; however,
unlike that paper, we use a confidential version of the data that provides variation at a sub-
state (Mexican municipality - U.S. County) level, allowing us to control for state-level shocks
(such as policies) that may impact migration flows. Relative to both papers, we estimate
the welfare effects of the border wall expansion and other counterfactuals by developing a
new methodology of combining the “reduced form” techniques of the immigration literature
with a new general equilibrium spatial model with multiple labor types and flexible trade
and migration frictions.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start by describing the data and the
border wall expansion in Section 2. Section 3 estimates the direct impact of the border
wall expansion on migration flows. Section 4 presents our general equilibrium spatial model.
Section 5 derives the structural estimating equations and estimates the key model parameters.
Section 6 estimates the economic impacts of the Secure Fence Act, larger (counterfactual)
of changes in immigration policy on migration patterns, including e.g., Bazzi, Burns, Hanson, Roberts, and
Whitley (2018); Lessem (2018); Hanson and Spilimbergo (1999); Angelucci (2012) and Bohn and Pugatch
(2015).



                                                    7
border wall expansions, and (counterfactual) reductions in trade costs. We briefly conclude
in Section 7.


2       Empirical context and data
This section describes the border wall expansion we examine and the different data sources
we use to evaluate its impact on Mexican migration to the United States.5


2.1     Empirical context: The Secure Fence Act of 2006
We study the effect of border wall expansion between 2007 and 2010 that occurred as a
result of the Secure Fence Act signed by President George Bush on October 26, 2006. The
bill authorized the construction of reinforced fencing on locations of the border in California,
Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas. Between 2007 and 2010, 548 miles of wall were constructed
along the 1954-mile U.S.-Mexico border, bringing the total wall to 658 miles. Of this new
wall, 260 miles were “vehicular wall” and 288 miles were “primary pedestrian wall.”6 The cost
of the wall construction between 2007 and 2015 was $2.3 billion (United States Government
Accountability Office (2017b,a)). This number is equivalent to spending over $7 for each
person in the United States.7
    We geocode the locations of the wall along the border by digitizing an engineering report
that displays all the wall locations at a 1:50,000 scale (Michael Baker Jr. Inc. (2013)). This
report displays the location of all constructed walls and identifies the particular construc-
tion project each wall segment belongs. In some cases, the wall replaced legacy fence from
earlier efforts to control immigration (for example, Operation Gatekeeper built six miles of
fence along the San Diego portion of the U.S.-Mexico border in 1994).8 In the majority of
cases, however, the wall was built in locations that previously did not have any fence. We
    5
      While the migration of other groups to the United States, particularly Central Americans, has become
increasingly important over the past several years, 94% of apprehensions at the U.S.-Mexican border during
2000–2010 were of Mexican nationals, suggesting our abstraction from the impact of the border wall expansion
on migration to the United States from countries other than Mexico is reasonable for our period of study.
    6
      These numbers are based on analysis of GIS shape files generously shared with us by Guerrero and
Castañeda (2017). These numbers differ very slightly from the official statistics, which as of 2017 are 354
miles of primary pedestrian fence and 300 miles of vehicular fence, so a total of 654 miles of fence (source).
The discrepancy may be due to the treatment of fence repairs across the two data sets.
    7
      This number does not account for maintanenance costs of the fence. Between 2007 and 2015, $0.45 billion
was spent on maintenance. The Government Accountability Office estimated lifetime maintanenance costs
of the fence to be estimated to be an additional $1 billion dollars (United States Government Accountability
Office, 2017b).
    8
      Other early wall sections were constructed in Arizona during Operation Safeguard in 1993 and Operation
Hold-the-Line in Texas in 1993.



                                                      8
complement this digitized data with GIS shapefiles collected by Guerrero and Castañeda
(2017) (and generously shared with us), which provides information on when each segment
of the wall was constructed. Figure 1 shows the location of the new wall and legacy wall
constructed on the border. Appendix Figure 1 shows two examples of the wall on the border.
    To generate our analysis dataset, we start by dividing the U.S.-Mexico border into 1001
equally spaced points, approximately two miles apart. We then overlay the location of
the border wall. For each point along the border, we construct a buffer of 10km around
each point9 , and we define a point as affected by the wall if it intersects this buffer. By this
measure, of the 1001 border points, 22% contained a wall in 2006. By 2010, 51% of the points
contained a wall. Column (2) of Table 1 shows that the geography along the border strongly
predicts where the wall was expanded: of the 781 border locations that were unwalled in 2006,
a wall was 83% less likely to be constructed if the location had a river, 23% less likely to be
constructed for every additional kilometer of elevation, and 5% less likely to be constructed
for each additional temperature degree (capturing the desert area). Columns (4) and (5) add
in economic variables and show that the wall was more likely to be constructed in populated
areas and was also more likely to be constructed in locations that were hit harder by the
Great Recession, as measured by the housing shock from Mian and Sufi (2014). Column
(6) adds state fixed effects. Even controlling for geographic heterogeneity, the wall was less
likely to be constructed in Texas compared with the three other border states.10 We consider
how this heterogeneity affects our estimates in Section 3
    To measure the impact of the border wall expansion on a particular Mexican origin
(municipality) - U.S. destination (PUMA, or public use micro-data area) pair, we calculate
the distance between the pair along the least cost overland path that avoids a wall. In what
follows, we refer to this distance along the least cost route avoiding a border well as “travel
time.”11 Our primary measure of wall exposure will be the change in this (log) travel time
   9
     We consider robustness to the size of the buffer in Section 3.
  10
     This is likely due to the “Roosevelt Reservation,” a proclamation by President Theodore Roosevelt in
1907 that set apart a strip of land within 60 feet of the U.S.-Mexico border with California, Arizona, and New
Mexico and reserved it from entry, settlements, or operation of public land laws. The Roosevelt Reservation
did not apply to Texas because Texas had retained title to all its public lands at the time of annexation in
1845. As a result, the federal government already owned much of the land adjacent to the border in California,
New Mexico, and Arizona, and so legal action to acquire the land was not required before building the wall.
This was not the case in Texas, where lengthy and costly eminent domain proceedings needed to occur before
the start of wall construction (Congressional Research Service (2009); Miller, Collier, and Aguilar (2017)).
Consistent with this, Appendix Figure 2 shows when the wall in each state was constructed: the Arizona
portion of the wall was constructed first, between 2006 and 2008, whereas the Texan portion was constructed
in the latter period of wall building.
  11
     To do so, we calculate the least cost overland distance from each location to each point along the border
without a wall and find which point minimizes the total distance. Since each point along the border is
identified as having a wall if it is within 10km of the border wall, this procedure does not allow small gaps in
the wall to impact the measure of exposure (as small gaps in the wall may reflect other deterrents to crossing


                                                       9
between 2006 and 2010 as a result of the wall expansion. Based on this measure 86% of all
possible origin-destination pairs were affected by the wall. However, we predict that most
migrants can avoid the wall by making small changes to their path: conditional on being
affected by the wall, migrants moving between the median pair face a 1.7% increase in travel
time, and those moving between the 75th(25th) percentile pair face a 2.1%(1.3%) increase.
Those moving between the 95th percentile pair face a 5.0% increase in travel time.


2.2     Data
Our goal is to measure the migration flow between Mexico and the United States as well as
the migration stock in each United States destination and Mexican origin. The American
Community Survey (ACS) and the Census include information on Mexican migrants. How-
ever, only the country of birth, and not any further information about which part of Mexico
the individual migrated from, is included, making it difficult to study the exposure of the
migrant to the wall. To measure migration between origins in Mexico and destinations in
the United States we use the confidential version of the Mexican government’s Matrı́cula
Consular database.

2.2.1    The Matrı́cula Consular Database

The Matrı́cula Consular (Consulate ID card) is a document issued by Mexican consulates in
the United States to Mexican citizens residing in the United States. The Matrı́cula Consular
is accepted as an identification document by several financial institutions and government
agencies.12 Applying for a Matrı́cula Consular is voluntary. To apply, individuals are required
to show proof of Mexican citizenship; they do not need to provide proof of legal status in
the United States. For this reason, the Matrı́cula Consular is a particularly valuable form of
identification for unauthorized migrants living in the United States. A Matrı́cula Consular
is valid for five years once issued, after which it may be renewed. A renewed card appears
as a new entry in the database. We use the confidential version of the Matrı́cula Consular
database which contains the Mexican municipality of birth, the U.S. county the migrant
is living in at the time the card is issued, and some demographic information on gender,
education, and occupation.13
the border). We show that our estimates are qualitatively unchanged if we use a 4km buffer instead.
  12
     For example, Bank on California, an initiative spearheaded by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger in
2008 to help Californians open a bank account, encourages banks to accept Consular ID cards as a form of
identification. http://www.bankoncalifornia.ca.gov/files/id requirements.pdf
  13
     One shortcoming of the Matrı́cula data is that we do not observe any labor market outcomes. The Pew
Research Center undertook a one-time survey, during 2004–2005, of Matrı́cula applicants in six different
states when they were inside the consulate applying for the ID card. These data give us a snapshot of a


                                                  10
    Because take-up of the Matrı́cula is a choice, the number of Matrı́culas we observe in a
given year will depend on both the flow of migrants and their take-up rate. A decrease in the
number of Matrı́culas across years could therefore reflect a decrease in the take-up rate rather
than a decrease in migration. Our primary analysis will exploit the pair-level structure of
the data (how many cards were issued to migrants from origin i in destination j ) and thus
allow us to control for destination-year fixed effects and pair fixed effects.14 If it is the case
that the take-up decision is a destination characteristic (for example, migrants in California
feel comfortable applying for a Matrı́cula ID card, which may signal being an unauthorized
migrant, but migrants in Texas do not), then the destination-year fixed effect will control
for different (potentially time-varying) take-up rates, and the change in Matrı́cula IDs will
measure the change in migration. If take-up is a time-invariant characteristic at the pair level,
then the pair fixed effect will control for this. The challenge will be if take-up is an time-
varying pair level characteristic, if, for example, take-up depends on both the destination and
the size of one’s own network. While we cannot conclusively rule out this possibility, we do
not find that Matrı́cula issuances correlate with Herfindahl indices of migrant concentration,
as would be the case if take-up were a function of network size.15
    Columns (1) and (4) in Appendix Table 2 give summary statistics for the Matrı́cula
database. We observe approximately 850,000 Matrı́culas Consulares issued per year. 96% of
Matrı́culas are issued to individuals with a high-school education or less. This group is highly
likely to be unauthorized: Passel (2007) estimates that 72% of unauthorized migrants have
this level of education, compared with 45% of authorized migrants. 64% of the Matrı́cula ID
cards are issued to men. California is the most common destination (with 38% of migrants in
sample of Matrı́cula applicants. We compare this database to the sample of Mexican-born individuals in the
2005 ACS. Appendix Table 6 shows that the Matrı́cula applicants are on average slightly younger (31 vs 37
years); slightly less educated (94% of the sample has high school or less as their highest level of completed
education, compared with 86% in the ACS); earn slightly less ($334/week, compared with $451/week); and
have spent less time in the United States (39% arrived less than five years ago, compared with 17% in the
ACS).
  14
     While we have observations that come from all 50 U.S. states, Mexico has consulates in only 23 of the
50 states. It is plausible that it is easier for a migrant to visit a consulate if there is one closer to where they
are living. We will undertake robustness for this possibility in later empirical sections.
  15
     There are two other complications here. The first is that migrants who have been in the U.S. for many
years may also apply for a Matrı́cula card, and so changes in the number of ID cards could reflect a change
in the take-up rate of pre-existing migrants. The second is that the Matrı́cula card is valid for 5 years,
after which it is renewed and appears as a new entry in the database. The same identification assumption
– that the take-up rate for pre-existing migrants and the renewal rate for matriculas is a destination-level
characteristic (i.e. not an origin-destination characteristic) enables the change in ID cards to reflect the
change in new migrants. A separate issue is that the migrant stock depends on both migrant entry as well as
migrant exit. It may be the case that new migration is entirely offset by migrant exit, leading to an increase
in the number of Matrı́culas issued but no change in the stock of migrants. We show below that the data
checks are consistent whether we consider the stock of migrants or the stock of migrants who have arrived
within the last five years.



                                                        11
2005–2006, and 31% during 2010–2012), followed by Texas (with 15% of migrants in 2006 and
23% during 2010–2012). Broadly, the Matrı́cula data suggest a shift away from California
and Arizona and into Texas over the study period. The other columns in Appendix Table 2
show the distribution of migrants in the ACS. The same broad patterns are present, with a
shift away from California and towards Texas.
    The Matrı́cula data have been used to study migration by Massey, Rugh, and Pren (2010),
Clemens (2015), and Caballero, Cadena, and Kovak (2018). These papers use a publicly
available version of the data that aggregates migration flows between Mexican municipalities
and U.S. states. We use a confidential version of the data that disaggregates the destination
to the U.S. county, rather than the state, level. This additional level of spatial disaggregation
will prove helpful in the estimation of the structural parameters below as it will allow us
to exploit very localized migration networks, providing additional variation in the exposure
to the wall. The state-level version of the Matrı́cula database has been correlated against
several measures of migrant stocks in Caballero, Cadena, and Kovak (2018). Since we use
the county-level version of the data, we provide checks for the county-level version of the
data against Census and ACS data sets in Appendix B.5, where we find that the Matrı́cula
database positively correlates with population counts (looking within PUMA over time) and
negatively correlates with population counts when we consider a fixed cohort of individuals
(looking within municipality over time) in Mexico.16
    The highly disaggregated geographical coverage in the confidential Matrı́cula data allows
us to recover rich patterns of migration. To illustrate these patterns, Appendix Figure 3 plots
the share of Matrı́culas Consulares that were issued in California for each origin municipality
in Mexico. The figure shows both that there is a geographic pattern to migration (74% of
migrants from Baja California migrate to nearby California), but also that geography is not
the only predictor of migration (71% of migrants from the Yucatán Peninsula, in the far
south of Mexico, also migrate to California). Such patterns likely reflect historical migration
patterns and the fact that migration networks are very persistent (Munshi (2003); Card
(2001)). Panel (a) and (b) show that the migrant network also differs within California –
for example, 32% of migrants from Yucatán go to the Bay Area, whereas migrants from
Baja California are much more likely to migrate to Los Angeles, with only 4% moving to
the Bay Area.17 Given this rich heterogeneity in migration destinations, the same event –
  16
     At the destination level, a stronger assumption is needed for the assumption for the change in matriculas
to reflect the change in new migrants: the take-up rate of matriculas are homogenous across origin groups
and across destinations.
  17
     Appendix Figure 4 shows similar patterns for migration to Texas, with the role of geography clear
through the concentration of migration to Texas from the northeastern states of Coahuila and Nuevo León,
but also with a large amount of heterogeneity, especially regarding the location of those who migrate to
Dallas instead of Houston.


                                                     12
e.g., the construction of a wall on the border – may therefore have very different effects on
how it changes the migration destination of migrants from two different origin municipalities,
depending on how exposed they are to the wall as well as their historical migration patterns.
Empirically, we will show that accounting for these network effects improves the ability of
the model to predict the effects of the wall.

2.2.2   U.S. PUMA-level economic data

We use the ACS and Census waves from 2000–2012 to analyze the impact of migration
in the United States. Our unit of analysis is the PUMA (public use microdata area), ad-
justed to constant boundaries between 2000 and 2010. Dropping observations in Hawaii and
Alaska, this yields 1066 unique markets. We follow Borjas, Grogger, and Hanson (2012)
and Ottaviano and Peri (2012) in the construction of the sample. The sample includes all
adults aged 18–64, who are not residing in group quarters and who have worked at least one
week in the year prior to the Census. The wage is defined as the mean log average weekly
wage. We omit self-employed workers both from both the computation of wages (following
the argument that returns to self-employment may also include returns to non-labor inputs)
and from the counts of population. We classify workers into two education groups: high
education (if they have completed at least some college) and low education (if they have
completed high school or less). We differ from the sample definition used in Borjas, Grogger,
and Hanson (2012) in two ways. We include women as well as men and we do not drop
people who worked zero hours from the population counts (because not working is likely an
endogenous outcome). Our primary sample for the structural estimation and counterfactuals
below is the 2000 United States Census (“pre” border wall expansion) and an average across
the 2010–2012 ACS (“post” border wall expansion).

2.2.3   Mexican municipality-level economic data

We use the Mexican Census waves from 1990, 2000, 2005, 2010 and 2015. Our unit of analysis
is the Mexican municipality, adjusted to consistent boundaries over time. This yields 2331
unique markets in Mexico. We follow the same definition for the variables as we did for
the United States data. We compute wages as the monthly income earned adjusted by the
number of hours worked. We follow the same education classification and define workers as
low education if they have completed high school or less and high education if they have
completed some college. We keep self-employed individuals in the income data. Our primary
sample for the structural estimation and counterfactuals below is the 2000 and 2010 Censuses
(“pre” and “post” border wall expansion, respectively).


                                             13
2.2.4    Bilateral state-to-state trade flow data

We use the United States Commodity Flow Survey to construct the value of trade shipped
from each United States state to each other United States state in the years 1997, 2002,
2007, and 2012. We combine this with the North American TransBorder Freight Database,
which allows us to construct the value of trade shipped from each United States state to
each Mexican state for the years 2006–2016. Our primary data set compares 2007 (“pre”
border wall expansion) and 2012 (“post” border wall expansion) where we have trade flows
both within the United States and from the United States to Mexico.


3       The direct impact of a border wall on migration
This section develops an identification strategy based on leveraging changes in pair-level
origin-destination flows to separate the effect of the wall from origin and destination shocks.


3.1     Main results
In order to quantify how much each origin-destination pair was affected by the wall expansion,
we estimate a gravity model of location decision. This gravity equation will have a structural
interpretation in the model we develop in Section 4. We estimate the following equation:

                  log Nijt = βpostt × ∆ log traveltimeij + γit + δjt + λij + εijt ,                    (1)

where Nijt is the number of migrants from origin i to destination j in year t, ∆ log traveltimeij
is the change in log travel time between origin i and destination j along the least cost
overland path that avoids a wall, and γ, δ, and λ are origin-year, destination-year, and origin-
destination fixed effects, respectively. That is, controlling for these fixed effects, we look to
see if the construction of a wall on the least-cost path between the origin and destination
reduced the relative migration flow between the origin and destination. The fixed effects
included in this regression control for any destination-year specific shock (for example, the
effects of the Great Recession on destination labor markets) as well as any shocks to the
origin labor market (such as negative economic shocks). The destination-year fixed effects
also control for any differences in take-up of the Matrı́cula Consular across destinations.18
  18
     For the destination-year fixed effect to control for takeup it needs to be the case that migrants from
different origins have the same takeup rate within a destination. One concern could be that migrants who
have a bigger network in the destination have less need for a Matrı́cula Consular and so takeup for some
groups is lower than others. We look at this by examining whether the correlation between Matrı́culas and
the ACS migration counts is weaker is if the location has a higher origin-based Herfindahl index. We do not
find any consistent evidence of this. Results are available on request to the authors.


                                                    14
The pair fixed effect absorbs any time-invariant determinants of migration, such as the
bilateral distance between two locations or the existence of historical migration networks. In
other words, identification comes only from the differential migration response at the pair
level, holding constant all origin and destination confounds. We use Matrı́cula data from
2006 as the pre-period and from 2010 as the post-period. We estimate the equation using
weighted least squares or weighted 2SLS, weighting by population in the pre period.19 To
account for spatial correlation in the exposure to the wall we define spatial clusters of 1
degree by 1 degree for the origin and destination, and cluster the standard errors by origin-
cluster/destination-cluster.20
    One immediate concern is that the location of the border wall expansion is endogenous.
To estimate Equation 1 we need that the change in log travel time, conditional on origin-year
and destination-year fixed effects, to be uncorrelated with the pair-level shock. If this were
not the case – for example, the wall was built in locations where migrant flows were expected
to increase the most – then OLS estimation of Equation 1 may understate the effect of the
wall on migration. To address this concern we use geographic variation along the border –
elevation, river, and temperature – to construct a predicted wall expansion of the same size
that actually occurred (that is, we use Column (2) of Table 1 and then rescale the predicted
wall to have the same length as the actual wall). We then compute the predicted change in
travel time if the wall were built in our predicted locations as an instrument for the actual
change in travel time. The identification assumption is that the topography at the point
that one crosses the border is uncorrelated with bilateral pair specific unobserved shocks to
migration, conditional on origin-year and destination-year fixed effects.
    A second, related, concern is that because the wall is a shock that is inherently spa-
tial, then characteristics of the pair (such as distance to the border) may be mechanically
correlated with the exposure to the wall. Appendix Table 1 shows how the actual travel
time change (Column (1)) and the predicted travel time change (Column (2)) correlate with
characteristics of the origin, destination, and the pair. In addition to distance, pairs with
higher baseline migration (likely because shorter distances are correlated with higher levels of
migration), and origin and destination industry composition received a larger shock. These
correlations are present both for the actual change in travel time as well as our predicted
change in travel time. We show event studies in Appendix Figure 5 that find no evidence
  19
      We weight due to heteroskedasticity. We run the diagnostic tests for heteroskedasticity suggested by
Solon, Haider, and Wooldridge (2015). The results (available on request) provide evidence of heteroskedas-
ticity. The unweighted regressions, reported in Appendix Table 8, have coefficients that are consistent with
the weighted regression, albeit less precisely estimated. This is expected given the diagnostic tests.
   20
      Appendix Table 9 shows that results are robust to alternative spatial and non-spatial clustering of the
standard errors.



                                                     15
that pairs with a higher wall shock were on a differential migratory trend before the wall,
which we take as reassuring evidence that our effects are not driven by characteristics of the
pairs that were treated by the wall. Nonetheless, we include time trends for all origin-specific,
destination-specific, and pair-specific variables in our estimating equation.21 We find that
these time trends do not affect the point estimate.
    Finally, this discussion suggests that there may be important heterogenous effects – for
example, if the wall has diverted migrants onto more difficult paths, or if the effect of the
wall is different for pairs closer to the border – which we consider below.
    The results of estimating Equation 1 are in Table 2. Columns (1) – (3) show the OLS
regressions. We find a negative elasticity of migration flows to the wall, with an elasticity
of 10% (considering observations where we see positive migration flows); 13% (considering
the elasticity to 1 + the number of migrants, to include observations with zero observed
migration); and 14% (considering the elasticity to the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number
of migrants). Columns (3) – (6) report the reduced form estimates. We estimate an elasticity
of between 11% and 18%. Columns (7) – (9) show the instrumental variable estimates.22
We estimate an elasticity between 14% and 27%. The IV elasticities are larger than those
estimated by OLS, consistent with the wall being built in locations that were expected to
receive larger flows of migrants.
    To give a sense of the magnitude of our estimates, we conduct a simple back-of-the-
envelope calculation and predict the total change in migration, weighting by pre-period
flows, holding constant all fixed effects in the regression. This tells us that the (partial
equilibrium) direct effect of the Secure Fence Act is to reduce total migration from Mexico
to the United States by 0.5%. Of course, such a number is fraught for two reasons: first, it
ignores the possibility that the Secure Fence Act led to an overall decrease (or increase) in
total migration from a particular origin; second, it ignores the possibility that the benefits
of migrating to a particular destination may change as a result of the Secure Fence Act
(e.g., by changing the wages or prices). (These effects are absorbed by the origin-year and
destination-year fixed effects in the gravity regression, respectively). A main contribution of
our paper is to estimate the total economic impacts of the Secure Fence Act (including these
two indirect effects), which we do in Section 5 below by combining this estimated elasticity
with a general equilibrium spatial model.
  21
     In practice, this only requires an explicit time trend for the pair-level variable, baseline migration, as
time trends in origin-specific and destination-specific variables are already included by the origin-year and
destination-year fixed effects.
  22
     We report the first-stage regressions for the IV results in Appendix Table 7.




                                                      16
3.2     Robustness
Several other concerns remain. Appendix Table 10 consider several possibilities. First,
Column (2) shows that including a time trend in pre-migration flows does not affect the
point estimate. Second, our main specification pools together the vehicular and pedestrian
fences. Column (3) of Table 3 shows that the effects are larger for a pedestrian fence, which
is reassuring, as internal U.S. government documents suggest that vehicular fences were not
designed to prevent migrants from crossing the border on foot (United States Government
Accountability Office (2017b)).23 Third, Column (4) shows that the results are robust to
using a buffer for the fence of 4km instead of 10km (the elasticity is larger, but this is offset
but a much smaller increase in travel time). Fourth, although we control for a rich set of fixed
effects, which help alleviate concerns about specific labor market or political shocks in the
destination, it could be the case that there are time-varying shocks at the pair level that are
not absorbed by the origin-year and destination-year fixed effects. For example, although
the overall effect of the Great Recession is absorbed by the destination-year fixed effects,
if certain origins have many migrants who work in the construction sector, these origins
may have been much more affected by the Great Recession. To examine this, we include
a measure of the share of migrants in the baseline who report working in the construction
sector interacted with a measure of the intensity of the housing shock taken from Mian and
Sufi (2014). Column (5) shows that, after allowing for these pair-level shocks, the estimated
effect of the wall is almost unchanged. Column (6) of the same table shows that the elasticity
is robust to controlling for Border Patrol resources along each sector, which measures the
intensity of staffing along the border. Another concern is that the results may be driven
by specific subgroups. We show that the estimated elasticity is stable if estimated for only
the 23 states that have Mexican consuls (Column (7)), or if very large flows are dropped
(Column (8)). Column (9) shows the result of nonparameterically estimating the effect of
the wall by allowing the wall to have a separate effect for each quintile of the shock. The
results show that, in general, locations that received a larger wall shock faced larger declines
in migration, although there is a small amount of non-linearity for locations that were barely
affected by the wall.
    Finally, we may expect that the effects of the wall depend on the initial characteristics
of the location, either at the border crossing location or at the pair level. Appendix Table
11 considers the effect of geographical characteristics at the border-crossing location itself.
Appendix Table 12 considers heterogenous effects based on baseline characteristics (which
  23
    The rest of the estimation is robust to creating an instrument based on the pedestrian fence only;
although the point estimate is larger, only half the fence constructed was pedestrian, so the net effects we
estimate are similar.


                                                    17
have all been transformed into standardized normal variables) of the migration pair. The
effect of the wall is always negative for the median observation.


3.3     Additional evidence
Our measure of wall exposure assumes that migrants will choose to cross the border at
different locations to avoid the wall. It is useful to verify if this is a reasonable modeling
choice. We use a second data set, the Encuestas sobre Migracı́on en las Fronteras Norte y Sur
de México (EMIF), which surveys migrant workers in 17 border cities that are traditionally
used as crossing points, to provide additional evidence that the wall did indeed change the
location where people crossed the border. By design, these border cities are high-traffic
locations; 60% were already fenced before the Secure Fence Act, and this increased to 90%
after the Secure Fence Act.24 We use the expansion of the wall and show in Appendix Table
13 that individuals were 3 percentage points (or 51%) less likely to report planning to cross
at one of 17 high-frequency border crossing points after a wall was built at that location.
    Another measure of border crossing activity is apprehensions by the U.S. Border Patrol.25
The Southern border is divided into nine border sectors, as shown in Appendix Figure 10.
To a first approximation, the wall expands in all the border sectors except for three sectors
in Texas – Big Bend, Del Rio, and Laredo. We plot the apprehensions of Mexican nationals
by sector in Appendix Figure 11.26 The figure shows that annual apprehensions of Mexican
nationals on the U.S.-Mexico border declined from 1.6 million in 2000 to 400,000 in 2010.
While the other six sectors saw share decreases in apprehensions between 2007 and 2010
(although this decline started earlier than 2007 in some sectors) the three unwalled sectors in
  24
      A detailed description of the data can be found at https://www.colef.mx/emif/eng/index.php. Some care
should be taken interpreting these data; given the clandestine nature of much of the cross-border migration,
it would be difficult to survey a truly representative group of migrants. The survey itself also takes place at
locations which are widely considered to be common border crossing points; migrants who choose to cross
at these points may differ from migrants who choose to cross at less common crossing points. It is also
the case that many migrants are not successful at crossing: estimates of the apprehension rates of crossing
the border fall in the range of 30%-40% (Massey, Durand, and Malone (2003)), and so a survey of those
attempting to cross the border will not necessarily be representative of those who successfully cross the
border. Nonetheless, the data provide rich insight into intended migration patterns and allow us to study
the choice of border crossing.
   25
      Apprehension data is an imperfect measure of border crossing activity as it may be that both the
apprehension probability as well as the number of attempts change when a wall is built. It is also the case
that people may be changing their border crossing locations due to differential labor market opportunities
in different states and not because of the wall.
   26
      The plot for non-Mexican nationals is included in Appendix Figure 11 for comparison. Over the period
2000—2010, 94% of apprehensions on the Southern border were Mexican nationals. This number decreases
to 58% after 2010, primarily because of the 2014 crisis resulting from entry of large numbers of unauthorized
Central American children. Most of these migrants turned themselves in at the Rio Grande Valley sector,
and so this explains the spike in apprehensions in that sector shown on the figure.



                                                      18
Texas had low but stable apprehensions across the period, yielding some suggestive evidence
that migrants were less likely to be apprehended in border sectors after a wall was built.27
   Taken together, these results suggest that the wall changed relative migration patterns
between Mexico and the United States, although our estimates imply that the direct impact
on migration was small. However, this direct impact does not consider any possible indirect
impacts the wall might have had by changing underlying returns to migration and leading
to general equilibrium effects. We now turn to a framework that allows us to characterize
such general equilibrium effects.


4     Theoretical framework
In this section, we present our theoretical framework. The framework embeds the labor
market structure featuring imperfectly substitutable labor types differing in skill and nativity
developed in the immigration literature28 into a general equilibrium “quantitative” spatial
framework29 where outcomes are intertwined across labor markets through both the costly
movement of goods (i.e. trade) and people (i.e. migration). The framework serves three
purposes: first, it allows us to quantify the indirect economic impacts of the Secure Fence
Act; second, it allows us to assess the welfare effects of the wall expansion on different types
of labor in different locations; and third, it allows us to compare the Secure Fence Act to
other large-scale counterfactual policies.


4.1     Setup
Consider a world comprising i ∈ {1, ..., N } ≡ N locations and inhabited by workers of two
different skills s (high-skill h and low-skill l) and two different nationalities n (Mexican M
and United States U ), each endowed with a unit of labor which they supply inelastically. In
each location i ∈ N , the four types of workers combine their labor to produce a differentiated
  27
     Analysis undertaken by the Congressional Research Service on an earlier period of fence building in the
San Diego sector found decreases in apprehensions in that sector coinciding with Operation Gatekeeper, which
built a fence along the San Diego border during 1995—1998. The analysis found increases in apprehensions
in other sectors of the border, which the authors interpret as evidence that the fence shifted the crossing
location for migrants (Congressional Research Service (2009)).
  28
     See, for example, the works of Katz and Murphy (1992); Card (2001); Borjas (2003); Borjas and Katz
(2007); Ottaviano and Peri (2012) and the excellent review article of Dustmann, Schönberg, and Stuhler
(2016).
  29
     See, for example, the works of Allen and Arkolakis (2014); Tombe and Zhu (2015); Burstein, Hanson,
Tian, and Vogel (2017); Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018); Redding (2016) and the excellent
review article of Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017).




                                                    19
variety of good using a nested constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production function:
                                                                    ρ
                                                 ρ ρ−1
                                                        s
                                                            ρ−1
                                                              ρ
                                                                  ρ−1
                                                      s
                                         n,s ρsρ−1
                           X    X  n,s                    
                     Qi = 
                                 Ai (Li ) s                     ,                                (2)
                               s∈{h,l}        n∈{M,U }



where An,s
         i  > 0 is the productivity of a worker of nationality n and skill s in location i, ρs ≥ 1
is the elasticity of substitution across the nationalities of workers of a skill s, and ρ ≥ 1 is
the elasticity of substitution across high-skill and low-skill workers.30
    Production occurs under perfect competition and a worker in location i of nationality n
and skill s is paid a wage win,s equal to her marginal product:

                                                ρ ρ−1
                                                      s
                                                         ( ρ1 − ρ1 )
                                                             s
                                                    s
                         1                 ρs −1
                                                                               n,s − ρ1s
                                X
        win,s   = pi × Qiρ ×    An,s n,s ρs 
                                   i (Li )                            × An,s
                                                                         i × (Li )       ,              (3)
                                                        
                                                         
                                       n∈{M,U }


where pi is the equilibrium price of the differentiated variety produced in location i, which
from perfect competition and the production function above can be written as:
                                                                    1
                                                            1−ρ  1−ρ
                                                        1
                                                  1−ρ
                                                          s
                          X  X       ρs n,s 1−ρs 
                    pi =         (An,s
                                    i ) (wi )                          .
                                                             
                                                            
                             s∈{h,l}        n∈{M,U }


    The movement of goods across locations are subject to “iceberg” frictions. Let τij ≥ 1 be
the number of units of a good shipped from location i ∈ N in order for one unit of the good
to arrive in location j ∈ N ; as a result, the price of a differentiated variety from location
i ∈ N in location j ∈ N is pij = τij pi . Workers of all types in all locations have identical CES
preferences over the differentiated varieties with constant elasticity of substitution σ ≥ 1 so
their indirect utility can be written as:

                                                            win,s n,s
                                                  Win,s   =      u ,
                                                             Pi i
  30
    While our framework abstracts from capital, it is formally isomorphic to a setting where capital is
perfectly mobile across locations and hence rent is equalized, see Allen and Arkolakis (2014). The model
can be extended to incorporate immobile capital (i.e. a fixed factor of production) by assuming that the
productivity of workers is a function of the number of workers within a labor market, thereby creating
diseconomies of scale. Note, however, that even with a constant returns to scale production function in
labor, because there are many labor markets varying in their levels of productivity, a reallocation of labor
across labor markets can have impact aggregate output – something that is not true in frameworks that
assume a single national production function (see e.g. Ottaviano and Peri (2012)).


                                                           20
               P                            1
                                           1−σ
                                    1−σ
where Pi ≡      j∈N (τji pj )        is the Dixit-Stiglitz price index and un,s
                                                                            j   is a type-specific
amenity for each location.
    The movement of people across locations are also subject to “iceberg” frictions. For
simplicity, we take the initial distribution of different types of labor across locations Ln,s
                                                                                           
                                                                                             i,0
as exogenous and treat the migration decision as static. In particular, we suppose that for
each type of labor in each initial location, there is a continuum of heterogeneous workers
ν ∈ 0, Ln,s
           
         i,0 who chooses where to live in order to maximize her welfare:


                                                                 Wjn,s n,s
                                            Uin,s      (ν) = max n,s εij (ν) ,                                      (4)
                                                             j∈N µij


where , µn,s ij ≥ 1 is a migration friction common to all workers moving from i ∈ N to j ∈ N
of type {n, s}, and εn,s  ij (ν) is an migration friction idiosyncratic to worker ν drawn from an
extreme value (Fréchet) distribution with shape parameter θn,s ≥ 0.
     Some terminology is helpful in what follows. We refer to the set of (5N 2 ) parameters
              n∈{U,M },s∈{h,l}                                                                      n,s n∈{U,M },s∈{h,l}
  τij , µn,s                   as the bilateral frictions and the set of (8N ) parameters {An,s

         ij   i,j,∈N ×N                                                                        i , ui }i∈N
as the location fundamentals; together, they comprise the geography of the world. The seven
parameters {ρ, ρs , σ, θn,s }n∈{U,M },s∈{h,l} we refer to as the model elasticities. Finally, we refer
                                                         n∈{U,M },s∈{h,l}
to the (8N ) endogenous outcomes {win,s , Ln,s       i }i∈N               as the location observables.


4.2     Migration and Trade Gravity Equations
Given the initial distribution of the population and a set of wages and prices, the assumed
Fréchet distribution yields the following gravity migration equation for the bilateral flow of
workers of nationality n and skill s from location i to location j:
                                                                           θn,s
                                                               wjn,s n,s
                                                          
                                                −θn,s                                   −θ   n,s
                             Ln,s
                              ij    =      µn,s
                                            ij                      u              (Πn,s
                                                                                     i )            Ln,s
                                                                                                     i,0 ,          (5)
                                                                Pj j
                                                                        1
                   
                                   −θn,s     wn,s            θn,s  θn,s
        Πn,s                  µn,s                      un,s
                       P                           j
where    i     ≡       j∈N     ij                 Pj     j                    is a migration “price-index” that is (pro-
portional to) the expected welfare of workers of nationality n and skill s initially residing in
location i.
    Similarly, given the assumed perfect competition and iceberg trade costs, consumer pref-
erences over the differentiated varieties yield the following gravity trade equation of the value
of trade flows from location i to location j:

                                                  Xij = τij1−σ p1−σ
                                                                i   Pjσ−1 Ej ,                                      (6)


                                                                   21
where Ej is the total expenditure of all agents residing in location j.


4.3    Equilibrium
Given a geography of the world, the model elasticities, and the initial distribution of popu-
lation Ln,s
      
         i,0 , the equilibrium of the model is defined by a set of location observables such
that:

  1. Given wages and the price index, the number of workers of each type in each location
     is equal to the total flows of workers to that location:
                                                                          θn,s
                                                              win,s n,s
                                                          
                                   X           −θn,s                                    −θn,s
                        Ln,s
                         i     =          µn,s
                                           ji                      u              Πn,s            Ln,s   (7)
                                   j∈N
                                                               Pi i                j               j,0




  2. Given the number of workers in each location, the quantity produced of the differ-
     entiated variety in each location is given by the production function from Equation
     (2).

  3. Given the number of workers in each location, the equilibrium price of the differentiated
     variety, and the quantity produced of the differentiated variety, the equilibrium wage of
     each type of worker in each location is equal to its marginal product given by Equation
     (3).

  4. Given the equilibrium quantity produced of the differentiated variety in each location,
     equilibrium prices are determined by the income and expenditure of a location being
     equal to its total sales (i.e. market clearing):
                                                    X
                                         pi Q i =         τij1−σ p1−σ
                                                                  i   Pjσ−1 pj Qj                        (8)
                                                    j∈N


In what follows, we focus on the steady state equilibrium where the initial spatial distribution
of labor of each type is equal to the equilibrium spatial distribution of labor of each type,
i.e. Ln,s
      i   = Ln,s
              i,0 for all i ∈ N , n ∈ {M, U }, and s ∈ {h, l}.
     Despite the many locations, multiple types of workers, and flexible bilateral frictions
and location fundamentals, we are able derive sufficient conditions for the existence and
uniqueness of the equilibrium. We first state a more general theorem that encompasses a
large class of spatial gravity models before deriving the sufficient conditions for existence and
uniqueness of our model as a corollary. While previous work has provided such conditions
for systems of log-linear equilibrium equations arising from gravity models with multiple

                                                          22
factors of production combined in Cobb-Douglas production functions,31 to our knowledge,
the following theorem is the first to allow for multiple factors of production combining with
non-unit elasticities of substitution:
                                                         ×K      ×K
Theorem 1. Consider any N × K system of Equations F : RN
                                                       ++   → RN
                                                               ++ :


                       X            K
                                    Y                  K
                                                       Y                   M
                                                                           Y                   M
                                                                                               Y
                                                αk,l                λk,l                γk,m
           F (x)ik ≡        Kij,k         (xj,l )            (xi,l )             Pm (xj )            Pm (xi )χk,m ,
                        j           l=1                l=1                 m=1                 m=1

where Qm (·) are nested CES aggregating functions:
                                                                          1
                                                               ! δ 1  βm βm
                                                                   m,l
                              X 1  X 1
                   Pm (xj ) ≡                      (xj,n )δm,l          ,
                                l∈S
                                    |Sm | n∈T
                                              |Tn |
                                          m                     l




where δm,l > 0 and βm > 0 for all m and l, {Kij,k , Ul , Tj,n } are all strictly positive parameter
values; Sm and Tl,m are (weak) subsets of {1, ..., K}; and {αk,l , λk,l , γk,m , χk,p } are all real-
valued.               P                                                            
                        M           PK               PM              PM
    If maxk∈{1,...,K}       |γ
                        m=1 k,m | +   l=1 |α k,l | +  m=1 |λ k,m | +   m=1  |χ k,m |  < 1, then there
                                ∗     ∗
exists a unique fixed point F (x ) = x .

Proof. See Appendix A.1.

    It is straightforward to see how the system of equilibrium conditions in our framework
falls into the framework considered by Theorem 1 (see Appendix A.2 for details). As a result,
the following corollary follows immediately:

Corollary 1. Given any geography with symmetric trade costs and migration costs, there
exists a unique strictly positive set of location observables if the trade elasticity and migration
                                                              σ−1
elasticity are sufficiently small. In particular, θn,s < 12 4σ−3
                                                                   
                                                                     ∀n ∈ {M, U } , s ∈ {h, l} and
     5
σ < 4.

Proof. See Appendix A.2.

    Unfortunately, Corollary 1 does not directly apply to the empirical setting we consider
below for two reasons: first, we allow for asymmetric migration costs (as the border wall
affects the cost of migrating from Mexico to the United States but not vice versa); second, it
  31
     See e.g. Karlin and Nirenberg (1967); Zabreiko (1975); Kennan (2001) for existence and uniqueness
conditions of systems of non-linear operators, Allen and Arkolakis (2014) for the application of such theorems
to log-linear spatial models with many locations and a single spatial linkage, and Allen, Arkolakis, and Li
(2016) for the generalization to log-linear spatial models with many locations and many spatial linkages.


                                                               23
turns out that the trade and migration elasticities we ultimately estimate do not satisfy the
conditions provided by Corollary 1. Still, we present the theoretical results in the hope they
will prove helpful future spatial models that move beyond log-linear equilibrium relationships.


5      Estimation
In this section, we estimate the structural parameters from the model presented in Section 4.
To do so, we derive a series of straightforward estimating equations that can be implemented
using an instrumental variables regression strategy using the construction of portions of the
U.S.-Mexico border wall discussed in Section 3 for identifying variation. We first derive the
estimating equations for each of the model elasticities (i.e. the elasticities of substitution
between different types of labor in the production function (i.e. ρl , ρh , ρ); the migration
elasticity of each type of worker {θn,s } for n ∈ {M, U } and s ∈ {h, l}; and the elasticity of
substitution σ which governs the trade elasticity). We then show how the location funda-
mentals (i.e. the productivity An,si   and amenity un,s
                                                      i  for n ∈ {M, U } and s ∈ {h, l} in each
location in each location i ∈ {1, ..., N }) can be uniquely identified to rationalize the observed
data given the estimated parameters.
    Our estimation strategy exploits the nested CES framework that has been extensively
used to study the impact of immigration on wages (see, e.g. Katz and Murphy (1992); Card
and Lemieux (2001); Borjas (2003); Borjas and Katz (2007); Ottaviano and Peri (2012)Katz
and Murphy (1992); Card and Lemieux (2001); Borjas (2003); Borjas and Katz (2007);
Ottaviano and Peri (2012)).32 By showing that these estimation approaches pioneered in the
immigration literature can be applied in a general equilibrium context where labor markets
are linked through trade and migration, the paper helps bridge the gap between the large
immigration literature and the growing “quantitative spatial” literature.


5.1     Estimating elasticities of substitution between worker types
We first estimate the elasticity of substitution of U.S. and Mexican workers within a skill
group. Taking ratios of Equation (3) across the two worker types, then taking logs and
  32
    The literature has identified several empirical issues with this methodology. One concern is whether
migrants face occupational downgrading, where they work in occupations lower than their level of education
would predict. This issue may be particularly important for recently-arrived migrants, who e.g. may not
yet be certified to work in their area of training, and may lead to under-estimates of the substitutability
of native and non-native workers (see, e.g, the discussion in Dustmann, Schönberg, and Stuhler (2016)).
Another concern with the approach is that it ignores labor supply decisions of native workers, assuming
that labor supply shocks come only from immigration (see also the discussion in Dustmann, Schönberg, and
Stuhler (2016), and recent extensions by Llull (2018); Piyapromdee (2019)).



                                                    24
first-differencing yields the following expression:
                                  !                           !
                          wiM,s          1             LM,s
                                                        i                  AM,s
                                                                            i
                  ∆ ln                = − ∆ ln                    + ∆ ln        ∀s ∈ {h, l} ,          (9)
                          wiU,s          ρs            LU,s
                                                        i                  AU,s
                                                                            i


where ∆ indicates a first-difference (i.e. ∆xi = xi,t+1 − xi,t ). Hence, if one can find an
instrument for the change in the relative supply of labor in a location that is orthogonal
to the change in relative productivity, we can use Equation (9) to estimate the elasticity of
substitution between worker nationalities, ρs . We discuss such an instrument below.
    Given estimates of ρl and ρh , we can proceed similarly to estimate the elasticity of substi-
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                               1−ρs        1−ρs  1−ρ
                                                                       wiM,s
                                                                                M,s                                  s
                                                             s                   Li        M,s           U,s
tution between the high and low skilled labor. Define p̃i ≡             wiU,s     U,s
                                                                                 Li
                                                                                         w i        +  wi
                                                                        ρs
                               1         ρs −1            ρs −1  ρ −1
                                                                        s
                wiM,s     LM,s
                              ρs
                                              ρs
                                                              ρs
                                        M,s              U,s
and Q̃si ≡      w U,s
                          L
                           i
                           U,s         Li           +   Li                    to be combinations of ob-
                    i        i

servables that are closely related to the composite price and quantity of skill group s. It
can be shown that the elasticity of substitution between high and low-skill labor relates the
relative price and quantity of the high and low-skill composites in a location:

                                             p̃hi     1      Q̃hi
                                      ∆ ln        = −   ∆ ln      + ∆ ln εi ,                         (10)
                                             p̃li     ρ      Q̃li
                                       ρh
                              (AU,h ) ρh −1
                        
                       1        i
where ∆ ln εi ≡ 1 − ρ ∆ ln             ρl   . As above, if we can also find an instrument for the
                              (AU,l
                                 i )
                                      ρl −1

change in the relative composite quantities, we can use Equation (10) to recover the elasticity
of substitution ρ.


5.2     Estimating trade and migration bilateral frictions
We next estimate the bilateral frictions. To do so, we use the gravity equation for the flow
of people and the flow of goods.
    Consider first the estimation of bilateral migration frictions.Taking logs of the migration
gravity equation (5) and adding a time subscript yields:

                              Ln,s
                               ijt
                                             n,s 
                                         n,s −θ
                            ln n,s = ln µijt         + ln γitn,s + ln δjt
                                                                       n,s
                                                                           ,
                              Lit,0

                          −θn,s                                         n,s
                                                                    n,s θ
where ln γitn,s ≡ (Πn,s
                    it  )       is the push factor and ln δ n,s
                                                            jt  ≡ Wjt        is the pull factor of
the migration gravity equation. This equation is equivalent to Regression 1 in Section 3,
although here we also include data on migration flows between locations within the United


                                                        25
States and between locations within Mexico in order to estimate migration frictions within
countries.33 To estimate the migration frictions (raised to the migration elasticity), we then
use the estimated origin-destination pair fixed effect and for Mexican workers (but not U.S.
workers), we increase the migration cost according to the estimated impact of the wall
variables:

                          ˆ −θn,s                                                
                     µn,s
                         
                      ijt           = exp β̂ log traveltimeijt × 1 {n = M } + λ̂ij .

    We pursue a similar strategy for the estimation of the bilateral trade frictions, taking
into account that trade flows are observed at the more aggregate state-to-state level.
    We take the mean across all locations (i.e. all pairs of municipalities in Mexico and
PUMAS in the United States that are within the origin-state-destination-state pair ij) of the
traveltime variable. Taking logs of the trade gravity equation (6), adding a time subscript,
and normalizing the trade flows by own origin trade flows (which, along with an assumption
of costless trade within state, allows us to recover the constant in the gravity regression)
yielding the following regression:

                               Xijt
                         log        = β ln traveltimeijt − δit + δjt + λij + εijt .                      (11)
                               Xiit
    Appendix Table 14 presents the results. We find that in the absence of the origin-
destination fixed effect and including least cost overland distance rather than travel time
avoiding walls, trade flows decline strongly with distance, with an elasticity of -1.25 for
domestic trade flows, and an elasticity of -1.81 for international trade flows. (We return
to these estimates in Section 6, where we examine what would happen if the international
distance elasticity were to decline in magnitude closer to the intra-national distance elastic-
ity). However, with the inclusion of the origin-destination fixed effect and the travel time
measure avoiding walls (so that the coefficient on travel time is only identified based on the
border wall expansion), we find no evidence that there was a direct impact of the border
wall expansion on trade flows.
    As we found no evidence that the border wall affected trade flows, we construct a measure
of trade costs at the location-pair level (where locations are Mexican municipalities and
United States PUMAs), by taking the estimated coefficients on distance from the state-
to-state flows using the location-pair distances and allowing distance to have a different
  33
    Given that observed migration flows are over one year for the Mexico-United States flows and the within-
United States migration flows and over five years for the within-Mexico flows, we scale the number of migrants
by ten and two, respectively, to get a measure of the number of people migrating over the ten year period of
study (2000 to 2010).



                                                     26
elasticity for domestic and international pairs:
                                                                                                
                        ˆ
                       1−σ
                      τijt   = exp β̂0 + β̂1 ln distij + β̂2 ln distij × 1 {intlij } .


5.3     Estimating trade and migration elasticities
                                                                                                         
Given our estimates of the elasticities of substitution in the production function, i.e. ρh , ρl , ρ
                                                            θn,s
and the estimates for the bilateral frictions µn,s      ij        and τij1−σ along with location observables
                    n∈{U,M },s∈{h,l}
(i.e. {win,s , Ln,s
                i }i∈N               ), we proceed by estimating the trade and migration elastici-
                                                                                                   wn,s
ties. To do so, define the welfare of worker of type {n, s} in location i Win,s ≡ Pi i un,s               i  . We
then rely on the following Lemma:
                                                                 n             θn,s on∈{U,M },s∈{h,l}
Lemma 1. For any set of bilateral frictions (i.e. τij1−σ , µn,s            ij                          ) and loca-
                                                                                      i,j,∈N ×N
                                         n∈{U,M },s∈{h,l}
tion observables (i.e. {win,s , Ln,s
                                                                                                         1−σ σ−1
                                   i   }                  ), there exists  a  unique   (to-scale) set    pi , Pi
                                 n i∈N n,s                   n,s
                                                                 on∈{U,M },s∈{h,l}                                   i∈N
                                           −θ
and a unique (to-scale) set (Πn,s       i )      , (Win,s )θ                       .
                                                                     i∈N

Proof. See Appendix A.3.

    Applying Lemma 1, we recover the unique (to-scale) push and pull factors of the mi-
                                           n                              on∈{U,M },s∈{h,l}
                                                     −θn,s       n,s θn,s
gration gravity equation (i.e.               (Πn,s
                                                i  )       , (W i   )                       ) and origin and des-
                                                                           i∈N
tination fixed effects of the trade gravity equation (i.e. p1−σ                 i    , Piσ−1 i∈N ). Define p̃i ≡
                              !−ρ               1
                                             ! 1−ρ
                            1
         1−ρ   p̃ (Q̃ )
                  h     h   ρ           1−ρ
   p̃hi       + i i 1             p̃li              to be combinations of the observed composite price
                 p̃i (Q̃i )
                   l    l   ρ

of the two different skill groups. Then we can regress the origin fixed effect of the gravity
trade Equation (recovered from the market clearing conditions) onto this observed composite
price as follows:
                                                                                       
                                                                                 ρh
                           p1−σ                                                             ∆ ln AU,h
                                  
                    ∆ ln    i         = (1 − σ) ∆ ln p̃i + (σ − 1)                                i .      (12)
                                                                               ρh − 1

If we have an appropriate instrument for the change in the composite price in location i that
is uncorrelated with the change in local productivities, we can recover the trade elasticity
from Equation (12). Intuitively, the extent to which exports decline as the local price rises
identifies consumer’s elasticity of substitution across goods produced in different locations.
    Finally, estimating the migration elasticities is reasonably straightforward. Recall that
                 wn,s
welfare Win,s ≡ Pi i un,s
                      i , so that we have:


                                              n,s                 win,s
                             ∆ ln (Win,s )θ         = θn,s ∆ ln         + θn,s ∆ ln un,s
                                                                                     i .                   (13)
                                                                   Pi

                                                           27
Hence, if we have an appropriate instrument for the change in the nominal wage of labor
group {n, s} and the price index that is uncorrelated with the change in the local amenity,
we can identify the migration elasticity of that group from Equation (13) (along with the
trade elasticity). Intuitively, we recover the pull factor in each destination using the labor
market clearing condition and regress the change in this pull factor after the construction of
the wall on the change in the local real wage to recover the migration elasticity of each labor
group.


5.4     Estimating location fundamentals
Once we have estimated all the model elasticities, the following proposition shows that it is
possible to recover all location fundamentals from observed data:

Proposition 1. For any set of model elasticities, bilateral friction , and location observables,
                                                                             n,s n∈{U,M },s∈{h,l}
there exists a unique (to-scale) set of location fundamentals (i.e. {An,s
                                                                        i , ui }i∈N               ).

Proof. See Appendix A.4.

   Intuitively, the productivity and amenity of each labor type in each location can be
chosen so that the observed populations and wages are exactly consistent with the model
equilibrium given trade and migration frictions; this result is not particularly surprising, as
the location fundamentals play the role of structural residuals in the estimating equations
above.


5.5     Using the border wall expansion as an instrument
As is evident from above, to estimate the model elasticities, we need to find instruments for
                                                                                     M,s 
                                                                                      Li
the change in relative United States and Mexican labor of the same skill (i.e. ∆ ln LU,s ),
                                                                                                       i
                                                                                Q̃h
the change in the relative supply of high and low-skill labor (i.e. ∆ ln          i
                                                                                Q̃li
                                                                                     ),   the change in good
                                                                                                wn,s
price (i.e. ∆ ln p̃i ), and the change in the real wage of each labor group, (i.e. ∆ ln Pi i ). These
instruments must be uncorrelated with changes in the local productivities (i.e. ∆ ln An,s     i ) and
                          n,s
amenities (i.e. ∆ ln ui ). We use the border wall expansion due to the Secure Fence Act to
construct such an instrument.34
  34
    The assumed orthogonality of the instrument with each of the four local productivities and four local
amenities is why the eight model elasticities can be identified with a single instrument. Moreover, the
recursive nature of the model allows us to estimate the model parameters using a sequential series of linear
instrumental regressions (rather than having to implement the estimation procedure using GMM), which
greatly increases the transparency of the estimation procedure (albeit with a loss of efficiency).




                                                    28
5.5.1     Constructing the border wall exposure instrument

We begin by noting that the model implies that the change in the number of Mexican
migrants arriving in a destination (i.e. a U.S. location) j, M̂jU S , can be written as:
                                                                                               !−1 
                                 X  Lij0                    X  Lil0 
              M̂jU S   = δ̂j ×             κ̂ij M̂iM EX ×       P       κ̂il δ̂l                  
                                i∈M ex
                                       Mi0                    l    k Lkl


where the “exact hat” notation denotes the ratio of a variable before and after the border
wall expansion (i.e., x̂i ≡ xxi1i0
                                   ) , κ̂ij ≡ µ̂−θ
                                                ij is the impact of the border wall expansion on
migration costs (to the power of the migration elasticity), and we assume a single skill type
for simplicity. Intuitively, the first component, δ̂j is the direct change  in theattractiveness of
                                                                              L
the destination (for example, through the wage). The second term, P ij0              κ̂ij M̂i , measures
                                                                               k Lik
the effect of the wall, weighted by the lagged share of migrants from that origin in the
destination population. The third piece accounts for the fact that migrants from origin i
make a decision about going to destination j based on how attractive j has become relative to
every other possible destination (this is very similar to the concept of multilateral resistance
in the trade literature (Anderson and van Wincoop (2003)).) Similarly, the change in the
                                                                                M EX
number of migrants  departing      an origin i (i.e. a Mexican location), M̂i      , can be written
                                                                 −1
                                Lij0                      Lkj0
as M̂iM EX = γ̂i ×                           US
                     P                               P
                        j∈U S Mj0 κ̂ij M̂j       ×     k Mj0 κ̂kj γ̂k      .
   We derive three different measures of the exposure of a location to the border wall ex-
pansion that move from the simplest measure of wall exposure toward this expression:

   1. Simple wall exposure: We approximate M̂jU S ≈ i∈M ex κ̂ij and M̂iM EX ≈ j∈U S κ̂ij .
                                                         P                              P

      This is an unweighted average of the change in travel time (across all origins for a
      destination in the United States,and, conversely, across all destinations for an origin in
      Mexico.).
                                                                            
                                                                        L
   2. Network wall exposure: We approximate M̂jU S ≈ i∈M ex Mij0               κ̂ij and M̂iM EX ≈
                                                             P
                                                                          i0
                    
      P         Lij0
         j∈U S Mj0 κ̂ij . This calculates a weighted average in the change in travel time,
      where the weights are the initial migrant shares. This incorporates for the possibility
      that different origins have different migration costs to a particular destination (e.g. due
      to differences in existing migration networks).
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                      L                                                     Lij0
                                                                          ij0
                                                                                κ̂ij                                          Mj0
                                                                                                                                         κ̂ij
                                                                         Mi0
   3. General equilibrium wall exposure: M̂jU S ≈                                           and M̂iM EX ≈
                                                       P                                                    P
                                                          i∈M ex   P   
                                                                           Lil0
                                                                                   
                                                                                                                j∈U S P
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                  Lkj0
                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                     l
                                                                         P
                                                                             L
                                                                                     κ̂il                                                   κ̂kj
                                                                           k kl                                           k       Mj0

        Unlike the network wall exposure, this instrument additionally accounts for the possi-
        bility that the wall expansion altered the cost of migrating to other possible destinations

                                                  29
        from a given origin (or to a given destination), thereby changing the relative benefit of
        migrating to a particular destination.

Appendix Figure 6 shows the spatial patterns of the three exposure measures. The more
sophisticated instruments have the potential to provide additional identification power, both
because they take advantage of the observed rich heterogeneity in pre-expansion bilateral
migration flows and because they are closer approximations to the model-consistent expres-
sion (to the extent the model is an accurate reflection of reality). However, note that even
the last measure of wall exposure fails to account for the direct change in the attractive-
ness of a destination (or origin), as the gravity regression above cannot separate the change
in the push factors δ̂i and pull factors δ̂j because of the border wall expansion from other
economic changes. To calculate such impacts, we turn to a full general equilibrium spatial
model below.

5.5.2     Assessing the validity of the wall exposure instrument

Before turning to the results, we briefly assess the validity of the instrument. Our exclu-
sion restriction is that exposure to the Secure Fence Act is uncorrelated with changes in a
location’s productivities or amenities of any worker type. Note that this is a stronger iden-
tification assumption that that required for the gravity regressions where, because we had
pair-level data, we only required that the wall was exogenous conditional on origin-year and
destination-year fixed effects.
     One concern with such an assumption is that the location of the wall expansion may
have been built in response to time-varying characteristics of the destination (for example, a
location that elects anti-immigrant politicians may both build a wall and have a less-friendly
labor market for immigrants). To address this concern, we use the geographical prediction
of where the wall was constructed (from Section 3) and related predicted change in travel
time to generate a predicted change in migrants. As a result, the identification assumption
becomes that the geographical variables that we use to predict the location of the wall
expansion are uncorrelated with changes in a location’s productivities or amenities.
     Due to the spatial nature of the shock, one concern with such an assumption is that the
exposure to the border wall construction will be correlated with geographic variables (like the
distance to the border), which may be correlated with pre-existing trends in productivities
or amenities unrelated to the border wall expansion. Indeed, Appendix Table 15 shows that
the predicted change in migration is larger for border states, locations closer to the border,
areas with a larger baseline share of the workforce in agriculture, and areas with a smaller
baseline share of the workforce in manufacturing, although after controlling for state fixed


                                                30
effects (which we will include in our specification) only distance to border (and the housing
shock, for one of the three instruments) remains significant.
    To check for the possible presence of pre-existing trends, we estimate event studies of
the estimated impact of our measure of border wall exposure for low-skilled Mexico and
U.S. populations before, during, and after the border wall expansion. Appendix Panel (i)
of Figure 8 depicts the results in the United States (for our preferred general equilibrium
network instrument). While the confidence intervals are wide, there is suggestive evidence
that the predicted change in migration correlates more strongly with the change in actual
migration in the post-wall period. However, there is also some evidence that that once the
regression is weighted by the baseline population (panel (c)), locations that receive a larger
predicted migration shock in fact see migration falling before the wall. Panel (ii) of Figure
8 considers locations in Mexico. If migrants do not leave, then we expect to see population
increase in Mexico, and so again expect to see a positive coefficient. We again find no clear
evidence that population increased in Mexico, although the confidence intervals are even
wider.
    What do we make of these results? Given the small estimated impact of the border wall
expansion (and the inconvenient timing concurrent to the Great Recession), it is difficult
to ascertain to assert confidently that migration fell most in locations most impacted by
the border wall.35 However, the confidence intervals are wide, and we cannot reject that
the wall reduced migration by the amount estimated using the Matrı́cula bilateral flow data
in Section 3. To address concerns of possible pre-existing trends in what follows we will
pursue two strategies: first, we will show that our estimation of the structural elasticities
are remarkably robust to the inclusion of a large number of controls (including observed pre-
trends) and across alternative specifications; second, we will show that our key conclusions
regarding the effect of the wall are robust to using parameter values at each extreme range
in the literature instead of our own estimates.


5.6     Results
We first consider the estimation of the elasticity of substitution between different workers
estimated using Equation (9) and (10). Appendix Table 18 presents the first-stage estimates
  35
     We investigate this finding in other datasets. For example, Feigenberg (2017) uses Mexican labor force
(ENOE) data to study the time-varying impact of the wall. His study exploits the time variation of when the
wall is constructed and finds a large decrease in migration from border municipalities immediately after a
wall is constructed. In Appendix C we use the ENOE data to look the change in migration between 2006 and
2010 across all municipalities and do not find any evidence that, over this longer time period, migration rates
differentially fell between highly affected locations and less affected locations across the country, consistent
with the evidence presented above for the ACS/Census data.



                                                      31
of the three measures of border wall exposure used as instruments; as expected, all three
instruments are positively correlated with both relative changes in the ratio of Mexican to
U.S. workers within a skill group and negatively correlated with relative high- to low-skill
workers. (Recall the instruments are predicted changes in Mexican migrants). However, we
should note that the identifying variation is arising almost entirely from locations within
the United States. This seems reasonable, as the impact of the border wall on the stock of
Mexican workers within Mexico was likely quite small (as we found in the proceeding section,
and as the counterfactuals confirm below).
    Table 3 reports the second stage results of Regression (9) and (10). Using our preferred
“general equilibrium network” instrument, we estimate an elasticity of substitution between
United States and Mexican low-skill workers (ρl ) of 4.5 (with a standard error of 1.5), high-
skill workers (ρh ) of 8.6 (with a standard error of 10.9), and an elasticity between low and
high-skill workers (ρ) of 2.0 (with a standard error of 0.6).36 We will also undertake robustness
over very large and very small values of these elasticities.
    We next turn to the direct estimate of the trade elasticity using regression (12). Table 4
presents the results. The first column shows the first stage of a regression of the observed
change in the price of a good (measured as a CES composite of observed wages for each
labor type) on the predicted change in the stock of Mexican workers from the border wall
expansion. As expected, for all three instruments, we find that a decrease in the stock of
Mexican workers increased the price of the good relative to other less-affected locations,
an effect which is strongly significant for the “network” and “GE network” measures and
of similar magnitude in both the United States and Mexico. The second column presents
the second stage regression of the change in the “exporter fixed effect” recovered from the
inversion of market clearing conditions ∆ lnp1−σ  i    on the predicted change in the price of
goods. We find that the predicted increase in the price of goods is indeed associated with a
fall in exports, with an implied elasticity of substitution of σ = 3.1 (with a standard error of
0.8).37 We take both the first- and second-stage results as strong evidence of the importance
of incorporating spatial linkages through the flow of goods in order to analyze the economic
impacts of the wall expansion.
  36
      Our estimate of the elasticity between Mexican and U.S. workers are slightly lower than those estimated
in the literature: Burstein, Hanson, Tian, and Vogel (2017) estimate a (within occupation) elasticity of 5.6,
Ottaviano and Peri (2012) find an elasticity of 12.5, while Piyapromdee (2019) finds an estimate of 18. For the
elasticity between high-skill United States and Mexican workers, our estimate is very close to Piyapromdee
(2019)’s estimate of 6.9. Our estimate of the elasticity of substitution between low and high-skill workers of
2.1 is very close to the values estimated in Ottaviano and Peri (2012) and Piyapromdee (2019) of 2 and 2.2,
respectively.
   37
      This estimate implies a trade elasticity of 2.1, which is lower than (but statistically indistinguishable
from) the value of 4 typically found in the international trade literature, see e.g. Simonovska and Waugh
(2014).


                                                      32
    Finally, we estimate the migration elasticities. Appendix Table 19 reports the first stage
regression of the change in real wages of each skill group on border wall exposure (where
the change in price index P̂i , is recovered using the Lemma (1) and our estimate of σ).
While we do find evidence that locations which faced declines in Mexican-born population
due to border wall exposure saw declines in real wages for Mexican low-skill workers, we
do not find strong evidence of real wages changing for any other labor group (although
there is some evidence that real wages of United States high-skill workers increase). Perhaps
because of the weakness of the instrument, our estimates of the migration elasticities in
the second stage – as presented in Table 5 – are imprecise for all labor types except low-
skilled Mexican workers, for whom we actually estimate a marginally statistically significant
negative elasticity. Taken together, we interpret these results as suggesting limited re-sorting
of labor as a result of general equilibrium changes in labor markets due to the border wall
expansion. The literature has found a migration elasticity in the range of 2-4 (Bryan and
Morten (2018); Morten and Oliveira (2018); Diamond (2016); Tombe and Zhu (2015); Monte,
Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018)); we will use an estimate of 3 for our baseline estimate
and then undertake robustness around this value.
    Finally, Table 22 implements a number of robustness tests on the full set of structural
estimates for the general equilibrium network instrument. Column (1) replicates the es-
timates from Tables 3, 4, and 5. Because of concerns of possible pre-trends in locations
differentially impacted by wall (see Section 5.5.2), Columns (2)-(6) sequentially control for
1990-2000 population growth rates for each labor group; the 2000-2005 population growth
rates for each labor group (i.e. controlling for pre-trends directly); (log) distance to the
border; the year 2000 agriculture, industry, and manufacturing employment shares in each
location; and the United States housing shock as measured by Mian and Sufi (2014). As is
evident, the low-skill elasticity of substitution ρl , the high-low skill elasticity of substitution,
and the trade elasticity σ estimates remain stable across all controls, although the standard
errors do increase when all controls are included (in Column (7)). Columns (8)-(10) show
how the results change for different specifications. Regardless if the first stage is restricted
to have the same effect in both countries (column (8)), or if we use instruments based on the
actual location of the wall expansion (column (9)) (instead of the geographic predict wall
expansion) or if we restrict the sample to only U.S. locations, we again find similar structural
estimates for the structural parameters.38 While we believe these results are evidence that
the structural parameters are robust to a variety of specifications, in the counterfactuals that
  38
    Another concern is about whether the selection of immigrants changed after the wall. We estimate a very
similiar elasticity of substitution between Mexican and U.S. workers if we use Mincerian residuals instead of
wages. This controls for (observable) characteristics of the labor force (results available upon request from
the authors).


                                                     33
follow we also consider how altering the parameters to either low or high extremes change
our conclusions.


6     The total economic impact of a border wall
In this section, we estimate the steady state economic impact of the Secure Fence Act and
then compare it to two alternative policies: one in which the border wall is expanded even
further and one in which, instead of a border wall, international trade costs are reduced.


6.1     The Secure Fence Act of 2006
Given our estimated parameter values above, we proceed to estimated the economic impact
of the Secure Fence Act. To do so, we first rely on Proposition 1 to identify the underlying
geography consistent with the observed data and our model estimates in the year 2000 prior
to the Secure Fence Act. We then calculate a new steady state equilibrium in which we
adjust the bilateral migration costs to account for Secure Fence Act using the estimates from
Section 3, holding constant the underlying geography at its year 2000 level. This allows us
to answer the question: What would the impacts of the Secure Fence Act have been on the
welfare of each type of worker in every location in the United States and Mexico if nothing
else had changed between 2000 and 2010?
    Because workers of the same type living in different locations will be impacted differ-
ently, we summarize the change in aggregate welfare of a particular group from a pol-
icy shock as a weighted geometric mean of the change in expected welfare across all lo-
cation pairs, where the weights are the pre-period group-specific population shares, i.e.
                   Ln,s                                                  n,s           n,s
                                                                                              n,s − θ 1
                                  n,s             n,s        ˆ (ν)) =
                                                             n,s      ( ŵ     / P̂ j )û     L̂ij     n,s
log Ŵ n,s ≡
             P       ij,0                                                 j              j
               i,j L̄n,s   log Ŵij   , where Ŵ ij   ≡ E (Ui                 µ̂ n,s
                                                                                              L̂n,s        is
                                                                                   ij          i

the expected utility of an worker of nationality n and skill s born in location i ∈ N (see
equation (4)). This aggregate welfare function allows for the following convenient decompo-




                                                     34
sition of the impact of the Secure Fence Act on the log difference in welfare of workers:
                                                                                                              
                                                                       !                               !
                      X  Ln,s  
                                                                  Q̂sj                           L̂n,s
                                                                                                               
                            j,0            p̂j          1                              1          j           
       log Ŵ n,s   =       n,s
                                      log             −   log           −                log                  
                          L̄              P̂            ρ        Q̂j                  ρs         Q̂sj         
                      j               | {z j}           |     {z      }               |      {z       }
                                                                                                               
                                    “terms of trade”    “relative skill supply”    “relative nationality supply”
                                                                                  
                                                                      !
                       X  Ln,s
                             ij,0
                                  
                                                     1         L̂n,s
                                                                   ij    
                     −        n,s
                                    log µ̂ij +           log      n,s 
                                                                         ,
                       i,j
                           L̄       | {z }
                                                   θ n,s       L̂ i     
                                    “direct effect” |        {z        }
                                                             “idio. preferences”


where x̂i ≡ xxi0
              i1
                 .
    The Secure Fence Act (or a policy shock more generally) can affect welfare of a worker
group in five ways: (1) it can affect the terms of trade by changing the relative price of the
production good (pj ) to the consumption bundle (Pj ); (2) it can change the relative scarcity
of skill group s (thereby affecting wages); (3) it can change relative scarcity of the nationality
n within skill group (also affecting wages); (4) it can directly affect the cost of migrating;
and (5) it can affect the expected idiosyncratic preferences of workers by changing patterns
of sorting.
    Column 1 of Table 6 summarizes the impact of the Secure Fence Act on each labor
group, where we convert from percentage changes in welfare to equivalent variation changes
in per capita annual real income using U.S. and Mexican real GDP and total population
figures from the year 2000.39 Consider, for example, low-skill U.S. workers. By reducing the
number of low-skill Mexican workers in the United States, the Secure Fence Act increased
the scarcity of low-skill workers (the “relative skill supply”), increasing the wages of U.S.
low-skill workers by $1.70. However, this effect was almost wholly offset by the fact that
there were now more relatively more U.S. low-skill workers than Mexican low-skill workers
(the “relative nationality supply”), which decreased wages of U.S. low-skill workers by $1.46.
All told, the benefit of the Secure Fence Act for U.S. low-skill workers was tiny: an equivalent
variation annual per capita income increase of $0.28.
    This paltry effect turns out to be the largest positive benefit of the Secure Fence Act,
as all other groups of workers were harmed. For Mexican low- and high-skill workers, small
increases in their wages due to their increased scarcity in the United States (the “relative
  39
    We calculate a year 2000 per capita real income of $11,549 for Mexican low-skill workers, $28,789
for Mexican high-skill workers, $37,504 for U.S. low-skill workers, and $61,081 for U.S. high-skill workers,
all measured in 2012 chained U.S. dollars. Note that the population figures are for the total population,
so individuals outside the workforce (e.g. children) are proportioned across skill groups according to the
fraction of the workforce each worker type comprises.

                                                        35
nationality supply”) were insufficient to offset the direct increased costs of migration due to
the wall expansion, with low-skill Mexican workers losing an equivalent of $0.81 and high-
skill Mexican workers losing an equivalent of $1.82. U.S. high-skill workers were the worst
impacted, losing an equivalent of $2.73, as they became both less scarce as a nationality
(the “relative nationality supply”) and less scarce as a skill group (the “relative skill supply”).
Note that none of these effects account for the direct costs of wall construction, estimated
to be $7 for each person in the United States (see Section 2.1).
    What about the aggregate economic impacts? Column (1) of Table 7 summarizes the
results. Because the wall expansion resulted in fewer Mexican workers residing in the United
States, economic activity was redistributed toward Mexico, increasing real GDP in Mexico
by $0.7 billion and causing real GDP in the United States to fall by $1.5 billion. In total,
we estimate the Secure Fence Act reduced the aggregate Mexican population living in the
United States by 0.39%, equivalent to a reduction of 49,956 people. Note that this 0.39%
total (general equilibrium) decline in migration is smaller than the (0.5%) direct (partial
equilibrium) decline calculated in Section 3, indicating the importance of accounting for the
general equilibrium forces when calculating aggregate impacts. Intuitively, the wall expansion
increased the relative scarcity of Mexican workers in the United States, which increased the
incentive to migrate, thereby mitigating the direct impact of the increased migration costs.
Taken together, this suggests that for each fewer migrant in the United States as a result
of the Secure Fence Act, GDP declined by $30,000 (in addition to the direct costs of wall
construction).
    How robust are these estimated effects? The top panel of Table 23 reports how the
impact of the Secure Fence Act changes as we vary each of the structural elasticities – i.e. the
elasticity of substitution across nationalities, the trade elasticity, or the migration elasticities
– to values at either the lower or upper end of the range found in the literature. While the
aggregate impacts differ quantitatively across parameter constellations, they are qualitatively
similar, with a decline in migration of Mexican workers to the United States between 917 (for
very low migration elasticities) and 68,173 (for very high elasticities of substitution between
U.S. and Mexican workers). Moreover, across all parameter constellations the welfare effects
are qualitatively consistent and quantitatively modest: U.S. low-skill workers never benefit
more than an equivalent of $2.32 and may even lose (for very low elasticities of substitution
between U.S. and Mexican workers); U.S. high-skill workers are always made no better off;
and Mexican low-skill workers are always made worse off. Mexican high-skill workers are
usually made worse off, although with a low elasticity of substitution between U.S. and
Mexican workers, it is possible for them to benefit (as the positive “relative nationality
supply” dominates the negative “relative skill supply”). That the results remain small across


                                                36
all parameter constellations is not particularly surprising, as we are calibrating the model to
match the modest changes in migration flows we observe in Section 3.
    These aggregate effects belie a substantial amount of heterogeneity across space. The
top panel of Figure 2 depicts the change in population of each labor type across space.
As is evident, the Secure Fence Act reduced the number of Mexican workers in United
States locations most affected by the border wall expansion, causing a redistribution of U.S.
workers to these areas. The bottom     panel of Figure 2 depicts the change in real wages
                            n,s
of each labor type (i.e. ŵj /P̂j , expressed in equivalent variation changes in per capita
real income) across space, which is negatively correlated with the change in population;
intuitively, Mexican workers and low-skill U.S. workers residing in locations most affected
by the border wall expansion benefit from their relative scarcity. However, the effects of the
Secure Fence Act are small in all locations, especially for U.S. workers: no U.S. worker in
any location benefits by more than an equivalent increase in annual income of $5.52.


6.2     Counterfactual #1: Additional border wall
What would happen if the United States had pursued an even greater expansion of the border
wall than the Secure Fence Act? To answer this question, we use the geography along the
border to predict the locations of a border wall expansion beyond that of the Secure Fence
Act. We then construct two counterfactuals, illustrated in Appendix Figure 2, expanding
the border wall beyond the Secure Fence Act locations to cover either 25% or 50% of the
remaining border with a wall. In each case, we then calculate the expected increase in travel
time to avoid a border wall and recalculate the equilibrium, assuming that the impact of the
border wall on migration costs through increased travel time is the same as estimated for the
Secure Fence Act in Section 3. Because the increase in travel time to avoid the border wall
becomes an increasingly large fraction of the total trip as a greater proportion of the border
is fenced, such counterfactuals are helpful in assessing whether there are non-linearities in
the impact of a border wall.40
    Columns (2) and (3) of Table 6 summarize the impact of the 25% and 50% wall expan-
sion, respectively, on the welfare of each labor group. We estimate that a more expansive
border wall would have qualitatively similar welfare impacts on each labor group that are
quantitatively larger (but still small in absolute magnitude). For example, U.S. low-skill
workers would on average benefit by $0.43 by a 25% additional expansion and $0.47 by a
  40
     In the limit where a wall is constructed along the entirety of the border, our measure of travel time
becomes infinite. In such a situation, it is possible that potential migrants would find alternative methods of
migrating. As a result, we limit our analysis to more modest counterfactual border wall expansions – such as
those recently proposed in the U.S. Senate – where extrapolating from the estimated impacts of the Secure
Fence Act is more plausible.


                                                      37
50% additional expansion, while all other groups would be made worse off (e.g. U.S. high-
skill workers would on average lose $4.11 by a 25% additional expansion and $4.78 by a 50%
additional expansion). This does not include the direct costs of the construction of additional
wall.
    Columns (2) and (3) of Table 7 summarize the impacts of a 25% and 50% wall expansion,
respectively, on aggregate real output of each country and total migration flows. While larger
border walls would have larger impacts on migration from Mexico to the United States, they
would also result in greater reallocation of economic activity to Mexico; for example, a wall
expansion that builds along half the remaining uncovered border would result in 87,392 fewer
Mexican workers residing in the United States, causing the United States real GDP to decline
by $2.6 billion, or approximately $29,750 in lost economic output for each migrant prevented,
which is very similar to the cost per migrant of the Secure Fence Act. As a result, we do
not find any evidence that a larger border wall expansion would have substantively different
impacts from the Secure Fence Act.
    Panels 2 and 3 of Table 23 report how these impacts of a border wall expansion vary
across different parameter constellations; across all parameter constellations, the positive
impact of a wall expansion on low-skill U.S. workers is always less than $4.15 and is always
exceeded by the negative impact on high-skill U.S. workers.
    Figure 3 depicts the change in population (top panel) of each labor type and equivalent
variation in real wages (bottom panel) across space as a result of a 25% expansion in the
border wall beyond that of the Secure Fence Act. As with the aggregate effects, the spatial
distributions of the impact of greater wall expansions are similar to those of the Secure Fence
Act.


6.3    Counterfactual #2: Reducing international trade costs
Suppose instead of constructing a border wall to increase migration costs, the United States
and Mexico engaged in a policy that reduced international trade costs. In particular, recall
in Section 5 we estimated that international trade flows declined more with distance than
domestic trade flows. What would be the impact of a policy that reduced the cost of inter-
national trade in a way that the caused the relationship between international trade flows
and distance to approach the domestic relationship? In particular, we consider two variants
in which the additional decline with distance for international trade flows is reduced by 25%
or 50%. As with the previous analysis, for both of these variations on reducing international
trade costs, we calculate the equilibrium effect of the policy holding constant the geography




                                              38
at its year 2000 level.41
    Columns (4) and (5) of Table 6 summarize the impact of reducing trade costs on each
labor type. Unlike a border wall expansion, all labor groups benefit from a reduction of
trade costs. Moreover, the benefits are much larger than the impact of a border wall: for
example, we estimate that a reduction in trade costs that moves the international trade costs
of distance 25% closer to the domestic cost would increase welfare for low-skill U.S. workers
by an amount equivalent to increasing their income by $57.63. The effects are even larger for
U.S. high-skill workers ($78.27), Mexican low-skill workers ($100.12), and Mexican high-skill
workers ($244.95). Perhaps not surprisingly, this positive impact is driven almost entirely by
improvements in terms of trade, i.e., as trade costs fall, the cost of goods workers consume
become less expensive relative to the price of the goods the workers produce.
    Columns (4) and (5) of Table 7 summarize the aggregate impact of reducing trade costs.
Regardless of the size of the trade cost reduction, we estimate that the number of Mexican
workers residing in the United States would decline and the real GDP of both countries
would increase. That trade and migration are substitutes it arises from the fact that as a
smaller economy, Mexico’s terms of trade improve relatively more than the U.S., thereby
reducing the incentive of Mexican workers to migrate to the U.S.42 Indeed, a 25% reduction
in trade costs would result in more than twice as large a decline in migration from Mexico to
the United States (107,030) than the Secure Fence Act achieved. However, unlike a border
wall – which causes real GDP in the United States to fall – a reduction in trade costs would
result in increased United States economic output and increased Mexican economic output.
For example, a 25% reduction in trade costs would increase real United States GDP by $7.2
billion, or for each fewer migrant, a benefit (rather than a cost) of about $67,000. The bottom
two panels of Table 23 report how these aggregate impacts of a reduction in trade costs vary
across different parameter constellations. While the aggregate impacts differ quantitatively
across parameter constellations (especially depending on the assumed trade elasticity), they
are qualitatively similar, with a decline in migration of Mexican workers to the United States
and an increase in welfare of all labor types.
    Figure 4 depicts the change in population (top panel) of each labor type and equivalent
variation in welfare (bottom panel) across space as a result of a 25% reduction in trade
  41
     While our framework allows for rich patterns for how the gains from trade are distributed across space and
worker types, our single-sector model abstracts from the possible unequal gains from trade across occupations
and industries, which are likely important margins as well. An interesting avenue for future research would
be to extend our framework to incorporate such margins using e.g. the tools developed by Caliendo and
Parro (2015), Lee (2018), and Burstein, Hanson, Tian, and Vogel (2017).
  42
     It is straightforward to construct alternative geographies for which our framework implies that reductions
in trade costs increases migration – hence, in our framework, the degree of substitutability between trade
and migration depends on the particular context considered.



                                                      39
costs. As is evident, reducing international trade costs would result in a redistribution of
population (and economic activity) closer to the border between the two countries. As a
result, the welfare impacts – while positive everywhere – are larger for both U.S. workers
and Mexican workers residing near the U.S.-Mexico border, the same locations that are
disproportionately impacted by the border wall. Hence, even if the policy objective of the
border wall is to benefit low-skill U.S. workers residing along the border, these results suggest
that such an objective is better achieved by a reduction in trade costs.


7     Conclusion
In this paper, we provide three contributions to the debate on the economic impact of border
walls. First, we combine confidential data on detailed sub-national bilateral migration flows
with geographic variation in the 2007-2010 expansion of the United States Mexico border
wall. We document that migration flows fell differentially for origin-destination pairs most
impacted by the border wall expansion. Second, we develop a general equilibrium spatial
model incorporating multiple types of labor and flexible spatial linkages in the flow of people
and goods and estimate the key structural parameters of the model using the border wall
expansion. Third, we compare the estimated economic impacts of the border wall expansion
to a counterfactual policy reducing international trade costs. We find while both reduce the
number of Mexican workers to the United States, the reduction in international trade costs
is also associated with substantial welfare gains for all labor types, while the border wall
expansion is not.
    While this paper contributes to a growing literature emphasizing the need to incorporate
general equilibrium effects when evaluating the impact of spatial policy in general and immi-
gration policy in particular, we should emphasize that there are likely additional economic
forces absent from the model that may be important in reality, e.g. productivity and amenity
spillovers across and within labor groups. We look forward to future research incorporating
such forces.




                                               40
References
Ahlfeldt, G., S. Redding, D. Sturm, and N. Wolf (2015): “The Economics of
 Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall,” Econometrica, 83(6), 2127–2189.

Allen, T., and C. Arkolakis (2014): “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Econ-
 omy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1085–1140.

Allen, T., C. Arkolakis, and X. Li (2016): “On the Existence and Uniqueness of Trade
 Equilibria,” .

Allen, T., and D. Donaldson (2018): “The Geography of Path Dependence,” .

Anderson, J., and E. van Wincoop (2003): “Gravity with Gravitas : A Solution to the
 Border Puzzle,” American Economic Review, 93(170-192).

Angelucci, M. (2012): “US Border Enforcement and the Net Flow of Mexican Illegal
 Migration,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 60(2), 311–357.

Baldwin, R., and D. Taglioni (2006): “Gravity for Dummies and Dummies for Gravity
 Equations,” NBER Working Paper.

Bazzi, S., S. Burns, G. Hanson, B. Roberts, and J. Whitley (2018): “Deterring Il-
 legal Entry: Migrant Sanctions and Recidivism in Border Apprehensions,” NBER Working
 Paper.

Bohn, S., and T. Pugatch (2015): “U.S. Border Enforcement and Mexican Immigrant
 Location Choice,” Demography, 52(5), 1543–1570.

Borjas, G. J. (2003): “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining
 the Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 118(4), 1335–1374.

Borjas, G. J., J. Grogger, and G. Hanson (2012): “Comment: On Estimating Elas-
 ticities of Substitution,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(1), 198–210.

Borjas, G. J., and L. F. Katz (2007): “The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce
 in the United States,” in Mexican Immigration to the United States, ed. by G. J. Borjas.
 University of Chicago Press.

Bryan, G., and M. Morten (2018): “The Aggregate Productivity Effects of Internal
 Migration: Evidence from Indonesia,” Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming).

                                           41
Burstein, A., G. Hanson, L. Tian, and J. Vogel (2017): “Tradability and the Labor-
 Market Impact of Immigration: Theory and Evidence from the U.S.,” NBER Working
 Paper.

Caballero, M. E., B. C. Cadena, and B. K. Kovak (2018): “Measuring Sub-national
 Migration Networks using Matriculas Consulares,” Demography, 55, 1119–1145.

Caliendo, L., M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2019): “Trade and Labor Market Dynamics:
 General Equilibrium Analyis of the China Trade Shock,” Econometrica (Forthcoming).

Caliendo, L., and F. Parro (2015): “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
 NAFTA,” The Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 1–44.

Caliendo, L., F. Parro, L. D. Opromolla, and A. Sforza (2018): “Goods and
 Factor Market Integration: A Quantitative Assessment of the EU Enlargement,” pp. 1–72.

Card, D. (2001): “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Market Impacts of
 Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1), 22–64.

Card, D., and T. Lemieux (2001): “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to Col-
 lege for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 116(2), 705–746.

Clemens, M. A. (2015): “North American Labor Market Shocks and Violent Crime,” .

Clemens, M. A., E. G. Lewis, and H. M. Postel (2018): “Immigration Restrictions as
 Active Labor Market Policy: Evidence from the Mexican Bracero Exclusion,” American
 Economic Review, 108(6), 1468–1487.

Congressional Research Service (2009): “Border Security : Barriers Along the U.S.
 International Border,” Discussion paper.

Costinot, A., and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (2014): “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quan-
 tifying the Consequences of Globalization,” Handbook of International Economics, 4, 197–
 261.

Desmet, K., D. K. Nagy, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2018): “The Geography of De-
 velopment: Evaluating Migration Restrictions and Coastal Flooding,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 126, 903–983.

Diamond, R. (2016): “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’ Diverg-
 ing Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000,” American Economic Review, 106(3), 479–524.

                                           42
Dix-Carneiro, R. (2014): “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Economet-
 rica, 82(3), 825–885.

Dix-Carneiro, R., and B. K. Kovak (2017): “Trade Liberalization and Regional Dy-
 namics,” American Economic Review, 107(10).

Dustmann, C., U. Schönberg, and J. Stuhler (2016): “The Impact of Immigration:
 Why Do Studies Reach Such Different Results?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4),
 31–56.

Feigenberg, B. (2017): “Fenced Out: Why Rising Migration Costs Matter,” .

Guerrero, J., and L. Castañeda (2017): “America’s Wall,” Inewsource/KPBS.

Hanson, B. G. H., and A. Spilimbergo (1999): “Illegal Immigration, Border Enforce-
 ment, and Relative Wages: Evidence from Apprehensions at the U.S.-Mexico Border,” The
 American Economic Review, 89(5), 1337–1357.

Head, K., and T. Mayer (2013): “Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cook-
 book,” Handbook of International Economics, p. 63.

INEGI (2012): “Migración Internacional Captada a Través de la Encuesta Nacional de
  Ocupación y Empleo 2006-2010 ENOE. Metodologı́a y Caracterización Demográfica,” Dis-
  cussion paper.

Karlin, S., and L. Nirenberg (1967): “On a Theorem of P. Nowosad,” Journal of Math-
 ematical Analysis and Applications, 17(1), 61–67.

Katz, L. F., and K. M. Murphy (1992): “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
 and Demand Factors,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 35–78.

Kennan, J. (2001): “Uniqueness of Positive Fixed Points for Increasing Concave Functions
 on Rn: An Elementary Result,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 4(4), 893–899.

Lee, E. (2018): “Trade, Inequality, and the Endogenous Sorting of Heterogeneous Workers,”
  Working paper, (October).

Lessem, R. (2018): “Mexico-U.S. Immigration: Effects of Wages and Border Enforcement,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 85(4), 2353–2388.

Llull, J. (2017): “The Effect of Immigration on Wages: Exploiting Exogenous Variation
  at the National Level,” Journal of Human Resources, 53(3), 608–622.

                                           43
         (2018): “Immigration, wages, and education: A labour market equilibrium struc-
  tural model,” Review of Economic Studies, 85(3), 1852–1896.

Markusen, J. R. (1983): “Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as Complements,”
 Journal of International Economics, 14(3-4), 341–356.

Massey, D., J. Durand, and N. Malone (2003): Beyond Smoke and Mirrors: Mexican
 Immigration in an Era of Economic Integration. Russel Sage Foundation.

Massey, D. S., J. S. Rugh, and K. A. Pren (2010): “The Geography of Undocumented
 Mexican Migration,” Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos, 26(1), 129–152.

Mian, A., and A. Sufi (2014): “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?,”
 Econometrica, 82(6), 2197–2223.

Michael Baker Jr. Inc. (2013): “Border Fence Locations,” .

Miller, T. C., K. Collier, and J. Aguilar (2017): “The Taking,” ProPublica.

Monte, F., S. Redding, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2018): “Commuting, Migration, and
 Local Employment Elasticities,” American Economic Review (forthcoming), pp. 1–57.

Morten, M., and J. Oliveira (2018): “The Effects of Roads on Trade and Migration:
 Evidence from a Planned Capital City,” .

Mundell, R. (1957): “International Trade and Factor Mobility,” The American Economic
 Review, 47(3), 321–335.

Munshi, K. (2003): “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the US Labor
 Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 549–597.

Ottaviano, G. I. P., and G. Peri (2012): “Rethinking the Effects of Immigration on
 Wages,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(1), 152–197.

Passel, J. (2007): “Unauthorized Migrants in the United States,” Oecd Social, Employment
  and Migration Working Papers, (57).

Passel, J. S., and D. Cohn (2016): “Overall Number of U.S. Unauthorized Immigrants
  Holds Steady Since 2009,” Discussion paper, Pew Research Center.

Piyapromdee, S. (2019): “The Impact of Immigration on Wages, Internal Migration and
  Welfare,” .


                                          44
Redding, S. (2016): “Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare,” Journal of International
 Economics, 101, 148–167.

Redding, S., and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2017): “Quantitative Spatial Economics,” Annual
 Review of Economics, 9, 21–58.

Simonovska, I., and M. Waugh (2014): “Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence,”
  Journal of International Economics, 92(1), 34–50.

Solon, G., S. J. Haider, and J. M. Wooldridge (2015): “What Are We Weighting
  For?,” Journal of Human Resources, 50(2), 301–316.

Tombe, T., and X. Zhu (2015): “Trade, Migration and Productivity: A Quantitative
 Analysis of China,” .

United States Government Accountability Office (2017a): “Border Patrol: Ac-
 tions Needed to Improve Oversight of Post-Apprehension Consequences,” Discussion Paper
 January.

        (2017b): “Southwest Border Security: Additional Actions Needed to Better Assess
  Fencing’s Contributions to Operations and Provide Guidance for Identifying Capability
  Gaps,” Discussion Paper February.

Zabreiko, P. P. (1975): Integral Equations: A Reference Text. Springer Verlag.




                                          45
         Table 1: Predicting where the wall expansion occurs

                      (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
                     b/se         b/se         b/se         b/se         b/se
River               -0.675       -0.833   -0.867   -0.469              -0.350
                   0.035***     0.037*** 0.037*** 0.052***            0.059***
Elevation                        -0.228   -0.213   -0.003              -0.430
                                0.033*** 0.032***   0.037             0.062***
Temperature                      -0.053   -0.051   -0.087              -0.138
                                0.007*** 0.006*** 0.007***            0.008***
Populated                                  0.198    0.188               0.173
                                         0.035*** 0.033***            0.031***
Housing Shock                                       3.734               2.283
                                                  0.367***            0.452***
CA                                                                      0.719
                                                                      0.128***
AZ                                                                      0.794
                                                                      0.083***
NM                                                                      0.498
                                                                      0.055***
Mean dep. var        0.365        0.365       0.365        0.365        0.365
N                     781          781         781          781          781
r2                   0.327        0.401       0.424        0.492        0.559
  Notes: The table shows OLS regressions. Dependent variable is having a wall in
  2010. An observation is one of the 781 points (out of a total 1001 points) along
  the border without a baseline wall in 2006. Omitted border state is Texas.




                                      46
                                                             Table 2: Gravity equations: Matrı́cula data

                                                                  OLS                                     RF                                     IV
                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)           (9)
                                                    log(x)      log(1+x)     asinh(x)      log(x)      log(1+x)     asinh(x)       log(x)     log(1+x)      asinh(x)
                                                     b/se         b/se         b/se         b/se         b/se         b/se          b/se        b/se          b/se
     Post x change log traveltime                  -0.104        -0.131      -0.142                                               -0.269        -0.142       -0.160
                                                  0.034***      0.024***    0.026***                                             0.075***      0.047***     0.050***
     Post x change log travel time (pred)                                                  -0.176       -0.113       -0.127
                                                                                          0.049***     0.039***     0.042***
     N                                             451074       4969692      4969692       451074      4969692      4969692       451074       4969692      4969692
     First-stage F stat                                                                                                           153.14        276.29       276.29
     Mean change travel time var.                   0.036         0.018        0.018        0.017        0.018        0.018        0.036         0.018        0.018
     Destination-year FE                             yes           yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes           yes          yes
     Origin-year FE                                  yes           yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes           yes          yes
     Pair FE                                         yes           yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes           yes          yes
     Est. method                                    WLS           WLS          WLS          WLS          WLS          WLS         W2SLS        W2SLS        W2SLS
47




     SE clustered at:                              spatial       spatial      spatial      spatial      spatial      spatial      spatial       spatial      spatial
     Pre-mig trend                                   yes           yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes           yes          yes
       Notes: Data: 2006 and 2010 Matrı́cula database. Each observation is an origin (Mexican municipality) - destination (U.S. PUMA) pair. Log change travel
       time is the log change in travel time for the least-cost path between the origin and destination pair. Log change travel time (pred) is the change in travel time
       for the predicted wall expansion. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Spatial cluster is origin-cluster (1 degree x 1 degree) x destination cluster (1
       degree x 1 degree). If weighted, weighted by migration flow. Stars indicate statistical significance: *p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01.
              Table 3: Estimation of production function elasticities

                          Mex./U.S.: Low skill     Mex./U.S.: High skill   High/low skill
                                 (1)                       (2)                  (3)
Simple average wall exposure
Labor ratio                    -0.271***                  -0.042             -0.590***
                                (0.061)                  (0.428)              (0.144)
EoS                            3.693***                  23.897              1.695***
                                (0.827)                 (244.508)             (0.415)
First-stage F-statistic          1.796                    0.773                3.147
Network wall exposure
Labor ratio                    -0.223***                   -0.114            -0.518***
                                (0.075)                   (0.154)             (0.142)
EoS                            4.490***                    8.784             1.930***
                                (1.513)                  (11.861)             (0.528)
First-stage F-statistic          4.873                     4.512               9.019
GE network wall exposure
Labor ratio                    -0.221***                   -0.117            -0.491***
                                 (0.074)                  (0.147)              (0.150)
EoS                            4.533***                    8.581             2.036***
                                 (1.521)                 (10.852)              (0.624)
First-stage F-statistic           4.835                    6.138                5.979
Controls                          None                      None                None
Fixed Effects                     State                     State               State
Standard Errors              State clusters           State clusters       State clusters
Weighting                       Pre-pop.                Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.
Sample                       U.S. and Mex.            U.S. and Mex.        U.S. and Mex.
Observations                      3392                      3392                3392
  Notes: Two stage least squares. Each observation is a (log) difference in a U.S.
  or Mexico location pre- and post- the SFA. Pre- and post- data come from the 2000
  and 2010 censuses in Mexico, respectively; pre- data in the U.S. comes from the 2000
  census and post-data come from an average of the 2010-2012 ACS. The dependent
  variable is the change in relative payments to the two labor types between 2000 to
  2010-2012. The independent variable is the change in relative population shares. The
  construction of each instrument is discussed in the text and briefly summarized in the
  previous first-stage table. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Stars indicate
  statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.




                                              48
                                Table 4: Estimation of trade elasticity

                                                                   (1)             (2)
                                                               First stage     Second stage
                 Simple average wall exposure
                 Simple average wall exposure                    -5.243
                                                                (4.585)
                 ...X Mexico                                   197.699*
                                                               (108.132)
                 Change in total payments to labor                                 -0.377
                                                                                  (0.387)
                 EoS b/t goods in different locations (σ)                        1.377***
                                                                                  (0.387)
                 First-stage F-statistic                         2.241
                 Network wall exposure
                 Network wall exposure                         -2.471***
                                                                (0.806)
                 ...X Mexico                                     2.844
                                                                (5.536)
                 Change in total payments to labor                               -1.975***
                                                                                  (0.420)
                 EoS b/t goods in different locations (σ)                        2.975***
                                                                                  (0.420)
                 First-stage F-statistic                         4.709
                 GE network wall exposure
                 GE network wall exposure                       -2.333**
                                                                 (0.945)
                 ...X Mexico                                      3.163
                                                                 (6.164)
                 Change in total payments to labor                               -2.141***
                                                                                  (0.756)
                 EoS b/t goods in different locations (σ)                        3.141***
                                                                                  (0.756)
                 First-stage F-statistic                         3.055
                 Controls                                        None             None
                 Fixed Effects                                   State            State
                 Standard Errors                             State clusters   State clusters
                 Weighting                                     Pre-pop.         Pre-pop.
                 Sample                                      U.S. and Mex.    U.S. and Mex.
                 Observations                                     3392             3392
Notes: Two stage least squares. Each observation is a (log) difference in a U.S. or Mexico location prior
to the SFA in 2000 to after the SFA in 2010 (in Mexico) or an average across 2010-2012 (in the U.S.).
The dependent variable is the change in the origin fixed effect of the trade gravity equation recovered from
the goods market clearing condition. The independent variable is the change in the composite goods price
calculated from observed wages of each labor group and the estimated elasticities of substitution between
groups. The independent variable (the instrument) is either a simple average fence exposure which is the
unweighted average fence exposure across all origins; a network wall exposure which is a weighted average
fence exposure across all origins, where the weights are the pre-period migration flows; or a GE network wall
exposure which in addition to weighting flows by pre-period mirgation flows also accounts for substitution in
migration across different destinations by correcting for each orgin’s market access; see the text for details.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 ***
p<.01.
                                                      49
                                    Table 5: Estimation of migration elasticities

                                   (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)
                               Mex Low Skill    Mex High Skill   U.S. Low Skill   U.S. High Skill      Pooled
     Simple average wall exposure
     Migration elasticity         -1.007*           0.991            0.171             0.147            0.036
                                  (0.593)          (1.158)          (0.971)           (0.935)          (0.596)
     First-stage F-statistic       8.581            0.679            1.126             2.200            0.538
     Network wall exposure
     Migration elasticity        -1.114**           1.178            1.188            -11.684           -0.397
                                  (0.518)          (1.786)          (1.827)          (22.411)          (0.511)
     First-stage F-statistic      22.413            0.748            0.767             0.265            4.112
     GE network wall exposure
     Migration elasticity         -1.543*           1.273            1.724            -6.090            -1.130
                                  (0.856)          (3.277)          (4.459)          (5.102)           (1.101)
50




     First-stage F-statistic       25.258           0.568            0.197            0.664             1.496
     Controls                       None            None             None              None              None
     Fixed Effects                  State           State            State             State         State*Type
     Standard Errors           State clusters   State clusters   State clusters   State clusters    State clusters
     Weighting                   Pre-pop.         Pre-pop.         Pre-pop.         Pre-pop.          Pre-pop.
     Sample                    U.S. and Mex.    U.S. and Mex.    U.S. and Mex.    U.S. and Mex.     U.S. and Mex.
     Observations                   3392             3392             3392             3392             13568
       Notes: Two stage least squares. Each observation is a (log) difference in a U.S. or Mexico location pre-
       and post- the SFA. Pre- and post- data come from the 2000 and 2010 censuses in Mexico, respectively; pre-
       data in the U.S. comes from the 2000 census and post-data come from an average of the 2010-2012 ACS.
       The dependent variable is the (log) change in the labor type specific migration destination fixed effect. The
       independent variable is the (log) change in the real wage, where the nominal wages are observed and the
       price indices are calculated from the trade destination fixed effect and the estimated trade elasticity. The
       construction of each instrument is discussed in the text and briefly summarized in the previous first-stage
       table. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05
       *** p<.01.
                                            Table 6: Counterfactual Results: Welfare

                                   Secure Fence Act    Additional Border Wall Expansion      Reducing International Trade Costs
                                                       25% expansion 50% expansion           25% reduction 50% reduction
                                                               Mex. Low Skill (per capita 2012 USD)
     Terms of trade                0.26                0.39            0.45                 95.09             318.50
     Relative skill supply         0.18                0.26            0.28                 1.43              5.32
     Relative nationality supply   0.64                0.96            1.15                 2.80              9.77
     Direct effect                 -1.94               -2.93           -3.41                0.00              0.00
     Idiosyncratic preferences     0.05                0.10            0.10                 0.81              6.42
     Total welfare impact          -0.81               -1.22           -1.43                100.12            340.01


                                                               Mex. High Skill (per capita 2012 USD)
     Terms of trade                -0.15               -0.23            -0.26                238.20           792.47
     Relative skill supply         -0.18               -0.25            -0.22                -5.96            -23.16
     Relative nationality supply   2.60                3.90             4.54                 10.76            37.41
     Direct effect                 -4.22               -6.36            -7.37                0.00             0.00
     Idiosyncratic preferences     0.13                0.24             0.25                 1.95             15.37
     Total welfare impact          -1.82               -2.70            -3.06                244.95           822.09
51




                                                               U.S. Low Skill (per capita 2012 USD)
     Terms of trade                0.04                0.06             0.07                56.13             188.04
     Relative skill supply         1.70                2.57             3.03                7.73              27.23
     Relative nationality supply   -1.46               -2.20            -2.64               -6.50             -22.37
     Direct effect                 0.00                0.00             0.00                0.00              0.00
     Idiosyncratic preferences     0.00                0.00             0.00                0.27              2.21
     Total welfare impact          0.28                0.43             0.47                57.63             195.11


                                                               U.S. High Skill (per capita 2012 USD)
     Terms of trade                -0.15               -0.22            -0.25                88.97            297.19
     Relative skill supply         -2.07               -3.12            -3.63                -9.00            -31.64
     Relative nationality supply   -0.51               -0.76            -0.89                -2.06            -7.04
     Direct effect                 0.00                0.00             0.00                 0.00             0.00
     Idiosyncratic preferences     0.00                0.00             0.00                 0.36             2.87
     Total welfare impact          -2.73               -4.11            -4.78                78.27            261.37


       Notes: The Secure Fence Act counterfactual calculates the equilibrium effect of the estimated increase in migration
       costs for Mexican born workers due to the construction of additional segments of border wall. The reducing trade costs
       counterfactual reduces the additional estimated distance elasticity for international trade over and above the distance
       elasticity of domestic trade flows by a given percentage. The change in welfare is the change in the population-weighted
       gemoetric mean of expected welfare across all locations, where the welfare includes real wages, amenities, and idiosyncratic
       preferences.
                                     Table 7: Counterfactual Results: Aggregate impact

                                 Secure Fence Act   Additional Border Wall Expansion     Reducing International Trade Costs
                                                    25% expansion 50% expansion          25% reduction 50% reduction
                                                              Change in Mex. to U.S. migration
     % change                    -0.390             -0.584           -0.681            -0.835             -3.195
     Absolute change (persons)   -49956             -74937           -87392            -107030            -409761

                                                                  Change in U.S. real GDP
     % change                    -0.012             -0.018           -0.020             0.056             0.187
52




     Absolute change ($b)        $-1.5              $-2.3            $-2.6              $7.2              $24.1

                                                                 Change in Mex. real GDP
     % change                    0.048              0.071           0.083             0.840               2.933
     Absolute change ($b)        $0.7               $1.0            $1.2              $12.3               $42.8
       Notes: The Secure Fence Act counterfactual calculates the equilibrium effect of the estimated increase in migration
       costs for Mexican born workers due to the construction of additional segments of border wall. The reducing trade costs
       counterfactual reduces the additional estimated distance elasticity for international trade over and above the distance
       elasticity of domestic trade flows by a given percentage. Absolute changes in real GDP calculated by scaling the model
       estimated baseline GDP by year 2000 real GDP for U.S. and Mexico, respectively.
     Figure 1: The location of old and new walls on the United States-Mexico border




Notes: Data digitized from Michael Baker Jr. Inc. (2013).




                                           53
                                               Figure 2: Effect of the Secure Fence Act
                                                          Panel (i): Population


              (a) Mex. low-skill               (b) Mex. high-skill            (c) United States low-skill      (d) United States high-skill




                                                         Panel (ii): Real Wages
54




              (e) Mex. low-skill               (f) Mex. high-skill            (g) United States low-skill      (h) United States high-skill




     Notes: These figures show effect of the Secure Fence Act (Secure Fence Act ) on the spatial distribution of population
                                                                                                                           ofeach
     labor type (top panel) and the real wage impact of each labor type (bottom panel). Changes in real wages (i.e.    ŵjn,s /P̂j   are
     expressed in equivalent variation changes in per capita annual real income, measured in chained 2012 USD.
                                               Figure 3: Effect of additional border wall
                                                          Panel (i): Population

              (a) Mex. Low Skill            (b) Mex. High Skill         (c) United States Low Skill   (d) United States High Skill




                                                          Panel (ii): Real Wages
55




              (e) Mex. Low Skill            (f) Mex. High Skill         (g) United States Low Skill   (h) United States High Skill




     Notes: These figures show effect of a 25% additional expansion in the border wall on the spatial distribution of population
                                                                                                                                of
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                           n,s
     each labor type (top panel) and the real wage impact of each labor type (bottom panel). Changes in real wages (i.e. ŵj /P̂j
     are expressed in equivalent variation changes in per capita annual real income, measured in chained 2012 USD.
                                                 Figure 4: Effect of reducing trade costs
                                                           Panel (i): Population

              (a) Mex. Low Skill             (b) Mex. High Skill         (c) United States Low Skill    (d) United States High Skill




                                                           Panel (ii): Real Wages
56




              (e) Mex. Low Skill             (f) Mex. High Skill         (g) United States Low Skill    (h) United States High Skill




     Notes: These figures show effect of a 25% reduction in international trade costs on the spatial distribution of population
                                                                                                                               ofeach
                                                                                                                            n,s
     labor type (top panel) and the real wage impact of each labor type (bottom panel). Changes in real wages (i.e. ŵj /P̂j are
     expressed in equivalent variation changes in per capita annual real income, measured in chained 2012 USD.
Online Appendix (not for publication)
A        Proofs
In this section, we provide proofs of Theorem 1, Corollary 1, Lemma 1, and Proposition 1.

A.1      Proof of Theorem 1
In this section, we prove Theorem 1 using the contraction mapping theorem. Recall that the
                            ×K       ×K
system of Equations F : RN ++   → RN++   are written as:

                      X               K
                                      Y                     K
                                                            Y                   M
                                                                                Y                   M
                                                                                                    Y
                                                  αk,l                   λk,l                γk,m
          F (x)ik ≡           Kij,k         (xj,l )               (xi,l )             Pm (xj )            Pm (xi )χk,m ,
                          j           l=1                   l=1                 m=1                 m=1

where Qm (·) are nested CES aggregating functions:
                                                                         1
                                                              ! δ 1  βm βm
                                                                  m,l
                             X 1  X 1
                  Pm (xj ) ≡                      (xj,n )δm,l          ,
                               l∈S
                                   |Sm | n∈T
                                             |Tn |
                                            m                        l



where δm,l > 0 and βm > 0 for all m and l, {Kij,k , Ul , Tj,n } are all strictly positive parameter
values; Sm and Tl,m are (weak) subsets of {1, ..., K}; and {αk,l , λk,l , γk,m , χk,p } are all real-
valued.
   It proves helpful to instead consider an equivalent function G : RN ×K → RN ×K :

              X           K
                          Y                           K
                                                      Y                         M
                                                                                Y                          M
                                                                                                           Y
G (x) ≡ log       Kij,k         (exp xj,l )αk,l             (exp xi,l )λk,l           exp Qm (xj )γk,m          exp Qm (xi )χk,m ,
              j           l=1                         l=1                       m=1                       m=1


where:                                                                     1
                                                                ! δ 1  βm βm
                                                                    m,l
                             X 1  X 1
              Qm (xj ) ≡ log                    (exp xj,n )δm,l          .
                               l∈S
                                   |Sm|
                                        n∈T
                                            |Tn|
                                            m                        l



Clearly if there is any fixed point x̃∗ ∈ RN ×K such that G (x̃∗ ) = x̃∗ implies that x∗ ≡
                 ×K
exp (x̃∗ ) ∈ RN ++   is a fixed point for F , i.e. F (x∗ ) = x∗ (where it is understood that the
exponential function is element by element).
                             N ×K
     For any x and y in R        , consider the “max” metric d (x, y) = maxi,k |xi,k − yi,k |. Then
    N ×K
  R      , d is a complete metric space so that by the contraction mapping theorem, there ex-
                                                                                                 ×K
ists a unique x̃∗ ∈ RN ×K such that G (x̃∗ ) = x̃∗ (and hence there exists a unique x∗ ∈ RN     ++ )
                                                             N ×K
if there exists a ρ ∈ [0, 1) such that for
                                         Pall x and y inPR        we have d (G (x) , G (y)) ≤ ρ × 
                                              M             K             PM             PM
d (x, y). We define ρ ≡ maxk∈{1,...,K}        m=1 |γk,m | + l=1 |αk,l | +  m=1 |λk,m | +   m=1 |χk,m | ,
and show in the following that d (G (x) , G (y)) ≤ ρ × d (x, y), as required.
     First, choose any two x and y in RN ×K . We then can calculate the metric of G (x) and

                                                                    57
G (y):
                                                       K                   M                                    M
                                                                                                                                          !
                                 X                     X                   X                                    X
d (G (x) , G (y)) = max | log          Kij,k exp             αk,l xj,l +          γk,m Qj,m (xj ) +                    χk,m Qj,m (xi )        ⇐⇒
                     i,k
                                 j                     l=1                 m=1                                  m=1
                                                 K                   M                                    M
                                                                                                                                    !
                           X                     X                   X                                    X
                   − log         Kij,k exp             αk,l yj,l +          γk,m Qj,m (yj ) +                   χk,m Qj,m (yi ) |
                             j                   l=1                 m=1                                m=1
                                          P                                                                            
                                 P           K                PM                                PM
                             j K ij,k exp    l=1 αk,l x j,l +    m=1  γ k,m   Q j,m  (x j ) +    m=1 χ k,m Q j,m (x i )
                 = max log P              P                                                                            ⇐⇒
                    i,k                      K                PM                                PM
                             j K ij,k exp        α    y
                                             l=1 k,l j,l    +         γ
                                                                 m=1 k,m j,m  Q      (yj  ) +        χ     Q
                                                                                                 m=1 k,m j,m     (yi  )
                                                    PK                                         
                           X                               l=1 αk,l (xj,l − yj,l ) +
                                            PM
                 = max log     Cij,k exp       m=1 γk,m (Qj,m (xj ) − Qj,m (yj )) + 
                                                                                                     ,                    (14)
                                                                                                
                    i,k                        P  M
                           j                            χ
                                                  m=1 k,m      (Q j,m (x  i ) − Q  j,m (y   i ))

                         Kij,k exp( K
                                                    PM                   PM
                                     l=1 αk,l yj,l + m=1 γk,m Qj,m (yj )+ m=1 χk,m Qj,m (yi ))
                                   P
                 P                                                                                                                             P
where Cij,k ≡        j P Kij,k exp(PK αk,l yj,l +PM γk,m Qj,m (yj )++ PM χk,m Qj,m (yi )) .                                       Note that        j   Cij,k =
                        j             l=1            m=1                    m=1
1 for all i and k.
    Second, note that we can bound the difference in the CES aggregate functions Qm (·) as
follows:
                                                                                   1
                                                                         ! δ 1 βm βm
                                                                             m,l
                                          X 1  X 1                 δ
         |Qj,m (xj ) − Qj,m (yj )| =| log              (exp (xj,n )) m,l            ⇐⇒
                                            |Sm | |Tn |
                                                                                   
                                                 l∈Sm                   n∈Tl

                                                                                            1
                                                                                  ! δ 1 βm βm
                                                                                      m,l
                                                   X 1  X 1                 δ
                                             − log              (exp (yj,n )) m,l            |
                                                     |Sm | |Tn |
                                                                                            
                                                    l∈Sm                   n∈Tl
                                                                                                                     δ 1 βm 
                                                         P               P         1                            δm,l      m,l
                                                 l∈Sm                      n∈Tl |Tn |      (exp (xj,n ))
                                          1                                                                                      
                                       =    log                                                                                   ⇐⇒
                                                                                                                                
                                         βm                                                                           δ 1 βm 
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                δm,l
                                                P                                                                               
                                                                                    1                                     m,l
                                                          P
                                                             l∈Sm            n∈Tl |Tn |     (exp (yj,n ))
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                        ! δ 1 βm
                                                                                                            m,l
                                              1     X                  X
                                       =        log    λl                 ωn,l exp (δm,l (xj,n − yj,n ))         ,
                                             βm
                                                        l∈Sm             n∈Tl

                                                                                                                            !βm
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                            δm,l
                                                                           ( |T1n |                                ) δm,l
                                                                                      P
                                      δm,l                                                n∈Tl   (exp(yj,n ))
                       (exp(yj,n ))
where ωn,l ≡      P                      δm,l   and λl ≡                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                  !βm .   Note that
                      n∈Tl (exp(yj,n ))                                                                      δm,l
                                                                                (            1
                                                                                                                         ) δm,l
                                                                    P             P
                                                                        l∈Sm          n∈Tl |Tn | (exp(yj,n ))
                 P                                                                           P
ωn,l ≥ 0 and        n∈Tl   ωn,l = 1 and, similarly, λl ≥ 0 and                                     l∈Sm   λl = 1, i.e. both ωn,l and λl




                                                                     58
are weights. As a result we have:
                                                                                                       
                                                                                             ! δ 1 βm
                                                                                                 m,l
                             1     X                      X
|Qj,m (xj ) − Qj,m (yj )| =    log    λl                       ωn,l exp (δm,l (xj,n − yj,n ))         =⇒
                            βm
                                           l∈Sm          n∈Tl
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                          1 βm
                                                                                                    ! δm,l
                               1     X  X
|Qj,m (xj ) − Qj,m (yj )| ≤      log       ωn,l exp δm,l                          max |xi,k − yi,k |                  ⇐⇒
                                                                                                                × λl 
                              βm                                                   i,k
                                         l∈Sm         n∈Tl

|Qj,m (xj ) − Qj,m (yj )| ≤ max |xi,k − yi,k |                                                                         (15)
                              i,k
                                                                     P
Third, we apply Equation (15) and the fact that                            j   Cij,k = 1 to derive the following bound:
                        PK                                                         PK                                   
X                            αk,l (xj,l − yj,l ) +
                              l=1                            X                              l=1 |αk,l | |xj,l − yj,l | +
                 PM                                                            PM
     Cij,k exp   m=1 γk,m (Qj,m (xj ) − Qj,m (yj )) + 
                                                           ≤     Cij,k exp       m=1 |γk,m | |(Qj,m (xj ) − Qj,m (yj ))| + 
                                                                                                                          
                  P M                                                             P  M
                    m=1 χk,m (Qj,m (xi ) − Qj,m (yi ))                               m=1 |χk,m | |Qj,m (xi ) − Qj,m (yi )|
 j                                                            j

                                                                    K            M             M
                                                                                                            !
                                                                   X             X            X
                                                           ≤ exp       |αk,l | +    |γk,m | +      |χk,m | max |xi,k − yi,k | .
                                                                                                                             i,k
                                                                                         l=1           m=1   m=1
                                                                                                                       (16)

Finally, applying Equation (16) to Equation (14) yields:

                                         d (G (x) , G (y)) ≤ ρ × d (x, y) ,

as required.

A.2       Proof of Corollary 1
We first derive two equilibrium equations from the four conditions defining the equilibrium
presented in Section 4.3. We then apply Theorem 1 to this system of equations.
   Suppose migration costs are symmetric. Recall the first equilibrium condition requires
both:                     n,s    −θn,s X
                     n,s  wi n,s                    −θn,s n,s −θn,s n,s
                    Li         ui       =      µn,s
                                                ji        Πj         Lj
                           Pi              j∈N
                                                                                               θn,s
                                                                                wjn,s n,s
                                                                           
                                          θn,s
                                                      X           −θn,s
                                    (Πn,s
                                      i )         ≡          µn,s
                                                              ij                     u
                                                      j∈N
                                                                                 Pj j

It turns out that this set of two equations can be simplified to a single equation when
migration costs are symmetric. To see this, suppose that the following relationship holds
true for some scalar κn,s > 0:
                                    n,s    −θn,s
                               n,s  wi n,s                      θn,s
                            Li           ui        = κn,s (Πn,s
                                                            i )
                                     Pi




                                                                59
Then the first equation becomes:
                                      −θn,s
                          win,s n,s
                                                  X             −θn,s            −θn,s
               Ln,s
                i              u               =          µn,s             Πn,s             Ln,s ⇐⇒
                           Pi i                    j∈N
                                                           ji               j                j

                                                                                          θn,s
                                                                              wjn,s n,s
                                                                          
                                     θn,s
                                                   X           −θn,s
                             κ (Πn,s
                                 i )           =          µn,s
                                                           ji                      u              κ ⇐⇒
                                                   j∈N
                                                                               Pj j
                                                                                          θn,s
                                                                              wjn,s n,s
                                                                          
                                     θn,s
                                                   X              n,s
                                                              n,s −θ
                               (Πn,s
                                 i )           =          µij                      u              ,
                                                   j∈N
                                                                               Pj j

where the last line imposed symmetry. Hence both equations in the system are identical
given the above relationship. This allows us to consider a single non-linear equation:
                                                                          θn,s                  θn,s
                                                              win,s n,s             wjn,s n,s
                                                          
                                    X          −θn,s
                 Ln,s
                  i       =κ  n,s
                                          µn,s
                                           ji                      u                     u                .   (17)
                                    j∈N
                                                               Pi i                  Pj j

   Similarly, suppose trade costs are symmetric. Recall the fourth equilibrium condition
requires that both:
                                         X
                              Yiσ Q1−σ
                                   i   =   τij1−σ Pjσ−1 Yj
                                                         j∈N
                                                         X
                                          Pi1−σ      ≡         τji1−σ Yi1−σ Qσ−1
                                                                             i
                                                         j∈N


Suppose that the following relationship holds true for some scalar κ > 0:

                                          Yiσ Q1−σ
                                               i   = κPi1−σ ⇐⇒
                                                                       σ
                                                                1   − σ−1
                                                   Pi = κ σ−1 Yi              Qi                              (18)

then the first equation becomes:
                                               X
                             Yiσ Q1−σ
                                  i   =              τij1−σ Pjσ−1 Yj ⇐⇒
                                               j∈N
                                               X
                               κPi1−σ =              τij1−σ κYj−σ Qσ−1
                                                                       
                                                                   j     Yj ⇐⇒
                                               j∈N
                                               X
                                 Pi1−σ =             τji1−σ Yj1−σ Qσ−1
                                                                   j
                                               j∈N


where the last line imposed symmetry of trade costs. Hence the two equations are identical.




                                                           60
This allows us to consider a single non-linear equation:
                                    X
                      Yiσ Q1−σ
                           i   =κ      τij1−σ Yj1−σ Qσ−1
                                                     j   ⇐⇒
                                                         j∈N
                                                         X
                                                                 τij1−σ Yi1−σ Qσ−1                  Yj1−σ Qσ−1
                                                                                                              
                                              Yi = κ                           i                           j     .                     (19)
                                                         j∈N


   Substituting the price index equation (18) into the migration equation (17) yields:
                                                                               θn,s                    θn,s
                                                                  win,s n,s               wjn,s n,s
                                                              
                                   X               −θn,s
              Ln,s
               i     =κ      n,s
                                              µn,s
                                               ji                      u                       u                  ⇐⇒
                                   j∈N
                                                                   Pi i                    Pj j
                                                                                          ! n,s                        θn,s
                                                                                                θ            n,s
                             κ   n,s    X              −θn,s          win,s                               wj
              Ln,s
               i   =           2θ n,s
                                                µn,s
                                                 ji                      σ
                                                                      − σ−1
                                                                                un,s
                                                                                 i
                                                                                                            σ
                                                                                                          − σ−1
                                                                                                                   un,s
                                                                                                                    j
                                                                                                                        
                           κ    σ−1
                                        j∈N                         Yi       Qi                         Yj      Qj

Moreover, using the equilibrium equation (3) for wages from the first order conditions of the
producer (the third equilibrium condition):
                                                                    1−ρ
                                                                     1   1
                                                                                   − ρ1
                                         win,s = An,s
                                                  i Yi Qi
                                                          ρ
                                                            (Qsi )( ρs − ρ ) (Ln,s
                                                                               i )
                                                                                      s



we have:
                                                                                  !θn,s                             θn,s
                 κ   n,s     X               n,s
                                         n,s −θ                  win,s                                wjn,s
       Ln,s
        i   =       2θ n,s
                                        µji                        σ
                                                                − σ−1
                                                                          un,s
                                                                           i
                                                                                            
                                                                                                  − σ
                                                                                                                un,s
                                                                                                                 j
                                                                                                                            ⇐⇒
                κ    σ−1
                             j∈N                              Yi       Qi                       Yj σ−1 Qj
                                                                    n,s                                              θn,s
                       X  An,s n,s n,s n,s θ
                            i ui Aj uj
                                                                           2σ−1
                                                                                   − 2ρ−1        1   1
                                                                                            s ( ρs − ρ )   n,s − ρ1s
       Ln,s   =κ̃n,s
                                                                           Yi σ−1
                                                                                  Qi   ρ
                                                                                          (Qi )          (Li )
        i
                       j∈N
                                                µn,s
                                                 ij
                                                          n,s
                                                    1 θ
                  2σ−1
                     σ−1
                          − 2ρ−1
                              ρ
                                     1 1
                                  s ( ρs − ρ )  n,s − ρs
                × Yj     Qj      Qj            Lj              .                                                                       (20)

   We apply Theorem 1 to the system of equations (19) and (20). Note that the second
                                                                       s∈{h,l}
equilibrium condition defines how Qi and Qs are functions of the {Ln,s
                                                                   i }n∈{M,U } . Recall that
                                                     ×K        ×K
Theorem 1 applies to any system of Equations F : RN++    → RN ++   are written as:

                           X                  K
                                              Y                   K
                                                                  Y                   M
                                                                                      Y                          M
                                                                                                                 Y
                                                          αk,l                 λk,l                      γk,m
           F (x)ik ≡               Kij,k            (xj,l )             (xi,l )             Qm (xj )                  Qm (xi )χk,m ,
                             j                l=1                 l=1                 m=1                       m=1

where Qm (·) are nested CES aggregating functions:
                                                                     1
                                                             δ 1 βm βm
                                                              
                                                               m,n
                                X  X                 δm,n        
                     Qm (xj ) ≡ 
                                 Ul   T j,n (xj,n )                ,
                                                                    
                                                l∈Sm               n∈Tl,m




                                                                          61
{Kij,k , Ul , Tj,n } are all strictly positive parameter values; Sm and Tl,m are (weak) subsets of
{1, ..., K}; and {αk,l , λk,l , γk,m , χk,p } are all real-valued.
    Equations (19) and (20) are one such system where N is the number of locations, K = 5
is the number of endogenous variables in each location (corresponding to the four types of
labor Lh,Mi   , Lh,U    l,M
                  i , Li , Li
                               l,U
                                    and the income in each location Yi , using the production function
– equilibrium condition ), and M = 3 (one CES aggregate for high-skill labor Qh , one CES
for low-skill labor Ql , and one nested CES aggregate across both high and low-skill labor
Q). Under the assumptions that ρs > ρ for s ∈ {h, l}, ρ > 12 and σ > 1, Theorem 1 provides
the following sufficient conditions for uniqueness:
                                                  
                                 n,s   1 σ−1
                              θ <                      ∀n ∈ {M, U } , s ∈ {h, l}
                                       2 4σ − 3
                                                       5
                                                     σ< ,
                                                       4
as claimed.

A.3     Proof of Lemma 1
First, note that we can immediately
                             P construct the total income of a location from the location
observables as follows: Yi = n∈{U,M },s∈{h,l} win,s Ln,s
                                                     i . Noting that Yi = pi Qi as well and
rearranging Equation (8), we have:
                                                   N                            
                                                   X                        Yj
                                     pσ−1
                                      i        =         τij1−σ Pjσ−1
                                                   j=1
                                                                            Yi
                                                   N
                                                   X
                                    Pi1−σ      =         τji1−σ p1−σ
                                                                 j
                                                   j=1


An immediate application of Theorem 3 of Allen, Arkolakis, and Li (2016) tells us that  there
                                   1−σ      1−σ
exists a unique (to-scale) set of pi and Pi     consistent with observed trade costs τij1−σ
and incomes {Yi }.
                                                                    wn,s
    Identifying amenities proceeds in a similar way. Define Win,s ≡ Pi i un,s
                                                                          i   as the welfare of
worker of type {n, s} in location i. Rearranging equation (7) then yields:

                                     n,s                  −θn,s             −θn,s      Ln,s
                          (Win,s )−θ
                                               X                                          j,0
                                           =         µn,s               Πn,s
                                               j∈N
                                                      ji                 j
                                                                                         Ln,s
                                                                                          i

                                   θn,s
                                               X            −θn,s               θn,s
                             (Πn,s
                               i )         =         µn,s
                                                      ij                Wjn,s
                                               j∈N


Again, an immediate application of Theorem 3 of Allen, Arkolakis, and Li (2016) tells us
                                                       n,s           n,s
that there existsna unique (to-scale)  set of (Win,s )θ oand (Πn,s
                                                               i   )θ consistent with observed
                        −θn,s                       Ln,s
                               o                  n
migration costs µn,s ij          and populations Ln,s  j,0
                                                           .
                                                                i




                                                          62
A.4     Proof of Proposition 1
We express the (unobserved) productivities of each type of labor as a function of the local
factor price (which from above can be recovered from the data using the market clearing
condition). First, taking ratios of United States and Mexican born workers, Equation (3)
implies:
                                          !       ! ρ1
                         AM,s
                           i        w M,s
                                      i      LM,s
                                              i
                                                     s

                               =                       ∀s ∈ {h, l} ,
                          AU,s
                            i       wiU,s    LU,s
                                               i

so that given observed relative wages and populations (along with the known elasticity of
substitution ρs ), relative productivities of United States to Mexican workers of the same skill
group within location are observed. Hence, once the productivity of U.S. workers of a skill
group is recovered, we can immediately deduce the productivity of Mexican workers in that
skill group.
    We proceed by identifying the price and quantity of skilled workers within a location (an
identical derivation holds for low-skilled workers). Using the CES aggregate of the price of
high-skill workers, we have:
                             ρh             1−ρh          ρh       1−ρh
            h 1−ρh        M,h           M,h                U,h        U,h
              
          pi          = Ai            wi             + Ai            wi         ⇐⇒
                                                 !ρh                               !
                                             M,h
                1−ρ
                             ρh        A                  1−ρh          1−ρh
          phi         = AU,h                 i
                                                       wiM,h        + wiU,h
                   h
                          i                                                          ⇐⇒
                                         AU,hi
                                                     !ρh                             ! 1
                             − ρ ρh−1        A M,h            1−ρh         1−ρh 1−ρh
                  phi = AU,h
                          i
                                  h              i
                                                           wiM,h        + wiU,h            ⇐⇒
                                                AU,h
                                                 i
                             − ρ ρh−1
                    h     U,h
                  p i = Ai        h
                                        p̃hi ,

                                                                            1
                           ρh             1−ρh                   1−ρh  1−ρ
                    AM,h
                                                                               h
where p̃hi ≡         i
                    AU,h
                                   wiM,h            +       wiU,h                      can be recovered from observed data.
                     i

That is, the high-skill price is identified up to the United States high skilled productivity in
a location.
    Similarly, using the CES aggregate of the quantity of high-skill, we have:

                                                                                                      ! ρ ρh−1
                                    ρ ρh−1     AM,h                    ρhρ−1            ρhρ−1       h

                Qhi = AU,h
                       i
                                        h         i
                                                              LM,h
                                                               i
                                                                             h
                                                                                   + LU,h
                                                                                      i
                                                                                                h
                                                                                                                 ⇐⇒
                                                 AU,h
                                                  i
                           ρ ρh−1
                Qhi = AU,h
                       i
                              h
                                    Q̃hi ,

                                                                          ! ρ ρh−1
                                        ρhρ−1                 ρhρ−1         h
                     AM,h
                                                   
where Q̃hi ≡          i
                     AU,h
                                LM,h
                                 i
                                             h
                                                 + LU,h
                                                    i
                                                                     h
                                                                                     can be recovered from observed data.
                      i

Combining the above expressions for prices and quantity yields:


                                                                     63
                                                                              −ρρh−1                                       ρ ρh−1             ρ1
                                        ρ1                    
                         phi     Qhi              =   p̃hi         AU,h
                                                                    i
                                                                                      h
                                                                                              ×               AU,h
                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                  h
                                                                                                                                          Q̃hi             ⇐⇒
                                                                                                                 
                                                                       1                              ρh
                                     1                        
                                                                     h ρ
                                                                                                      ρh −1          ( ρ1 −1)
                         phi     Qi h ρ
                                                  =   p̃hi         Q̃i     AU,h
                                                                            i


Since the same expression holds for low-skill workers, we can combine these results with the
                             1          1
first order condition phi Qhi ρ = pli Qli ρ to yield:
                                                                                                                                                   
                                 ρ1                          ρh                                                                              ρl
                                                            ρh −1        ( ρ1 −1)                           ρ1                          ρl −1   ( ρ1 −1)
              p̃hi       Q̃hi            AU,h
                                          i                                           =     p̃li       Q̃li                  AU,l
                                                                                                                              i                                   ⇐⇒
                                                                     
                                                               ρh
                                                            ρh −1       (1− ρ1 )                                ρ1
                                       AU,h
                                        i                                                     p̃hi         Q̃hi
                                                          
                                                               ρl
                                                                                     =                            ρ1
                                                            ρl −1       (1− ρ1 )                   
                                         AU,l
                                          i
                                                                                              p̃li         Q̃li

                                                              ρh                                         ρh                       !−(1−ρ) ρ1
                       (AU,h )( ρh −1 )( ρ )                                                         )( ρh −1 )
                                                                          1− 1
                                                                                               (AU,h
Finally, we define xi ≡ i        ρl          =                                                   i
                                                                                                         ρl                                               (which can be recovered
                       (AU,l )( ρl −1 )( ρ )                                                   (AU,l )( ρl −1 )
                                        1− 1
                                              i                                                        i
from data using the above expression) and use the CES aggregate expression for prices to
derive an expression for the United States high skilled workers:


                    h 1−ρ          l 1−ρ
          p1−ρ
                                    
           i   =  p i       +    p i        ⇐⇒
                          − ρ ρh−1        1−ρ       − ρ ρ−1
                                                                l
                                                                        1−ρ
           1−ρ          U,h     h          h          U,l     l       l
          pi =        Ai               × p̃i     +   Ai            × pi      ⇐⇒
                                    − ρ ρh−1                           1−ρ                             − ρ ρ−1
                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                            1−ρ
          p1−ρ
           i     =          AU,h
                             i
                                                  h
                                                              ×    p̃hi              +             AU,l
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                                  ×   pli                 ⇐⇒
                                                                                                                       ρ ρh−1 (1−ρ)                           
                                 − ρ ρh−1 (1−ρ)  1−ρ                                                    AU,h
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                              h
                                                                                                                                                                1−ρ 
          p1−ρ   =       AU,h         h            p̃hi +                                                                                              pli         ⇐⇒
                                                                                                                                
           i              i                                                                                              ρ ρ−1
                                                                                                                              l                                     
                                                                                                            AU,l
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                              l


                                 − ρ ρh−1 (1−ρ)                             1−ρ                               1−ρ        
          p1−ρ
           i     =       AU,h
                          i
                                          h
                                                                          p̃hi            +   x−ρ
                                                                                               i             p̃li                     ⇐⇒
                                                                                                                         ρh −1
                                                                                             1
                                                                                        1−ρ                         ρh
                                        1−ρ                                    1−ρ
          AU,h
           i     =                 p̃hi               +       x−ρ
                                                               i           p̃li                            /pi




                                                                                           64
   Finally, we recover AU,l
                        i   in all locations:
                                                                      1
                                           ρh
                                                           
                            U,h
                                         ρh −1   (1− ρ1 )       ( ρlρ−1
                                                                      l
                                                                         )(1− ρ1 )
                          Ai                                                                      
                                                                                             AU,l
                                                             
                                                                                   =        i         .
                                         xi                 


As a result, we have recovered the productivity of all labor types solely as a function of
observables and model elasticities. Note that because the factor price is only recovered up
to scale (see Lemma 1), each productivity is only recovered up to scale.
                                                             wn,s
    Identifying amenities is simpler. Recall that Win,s ≡ Pi i un,s
                                                                  i is the welfare of worker of
                                                                                                  n,s
type {n, s} in location i. From Lemma n  1, there exists   a unique (to-scale)  set  of (Win,s )θ
                                                 −θn,s                     Ln,s
                                                        o                 n      o
consistent with observed migration costs µn,s ij
                                                                             j,0
                                                          and populations Ln,s     . Since win,s is
                                                                             i
observable in the data and Pi is uniquely (to-scale) recovered from the data (see Lemma 1),
the amenity of each type of worker is immediately recovered from the following expression:
                                                   n,s 
                                     n,s     n,s    wi
                                    ui = Wi /              ,
                                                     Pi

as required.




                                                             65
B      Data appendix
B.1     United States Data
We follow the replication files provided by Ottaviano and Peri (2012) and Borjas, Grogger,
and Hanson (2012) and define our sample variables in the same way:

    • Our primary sample is all individuals aged 18-64 (inclusive).

    • We drop people in group quarters (inlist(gq,0,3,4))

    • We define education as low education if the person has complete high school or less
      (educ variable less than or equal to category 6). We define education as high educa-
      tion if the person has completed some college (educ variable greater than or equal to
      category 7).

    • We define experience as age minus first time worked, where we assume first time worked
      is 17 for workers with no HS degree, 19 for HS graduates, 21 for workers with some
      college, and 23 for college graduates. We then drop if experience <1 | experience
      > 40.

    • We use the CPI - U variable to deflate the wage variables into constant year 2000
      dollars

    • We calculate the usual hours of work per week. Before 1980 and from 2008, we use the
      midpoint of the aggregated variable wkswork2. For the other years, we use the value
      reported in the variable hrswork2.

    • We sum the variable PERWT to get the total counts of individuals.

Further sample selection rules

    • We include both males and females in the analysis. Ottaviano and Peri (2012)and
      Borjas, Grogger, and Hanson (2012) consider only males

    • For computing population counts, we drop self-employed people (classwkrd<20 |
      classwkrd>28). We keep people who did not work the last week (this is in contrast
      to B/OP who drop this. We are interested in employment as an outcome)

    • For computing average wages, we drop self-employed people, those with zero wage
      income, and those who with 0 hours of regular work. Average income is weighted by
      the number of hours worked.

B.2     Mexican data
We follow the same definitions as above as closely as possible to define analgous variables in
the Mexican Census.



                                             66
B.3     Geographic concordances
We are restricted to using geographical variables that are available in the public use files.
The primary variable is the PUMA (public use microdata areas). PUMAS are redefined
after each Census year. We use the IPUMS variable cpuma0010, which provides consistent
groupings of PUMAS from 2000-2015 for our primary analysis.

B.4     Matrı́cula Database
One of the data sets used in this study was constructed from the administrative records of
the Mexican Matrı́cula Consular. The original source did not provide numeric identifiers for
place of birth or residency, but the names of these locations. In this appendix we describe
how we constructed our data set from this records. We will do so in two parts: first merging
places of residency to PUMAs in the United States and then merging place of birth to
GEOLEV2 locations in Mexico43

Place of residency in the United States
The raw data gives us two pieces of information regarding place of residency, “Current State”
and “Current Municipality”. The field “Current Municipality” is vague and was interpreted
by applicants in different ways, some providing a county, others a city. Furthermore, it is
common to use unofficial names, e.g. “LA” for “Los Angeles”. To match theses localities to
PUMAs, we made use of a crosswalk provided by the Missouri Census Data Center.44 It
contains the names of all counties, minor civil divisions, cities, villages, towns, etc. in the
United States We matched these with the Matrı́cula data set using the Stata function reclink.
After this, we hand-coded the unmatched localities with the highest numbers of Matrı́culas
cards. One example of such location is “LA”, which the algorithm could not recognize as
being “Los Angeles”. This procedure yields the following results: 92% of the Matrı́culas
Consulares were matched to a PUMA, 7% did not have place of residency in the raw data
and 1% were not matched.

Place of birth in Mexico
The raw data gives us two pieces of information regarding place of birth, “State of Birth” and
“Municipality of Birth”. Again, the field “Municipality of Birth” was interpreted by applicants
in different ways. To match these to Municipality codes, we used a list of all geographical
divisions of Mexico provided by the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y Geografia 45 and
the Stata function reclink. As above, we hand-coded the unmatched localities with the
highest numbers of Matrı́culas cards. Finally we used the dictionaries provides by IPUMS
to aggregate municipalities to GEOLEV2 areas. This procedure yields the following results:
  43
     PUMAs and GEOLEV2 are time-invariant geographical divisions provided by IPUMS, which are com-
parable to counties, but usually larger. More details in https://usa.ipums.org/usa/
  44
     http://mcdc.missouri.edu/websas/geocorr2k.html
  45
     See “Catálogo de Claves de Entidades Federativas y Municipios” in http://www.inegi.org.mx/
default.aspx.




                                               67
86% of the Matrı́culas Consularess were matched to a GEOLEV2, 7% did not have place of
birth in the data and 7% were not matched.

B.5     Verification of Matrı́cula database
First, we show that the Matrı́cula counts correlate with measures of migrants from the
ACS. Because the stock of migrants at a point in time depends on both the inflows of new
migrants and the outflows of pre-existing migrants, we consider three different measures,
shown in Appendix Table 3. The first panel considers the elasticity of migrant stocks in
the ACS to the number of Matrı́culas Consulares. We find an elasticity of 6.1 (across all
migrants) and an elasticity of 7.7 (for low-educated migrants in the ACS). We then do the
same exercise considering a fixed cohort of individuals, born between 1940-1987, to hold
constant population growth. We find similar elasticities of 4.6 and 6.1. The second panel
considers the correlation between the stock of migrants in levels and the number of Matrı́culas
in levels. We find that each additional Matrı́cula is associated with an increase of between
0.4 migrants in the ACS46 and 0.42 for the stock of lower-educated migrants. Considering
only male migrants and Matrı́culas issued to males, we find a point estimate of 0.60. The
point estimates using the fixed cohort are larger, at 0.48, 0.52, and 0.77 respectively. The
third panel considers the change in the stock of migrants and the level of Matrı́culas. We
find that each additional Matrı́cula is associated with a net change in the stock of between
0.03-0.07 migrants, although the point estimates are smaller for the fixed cohort estimates.
    Next, we repeat the same exercise using Mexican Census data. The population growth
rate in Mexico is about twice that of the United States and so we focus on the fixed cohort
numbers, although both are included in the table for completeness. Appendix Table 5 shows
that the number of Matrı́culas Consulares correlates negatively with population stocks in
the Mexican Census. This is the expected direction because migrants are people who are
not living in Mexico. We find that each additional Matrı́cula is associated with between
14-24 fewer working age people (Panel b) and a change in the stock of Mexican working-age
population of between 0.6-1.5 (Panel c) in an Mexican municipality.
    The above tables were constructed considering all Mexican immigrants. If we instead
use only recently-arrived Mexican immigrants, then the results, shown in Appendix Table 4,
look similar.


C      Alternative measures of migration
We run our analysis using several other datasets. In Appendix Table 16 using the 2000 and
2010 Mexican Censuses, we find no difference between the number of migrants a household
reports having in the United States at the time of the Census. We also do not see any
evidence of differential changes in migration from Mexico’s National Labor Force Survey
(ENOE) as shown in Appendix Figure (12) and Appendix Table 17. This finding suggests
that either (1) total migration was unchanged because of the wall (perhaps the effect of
the wall changed the destination rather than the decision to leave), or (2) since potential
  46
   We should expect this value to be less than one: demographers estimate that the ACS and the Census
under-count unauthorized migration by 8-13% Passel and Cohn (2016).


                                                 68
migrants are a small share of the total Mexican population, this effect is just too small to
pick up.
   Finally, we also look for evidence of whether the wall reduced return migration from
the United States to Mexico, perhaps because of concerns that re-entering the United States
would be more difficult in the future (Massey, Durand, and Malone (2003); Angelucci (2012);
Lessem (2018)). We do not find any evidence of this, in either the 2010 Census, as shown in
Appendix Table 16 or in the ENOE data, as shown in Appendix Table 17.




                                            69
   Appendix Table 1: Correlates of change in travel time (pair level)

                                                  (1)             (2)
Dep. var: Change in log travel time          Actual change Predicted change
Origin: log distance to border                    0.001                0.007
                                               0.000***              0.000***
Origin: share ag                                  0.001                0.008
                                               0.000***              0.000***
Origin: share construction                       -0.001                0.006
                                                  0.001              0.001***
Origin: share manufact                           -0.002               -0.003
                                                0.001**              0.001***
Dest: log distance to border                     -0.008               -0.001
                                               0.000***              0.000***
Dest: share ag                                   -0.029               -0.096
                                               0.005***              0.004***
Dest: share construction                         -0.113                0.098
                                               0.006***              0.006***
Dest: share manufact                              0.028               -0.003
                                               0.001***               0.002*
Dest: housing shock                              -0.056                0.017
                                               0.001***              0.001***
Pair: baseline migration                          0.000                0.000
                                               0.000***              0.000***
N                                               2483780              2483780
r2                                               0.168                0.066
Est. method                                       OLS                  OLS
  Notes: An observation is an origin-destination pair. Standard errors in parentheses.
  Standard errors clustered at the spatial-pair cluster level.




                                        70
           Appendix Table 2: Geographical location of migrants: ACS and Matrı́cula

                                       2005/2006                                 2010-2012
                        Matricula       ACS      ACS: recent Matricula            ACS      ACS: recent
Demographics
Female                     0.362        0.332         0.263          0.395        0.358          0.288
High education             0.035        0.000         0.000          0.039        0.000          0.000
Destinations
California                 0.379        0.374         0.251          0.313        0.355          0.249
Texas                      0.154        0.181         0.162          0.216        0.186          0.188
Illinois                   0.093        0.068         0.050          0.075        0.068          0.052
Arizona                    0.036        0.049         0.061          0.030        0.037          0.025
Nevada                     0.029        0.021         0.023          0.021        0.021          0.014
Georgia                    0.027        0.028         0.049          0.030        0.027          0.038
Florida                    0.025        0.030         0.050          0.028        0.026          0.031
Colorado                   0.022        0.023         0.027          0.024        0.022          0.021
North Carolina             0.022        0.025         0.042          0.037        0.027          0.040
Washington                 0.021        0.021         0.025          0.011        0.024          0.026
New Mexico                 0.012        0.010         0.009          0.013        0.011          0.008
All other states           0.182        0.170         0.250          0.203        0.196          0.309
N (average per year)      887,564     5,928,770      1,291,722      841,503     5,627,935      573,386
  Notes: Table shows share of migrants in each state. Data source: Matrı́cula Consular database, 2005, 2006,
  2010; ACS 2005-2012. Only migrants with high-school education or lower included from ACS.




                                                71
              Appendix Table 3: Comparing Matrı́culas and ACS Mexican-born

                                         All                        Fixed cohort (born 1940-1987)
                            (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)
                         All ACS    Low-ed ACS    Male ACS       All ACS Low-ed ACS Male ACS
Panel (a): Log-Log
Log num matr              0.061        0.077                       0.046      0.061
                         0.021**     0.022***                     0.021*     0.022**
Log num male matr                                      0.030                                0.021
                                                       0.020                                0.020
N                         8287         7856            8057       8251        7802          8005
yearFE                     yes          yes             yes        yes         yes           yes
cpumaFE                    yes          yes             yes        yes         yes           yes
Panel (b): Level-Level
Num matr                   0.402       0.419                       0.482      0.517
                         0.017***    0.017***                    0.021***   0.022***
Num male matr                                           0.598                               0.766
                                                      0.024***                            0.030***
N                         11858       11858            11858      11858       11858        11858
yearFE                     yes         yes               yes       yes         yes           yes
cpumaFE                    yes         yes               yes       yes         yes           yes
Panel (c): First diff-level
Num matr                  0.053       0.031                       0.008      -0.021
                         0.018**      0.017                       0.018      0.017
Num male matr                                          0.069                                0.004
                                                      0.024**                               0.024
N                         10780       10780            10780      10780       10780         10780
yearFE                     yes         yes              yes        yes         yes           yes
cpumaFE                    yes         yes              yes        yes         yes           yes
  Notes: An observation is an U.S. cpuma. Data compares Matrı́culas and Mexican-born population in the
  ACS. Period: 2005-2015 (except 2011/2012).




                                                 72
Appendix Table 4: Comparing Matrı́culas and ACS Mexican-born (migrants in U.S. 0-5 years)

                                          All                        Fixed cohort (born 1940-1987)
                             (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)
                          All ACS    Low-ed ACS    Male ACS       All ACS Low-ed ACS Male ACS
 Panel (a): Log-Log
 Log num matr               0.145       0.163                       0.131      0.142
                          0.037***    0.039***                    0.039***   0.041***
 Log num male matr                                      0.114                                0.115
                                                       0.037**                              0.039**
 N                         5661         5179             5086      5353        4843          4761
 yearFE                     yes          yes              yes       yes         yes           yes
 cpumaFE                    yes          yes              yes       yes         yes           yes
 Panel (b): Level-Level
 Num matr                   0.220       0.199                       0.300      0.275
                          0.011***    0.010***                    0.012***   0.011***
 Num male matr                                           0.283                               0.401
                                                       0.014***                            0.016***
 N                         11858       11858            11858      11858       11858        11858
 yearFE                     yes         yes               yes       yes         yes           yes
 cpumaFE                    yes         yes               yes       yes         yes           yes
 Panel (c): First diff-level
 Num matr                   0.048       0.041                      0.006      -0.000
                          0.008***    0.007***                     0.008      0.007
 Num male matr                                           0.049                               -0.005
                                                       0.011***                               0.011
 N                         10780       10780            10780      10780       10780         10780
 yearFE                     yes         yes               yes       yes         yes            yes
 cpumaFE                    yes         yes               yes       yes         yes            yes
   Notes: An observation is an U.S. cpuma. Data compares Matrı́culas and Mexican-born population in the
   ACS. Period: 2005-2015 (except 2011/2012).




                                                  73
            Appendix Table 5: Comparing Matrı́culas and Mexican census

                                      All                     Fixed cohort (born 1940-1987)
                            (1)       (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                            All       Male         Low-ed       All       Male      Low-ed
Panel (a): Log-Log
Log num matr              0.017       0.026                    -0.009     -0.004
                          0.008*     0.008**                   0.009       0.008
Log num male matr                                   0.002                            -0.017
                                                    0.007                            0.007*
N                          6046        6046         6371       6012       6012        6353
yearFE                      yes         yes          yes        yes        yes         yes
geolev2FE                   yes         yes          yes        yes        yes         yes
Panel (b): Level-Level
Num matr                  17.442      0.607                    -18.126    -22.878
                         0.624***     0.447                   0.627***   0.685***
Num male matr                                       13.776                           -14.472
                                                   0.507***                         0.594***
N                          6054        6046          6379      6020       6012        6361
yearFE                      yes         yes           yes       yes        yes         yes
geolev2FE                   yes         yes           yes       yes        yes         yes
Panel (c): First diff-sum of level
5-year sum matr           -0.188      -0.194                   -0.614     -1.374
                         0.034***    0.035***                 0.035***   0.037***
5-year sum male matr                                -0.299                           -0.587
                                                   0.033***                         0.032***
N                          4662        4644          4662      4662       4644        4662
yearFE                      yes         yes           yes       yes        yes         yes
geolev2FE                   yes         yes           yes       yes        yes         yes
  Notes: An observation is a Mexican (time-comparable) municipality. Data compares Matrı́culas
  and population in Mexican Census. Mexican Census data from 2005 and 2010. Matrı́cula data
  from 2005-2010.




                                              74
Appendix Table 6:      Comparison:        Pew Matrı́cula applicants vs ACS
Mexican-born

                                 Pew      2005 ACS (all)   2005 ACS (6 states)
Share male                       0.59         0.54                 0.52
Age                             31.29         36.26               36.96
High school educ or less         0.94          0.87                0.86
Married                          0.46
In U.S. for less than 5 years    0.39          0.21               0.17
Avg weekly earnings             334.51        441.71             451.07
No. obs (unweighted)             4836         62871              45683
  Notes: Data source: Pew Matrı́cula survey. Pew survey conducted in CA, NY, IL,
  GA, TX, NC, between July 2004-Jan 2005.




                                         75
  Appendix Table 7: First stage for gravity equations: Matrı́cula data

                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                  log(x)      log(x + 1)     asinh(x)
Dep var: Post x change log travel time             b/se          b/se          b/se
Post x change log travel time (pred)              0.656          0.796         0.796
                                                0.034***       0.027***      0.027***
N                                                451074        4969692       4969692
First-stage F stat                               377.426       853.549       853.549
Mean change travel time var.                      0.017         0.018         0.018
Destination-year FE                                yes           yes           yes
Origin-year FE                                     yes           yes           yes
Pair FE                                            yes           yes           yes
Est. method                                       WLS           WLS           WLS
SE clustered at:                                   pair          pair          pair
Pre-mig trend                                      yes           yes           yes
  Notes: Data: 2006 and 2010 Matrı́cula database. Each observation is an origin
  (Mexican municipality) - destination (U.S. PUMA) pair. Log change travel time is
  the log change in traveltime for the least-cost path between the origin and destination
  pair. Log change travel time (pred) is the change in travel time for the predicted wall
  expansion. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Spatial cluster is origin-
  cluster (1 degree x 1 degree) x destination cluster (1 degree x 1 degree). If weighted,
  weighted by migration flow. Stars indicate statistical significance: *p<0.10 **p<0.05
  ***p<0.01.




                                          76
                             Appendix Table 8: Gravity equations: Matrı́cula data (robustness: unweighted)

                                                          OLS                                    RF                                   IV
                                               (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)
                                             log(x)    log(1+x)      asinh(x)     log(x)     log(1+x)     asinh(x)     log(x)     log(1+x)     asinh(x)
                                              b/se       b/se          b/se        b/se        b/se         b/se        b/se        b/se         b/se
Post x change log traveltime                 -0.048      -0.208       -0.254                                           -0.372      -0.354       -0.442
                                              0.076     0.023***     0.029***                                          0.240      0.041***     0.051***
Post x change log travel time (pred)                                              -0.254      -0.282       -0.353
                                                                                  0.161      0.037***     0.046***
N                                            451074     4969692      4969692      451074     4969692      4969692      451074     4969692      4969692
First-stage F stat                                                                                                      81.69      400.44       400.44
Mean change travel time var.                  0.036       0.018        0.018       0.017       0.018        0.018       0.036       0.018        0.018
Destination-year FE                            yes         yes          yes         yes         yes          yes         yes         yes          yes
Origin-year FE                                 yes         yes          yes         yes         yes          yes         yes         yes          yes
Pair FE                                        yes         yes          yes         yes         yes          yes         yes         yes          yes
Est. method                                   OLS         OLS          OLS         OLS         OLS          OLS         2SLS        2SLS         2SLS
SE clustered at:                             spatial     spatial      spatial     spatial     spatial      spatial     spatial     spatial      spatial
Pre-mig trend                                  yes         yes          yes         yes         yes          yes         yes         yes          yes
  Notes: Data: 2006 and 2010 Matrı́cula database. Each observation is an origin (Mexican municipality) - destination (U.S. PUMA) pair. Log change
  travel time is the log change in travel time for the least-cost path between the origin and destination pair. Log change travel time (pred) is the change
  in travel time for the predicted wall expansion. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Spatial cluster is origin-cluster (1 degree x 1 degree) x
  destination cluster (1 degree x 1 degree). If weighted, weighted by migration flow. Stars indicate statistical significance: *p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01.




                                                                          77
                                                         Appendix Table 9: Gravity equation: standard errors

                                                   (1)                       (2)                       (3)                        (4)                  (5)             (6)
     Dep var: log(1+x)                            b/se                      b/se                      b/se                       b/se                 b/se            b/se
     Post x change log traveltime               -0.354                     -0.354                    -0.354                     -0.354               -0.354          -0.354
                                               0.041***                   0.029***                  0.082***                   0.152**              0.023***         0.185*
     N                                 4969692                           4969692              4969692                       4969692                 4969692        4969692
     First-stage F stat                 400.44                           1138.18               107.60                        23.66                  4985.41          16.03
     Mean change travel time var.       0.009                             0.009                 0.009                        0.009                   0.009           0.009
     Destination-year FE                  yes                              yes                   yes                          yes                     yes             yes
     Origin-year FE                       yes                              yes                   yes                          yes                     yes             yes
     Pair FE                              yes                              yes                   yes                          yes                     yes             yes
     Est. method                       W2SLS                             W2SLS                W2SLS                         W2SLS                   W2SLS           W2SLS
     SE clustered at:             spatial pair (1x1)              spatial pair (0.5x0.5) spatial pair (2x2)           two-way spatial (1x1)           pair       state-pair-yr
     Pre-mig trend                        yes                              yes                   yes                          yes                     yes             yes
       Notes: Data: 2006 and 2010 Matrı́cula database. Each observation is an origin (Mexican municipality) - destination (U.S. PUMA) pair. Log change travel time
       is the log change in traveltime for the least-cost path between the origin and destination pair. Log change travel time (pred) is the change in travel time for the
78




       predicted wall expansion. Cols (1)-(3) present pair spatially-clustered standard errors (origin-cluster x destination-cluster), where each cluster is noted in the table.
       Col (4) presents two-way clustering (origin-cluster and destination-cluster). Col (5) presents clustering at the origin-destination pair level. Col (6) presents state-pair
       clusters. If weighted, weighted by migration flow.
                                                      Appendix Table 10: Robustness checks of the gravity equations: Matrı́cula data

                                                      (1)           (2)         (3)                     (4)          (5)                      (6)           (7)                    (8)           (9)
                                                    Baseline     No trend Pedestrian fence           4km buffer Housing shock            Border patrol Consul states           No outliers     Quintile
     Dep var: log(1 + x)                             b/se          b/se        b/se                    b/se         b/se                     b/se          b/se                   b/se          b/se
     Post x change log traveltime                   -0.142        -0.138                                                 -0.138              -0.146             -0.162           -0.322
                                                   0.047***      0.046***                                               0.047***            0.048***           0.049***         0.050***
     Post x change log traveltime (ped)                                             -1.606
                                                                                   0.233***
     Post x change log traveltime                                                                      -1.440
                                                                                                      0.499***
     Post X construction X housing shock                                                                                 -0.462
                                                                                                                        0.080***
     Post X border patrol staff                                                                                                               0.002
                                                                                                                                              0.003
     Post x 2 quintile                                                                                                                                                                           0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.002***
     Post x 3 quintile                                                                                                                                                                          -0.035
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.004***
79




     Post x 4 quintile                                                                                                                                                                          -0.066
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.008***
     Post x 5 quintile                                                                                                                                                                          -0.040
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.006***
     N                                              4969692      4969692           4969692            4969692           4969692             4969692            3375288          4906624        4969692
     First stage F stat                              276.29       279.79            144.28              50.15            275.89              253.48             310.14           387.09         96.29
     Mean change travel time var.                     0.018        0.018             0.011              0.002             0.018               0.018              0.019            0.017         0.018
     Destination-year FE                               yes          yes               yes                yes               yes                 yes                yes              yes           yes
     Origin-year FE                                    yes          yes               yes                yes               yes                 yes                yes              yes           yes
     Pair FE                                           yes          yes               yes                yes               yes                 yes                yes              yes           yes
     Est. method                                    W2SLS        W2SLS             W2SLS              W2SLS             W2SLS               W2SLS              W2SLS            W2SLS
     SE clustered at:                                spatial      spatial           spatial            spatial           spatial             spatial            spatial          spatial        spatial
     Pre-mig trend                                     yes          no                yes                yes               yes                 yes                yes              yes            yes
       Notes: Data: 2006 and 2010 Matrı́cula database. Each observation is an origin (Mexican municipality) - destination (U.S. PUMA) pair. Log change travel time is the log change in travel
       time for the least-cost path between the origin and destination pair. Log change travel time (pred) is the change in travel time for the predicted wall expansion. Standard errors are reported in
       parentheses. Spatial cluster is origin-cluster (1 degree x 1 degree) x destination cluster (1 degree x 1 degree). If weighted, weighted by migration flow. Omitted category for quintile regressions
       is quintile 1 (smallest exposure to wall). Stars indicate statistical significance: *p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01.
                  Appendix Table 11: Heterogenous effects of the border crossing point

                                                       OLS                       RF                         IV
                                                (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
                                              Log(x)     Log(1+x)       Log(x)     Log(1+x)       Log(x)     Log(1+x)
                                               b/se        b/se          b/se        b/se          b/se        b/se
Post x change log travel time                 0.065        -0.194                                  -0.354      -0.375
                                              0.100       0.027***                                 0.337      0.061***
border elevation                              -0.029       -0.009                                  0.005        0.009
                                              0.031       0.002***                                 0.045      0.004**
border river dummy                            -0.175        0.003                                  -0.519      -0.025
                                              0.217         0.006                                  0.458       0.014*
Post x change log travel time (pred)                                    -0.229       -0.292
                                                                        0.228       0.051***
border elevation                                                        -0.001        0.002
                                                                        0.018         0.001
border river dummy                                                      -0.182        0.005
                                                                        0.192         0.005
N                                             97104        993938        97104       993938        97104       993938
First-stage F stat                                                                                 26.16       195.14
Mean change travel time var.                  0.035        0.018        0.017         0.018        0.035        0.018
Destination-year FE                            yes          yes          yes           yes          yes          yes
Origin-year FE                                 yes          yes          yes           yes          yes          yes
Pair FE                                        yes          yes          yes           yes          yes          yes
Est. method                                  W2SLS        W2SLS        W2SLS         W2SLS        W2SLS        W2SLS
SE clustered at:                             spatial      spatial      spatial       spatial      spatial      spatial
Pre-mig trend                                  yes          yes          yes           yes          yes          yes
  Notes: Data: 2006 and 2010 Matrı́cula database. Each observation is an origin (Mexican municipality) - destination
  (U.S. PUMA) pair. Log change travel time is the log change in travel time for the least-cost path between the origin
  and destination pair. Log change travel time (pred) is the change in travel time for the predicted wall expansion.
  Border elevation and border river are, respectivelly, the elevataion of and an indicator for a major river at the the
  border crossing point on the least cost path between the origin and destination. Elevation is in standard deviations.
  Standard errors in parentheses. Spatial cluster is origin-cluster (1 degree x 1 degree) x destination cluster (1 degree x
  1 degree). If weighted, weighted by migration flows.




                                                          80
                                           Appendix Table 12: Heterogenous effects of the wall: Matrı́cula data

                                         (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)
Dep var: log(1 + x)                     b/se          b/se           b/se            b/se           b/se           b/se            b/se           b/se           b/se
Post x change log traveltime          -0.142        -0.163          -1.230         -0.769         -0.228          -0.600         -0.139         -0.499           -1.578
                                     0.047***      0.049***        0.133***       0.115***       0.061***        0.080***       0.044***       0.066***        0.131***
X nummatr2005                                        0.001                                                                                                       -0.002
                                                     0.001                                                                                                      0.001*
X logorigdistborder                                                 -0.456                                                                                       -0.407
                                                                   0.051***                                                                                    0.062***
X logdestdistborder                                                                -0.190                                                                        -0.075
                                                                                  0.031***                                                                       0.040*
X housingShock                                                                                    -0.072                                                         -0.018
                                                                                                 0.023***                                                         0.023
X origshareag                                                                                                     -0.407                                         -0.122
                                                                                                                 0.051***                                       0.057**
X destshareag                                                                                                                     -0.053                         -0.057
                                                                                                                                 0.023**                        0.031*
X shareConstruction                                                                                                                             -0.713           -0.212
                                                                                                                                               0.087***        0.083**
N                                    4969692      4969692  4969692  4969692  4969692  4967560  4969692  4969692  4967560
First-stage F stat                    276.29       131.19   161.05   188.27    21.07    93.72   113.93   443.25    81.80
Mean change travel time var.           0.018        0.018    0.018    0.018    0.018    0.018    0.018    0.018    0.018
Destination-year FE                     yes          yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes
Origin-year FE                          yes          yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes
Pair FE                                 yes          yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes
Est. method                          W2SLS        Wgt 2SLS Wgt 2SLS Wgt 2SLS Wgt 2SLS Wgt 2SLS Wgt 2SLS Wgt 2SLS Wgt 2SLS
SE clustered at:                      spatial      spatial  spatial  spatial  spatial  spatial  spatial  spatial  spatial
Pre-mig trend                           yes          yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes      yes
  Notes: Data: 2006 and 2010 Matrı́cula database. Each observation is an origin (Mexican municipality) - destination (U.S. PUMA) pair. Log change travel time
  is the log change in travel time for the least-cost path between the origin and destination pair. Log change travel time (pred) is the change in travel time for the
  predicted wall expansion. Interaction variables are standardized normal variables. Spatial cluster is origin-cluster (1 degree x 1 degree) x destination cluster (1 degree
  x 1 degree). If weighted, weighted by migration flows.




                                                                                  81
Appendix Table 13: Fence expansion
and choice of crossing location (EMIF
data)

                                  (1)

 Indicator crossing location     b/se
 Log distance to destination    -0.046
                               0.022**
 Log distance to origin         -0.014
                                 0.015
 Fence Expansion                -0.030
                               0.017*
 Origin-destination FE         568378
 Crossing location FE            0.059
 IndividualFE                     Yes
 CrossLocFE                       Yes
   Notes: This table estimates a choice
   model at the individual level (hold-
   ing constant the origin and destina-
   tion) of which of the 17 EMIF border
   crossing points to chose. The stan-
   dard errors are multi-way clustered
   in each of the included fixed effects.




                   82
                          Appendix Table 14:          Gravity equations:
                          Trade data

                                                        (1)        (2)
                           Post x change log           0.171
                           traveltime                 (0.673)
                           Log overland                          -1.249***
                           distance                               (0.032)
                           Log overland                          -0.564***
                           distance * international               (0.153)
                           Constant                              3.922***
                                                                  (0.207)
                            Origin-year FE               Yes        Yes
                            Destination-year FE          Yes        Yes
                            Origin-destination FE        Yes         No
                            R-squared                   0.978      0.968
                            Observations                 6422       7011
Notes: Each observations is a U.S. state to U.S./Mexico state pair in either 2007 or 2012. The
dependent variable is the log value of trade flows in column 1 and the log value of trade flows
normalized by own trade flows in column 2. (The normalized trade flows imply the origin-year
and destination-year fixed effects are the same and allow the recovery of the constant). Overland
distance is the distance along the shortest overland route between origin and destination. Traveltime
is the distance along the shortest overland route that avoids a border wall. Both overland distance
and traveltime are averaged across all locations (Mexican municipalities and U.S. PUMAs) within
the state-year pair. Standard errors clustered by origin-destination pair. Stars indicate statistical
significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.




                                                 83
     Appendix Table 15: Correlates of change in predicted migration (origin and destination level)

                                   Unwgt inst.                         Wgt inst.                      GE inst.
                                 (1)          (2)                (3)               (4)          (5)              (6)
Panel (a): US
Dum border state           0.00057                              0.0010               0.00098
                        0.00012***                           0.00027***            0.00025***
Log dist. border           0.00026             0.00026         0.00076     0.00071   0.00069                  0.00063
                       0.000041***            0.00013*      0.000094*** 0.00027** 0.000084***               0.00026**
Share in ag                 0.0073            0.00098           0.011     -0.00028     0.011                  0.00029
                         0.0012***             0.00087       0.0029***      0.0011 0.0026***                   0.0012
Share in manufacturing    0.00043            -0.000025          0.0012   -0.000033    0.0010                 -0.00016
                           0.00039             0.00038         0.00090     0.00073   0.00080                  0.00066
Share in construction      -0.0057             -0.0023         -0.0088     -0.0031   -0.0083                  -0.0028
                         0.0015***             0.0023         0.0035**     0.0039  0.0032***                  0.0036
Share immigrants          0.00037             -0.00027         0.00074    -0.00066   0.00074                 -0.00055
                          0.00021*             0.00024         0.00048     0.00059  0.00043*                  0.00047
Housing shock             -0.00067            -0.00024        -0.00085    -0.00055  -0.00071                 -0.00040
                         0.00033**             0.00026         0.00076   0.00032*    0.00068                  0.00030
Growth 1990-2000        -0.0000017           -0.000029        0.000061  -0.0000033  0.000036                -0.000019
                          0.000053           0.000042          0.00012    0.000069   0.00011                 0.000064
N                            1066               1063             1066        1063      1066                     1063
stateFE                       no                 yes              no          yes       no                       yes
Panel (b): Mexico
Dum border state        -0.000080                               0.00100                      0.00065
                       0.000024***                            0.00018***                   0.00015***
Log dist. border          0.00018  0.00000058                   0.00041       -0.00080       0.00045        -0.00074
                       0.000016*** 0.000054                   0.00012***      0.00047*     0.00010***       0.00043*
Share in ag               0.00031    0.000025                   0.00027       -0.00059       0.00063        -0.00022
                       0.000031*** 0.000014*                    0.00024       0.00046      0.00019***        0.00035
Share in manufacturing   -0.00019   -0.000071                   -0.0019        -0.0013       -0.0012        -0.00074
                        0.000096*    0.000066                 0.00072***     0.00064**      0.00059*         0.00048
Share in construction     0.00016   0.000011                   -0.00037      -0.000039       0.00019         0.00020
                       0.000058*** 0.000033                     0.00044        0.00052       0.00036         0.00037
Growth 1990-2000          0.00014  0.0000086                    0.00081        0.00036       0.00071        0.00030
                       0.000026*** 0.000016                   0.00020***      0.00031      0.00016***        0.00025
N                                2069           2067            2069               2067        2069              2067
stateFE                           no             yes             no                 yes         no                yes
  Notes: Table shows the result of multivariate OLS regression. An observation is either a cpuma0010 (U.S.) or geolev2
  (Mexico). OLS regression. Table correlates instrument (predicted change in immigrants) with local characteristics. All
  characteristics defined in pre-period. Standard errors clustered by state.




                                                         84
Appendix Table 16: Predicting pop change in Mexico: three
measures (rf)

                                 (1)           (2)           (3)
 Dep var: log(Ndt /Ndt−1 )      b/se          b/se          b/se
 Low-educ pop
 Simple                        -6.732
                               46.964
 Network                                     0.877
                                             1.928
 GE Network                                                 1.952
                                                            2.828
 F (inst)                      0.021         0.207          0.477
 No. of migrants in US
 Simple                       239.688
                              500.225
 Network                                     -5.005
                                             12.878
 GE Network                                                11.569
                                                           19.360
 F (inst)                      0.230         0.151          0.357
 Return migrants
 Simple                       477.429
                              499.008
 Network                                    -17.282
                                            8.324**
 GE Network                                                -7.282
                                                           15.549
 F (inst)                      0.915         4.310          0.219
 N                              2328         2328           2328
 State FE                        yes          yes            yes
 controls                    Pop growth   Pop growth     Pop growth
 whatSE                        State        State          State
 WLS                             yes          yes            yes
   Notes: Standard errors clustered at the state level. Sample is 2000
   and 2010 Mexican Censuses.




                                 85
                                             Appendix Table 17: Migration rate: ENOE data

                                                                No state FE                     State FE            Add distance trends
                                                        Out          In     Net         Out        In    Net       Out    In       Net
     Dep var: rate per 10,000                           b/se        b/se    b/se        b/se      b/se b/se        b/se  b/se      b/se
     Post X predicted change in low-skill Mex          0.494    0.565  -0.071 0.260 0.177 0.084 0.319                      0.165   0.154
                                                       0.291* 0.192*** 0.252 0.264 0.197 0.097 0.264                       0.196   0.103
     Post X log dist border                                                                     0.003                      -0.001  0.004
                                                                                                0.002                      0.002 0.001***
     N                                                  4941       4941        4941     4931     4931     4931     4931     4931       4931
     clusterSE                                          state      state       state    state    state    state    state    state      state
     stateYrFE                                           no         no          no       yes      yes      yes      yes      yes        yes
       Notes: An observation is a (time-consistent) Mexican municipality. Data: 2005/2006 (pre) and 2010-2012 (post) ENOE household data.
       Measure of wall shock is the network instrument. Migration rates computed from the ENOE following the Mexican Statistical Agency
86




       methodological guidelines (INEGI (2012)). The instrument is the predicted change in low-skill Mexicans (which is more positive for places
       that are more affected by the wall). We expect the instrument to be negatively correlated with out-migration. If migrants do not want to
       return to locations that are more affected by the wall, then inflows would be negatively correlated with the instrument. The net effect on
       migration could therefore be either negative or positive.
                           Appendix Table 18: Estimation of production function elasticities: First stage

                                                              Mex./U.S.: Low skill          Mex./U.S.: High skill           High/low skill
                                                                     (1)                            (2)                          (3)
                    Simple average wall exposure
                    Simple average wall exposure                      32.833*                         15.078                   -17.975**
                                                                      (18.042)                       (15.397)                    (7.470)
                    ...X Mexico                                       -141.009                       -224.299                   -112.954
                                                                     (205.093)                      (273.744)                  (184.595)
                    F-statistic                                         1.796                          0.773                      3.147
                    Network wall exposure
                    Network wall exposure                             14.960**                        7.712*                   -8.649***
                                                                       (5.742)                        (4.226)                    (2.142)
                    ...X Mexico                                      -29.151***                     -28.969***                    -7.078
                                                                      (10.051)                        (9.859)                   (12.107)
87




                    F-statistic                                         4.873                          4.512                       9.019
                    GE network wall exposure
                    GE network wall exposure                        19.035**                          9.713                  -10.636***
                                                                      (8.314)                        (6.546)                    (3.228)
                    ...X Mexico                                    -39.665***                     -39.204***                     -0.492
                                                                     (12.854)                       (11.366)                   (11.097)
                    F-statistic                                        4.835                          6.138                       5.979
                    Controls                                           None                           None                        None
                    Fixed Effects                                      State                          State                       State
                    Standard Errors                               State clusters                 State clusters             State clusters
                    Weighting                                       Pre-pop.                       Pre-pop.                   Pre-pop.
                    Sample                                        U.S. and Mex.                  U.S. and Mex.              U.S. and Mex.
                    Observations                                       3392                           3392                        3392
     Notes: Ordinary least squares. Each observation is a (log) difference in a U.S. or Mexico location pre- and post- the SFA. Pre- and post- data come
     from the 2000 and 2010 censuses in Mexico, respectively; pre- data in the U.S. comes from the 2000 census and post-data come from an average of the
     2010-2012 ACS. The dependent variable is the change in the relative population shares. The independent variable (the instrument) is either a simple
     average fence exposure which is the unweighted average fence exposure across all origins; a network wall exposure which is a weighted average fence
     exposure across all origins, where the weights are the pre-period migration flows; or a GE network wall exposure which in addition to weighting flows by
     pre-period mirgation flows also accounts for substitution in migration across different destinations by correcting for each orgin’s market access; see the
     text for details. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
                                 Appendix Table 19: Estimation of migration elasticities: First stage

                                                   (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)                   (5)
                                               Mex Low Skill         Mex High Skill         U.S. Low Skill        U.S. High Skill            Pooled
      Simple average wall exposure
      Simple average wall exposure                -22.749***               -12.115               -3.506                0.011                  -4.809
                                                    (5.502)               (12.491)              (4.088)               (5.736)                (4.816)
      ...X Mexico                                    2.611                 -46.856              179.619              287.455**               -16.814
                                                   (79.836)               (92.073)             (143.112)             (137.155)              (77.542)
      F-statistic                                    8.581                  0.679                 1.126                2.200                   0.538
      Network wall exposure
      Network wall exposure                        -7.605***               -2.844                 -1.739                0.363               -1.816**
                                                    (1.158)               (2.745)                (1.408)               (0.932)               (0.694)
      ...X Mexico                                    4.277                 -0.194                  0.773                2.458                 -1.440
                                                    (2.831)               (5.421)               (10.237)               (4.690)               (2.857)
88




      F-statistic                                    22.413                 0.748                  0.767                0.265                  4.112
      GE network wall exposure
      GE network wall exposure                   -9.019***                -3.215                 -1.144               1.058                 -1.378
                                                   (1.285)               (3.090)                (1.825)              (0.946)               (0.943)
      ...X Mexico                                   5.331                  1.731                  1.634               0.459                 -1.967
                                                   (3.536)               (7.142)               (12.082)              (5.527)               (3.741)
      F-statistic                                  25.258                  0.568                  0.197               0.664                 1.496
      Controls                                      None                   None                   None                None                   None
      Fixed Effects                                 State                  State                  State               State              State*Type
      Standard Errors                          State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters        State clusters
      Weighting                                   Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.
      Sample                                   U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.
      Observations                                  3392                   3392                   3392                 3392                 13568
     Notes: Ordinary least squares. Each observation is a (log) difference in a U.S. or Mexico location pre- and post- the SFA. Pre- and post- data come
     from the 2000 and 2010 censuses in Mexico, respectively; pre- data in the U.S. comes from the 2000 census and post-data come from an average of the
     2010-2012 ACS. The dependent variable is the (log) change in the real wage, where the nominal wages are observed and the price indices are calculated
     from the trade destination fixed effect and the estimated trade elasticity. The independent variable (the instrument) is either a simple average fence
     exposure which is the unweighted average fence exposure across all origins; a network wall exposure which is a weighted average fence exposure across
     all origins, where the weights are the pre-period migration flows; or a GE network wall exposure which in addition to weighting flows by pre-period
     mirgation flows also accounts for substitution in migration across different destinations by correcting for each orgin’s market access; see the text for
     details. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
                                                                              Appendix Table 20: Robustness of estimated structural parameters: Simple instrument

                                                            (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)                   (5)                    (6)                   (7)                   (8)                   (9)                  (10)
     EoS between Mex. and                               3.693***               3.490***              3.103***                3.875               3.715***               3.780***                4.635               3.204***              3.930***              3.308***
     U.S. low skill (ρl )                                (0.827)                (1.211)               (1.017)               (4.523)               (0.913)                (1.055)              (10.039)               (0.625)                (0.845)              (0.617)
     EoS between Mex. and                                 23.897                 -5.462                -6.741                -2.855                8.331                197.073                 -1.511              2.277***                 7.672              2.470***
     U.S. high skill (ρh )                              (244.508)              (21.459)              (33.847)               (5.407)              (23.040)              (1.9e+04)               (2.386)               (0.382)               (13.780)              (0.579)
     EoS between high and                               1.695***               1.185***               1.580*               1.568***              1.701***               1.583***              0.958**               1.540***              1.990***              1.557***
     low skill (ρ)                                       (0.415)                (0.299)               (0.806)               (0.340)               (0.380)                (0.272)               (0.397)               (0.323)                (0.677)              (0.348)
     EoS between goods                                  1.377***               0.965***              1.191***              1.356***              1.264***               1.574***              1.010***              2.228***                 1.776              2.117***
     produced in different locations (σ)                 (0.387)                (0.108)               (0.377)               (0.353)               (0.293)                (0.461)               (0.047)               (0.701)                (2.576)              (0.526)
     Mex. Low skill                                      -1.007*                  0.149              -0.675**              -0.450**               -0.822*               -0.907**                -0.007                -1.409                 -1.698               -1.304
     migration elasticity (θlM )                         (0.593)                (0.184)               (0.326)               (0.178)               (0.444)                (0.444)               (0.011)               (0.920)                (1.678)              (0.831)
     Mex. High skill                                       0.991                 -0.277                 0.655                 0.794                 0.760                  1.376               0.053*                  1.344                  1.737                1.020
     migration elasticity (θhM )                         (1.158)                (0.190)               (0.667)               (0.699)               (0.887)                (1.601)               (0.031)               (2.527)                (4.555)              (2.804)
     U.S. Low skill                                       0.171                   0.014                 0.014                 1.189                -0.023                 0.474                 -0.146                -1.520                 -4.644               -1.059
     migration elasticity (θlU )                         (0.971)                (0.098)               (0.694)               (1.750)               (0.507)                (1.273)               (0.337)               (7.006)               (14.061)              (3.955)
     U.S. High skill                                       0.147               -0.181**                 1.247                 0.205                 2.213                 -1.971                 0.012                -2.522              -1.881***               -2.654
     migration elasticity (θhU )                         (0.935)                (0.086)               (1.300)               (0.951)               (2.884)                (2.474)               (0.043)               (2.313)                (0.489)              (2.630)
     Pooled migration                                      0.036                 -0.030                -0.153                -0.533                 0.032                 0.212                 -0.011                 0.792                 -0.922                0.886
89




     elasticity (θ̄)                                     (0.596)                (0.031)               (0.402)               (0.423)               (0.377)                (1.010)               (0.024)               (4.911)                (1.403)              (4.804)
     Controls:
     1990-2000 pop. growth (by type)                        No                    Yes                   No                    No                    No                     No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     2000-2005 pop. growth (by type)                        No                    No                    Yes                   No                    No                     No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     Distance to border (log)                               No                    No                    No                    Yes                   No                     No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     2000 U.S. Ag. employ. share                            No                    No                    No                    No                    Yes                    No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     Housing shock                                          No                    No                    No                    No                    No                     Yes                   Yes                    No                    No                    No
     IV construction:
     IV interacted with..                              Country                Country               Country               Country                Country               Country               Country                 None                 Country                None
     Wall location used..                             Predicted              Predicted             Predicted             Predicted              Predicted             Predicted             Predicted              Predicted              Actual               Predicted
     Sample                                         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. only
     Fixed Effects                                      State                  State                 State                 State                  State                 State                 State                  State                 State                 State
     Weighting                                        Pre-pop.               Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.               Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.               Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.
     Standard errors                                State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters
       Notes:   This table shows the estimated structural parameters for under a variety of alternative specifications. Every row is a result from a different regression; in each regression, each observation is a (log) difference in a U.S. or Mexico location pre- and post-
       the SFA. Pre- and post- data come from the 2000 and 2010 censuses in Mexico, respectively; pre- data in the U.S. comes from the 2000 census and post-data come from an average of the 2010-2012 ACS. Column (1) summarize the preferred results presented in
       Tables 3, 4, and 5. Columns (2) - (7) include additional control variables including the 1990-2000 population growth rate of each of the four types of labor, the 2000-2005 population growth rate of each of the four types of labor, the (log) distance to the border,
       the year 2000 agricultural employment share of each U.S. location, and a measure of the housing shock from Mian and Sufi (2014). Column (8) requires the instrument to have the same impact in the U.S. and Mexico by removing the country interaction. Column
       (9) constructs the instrument using the actual location of the border wall expansion (instead of the predicted location due to geography along the border). Column (10) restricts the analysis to U.S. locations only. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
       Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
                                                                          Appendix Table 21: Robustness of estimated structural parameters: Network instrument

                                                            (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)                   (5)                    (6)                   (7)                   (8)                   (9)                  (10)
     EoS between Mex. and                               4.490***               3.947***              3.705**                  4.265              4.215***                4.648**                 2.871               3.465**               4.921***             3.973***
     U.S. low skill (ρl )                                (1.513)                (1.476)               (1.615)                (5.347)              (1.006)                (1.818)               (2.421)               (1.353)                (0.847)               (0.666)
     EoS between Mex. and                                 8.784                 -11.011               35.047                 -27.910               5.043                  9.645                 -4.489                1.613                   4.366                2.612*
     U.S. high skill (ρh )                              (11.861)               (16.177)             (222.906)              (109.576)              (4.007)               (15.071)               (3.791)               (1.379)                (2.777)               (1.346)
     EoS between high and                               1.930***               1.576***              1.831**                2.028**              1.945***               1.840***                1.449*              1.443***               1.711***             1.669***
     low skill (ρ)                                       (0.528)                (0.566)               (0.897)                (0.917)              (0.496)                (0.466)               (0.833)               (0.118)                (0.264)               (0.267)
     EoS between goods                                  2.975***               1.088***             2.143***               3.157***              2.705***               3.023***               1.023**                3.943                2.146***             2.503***
     produced in different locations (σ)                 (0.420)                (0.334)               (0.483)                (0.396)              (0.569)                (0.150)               (0.430)               (5.073)                (0.602)               (0.305)
     Mex. Low skill                                     -1.114**                 -0.346              -1.061**               -0.805**             -1.363**               -1.020**                -0.036               -1.124*                 -0.166              -1.124**
     migration elasticity (θlM )                         (0.518)                (0.373)               (0.513)                (0.333)              (0.690)                (0.469)               (0.029)               (0.617)                (0.275)               (0.547)
     Mex. High skill                                      1.178                   0.908                 1.130                  1.162                0.828                  1.238                 0.162                 1.203                  2.138                 0.595
     migration elasticity (θhM )                         (1.786)                (1.189)               (1.754)                (1.638)              (1.142)                (1.868)               (0.102)               (1.803)                (1.647)               (0.988)
     U.S. Low skill                                       1.188                  0.178                 0.898                  -0.953                1.229                 1.504                  0.022                 1.191                  2.075                 1.211
     migration elasticity (θlU )                         (1.827)                (0.261)               (1.935)                (0.828)              (1.270)                (2.450)               (0.217)               (1.961)                (2.103)               (1.757)
     U.S. High skill                                     -11.684                0.637**                -8.304                  4.663               -4.671                -10.400                 0.176               -11.503                 -9.732               -32.135
     migration elasticity (θhU )                        (22.411)                (0.273)              (26.778)               (16.029)              (8.861)               (16.088)               (0.178)              (18.910)                (7.553)             (155.095)
     Pooled migration                                     -0.397                  0.071                -0.565                 -0.397               -0.369                 -0.404                -0.015                -0.169                  0.540                 1.136
90




     elasticity (θ̄)                                     (0.511)                (0.144)               (0.495)                (0.384)              (0.716)                (0.528)               (0.053)               (0.569)                (0.592)               (0.780)
     Controls:
     1990-2000 pop. growth (by type)                        No                    Yes                   No                    No                    No                     No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     2000-2005 pop. growth (by type)                        No                    No                    Yes                   No                    No                     No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     Distance to border (log)                               No                    No                    No                    Yes                   No                     No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     2000 U.S. Ag. employ. share                            No                    No                    No                    No                    Yes                    No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     Housing shock                                          No                    No                    No                    No                    No                     Yes                   Yes                    No                    No                    No
     IV construction:
     IV interacted with..                              Country                Country               Country               Country                Country               Country               Country                 None                 Country                None
     Wall location used..                             Predicted              Predicted             Predicted             Predicted              Predicted             Predicted             Predicted              Predicted              Actual               Predicted
     Sample                                         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. only
     Fixed Effects                                      State                  State                 State                 State                  State                 State                 State                  State                 State                 State
     Weighting                                        Pre-pop.               Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.               Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.               Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.
     Standard errors                                State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters
       Notes:   This table shows the estimated structural parameters for under a variety of alternative specifications. Every row is a result from a different regression; in each regression, each observation is a (log) difference in a U.S. or Mexico location pre- and post-
       the SFA. Pre- and post- data come from the 2000 and 2010 censuses in Mexico, respectively; pre- data in the U.S. comes from the 2000 census and post-data come from an average of the 2010-2012 ACS. Column (1) summarize the preferred results presented in
       Tables 3, 4, and 5. Columns (2) - (7) include additional control variables including the 1990-2000 population growth rate of each of the four types of labor, the 2000-2005 population growth rate of each of the four types of labor, the (log) distance to the border,
       the year 2000 agricultural employment share of each U.S. location, and a measure of the housing shock from Mian and Sufi (2014). Column (8) requires the instrument to have the same impact in the U.S. and Mexico by removing the country interaction. Column
       (9) constructs the instrument using the actual location of the border wall expansion (instead of the predicted location due to geography along the border). Column (10) restricts the analysis to U.S. locations only. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
       Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
                                                                        Appendix Table 22: Robustness of estimated structural parameters: GE network instrument

                                                            (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)                   (5)                    (6)                   (7)                   (8)                   (9)                  (10)
     EoS between Mex. and                               4.533***               4.182**               3.912**                   5.139             4.179***                4.749**                3.757               3.102***               4.486***             3.734***
     U.S. low skill (ρl )                                (1.521)                (1.769)               (1.771)                (7.209)              (1.062)                (1.927)               (4.595)               (1.079)                (0.389)              (0.604)
     EoS between Mex. and                                 8.581                 -33.238               18.647                 -42.459                5.217                  9.337                -8.347                 1.602                3.788**              2.645**
     U.S. high skill (ρh )                              (10.852)              (129.167)              (58.037)              (229.052)              (4.060)               (13.607)              (11.208)               (1.442)                (1.905)              (1.166)
     EoS between high and                               2.036***              1.490***               1.787**                2.132**              2.092***               1.902***              1.197**               1.487***               1.818***             1.723***
     low skill (ρ)                                       (0.624)                (0.474)               (0.908)                (1.002)              (0.602)                (0.496)               (0.545)               (0.171)                (0.371)              (0.340)
     EoS between goods                                  3.141***              0.976***               1.795***              3.139***              2.706***               3.168***              0.971***               11.407                1.827***             2.494***
     produced in different locations (σ)                 (0.756)                (0.242)               (0.371)                (0.682)              (0.830)                (0.279)               (0.146)              (97.382)                (0.445)              (0.535)
     Mex. Low skill                                      -1.543*                  0.156               -1.340*               -1.030**              -1.718*                -1.420*                0.081                 -1.723                -0.887*              -1.354*
     migration elasticity (θlM )                         (0.856)                (0.263)               (0.785)                (0.425)              (0.955)                (0.774)               (0.065)               (1.160)                (0.509)              (0.808)
     Mex. High skill                                       1.273                 -0.400                 1.019                  0.763                0.773                  1.532                -0.238                 1.831                  0.644                0.466
     migration elasticity (θhM )                         (3.277)                (0.547)               (2.397)                (1.157)              (1.898)                (3.871)               (0.158)               (6.709)                (0.519)              (1.294)
     U.S. Low skill                                       1.724                  -0.046                1.071                  -3.660               1.465                  2.647                 0.481                  1.631                 1.433                 1.368
     migration elasticity (θlU )                         (4.459)                (0.092)               (3.030)               (11.266)              (2.061)                (7.914)               (0.702)               (5.831)                (2.006)              (3.439)
     U.S. High skill                                      -6.090               -0.182**                -9.536                  5.641               -8.038                 -5.661                -0.353                -4.571               -5.741**               -7.798
     migration elasticity (θhU )                         (5.102)                (0.076)              (25.294)               (47.143)             (10.902)                (4.355)               (1.129)               (2.838)                (2.575)              (8.293)
     Pooled migration                                     -1.130                 -0.001                -1.048                 -0.950               -1.245                 -1.174                 0.082                -0.824                 -0.244                1.134
91




     elasticity (θ̄)                                     (1.101)                (0.047)               (0.987)                (0.718)              (1.411)                (1.182)               (0.088)               (0.928)                (0.355)              (1.374)
     Controls:
     1990-2000 pop. growth (by type)                        No                    Yes                   No                    No                    No                     No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     2000-2005 pop. growth (by type)                        No                    No                    Yes                   No                    No                     No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     Distance to border (log)                               No                    No                    No                    Yes                   No                     No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     2000 U.S. Ag. employ. share                            No                    No                    No                    No                    Yes                    No                    Yes                    No                    No                    No
     Housing shock                                          No                    No                    No                    No                    No                     Yes                   Yes                    No                    No                    No
     IV construction:
     IV interacted with..                              Country                Country               Country               Country                Country               Country               Country                 None                 Country                None
     Wall location used..                             Predicted              Predicted             Predicted             Predicted              Predicted             Predicted             Predicted              Predicted              Actual               Predicted
     Sample                                         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. and Mex.         U.S. and Mex.          U.S. only
     Fixed Effects                                      State                  State                 State                 State                  State                 State                 State                  State                 State                 State
     Weighting                                        Pre-pop.               Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.               Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.               Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.              Pre-pop.
     Standard errors                                State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters         State clusters        State clusters        State clusters
       Notes:   This table shows the estimated structural parameters for under a variety of alternative specifications. Every row is a result from a different regression; in each regression, each observation is a (log) difference in a U.S. or Mexico location pre- and post-
       the SFA. Pre- and post- data come from the 2000 and 2010 censuses in Mexico, respectively; pre- data in the U.S. comes from the 2000 census and post-data come from an average of the 2010-2012 ACS. Column (1) summarize the preferred results presented in
       Tables 3, 4, and 5. Columns (2) - (7) include additional control variables including the 1990-2000 population growth rate of each of the four types of labor, the 2000-2005 population growth rate of each of the four types of labor, the (log) distance to the border,
       the year 2000 agricultural employment share of each U.S. location, and a measure of the housing shock from Mian and Sufi (2014). Column (8) requires the instrument to have the same impact in the U.S. and Mexico by removing the country interaction. Column
       (9) constructs the instrument using the actual location of the border wall expansion (instead of the predicted location due to geography along the border). Column (10) restricts the analysis to U.S. locations only. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
       Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
                                                        Appendix Table 23: Counterfactual Results: Robustness

                                                    Baseline             Labor group elasticity                  Trade elasticity              Migration elasticity
                                                                Low (ρh = ρl = 1.1) High (ρh = ρl = 30)    Low (σ = 2) High (σ = 11)       Low (θ = 0.1) High (θ = 8)
                                                                               Secure Fence Act
     Change in Mex. to U.S. migration (persons)     -49956      -27350                -68173               -48861         -51931           -917             -30720
     Change in welfare (per capita 2012 USD):
     Mex. Low Skill                                 -0.81       -0.51                -1.31                 -0.71          -1.04            -8.04            -0.03
     Mex. High Skill                                -1.82       0.23                 -3.57                 -2.08          -1.21            -15.69           -0.42
     U.S. Low Skill                                 0.28        -1.75                2.32                  0.29           0.20             0.02             0.20
     U.S. High Skill                                -2.73       -2.05                -3.25                 -2.78          -2.56            0.00             -1.67


                                                               Additional Border Wall Expansion: 25% expansion
     Change in Mex. to U.S. migration (persons)     -74937      -40960                -102307             -73323          -77846           -1491            -46103
     Change in welfare (per capita 2012 USD):
     Mex. Low Skill                                 -1.22       -0.77                -1.98                 -1.07          -1.57            -12.89           -0.05
     Mex. High Skill                                -2.70       0.35                 -5.31                 -3.10          -1.77            -25.29           -0.62
     U.S. Low Skill                                 0.43        -2.64                3.50                  0.45           0.31             0.04             0.31
     U.S. High Skill                                -4.11       -3.09                -4.90                 -4.19          -3.86            0.00             -2.51


                                                               Additional Border Wall Expansion: 50% expansion
     Change in Mex. to U.S. migration (persons)     -87392      -47069                -119961             -85571          -90708           -2361            -53537
     Change in welfare (per capita 2012 USD:)
92




     Mex. Low Skill                                 -1.43       -0.88                -2.35                 -1.27          -1.83            -20.37           -0.07
     Mex. High Skill                                -3.06       0.41                 -6.04                 -3.52          -2.00            -40.01           -0.68
     U.S. Low Skill                                 0.47        -3.24                4.15                  0.49           0.32             0.05             0.31
     U.S. High Skill                                -4.78       -3.53                -5.75                 -4.87          -4.50            0.06             -2.90


                                                               Reducing International Trade Costs: 25% reduction
     Change in Mex. to U.S. migration (persons)     -107030      -20339                -176650             -245209        -20651           -11315           -144122
     Change in welfare (per capita 2012 USD):
     Mex. Low Skill                                 100.12      101.63               97.82                 215.23         21.44            13.19            103.97
     Mex. High Skill                                244.95      253.46               237.93                529.57         51.61            27.38            250.45
     U.S. Low Skill                                 57.63       48.27                66.72                 124.09         12.36            27.14            57.98
     U.S. High Skill                                78.27       81.31                75.86                 172.21         16.11            42.29            75.20


                                                               Reducing International Trade Costs: 50% reduction
     Change in Mex. to U.S. migration (persons)     -409761      -114062               -644476             -896651        -86313           -39055           -560532
     Change in welfare (per capita 2012 USD):
     Mex. Low Skill                                 340.01      345.59               331.93                732.00         73.02            44.43            354.86
     Mex. High Skill                                822.09      851.74               797.23                1786.46        173.09           91.77            845.54
     U.S. Low Skill                                 195.11      162.00               226.53                427.03         40.92            90.22            200.69
     U.S. High Skill                                261.37      271.26               253.62                587.23         52.14            141.92           256.68


       Notes: This table shows how the estimated impacts of the existing border wall expansion and counterfactual international trade cost reductions differ across a
       variety of alternative assumptions regardling the structural parameters. The Secure Fence Act counterfactual calculates the equilibrium effect of the estimated
       increase in migration costs for Mexican born workers due to the construction of additional segments of border wall. The reducing trade costs counterfactual reduces
       the additional estimated distance elasticity for international trade over and above the distance elasticity of domestic trade flows by a given percentage. Absolute
       changes in real GDP calculated by scaling the model estimated baseline GDP by current real GDP figures for U.S. and Mexico, respectively.
                       Appendix Figure 1: Example of border walls
              (a) Pedestrian Fence                          (b) Vehicular Fence




Notes:       Source:       (a)     https://www.memphisflyer.com/memphis/against-the-
wall/Content?oid=4602862; (b) http://mexicowall.net/gallery/




                                          93
                      Appendix Figure 2: Wall expansion by year




Notes: Source: Data shared by Guerrero and Castañeda (2017).




                                          94
                Appendix Figure 3: Matrı́cula database: Migration to CA
                                    (a) Destination: California




            (b) Destination: Bay Area                       (c) Destination: Los Angeles




Notes: Source: 2006 Matrı́cula Consular database.




                                                95
               Appendix Figure 4: Matrı́cula database: migration to Texas
                                       (a) Destination: Texas




            (b) Destination: Houston                            (c) Destination: Dallas




Notes: Source: 2006 Matrı́cula Consular database.




                                                96
                   Appendix Figure 5: Matrı́cula gravity: Event study
       (a) Log(1+x): OLS               (b) Log(1+x): RF                (c) Log(1+x): IV




Notes: Data: 2005, 2006, 2010, 2012-2015 Matrı́cula database. Figure plots the coefficient,
by year, on log change travel time from a gravity regression. Regression weighted by flows.
Standard errors clustered at the pair-spatial cluster, as defined in the text.




                                            97
Appendix Figure 6: Predicted change in low-educated Mexican-born: different instruments
               (a) Simple instrument                           (b) Network instrument




                                       (c) GE network instrument




Notes: Figure shows the predicted change in low-skill Mexican born for each of the three instru-
ments. Instruments defined in text.




                                                  98
Appendix Figure 7: Event studies (Simple in-
strument)
                                     Panel (i): United States

    (a) No controls, unweighted        (b) Controls, unweighted           (c) Controls, weighted




                                         Panel (ii): Mexico

    (d) No controls, unweighted        (e) Controls, unweighted           (f) Controls, weighted




Notes: Figure shows the predicted change in low-skill Mexican born for one of the three instruments.
Panel (i) considers the effect on destinations in the United States. Panel (ii) considers the effect on
origins in Mexico. Instruments defined in text.




                                                  99
Appendix Figure 8: Event studies (Network
instrument)
                                     Panel (i): United States

    (a) No controls, unweighted        (b) Controls, unweighted           (c) Controls, weighted




                                         Panel (ii): Mexico

    (d) No controls, unweighted        (e) Controls, unweighted           (f) Controls, weighted




Notes: Figure shows the predicted change in low-skill Mexican born for one of the three instruments.
Panel (i) considers the effect on destinations in the United States. Panel (ii) considers the effect on
origins in Mexico. Instruments defined in text.




                                                 100
Appendix Figure 9: Event studies (GE Net-
work instrument)
                                     Panel (i): United States

    (a) No controls, unweighted        (b) Controls, unweighted           (c) Controls, weighted




                                         Panel (ii): Mexico

    (d) No controls, unweighted        (e) Controls, unweighted           (f) Controls, weighted




Notes: Figure shows the predicted change in low-skill Mexican born for one of the three instruments.
Panel (i) considers the effect on destinations in the United States. Panel (ii) considers the effect on
origins in Mexico. Instruments defined in text.




                                                 101
                      Appendix Figure 10: Border Patrol Sectors




Notes:Source:United States Government Accountability Office (2017a)




                                         102
Appendix Figure 11: Apprehensions of Mexican and non-Mexican nationals by border sector
               (a) Mexican nationals                          (b) Non-Mexican nationals




Notes: Figure shows apprehensions of Mexican and non-Mexican nationals on the United States-
Mexico border between 2000 and 2015 fiscal year for each of the nine border sectors. The three
Texan border sectors with little wall are bolded. Data source: United States Customs and
Border Patrol. Downloaded: 1/14/2018.https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/assets/
documents/2017-Dec/BP%20Total%20Apps%2C%20Mexico%2C%20OTM%20FY2000-FY2017.pdf




                                             103
                     Appendix Figure 12: Migration rates from ENOE
           (a) Outflow                   (b) Inflow                   (c) Netflow




Notes: Data source: ENOE survey. Wall exposure is measured by the network instrument. Mi-
gration rates computed from the ENOE following the Mexican Statistical Agency methodological
guidelines (INEGI (2012)).




                                            104
                    Appendix Figure 13: Counterfactual wall expansion




Notes: Figure shows the expansion of the wall. We fill in the wall based on our geographical
prediction of where the wall was built, filling in the next 25% and 50% of the remaining pixels.




                                              105
