NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LONG-TERM AND INTERGENERATIONAL EFFECTS OF EDUCATION:
EVIDENCE FROM SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION IN INDONESIA
Richard Akresh
Daniel Halim
Marieke Kleemans
Working Paper 25265
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25265

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We thank Manuela Angelucci, Catia Batista, Sylvie Lambert, Nicholas Li, Leigh Linden, Karen
Macours, Edward Miguel, Adam Osman, Dean Spears, Rebecca Thornton, Pedro Vicente, and
seminar participants at the University of Texas at Austin, Paris School of Economics,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, NEUDC at Cornell University, and University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign for many helpful discussions and suggestions. All errors remain our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Richard Akresh, Daniel Halim, and Marieke Kleemans. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Long-term and Intergenerational Effects of Education: Evidence from School Construction
in Indonesia
Richard Akresh, Daniel Halim, and Marieke Kleemans
NBER Working Paper No. 25265
November 2018
JEL No. I2,J13,J62,O15,O22
ABSTRACT
In 1973, the Indonesian government began one of the largest school construction programs ever.
We use 2016 nationally representative data to examine the long-term and intergenerational effects
of additional schooling as a child. We use a difference-in-differences identification strategy
exploiting variation across birth cohorts and regions in the number of schools built. Men and
women exposed to the program attain more education, although women’s effects are concentrated
in primary school. As adults, men exposed to the program are more likely to be formal workers,
work outside agriculture, and migrate. Households with parents exposed to the program have
improved living standards and pay more government taxes. Education benefits are transmitted to
the next generation. Increased parental education has larger impacts for daughters, particularly if
mothers are exposed to school construction. Intergenerational results are driven by changes in the
marriage partner’s characteristics, with spouses having more education and improved labor
market outcomes.

Richard Akresh
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1407 West Gregory Drive
214 David Kinley Hall
Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER
akresh@illinois.edu
Daniel Halim
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 1407
West Gregory Drive
214 David Kinley Hall
Urbana, IL 61801
dzhalim2@illinois.edu

Marieke Kleemans
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1407 West Gregory Drive
214 David Kinley Hall
Urbana, IL 61801
kleemans@illinois.edu

1. Introduction
The questions of which adult outcomes are affected by increases in educational attainment and
whether these effects persists into the next generation are of great policy importance and broad
research interest. Governments in developing countries spend approximately one trillion dollars
annually on education, and households are estimated to spend hundreds of billions more on the
education of their children (Glewwe and Muralidharan, 2016). While much of the government
spending is motivated by the belief that increases in education will translate to higher economic
development and growth, the causal effect of schooling on economic growth is not uncontested.1
An extensive literature in macroeconomics and growth has pointed to a high correlation between
cross-country differences in per capita income and in education, but some have argued that these
may reflect reverse causality of increased educational attainment in anticipation of high rates of
economic growth (Bils and Klenow, 2000).2
Microeconomic analyses of the returns to schooling date back to Gorseline (1932) and
Walsh (1935) and have long recognized that without (quasi) exogenous variation in educational
attainment, the causal impact of education is hard to estimate because the choice of how much
education to obtain is correlated with a large number of individual, household, and community
characteristics. In recent years, major strides forward have been made using randomized
experiments, but reviewing 111 primary school interventions in developing countries, McEwan
(2015) finds that only 10 percent had any evaluation taking place more than one month after the

1

In the early nineties, theories endogenizing technology (such as Romer, 1990 and Grossman and Helpman, 1991)
were motivated by the belief that cross-country differences in human capital could not quantitatively explain the
differences in levels and growth rates of per capita output (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 1997, 2005). Several later
empirical papers challenge that belief showing that a Solow model augmented to include human capital can explain
the lion’s share of cross-country variance in output per capita (Mankiw, Romer, and Weil, 1992; Young, 1994,
1995; Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1995).
2
Foster and Rosenzweig (1996) also find evidence of this direction of causality by documenting that Indian
provinces that benefited from the Green Revolution saw increases in returns to, and enrollment in, schooling.

1

intervention had ended.3 While the focus on measuring early life outcomes is understandable
given that primary education provides the foundation for subsequent educational attainment, the
ultimate goal is improvements in later life outcomes and overall economic development.
In this paper, we study the causal impact of one of the largest primary school construction
programs ever completed on a wide range of long-term and intergenerational outcomes,
including those related to education, employment, migration, living standards, taxes, marriage,
health, housing and assets. Between 1973 and 1979, the Indonesian government constructed over
61,000 primary schools, averaging two schools per 1,000 children of primary school age. We use
2016 nationally representative Indonesian data to examine the long-term and intergenerational
effects of additional schooling as a child. Following the seminal work by Duflo (2001) who
studies the effects of this school construction program on men’s education and earnings in 1995,
we employ a difference-in-differences strategy, exploiting variation across geographic regions in
the number of schools built and across birth cohorts in their exposure to the schools.
The paper makes the following contributions. First, we estimate the causal impact of the
school construction program on an extensive range of outcomes, many of which researchers have
not previously studied. Second, we do so at a time that those exposed to the program are in their
forties and fifties, giving us a unique look at the persistence of the effects over time. This type of
long-term analysis is important for policy evaluation, but is uncommon and existing evidence on
the persistence of education interventions is mixed.4 Third, the long time horizon and detailed

3

Notable exceptions include Baird, Hamory Hicks, Kremer, and Miguel (2016) who show positive labor market
impacts 10 years after a deworming intervention in Kenya, and Gertler et al. (2014) showing higher earnings 20
years after an early child stimulation program in Jamaica. Evidence from the U.S. indicates preschool and
kindergarten programs lead to improved adult outcomes (Garces, Thomas, and Currie, 2002; Heckman et al., 2010;
Chetty et al., 2011) as do health interventions (Bhalotra and Venkataramani, 2018).
4
For example, Evans and Ngatia (2018) find that positive outcomes from a free school uniform program fade out
over time and are no longer observable eight years after the intervention. Andrabi et al (2011) using data from
Pakistan find that only one-fifth to one-half of student learning persists between grades. Jacob, Lefgren, and Sims
(2010) find low persistence of teacher learning in the U.S. with three-quarters or more fading out within one year.

2

household-level data allow us to observe intergenerational effects on children whose parents are
exposed to the program and study impacts on the children’s educational attainment and wellbeing.5 Fourth, we extend the focus on working-age men in Duflo (2001) to also study the impact
of school construction on women. This allows us to study gender differences for both the first
and second generation outcomes and explore marriage market outcomes, which appear to play a
crucial role in the intergenerational transmission of human capital. Finally, while most of the
education research evaluates demand-side interventions, we study the impacts of a supply-side
educational intervention, with large up-front costs and benefits dispersed over time. We perform
a detailed cost-benefit analysis to calculate the internal rate of return, and using tax data, we
evaluate whether school construction pays for itself with higher future government tax revenues.
Figure 1 provides an overview of our findings. Due to the data’s richness and the large
number of outcomes, we want to be careful to not overemphasize any single significant result
and so we take two approaches. First, following Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007), we create an
index for each family of outcomes where we aggregate all individual outcomes in that family
together. As described further in Section 3, we then estimate standardized effects from exposure
to school construction on these outcome indexes (Banerjee et al., 2015). Second, since we
examine multiple outcomes, we correct for the potential issue of simultaneous inference using
multiple hypothesis testing. We calculate q-values using the Benjamini-Hochberg step-up
method to control for the false discovery rate (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

5

Black and Devereux (2011) review the large literature on the intergenerational transmission of human capital that
measures the persistence between parents’ and children’s educational attainment, while Currie (2011) and Almond
and Currie (2011) provide a review of the long-term effect on education of negative shocks while in utero or early
childhood. In addition to the focus on the estimation of correlations between parent and child educational outcomes,
recently there is an increased emphasis on estimating causal relationships. Researchers have used changes in school
compulsory laws (see Chevalier, 2004 for U.K; Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2005 for Norway; Oreopoulos,
Page, and Stevens, 2008 for U.S.), other educational policies (Currie and Moretti, 2003; Maurin and McNally,
2008), and environmental shocks (Black et al., forthcoming) to estimate these effects. There is however limited
evidence from developing countries.

3

The consistent pattern seen in Figure 1 is that exposure to school construction improves
most outcomes we are able to explore in the data.6 School construction, not surprisingly, leads to
improved educational outcomes. Duflo (2001) previously showed this for men, and we now
confirm it also improves women’s education.7 The education effects for women are concentrated
in primary school only, while men also see significant increases in lower and upper secondary
education. As adults, men who are exposed to the program are more likely to be employed, to
work in the formal sector, and to work in the non-agricultural sector, while the likelihood of
migration increases for both men and women. Households in which either parent is exposed to
the program have higher living standards, better housing, more assets, and pay more government
taxes. While nutrition and health investments increase, we do not observe any improvements in
health outcomes. School construction leads to improved marriage market outcomes with spouses
being more educated, more likely to be literate, and more likely to have migrated.
Parents transmit these effects to the next generation, who have more education, with
larger impacts in secondary and tertiary education. Parental exposure has larger impacts for
daughters, particularly if the mother is exposed to the school construction program. We perform
a mediation analysis indicating that the intergenerational transmission of human capital appears
to be driven by changes in parents’ marriage outcomes, especially whether the spouse completed
primary school, is literate, and works in the formal sector and outside of agriculture.
To quantify the policy implications, we conduct a cost-benefit analysis in which we
create an accounting model to calculate the discounted costs of school construction and

6

An increase of one additional school built per 1,000 children would increase these indexes for those exposed to the
school construction by 0.02 to 0.07 standard deviations relative to the control group.
7
In addition to Duflo (2001) focusing on Indonesia, studies evaluating school construction projects have been
carried out in Mozambique (Handa, 2002), Pakistan (Alderman, Kim, and Orazem, 2003), Afghanistan (Burde and
Linden, 2013) and Burkina Faso (Kazianga et al., 2013). These studies focus on improvements in enrollment rates,
as opposed to later-life outcomes, and all confirm large increases in school enrollment.

4

subsequent benefits for the government in terms of increased tax revenues and overall improved
living standards for the Indonesian population. Across a range of different parameter estimates,
we find that school construction leads to increased government tax revenues that directly offset
construction costs in most cases within 40 years. Furthermore, accounting for improved living
standards of the Indonesian population reveals high internal rates of return ranging from 13-21
percent and benefits surpassing costs within 17-30 years after the schools were built. These
results provide strong support for the cost-effectiveness of supply-side interventions.8
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional context
and school construction program in Indonesia. Section 3 describes the empirical identification
strategy and the data. Section 4 presents the results examining the effects of exposure to school
construction on a range of long-term outcomes and Section 5 discusses the intergenerational
effects. Section 6 shows results of a number of robustness checks. Section 7 presents the costbenefit analysis and Section 8 concludes.
2. Institutional Context
Indonesia is the fourth most populous country in the world and the seventh largest economy in
terms of total GDP at purchasing power parity. The country has experienced over 40 years of
high economic growth. Beginning from Soeharto’s rise to power in 1967, Indonesia’s Ministry
of National Development Planning (Bappenas) outlined their plans for national development and

8

Recent education research has typically focused on evaluating demand-side interventions that include either
information-based interventions (see Jensen, 2010 for the first study of this type that provided information to parents
about the returns to schooling), cash transfer programs (see Fiszbein et al. 2009 for an overview; Behrman, Parker,
Todd, 2011 for evidence on the medium-term impacts of the Mexican conditional cash transfer program Progresa;
Parker and Vogl, 2017 for evidence on Progresa’s long-term impacts; Baird et al., 2011, Akresh, de Walque, and
Kazianga, 2013, 2016; and Benhassine et al., 2015 for research that explores the role of conditionality in these cash
transfer programs), scholarship programs (see Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton, 2009 for one of the first studies to
examine the impact of merit-based scholarships), or other household level interventions (see Oster and Thornton,
2011 for evidence on providing female sanitary products to secondary school girls; and Muralidharan and Prakash,
2017 for evidence from providing bicycles to families).

5

the reduction of poverty in a series of Five-Year Development Plans (Repelita). One important
part of these plans included the establishment of the “presidential instructions” (INPRES)
program, which set up a system for distributing revenues from the central government to lower
administrative levels. Starting with the oil boom in 1973, the central government emphasized the
explicit goal of reducing regional disparities (Ravallion, 1988).
As part of this redistribution goal, the government began a nationwide school
construction program, the Sekolah Dasar INPRES, which was one of the first and largest
INPRES programs. Between 1973 and 1979, around 61,800 primary schools were constructed.
Enrollment rates in 1972 before the start of school construction were 71 percent among primary
school-age children. By 1978, enrollment rates among this age group reached 85 percent.9 Prior
to this program in 1973, capital expenditures in education were low and enrollment rates in the
few years before school construction began were stagnant (World Bank, 1989).
School construction nearly doubled the stock of primary schools from a baseline of
around 63,000 primary schools. On average, the program added over 200 schools per district or
two schools for every 1,000 children of primary school age. There was large heterogeneity across
districts in how many schools the government built as the government designed the school
construction program to target regions in which enrollment was initially lower.10 The
government designed each school for 120 students, and they recruited teachers and paid their
salaries for these newly constructed schools. During the same period, the government attempted
to train new teachers, and the percentage of teachers who met the minimum qualification of
having an upper secondary school degree did not change over this period (World Bank, 1989).

9

World Bank Databank. 2018. “Adjusted Net Enrollment Rate, Primary (% of Primary School Age Children)”
(Accessed on October 17, 2018: databank.worldbank.org)
10
Appendix Figure A.1 presents a map of Indonesia indicating the geographical distribution of the number of
schools constructed in each district.

6

3. Empirical Strategy and Data
3.1 Difference-in-differences
Following Duflo (2001), we estimate a difference-in-differences specification in which an
individual’s region of birth and date of birth jointly determine their exposure to the INPRES
school construction program. Children in Indonesia typically attend primary school between age
seven and twelve. INPRES school construction started during the 1973-1974 school year, so
children who were born in or before 1962 were at least 12 years of age in 1974 and would not
have benefited from the school construction.11 Children younger than seven in 1974 would have
been exposed to the full potential benefits of the newly constructed schools. Children who were
of primary school age in 1974 might partially benefit from the new INPRES schools as some of
them were induced to enroll, and their propensity to enroll likely decreased with the child’s age.
Besides variation across birth cohorts, there is considerable variation across geographical
regions in the intensity of the school construction program. This is because the number of
schools constructed was linked to the regions’ primary school enrollment rate in 1972 (prior to
the school construction), and areas with low prior enrollment rates had more schools built.
Exploiting these two sources of variation (birth cohort and geographical), we estimate the
effect of school construction in the following regression:
⋅
where

is the outcome of individual i born in district j in year t,

1
measures the number

of schools constructed by the INPRES program between 1973 and 1979 per 1,000 children in the
individual’s birth district j. We use an individual’s birth district instead of current residence

11

The 1993 Indonesian Family Life survey indicates that less than 3 percent of individuals born between 1950 and
1962 were still in primary school in 1974. As a further check, we use the 1976 Intercensal Survey and find that only
4.3 percent of individuals born between 1950 and 1962 were still in primary school in 1976.

7

because the latter may be endogenous to program placement if households move to access
schools for their children.12

is an indicator variable for being born between 1968-1972

(ages 2-6 in 1974) and thus being young enough to benefit from the program. Individuals born
between 1957 and 1962 (ages 12-17 in 1974) represent older cohorts who are not exposed to the
program. Following Duflo (2001), we exclude individuals born between 1963 and 1967 (ages 711 in 1974) as they might have only partially benefited from school construction. We perform
several robustness checks to confirm results are consistent across various definitions of exposed
and unexposed cohorts.13

are time-invariant district of birth fixed effects,

birth fixed effects, and

is intended to control for district-specific time-varying factors that

are cohort of

might influence outcomes. Following Duflo (2001), we do this by interacting birth cohort
indicators with district enrollment in 1971 and with the presence of water and sanitation
programs in the district.14 Note that we closely follow Duflo (2001) with the only exceptions
that, unlike Duflo, we cluster our standard errors, and we do so at the district level, and that our
data allows us to estimate the effects of school construction on both men and women. To allow
for gender heterogeneity, we estimate Equation (1) separately for men and women.15

12

In the African context, child fostering, where the biological parents send their own child to live with another
family, is quite common and often done to send the child to school (Akresh, 2004, 2009). In the Indonesian context,
child fostering is much less common (Marazyan, 2012).
13
One of the reasons for Duflo (2001) to restrict the young cohort to those born before 1972 is so that these cohorts
would have completed schooling and begun participating in the labor market by 1995, the survey year of the data
she uses. The 1972 cohorts turned 23 in 1995, which is old enough to have completed tertiary education. With our
2016 data, cohorts born after 1972 would have also been exposed to the school construction and had sufficient time
to complete school and join the labor market. In the robustness checks discussed in Section 6, we explore the
robustness of the results to alternative cohort definitions. In particular, we show that results are robust to adding in
younger cohorts (born 1973-1980), older cohorts (born 1950-1956), and partially exposed cohorts (born 1963-1967).
14
We use district enrollment in 1971 because program intensity was tied to 1972 district enrollment and not
controlling for pre-program enrollment might bias the results as there could be mean reversion even in the absence
of the program. In addition, the oil boom, which provided financial resources for school construction, could have
also provided resources for other government programs that were correlated with INPRES school placement. Water
and sanitation programs were the second largest set of INPRES programs delivered by the central government.
15
Given the program targeted less developed areas, we want to show that our effects are not explained by general
catching up (or mean reversion) from those areas, as this would violate the parallel trends assumption. To test this
identification assumption, we estimate placebo regressions in which we compare the old cohort (ages 12-17 in 1974)

8

We are able to explore both individual and household-level variables to examine impacts
of exposure to school construction. For data collected at the household level, such as
expenditures and assets, we use the birth cohort and region of birth of the household head or the
spouse and present results in separate panels for men and women.16 In Equation (1), j refers to
the district of birth of the man or woman, while t refers to their year of birth.17
The duration between school construction that started in 1973 and data collection in 2016
allows us to not only study the long-term effects of exposure to the program but also the effects
of school construction on the next generation’s outcomes. Specifically, we estimate the impact
on children’s schooling and other child outcomes based on whether their mother or father (or
both) is exposed to school construction. We estimate reduced-form relationships between second
generation outcomes and schools construction in the following regression:
⋅
where

2

denotes the outcome of child c who is age a, born to a parent i who was born in

district j in year t,

is the number of schools constructed in the father’s or mother’s birth

with an even older cohort (ages 18-24 in 1974). Results are discussed in Section 6 and show there are no differential
time trends in outcomes prior to the school construction. Further, in Appendix Figure A.2, we estimate a regression
where we interact the number of INPRES schools constructed in one’s birth district with an indicator for age in
1974. We omit the age group 19-24 in 1974 from the regression so that we are comparing each age against this older
cohort. For both men and women, we do not observe any differential trend effects for non-exposed ages.
16
Female household heads represent 13.8 percent of the sample and are included in the regressions for women.
Results are robust to estimating the regressions separately for household heads and spouses, irrespective of gender.
Note that in the household level regressions the analysis for men does not condition on the women’s exposure to
school construction. Likewise, for women, the analysis does not condition on the men’s exposure.
17
This assignment is arguably the most natural way to define exposure for household-level outcomes as it is
possible to have multiple individuals living in a household and these individuals could be in the old, young, and
intermediate birth cohorts. For example, a household with the household head born in 1962, his wife born in 1968,
his younger brother born in 1965, and his sister-in-law born in 1970 would yield potentially four individuals of
which one is in the old cohort (1957-1962), one in the intermediate cohort (1963-1967), and two in the young cohort
(1968-1972). Robustness checks in Section 6 show that this assignment decision does not influence results.

9

district,

indicates if the father or mother belongs to the young cohort, and

is child c’s

age fixed effect.18 Standard errors are clustered at the father’s or mother’s birth district.19
3.2 Strategies to address the large number of outcomes
We adopt two strategies to address the large number of outcomes that we examine to avoid
overemphasizing any single significant result. First, as mentioned in the introduction, we create
indexes for each family of outcomes following Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007). These indexes
combine all of the outcomes in each family of outcomes. To construct the indexes, we define
each outcome so that higher values correspond with better outcomes. Then we standardize each
outcome into a Z-score by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the
older cohort born in low intensity regions. We then average all of the Z-scores and standardize
the average relative to the older cohort born in the low intensity regions.20 We then estimate the
effect of exposure to the school construction program on these standardized outcome indexes.
Second, we correct for the potential issue of simultaneous inference using multiple
hypothesis testing. Following Benjamini and Hochberg (1995), we use the concept of a false
discovery rate (FDR) to allow inference when conducting many tests. Intuitively, FDR allows a
researcher to tolerate a certain number of tests to be incorrectly discovered. An FDR adjusted qvalue of 0.05 implies that 5 percent of significant tests result in false positives compared with an
unadjusted p-value of 0.05 that implies 5 percent of all tests result in false positives. In all

18

We include child age fixed effects because old cohort parents mechanically have older children on average than
young cohort parents and older children have more time to complete additional schooling. Therefore, the marginal
benefit to children’s years of schooling is estimated across different households but among children of the same age.
19
As is common in household surveys, Susenas 2016 identifies all household relationships with respect to the
household head. If a child is not the biological or adopted child of the household head and spouse, the child will be
recorded as ‘other household member’. Therefore, our intergenerational analysis is restricted to children of the
household head and spouse.
20
This is the approach used by Banerjee et al. (2015) in evaluating the effect of poverty graduation programs across
six different countries on a range of outcomes. Ajayi and Ross (2017) who are not evaluating a randomized control
trial modify this standardization approach to use with a difference-in-difference empirical identification strategy that
does not have a randomly assigned control group.

10

regression tables, we show standard errors based on unadjusted p-values and FDR adjusted qvalues that address the multiple hypotheses being tested in a given family of outcomes.
3.3 Data
To measure the impact of this school construction program, we use Duflo’s data of the Sekolah
Dasar INPRES program that reports the number of schools constructed in each district between
1973 and 1979.21 We combine the data on school construction with the National Socioeconomic
Survey conducted in 2016, henceforth Susenas 2016, which is administered by Indonesia’s
Central Statistics Bureau, Badan Pusat Statistik. Susenas 2016 is a nationally representative
household survey that covers all 34 provinces and 511 districts of Indonesia.22 The data
combines a large sample size of 291,414 households and 1,048,575 individuals with a wide
range of variables, including on education, employment, migration, living standards, taxes,
housing and assets, nutrition, health, marriage market and demographic outcomes, welfare
program participation, and educational outcomes for the next generation.23
Summary statistics are presented for each family of outcomes in Tables 1 to 7 and
Appendix Tables A.1 to A.5, which we discuss in the next section together with the impacts of
school construction. For the birth cohorts that our analysis focuses on (1957-1962 and 19681972), households have on average over four members and the sample is evenly split between
men and women. Average completed years of schooling for individuals in these cohorts is 8.0
years for men and 7.1 years for women. Approximately 81 percent of men and 73 percent of

21

We are grateful to Esther Duflo for sharing these data.
The smallest geographical unit in the Susenas 2016 is the Indonesian ‘kabupaten’, loosely translated as district.
23
Susenas 2016 is particularly suitable to study the effects of the school construction program because it includes
information on the individual’s district of birth and because the sample is large enough to be able to precisely
estimate the observed relationships. Appendix B provides further rationale for the choice of data, in particular
showing that the sample for the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS) is not large enough to detect the effects of
school construction. This is confirmed by Bharati, Chin, and Jung (2018) who use the most recent round of the IFLS
and argue it is underpowered to estimate the effect of school construction on education.
22

11

women complete primary school. These individuals have lower rates of lower and upper
secondary school completion (39 and 34 percent for men respectively and 31 and 26 percent
respectively for women). Tertiary completion rates are 9.5 and 7.7 percent for men and women.
These individuals are ages 44 to 48 (young cohort) and 54 to 59 (old cohort) at the time
of the survey in 2016. Most men are working (95 percent), while women have lower labor force
attachment (64 percent). Conditional on working, only 33 percent of men and 24 percent of
women are in the formal labor market. Just over half of men and women work in the nonagricultural sector and around one-quarter of them have migrated from their birth district.
4. Results
This section describes the impact of school construction on long-term and intergenerational
outcomes. Following the estimation strategy previously outlined, the main explanatory variable
is an interaction of the number of schools constructed per 1,000 children in a person’s birth
district with an indicator variable for being young enough to have benefitted from the program.
As briefly discussed in the introduction, Figure 1 reveals broad positive impacts of school
construction across indexes of outcomes for first generation individuals exposed to the program,
and across indexes that capture second generation effects on their children. In the following
sections, we discuss the family of outcomes that these indexes are based on in more detail.
4.1. Impact on educational attainment
Table 1 studies the relationship between school construction and educational attainment.24 On
average, the program increases years of education for men by 0.27 years and for women by 0.23
years. At the mean number of schools built per 1,000 children (1.98), these estimates imply an
increase in years of schooling of 0.53 and 0.46 for men and women, respectively. The analysis

24

Educational outcomes are recorded for household members aged five and older and are missing otherwise.

12

by Duflo (2001) is restricted to men, and the comparable point estimate in her study (0.19 years)
is lower than ours. We can only speculate about the source of this difference, but both estimates
are modest in size given that the number of primary schools almost doubled.25
The next four rows examine completed levels of education and show considerable gender
differences. For men, the program increases the likelihood of completing primary school by 2.6
percentage points. Even though the program only targeted primary schools, effects for men are
seen in lower and upper secondary education at 2.3 and 2.6 percentage points. These represent
larger percentage increases than for primary school because average completion rates at these
levels are lower. On the other hand, the results for women are concentrated in primary school
only, which they are 4.1 percentage points more likely to complete, and we are able to reject the
equality of this coefficient with the male effect. The effects on lower and upper secondary
completion rates are considerably smaller and indistinguishable from zero. For both men and
women, school construction did not affect tertiary education completion rates. As shown in row
6, literacy rates are high on average at 95 percent for men and 91 percent for women, and the
program raises these by 1.5 and 3.3 percentage points, respectively. The FDR q-values (shown in
square brackets) that correct for multiple hypothesis testing across all of the outcomes in the
education table reveal that the coefficients remain statistically significant.
In the last row, we create an index using all other rows combined, following Kling et al.
(2007) as discussed previously. The point estimates correspond with those shown in Figure 1 and
confirm broad increases in educational attainment for men and women. Building two additional
schools in an individual’s birth district increases the educational outcomes for those exposed to
the school construction by approximately 0.13 standard deviations relative to the control group.

25

Similar to Duflo (2001), we also estimate the impact on average years of education for the sample of wage earners
and for all those employed. Results are broadly similar in magnitude and statistical significance.

13

The gender dynamics and patterns by grade are explored in further detail in Figure 2
showing the impact of school construction on the likelihood of completing at least a certain
number of years of education. For example, it shows that the program increased the likelihood of
completing at least one year of school by 0.95 percentage points for men and 2.3 percentage
points for women. For men and women, effects are significantly different from zero throughout
all primary school years and show an increasing pattern by grade. Consistent with Table 1,
effects for men continue throughout lower and upper secondary school and seem fairly stable
across grades. While positive, the secondary school effects for women are not distinguishable
from zero, nor are the effects on tertiary education for either gender.26
4.2. Long-run labor market impacts
Having observed large increases in education in response to school construction, Table 2 studies
subsequent labor market and migration outcomes.27, 28 As shown in row 1, 95 percent of men are
working and the program raises this by 0.6 percentage points. The effect for women is half as
large and insignificant, but allows for an economically meaningful increase within its confidence
bounds, especially considering a lower average employment rate of 64 percent. In row 2, we
explore the intensive margin of employment, namely number of hours worked conditional on
working. Estimates indicate increases of 0.26 hours for men and 0.16 for women, but neither are
significant. In response to school construction, men move to jobs that are generally deemed more

26

While the school construction program could be used as an instrument for years of education, we prefer to study
later-life outcomes using OLS in order to capture broad impacts and because the exclusion restriction could be
violated if the program caused community-level changes that affect long-term outcomes in ways other than through
increased schooling. There is a strong first stage relationship with an F-statistic of 32.3 for men and 31.8 for women.
That said, for scaling purposes, the coefficients on long-term outcomes can be multiplied by four to calculate the
effect of an extra year of education, given that the program increased schooling by approximately 0.25 years.
27
Employment outcomes are recorded for household members aged ten and older and are missing otherwise.
28
Heckman, Humphries, and Veramendi (2018) provide a recent overview of the extensive literature examining the
relationship between education and labor market outcomes. Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer (2017) is one of the few
randomized control trials in education that follows individuals over eight years and finds that secondary school
scholarships improves labor market outcomes.

14

desirable: they are 1.1 percentage points more likely to work in the formal sector that tends to
offer higher quality and more stable jobs (Kleemans and Magruder, 2018). Given an average
formal sector employment rate of 33 percent for men, increasing the number of schools in an
individual’s birth district by the sample mean raises the likelihood of men being in the formal
sector by almost 7 percent. Men furthermore move away from agricultural work, which they are
1.2 percentage points less likely to hold, compared to 44 percent on average, and shift towards
service sectors. We do not find any evidence of occupational shifts for women.29
Most research on the relationship between education and migration generally focuses on
the selection into migration in terms of educational attainment.30 We extend this work by
studying the causal relationship of increases in education on the likelihood of migration. On
average, 27 percent of men and 25 percent of women migrate away from their birth district.
School construction increases migration rates by 0.7 and 0.8 percentage points respectively. At
the mean level of school construction, this represents an economically meaningful increase of 5.1
and 6.5 percent for men and women, respectively. Row 7 indicates that the increase in migration
is concentrated in shorter distance moves within—rather than between—provinces.
Correcting for multiple hypothesis testing across all of the outcomes in the
work/migration table shows that the FDR q-values are somewhat larger but coefficients generally
remain statistically significant. Finally, aggregating the seven outcomes into an index following
Kling et al. (2007) shows a positive and significant impact for men with an increase of 0.076
standard deviations due to an increase of two additional schools built in the district.

29

The only occupation-related variable that shows up as statistically significant for women is whether they are selfemployed in their own micro-enterprise, which almost a quarter of women are. They are 1.1 percentage points more
likely to do so. Given the large number of outcomes variables, we decided not to report all subcategories separately,
but instead combine them into the ‘formal worker’ variable, which is not statistically significant.
30
Empirical evidence for Indonesia (Hicks et al., 2018) and for developing countries in general (Young, 2013)
shows positive selection from rural to urban areas and negative selection from urban to rural.

15

4.3. Long-term impacts on living standards, taxes, housing, and assets
Susenas 2016 collects detailed data on household expenditures, which we use as a proxy for
living standards.31 Table 3 shows the effects of exposure to school construction on five
aggregated living standard measures. Row 1 shows that total expenditure increases by 2.1 or 3.2
percent in households in which either males or females are exposed. The increase is larger for
non-food than food expenditure (rows 2 and 3) and, as a result, the ratio of non-food to total
increases (row 4). Households where the head or spouse is exposed spend 16 to 19 percent more
on education in 2016 (row 5). All results remain statistically significant after correcting for
multiple hypothesis testing. The last row combines the expenditure data from rows 1, 2, and 5
into a living standards index, showing an overall increase of 0.03 and 0.05 standard deviations
for men and women, respectively, for each additional school built in one’s birth district.32
Given that income is generally correlated with expenditure, we expect improvements in
labor market outcomes to go hand in hand with increases in expenditure. While this is true for
men, we observe increased expenditure in the absence of labor market improvements for women.
We explore this apparent puzzle in Appendix Table A.6. Note that labor market outcomes are
observed for each individual while expenditure is measured at the household level, so household
dynamics and spouse characteristics can interact with the direct effect of program exposure.
Column 1 repeats the total expenditure regression and the other columns add spouse
31

Susenas 2016 does not include information on income, unlike the 1995 Intercensal survey that Duflo (2001) used
to measure the returns to education. After the 1995 round, the earnings question was discontinued so we do not have
access to more recent income data. That said, Rizky, Suryadarma, and Suryahadi (2018) argue that expenditure is a
better measure of living standards because income data tends to suffer from under-reporting in developing countries.
All expenditure values refer to average monthly expenditure measured in 10,000 Indonesian rupiah (IDR). In 2016,
the exchange rate was 1 USD=13,308 IDR. Expenditure categories that were reported in weekly or annual amounts
are converted to monthly expenditure. In regression analyses, we apply an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation to
the nominal values since expenditure data tends to be skewed and a log transformation would not be defined for zero
expenditures. The inverse hyperbolic sine is approximately equal to log (2y) or log (2) + log (y), so in most cases it
can be interpreted the same way as a standard logarithmic dependent variable.
32
The variables shown in rows 3 and 4 of Table 3 can be derived from those shown in rows 1 and 2, so to avoid
double counting these are excluded from the living standards index.

16

characteristics as mediating variables. Controlling for spouse characteristics changes the direct
effect of program exposure on expenditure: the effect of men’s exposure drops significantly
when controlling for his spouse’s education-related variables but not when controlling for the
wife’s labor market outcomes. This is not surprising as we did not observe labor market effects
for women. The effect for exposed women drops 30 to 50 percent not only when controlling for
her husband’s education but when controlling for his labor market outcomes. When controlling
for all mediating variables in the last column, the direct effect falls by about 60 percent for both
men and women. We interpret this as suggestive evidence that household dynamics and marriage
market outcomes play an important role; an issue we return to in Section 4.5.
In addition to expenditures, we study tax payments, which are important for the costbenefit analyses in Section 7 and allow us to study if the program pays for itself from increased
taxes over time. Table 4 shows broad increases in total taxes and the three tax sub-components
that Susenas 2016 collects data on. Total taxes increase by 7.8 percent in households where
males are exposed to school construction and 12.3 percent if women are exposed. In rows 2, 3,
and 4, we analyze the three main sub-components of taxes, revealing increases in land and
building taxes, taxes on motorized and non-motorized vehicles, and local community taxes.33,34

33

Appendix Table A.1 explores effects on housing and assets. On average 43 percent of the sample lives in urban
areas and even though exposure increases migration, school construction does not increase the likelihood of living in
urban areas. They do appear to move to more valuable and larger housing. Row 2 shows an increase of 2.8 percent
in the monthly rent equivalent payments if women are exposed, and a smaller and insignificant effect if males are
exposed. Exposure increases floor area by 1.2-1.5 square meters (row 3) and utility usage by 5.1 to 8.5 percent (row
4). To approximate for household wealth, row 5 studies the impact of school construction on an asset index that is a
principal component analysis of household ownership of the following durable goods: ownership of motorcycle, car,
home phone, computer/laptop, television, gold/jewelry, refrigerator, water heater, LPG gas tube, boat, motorized
boat, and air conditioner. The program leads to a 3-4 percent increase in the index if men or women are exposed.
Aggregating all five housing and asset outcomes into an index confirms broad increases for men and women.
34
We also explore the effects of exposure to school construction on the first generation’s utilization of government
welfare programs. Susenas 2016 collects data on four national programs that aim to reduce poverty and inequality.
Ex-ante it is unclear if increased take-up of welfare programs reflects higher needs due to increased poverty or
whether it is indicative of increased awareness of existing programs. As shown in Appendix Table A.4, we see few
changes to any of the individual government programs or to the welfare program index in the last row.

17

4.4. Long-run impacts on nutrition and health
There exists a strong correlation between education and health, although research estimating a
causal relationship finds mixed evidence.35 Table 5 (health outcomes) together with Appendix
Tables A.2 (nutrition) and A.3 (health investment) show three components of health impacts in
response to school construction. Appendix Tables A.2 finds increases in food intake, particularly
for women exposed to the program. Overall calories increase by 1.8 percent for women while the
effect for men is smaller and not significant. Patterns are similar for consumption of protein, fats,
and carbohydrates with respective increases of 1.8, 2.3, and 1.7 percent when women are
exposed to the program, and smaller increases for men. We are unable to answer definitively
(although Table 5 examines self-reported health outcomes) whether these nutrition changes for
women are health improving as additional protein is likely to be beneficial for individuals in
developing countries, but additional fats can be indicative of a worsening diet.36
A natural follow-up question is whether increases in nutrition and health investments
result in improved health. Table 5 reveals that overall such improvements are not observed.
While we see increases in not reporting a health complaint in the last month (row 1) and the
number of days uninterrupted by health complaints (row 2), neither are statistically significant.

35

For example, Lleras-Muney (2005) finds positive effects of education on mortality in the U.S., while Clark and
Royer (2013), Malamud, Mitrut, and Pop-Eleches (2018), and Meghir, Palme, and Simeonova (2018) find no effects
of education on mortality in the U.K., Romania, and Sweden, respectively. Furthermore, Baird at al. (2016) show
that improved health through deworming treatment at primary schools in Kenya significantly increases education, as
well as later-life labor market outcomes.
36
Appendix Table A.3 shows that health expenditures increase by 7.1 percent for exposed men and 5.5 percent for
women, but only the men’s coefficient is significant. The effects are large for investments in preventative health,
including medical check-ups, family planning, and immunizations, which increase by 19-24 percent if the woman or
man is exposed to school construction. We see large increases in expenditures for family planning, including
contraceptives and consultations, of 32 and 23 percent for men and women, respectively. On the curative side,
households with either the man or woman exposed are 4.8-7.5 percent more likely to use a private instead of public
hospital, which generally provide higher quality and more expensive health care. Finally, there is an increase of 14
percent in health insurance expenditures if women are exposed to the program. Taken together, the health
investment index shows broad increases for exposed men and women, with an improvement in health investments of
0.13 standard deviations when an additional two schools are built in the individual’s birth district.

18

Considering severe health complaints only, we observe a 0.5 percentage point decrease in reports
from exposed men. The aggregated health index in row 4 shows an improvement in health
outcomes for men exposed to school construction but is insignificant for exposed women.
4.5. Long-run marriage and fertility effects
Evidence estimating the causal relationship between education and demographic outcomes has
generally been mixed and nuanced, and this appears to be the case in our setting as well.37 Table
6 explores marriage and fertility outcomes for those exposed to the program in the 1970s. On
average, women marry almost five years younger than men (row 1), but there is no effect of
exposure to school construction on the age of first marriage. Coefficients are small and
statistically insignificant. In rows 2 to 9 we explore if the program changed the types of spouses
that men and women exposed to the program marry. Rows 2, 3 and 4 reveal that both men and
women marry partners with higher levels of education and literacy. This is perhaps unsurprising
given that the average education levels in regions with additional schools has increased, but
important nonetheless because this means that education increases for exposed individuals as
well as for their spouses. This further increases average education in the household, which may
play an important role for the intergenerational transmission of education, which we explore in
Section 5. Results remain statistically significant after correcting for multiple hypothesis testing.
As shown in rows 5, 6, and 7, we do not observe any changes in the labor market outcomes of
spouses, but we do see that men and women are 0.7-0.8 percentage points more likely to have a
spouse who migrated (row 8).38 We do not observe changes in spouse’s health (row 9).

37

Osili and Long (2008) find evidence of education reducing fertility in Nigeria. On the other hand, McCrary and
Royer (2011) find only a small fertility effect but a larger effect on the quality of the marriage partner in the U.S. In
the Kenyan context, education subsidies reduce women’s likelihood of teenage marriage and pregnancy (Duflo,
Dupas, and Kremer, 2015). Looking at a wider age range, Geruso and Royer (2018) find increased education lowers
teen fertility and increases the education of the spouse, but has no impact on total completed fertility.
38
Migration is defined relative to the individual’s birth district and may have occurred anytime between birth and
2016, so spouses may have migrated together.

19

We do not have complete birth histories for each woman that would allow us to measure
the relationship between education and total fertility. However, we can measure impacts on the
number of children aged 0-14 living in the household at the time of the survey. Exposure to
school construction reduces the number of children for women. The combined marriage and
fertility index (row 10) shows broad improvements for both genders: two additional schools built
in a district lead to increases of 0.13 and 0.10 standard deviations for exposed men and women.
5. Second generation effects of school construction
Having observed large long-term effects of Indonesia’s school construction program on a wide
range of outcomes, including education, employment, migration, living standards, and marriage,
we now investigate whether the effects extend to the next generation and affect the children of
those exposed to the program. As explained in Section 3, second generation impacts are
measured using the same difference-in-differences framework as first generation effects. The
main explanatory variable is an interaction of the intensity of school construction in a parent’s
birth district with an indicator of whether the parent is young enough to have benefitted from the
program. Outcomes of all children living in the parent’s household are considered and age fixed
effects are included to ensure comparisons take place across children of the same age.
5.1. Second generation effects on education and wellbeing
Table 7 shows the effect of parental exposure to school construction on their children’s
educational attainment. Row 1 confirms that program effects persist into the next generation.39
Children with fathers exposed to the program obtain an additional 0.10 years of school, while
children with exposed mothers obtain 0.17 years more. We can reject the equality of these

39

Related research explores the production function for children’s human capital (Behrman and Rosenzweig, 2002;
Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix, 2017) as well as focuses on how parents or teachers respond to inequalities across
children (Akresh et al., 2012, Pop-Eleches and Urquiola, 2013).

20

coefficients. The magnitudes decrease compared to the first generation results of 0.27 and 0.23
years for men and women, but are still economically meaningful. In the next subsection, we
explore potential channels through which the effects persist into the next generation.
Unlike the first generation education results, no effects are observed on children for
primary school completion rates (row 2) because by 2016 primary school has become nearly
universal.40 There are large effects on completing lower and upper secondary for children whose
parents are exposed to school construction, with the effect for exposed mothers being statistically
larger than for exposed fathers. Also, unlike the first generation education results, increases in
educational attainment now extend to tertiary education completion rates. Children with exposed
mothers are 0.8 percentage points more likely to complete tertiary education, compared to a 0.4
percentage point increase for children with exposed fathers. An increase of the mean number of
schools in a mother’s birth district leads to a 25 percent increase in the likelihood her child
completes tertiary education, relative to average tertiary education levels.
To account for the fact that some second generation children may still be attending
school, we study the effects on age-for-grade (row 6), loosely defined as an indicator variable for
whether the child is on track to complete the appropriate grades on time.41 Results confirm that
having parents exposed to school construction increases the likelihood of being on track by 1.1
percentage points if the father is exposed and 1.8 percentage points if the mother is exposed.
All of the education results for mothers remain statistically significant after correcting for
multiple hypothesis testing, while lower secondary and tertiary completion rates for children

40

UNICEF statistics (accessed November 19, 2018: unicef.org/infobycountry/indonesia_statistics) indicate primary
school net enrollment rates in Indonesia from 2008-2012 are 98 and 100 percent for boys and girls, respectively.
41
The indictor variable is zero for those who did not start school by age 7 or had to repeat one or more grades before
completing upper secondary education, which is compulsory in Indonesia. The indicator variable is one for those
who have already completed upper secondary school or are on track to do so in a timely manner.

21

when the father is exposed are no longer statistically significant. We aggregate the six outcomes
into a second generation education index, and it shows broad increases for children with parents
exposed to school construction. An increase of two additional schools built in the father or
mother’s birth district increases their children’s educational attainment by 0.06 or 0.11 standard
deviations, respectively, relative to parents who are not exposed to the program.42
5.2. Heterogeneity of second generation results by gender and grade
We next explore two dimensions of heterogeneity in the second generation education results.
First, we examine if school construction had different second generation effects at different grade
levels. Second, we examine, within a household, if paternal or maternal exposure to school
construction had differential impacts on their children and if those impacts differed by whether
the child is a son or daughter.
In Figure 3, we estimate the likelihood of a second generation child completing at least a
certain number of years of school. We explore the effects depending on whether the father or
mother is exposed to school construction and whether their child is a son or daughter. Results
highlight that effects are small and indistinguishable from zero during primary school. Consistent
with Table 7, for all other grades, exposure to school construction by mothers has a larger effect
than fathers on their children’s education. For grades in lower secondary, upper secondary, and
tertiary, we observe effects that are significantly different from zero for daughters when either

42

Having observed increases in educational attainment for the children whose parents were exposed to the program,
Appendix Table A.5 explores effects on the children’s employment and self-reported health. Rows 1 and 2 examine
their likelihood of being employed. We consider it welfare improving for a child not to be employed so we define
these variables as the number of days and hours not engaged in work. For a child of an exposed father, we see slight
reductions in days and hours worked but no effect if the mother is exposed. None of these results remain statistically
significant after correcting for multiple hypothesis testing. Rows 3, 4, and 5 study second generation health effects.
Children whose mothers were exposed show no effects on their health. Children whose fathers were exposed report
worse health outcomes. We are unable to determine if these children are less healthy or whether their better educated
parents have an understanding of health that makes them more likely to report their child as ill. Aggregating these
employment and health indicators into a second generation wellbeing index shows no effect for children whose
fathers are exposed and shows a positive impact if the child’s mother is exposed.

22

their mother or father is exposed to school construction. Effect sizes for second generation
daughters are approximately of the same magnitude as those of the first generation’s men
exposed to the program (see Figure 2 for this comparison). Effect sizes are largest for daughters
when the mother is exposed to the program and lowest for sons when the father is exposed.
While we cannot statistically distinguish the results by gender of the parent or child when
examining each grade separately, in Table 8 we investigate this issue in more detail.
Table 8 examines if the impact of parental exposure within a household varies when
controlling for the partner’s exposure and if those impacts differ by whether the child is a son or
daughter. We face several challenges with our identification strategy that focuses on young (born
1968-1972) and old (born 1957-1962) cohorts. For a household to be included in the regression,
we need both the father and mother to be in these specific birth cohorts.43 Given this selected
sample, we observe that for these households the impact of mother’s exposure to school
construction has a much larger effect on the child than the father’s exposure. An additional
school built in the mother’s birth district raises her child’s education by 0.16 years; there is no
effect if the father is exposed. In column 2, we address this selection issue by expanding the
range of birth cohorts included in the regressions, now including all individuals born between
1950 and 1980. All birth cohorts born after 1968 could be exposed to the school construction that
began in 1973. Both parents no longer need to be part of the young and old cohorts as previously
defined. The sample size expands to 246,466 second generation children with parents in this
extended cohort range. Results are consistent, with mother’s exposure to school construction
increasing her child’s education more than father’s exposure. We can reject the equality of
coefficients in both the restricted (column 1) and extended birth cohort samples (column 2).

43

With this additional sample restriction, there are only 44,105 second generation children in the regression, a loss
of almost two-thirds of the sample from the 120,838 children in the regressions in Table 7.

23

We explore if parental exposure has different effects for sons and daughters. Panel A
studies all children, Panel B sons, and Panel C daughters. Results for sons and daughters show
consistently larger education effects for the second generation child if the mother is exposed to
school construction, and in all cases, mother exposure is statistically significant. Focusing on the
extended cohort sample (column 2), we can reject the equality of the mother and father exposure
coefficients in the case of daughters but not sons. The benefit to daughters is three times larger if
their mother rather than their father is exposed to school construction.
5.3. Channels for intergenerational persistence of education
In Tables 9 and 10, we perform mediation analyses to understand the mechanisms linking first
and second generation outcomes. Column 1 in each table repeats the effects of parent exposure
on children’s years of schooling. Subsequent Table 9 columns add indexes from Figure 1 as
control variables that may be mediators through which parental exposure manifests itself.
Subsequent Table 10 columns add characteristics about the spouse as potential mediating factors.
Column 2 in Table 9 shows that adding the father’s work and migration index leads to an
18 percent reduction of the effect of father’s exposure, but the effect remains large at 0.08
additional years of school. Controlling for the mother’s work and migration index barely affects
the coefficient on mother’s exposure. This is not surprising as we find few labor market effects
for women in response to school construction. A 23 percent drop occurs for women when we
control for their living standards index (column 3), in line with Section 4.3 showing large
increases in expenditure for women exposed to school construction. Despite this drop, children
still get an additional 0.13 years of education even if we hold expenditure constant. Columns 4
and 5 control for the index of taxes and housing/assets. Point estimates remain the same as when
we control for living standards. In columns 6, 7, and 8, we include controls for the parent’s

24

nutrition, health investments, and health outcomes. We do not find support for these factors as
potential mechanisms mediating the effect of parent’s exposure to school construction.
In column 9 we control for the individual’s marriage index, which includes spouse
characteristics as well as age of first marriage and household size. For fathers, this leads to a
sizable 42 percent drop in the direct effect of exposure on their children’s education. This is
consistent with the previous subsection’s findings showing that mothers, whose characteristics
are now partly controlled for, have a large impact on the intergenerational transmission of
education. On the contrary, when we control for the marriage market index for exposed mothers,
the drop is only 19 percent and the direct effect of exposure on children’s schooling remains.
In the last column, we include all indexes as control variables. The exposure coefficients
drop to 0.055 for fathers exposed and 0.111 for mothers exposed. Holding constant many of the
variables that are affected by school construction explains 43 and 34 percent of the effect on
second generation’s years of schooling and the rest appears to be a more direct effect. There are
many channels that we do not observe in the data through which these effects could manifest
themselves, for example through increased encouragement to attend school or study. We cannot
distinguish between these channels, but based on this table, we conclude there remains a direct
effect from parents to their children that is not explained by changes in own characteristics.
Given the marriage index’s importance as a mediating variable in Table 9, revealing that
marriage is an important mechanism explaining the intergenerational transfer of education, we
explore further the importance of specific spousal characteristics in Table 10. The effect of
father’s exposure on second generation’s years of schooling drops significantly once we control
for the mother’s education variables. Controlling for whether she completes primary school
reduces the estimate by more than half and makes it indistinguishable from zero. Controlling for

25

the wife’s years of schooling or literacy leads to reductions of 29 and 49 percent, respectively.
This reaffirms the importance of mother’s educational background for her children’s education,
as we saw in Section 5.2 and Table 8. When the mother is exposed, controlling for the father’s
education variables leads to a smaller but still sizable drop of 25–32 percent of the main effect.
Spouse’s labor market outcomes explain part of the effect of exposure on children’s years
of schooling, especially whether the spouse has a formal sector job or works in a non-agricultural
sector. The coefficient for father’s exposure falls by 28–30 percent when controlling for the
mother’s sectoral choice, and the mother’s coefficient drops by 23–25 percent. Controlling for
spouse’s migration status or health does not significantly alter the program exposure coefficients.
Finally, in column 10, we control for all spouse characteristics, and the main effect for
fathers falls to 0.020–almost an 80 percent drop–and becomes indistinguishable from zero. This
reveals that for fathers most of the effect of exposure works through his spouse’s characteristics.
For mothers, the coefficient drops by almost half, but remains statistically significant and
economically meaningful at 0.091 additional years of schooling. Overall, these analyses provide
evidence that especially for men, marriage market outcomes and spouse characteristics are an
important channel through which exposure to school construction increases children’s schooling.
5.4 Selection of second generation individuals
There are two data issues that are relevant for our second generation analysis and the selection of
individuals in the regressions. First, there is a tradeoff between the selection of which individuals
remain in a household, and are therefore in the survey, and what age they need to be to finish
higher levels of school. Focusing only on younger children ages 0-15 reduces the selection bias
as few of them leave the household by that age, but they are not old enough to complete higher
levels of schooling, which are important to study since primary school is nearly universal in

26

2016. As we include older children, they have time to complete higher schooling levels but a
larger percentage of them leave the household. In the second generation analyses thus far, we
include all children who still live with their parents, regardless of age. We, of course, include
child age fixed effects. We illustrate the rationale of not imposing age restrictions in Appendix
Figure A.3. In the top panel, we show the exposure coefficient for second generation children’s
years of schooling when we limit the analysis to individuals under a certain age, and on the xaxis we vary the upper-bound to the ages included. Given that lower levels of education are
universal in 2016, we do not find an effect if we for children age 0-15. As we move to higher
ages, the increase in sample size is shown in the bottom panel, and effect sizes increase as
individuals are given time to complete their education.
Second, Susenas 2016, like most household surveys, only includes information on
individuals currently residing in a given household but not on family members living elsewhere.
For second generation children who are no longer living with their parents, perhaps because they
started a new household, we cannot link them to their biological parents, and we do not know if
the parents of these children are exposed to the program. For this reason, all second generation
analyses thus far are based on those still living with their parents. We next explore the robustness
of the results under various assumptions about the children who have left the household.
To do this, we conduct three bounding analyses. First, we estimate extreme bounds in
which we assume all non-co-resident children have parents who are or are not exposed (Manski,
1990). The intuition behind this is to re-assign individuals living apart from their parents back
into the sample.44 In Appendix Table A.7, we compare our baseline estimate for the second

44

For children living away from their parents, we must assume the parent’s birth district and birth year to determine
the parent’s exposure. As we have no other information, we assume the parent’s and child’s birth district are the
same. To test this assumption’s robustness, we estimate Table 7 using a child’s instead of parent’s birth district, and
results are consistent. In the main regressions, we include birth year fixed effects, but it is harder to predict parent’s

27

generation’s years of schooling (Table 7, row 1) to the first bounding strategy. Including all
individuals in the survey under age 40 in the second generation regression increases the sample
from 120,838 and 105,523 in the father’s and mother’s regressions to 644,675 observations. In
regressions measuring the effect of father’s exposure on his child’s years of schooling, results are
no longer statistically significant with these extreme bounds in which we assume all non-coresident children are born to non-exposed fathers (column 2) and then all non-co-resident
children are born to exposed fathers (column 3). The education effects for second generation
children whose mothers are exposed to school construction remain statistically significant
despite these extreme assumptions. Assuming all non-co-resident children are born to mothers
who are not exposed yields an effect of 0.05 more years of school, while assuming all non-coresident children are born to mothers who are exposed yields an effect of 0.03.45
Aside from the extreme assumption that parents of non-co-resident children are either all
exposed or all not exposed, we also likely add too many individuals to the regression. The
second bounding exercise attempts to address these issues. The bounding regressions for second
generation children should not include children born to parents who are not in the old (19571962) or young (1968-1972) cohorts. To improve our bounds, we use the Indonesia Family Life
Survey (IFLS) that does well in tracking individuals over time and matching parents to children

birth year given only a child’s age, so we now include an indicator variable for whether the parent is in the young
cohort. Estimating Table 7 replacing birth year dummies with a young cohort dummy yield consistent results.
Further, to minimize the probability of including individuals who are unlikely to be children of a parent in our young
or old cohorts, we impose an age restriction of 40 that would imply parents in the old cohort were at least 14-19
years old at the time of birth. We also maintain the exposure status of children who still live with their parents.
45
The effects using these extreme bounds are smaller than our Table 7 estimates. This is to be expected if parental
exposure to school construction leads to an increase in their children’s years of schooling. The reason for this is that
the children we add to our sample are a combination of children whose parents are and are not exposed. In the case
we assume all parents are exposed, some of these children actually had non-exposed parents and thus no increased
educational attainment due to their parent’s exposure, but we incorrectly assign them to the group of exposed
parents, which biases the estimates downwards. Similarly, if we assume all parents are not exposed, some of these
children actually had exposed parents so increased educational attainment, but we incorrectly assign them to the
group of unexposed parents, which again leads to a downward bias of the estimates.

28

who moved away.46 We use these data to obtain the fraction of children at each age born to old
and young cohort parents among all children no longer living with their parents. We use these
IFLS-based fractions to randomly assign at each age non-co-resident children in the Susenas data
to either old or young cohort parents and exclude the rest from the regression.47 We simulate this
randomization assignment procedure 1,000 times and estimate the second generation years of
schooling regression. Appendix Figure A.4 shows the distribution of coefficients from these
1,000 repetitions for father’s and mother’s exposure to school construction. Effect sizes for
father’s exposure on their children’s years of schooling range from 0.011 to 0.047 at the 5th and
95th percentiles with a median coefficient of 0.028. Effect sizes for mother’s exposure are larger,
ranging between 0.018 and 0.065 with a median coefficient of 0.043.48
Third, we repeat the second generation analysis directly using the IFLS. The last three
columns in Appendix Table A.7 show estimates for all children, only those living with their
parents, and those who moved away. Those living with their parents provides the closest
comparison to our Susenas sample. Across all three samples, we find no statistically significant
effect for fathers exposed to school construction. The estimated effect of mother’s exposure is
0.539 in the sample of children still living with their parents compared to 0.300 in the sample of
all children. This suggests an effect only 56 percent as large if we are unable to include non-coresident children in the analysis. Scaling down our estimate of mother’s exposure in column 1 by
this magnitude yields an estimated effect of 0.094 additional years of schooling, which is still
economically meaningful and substantially higher than the coefficients in Appendix Figure A.4.

46

87.8 percent of individuals surveyed in the 1993 first wave were tracked or deceased by the last wave in 2014/5.
We match 91 percent of children in the last wave’s household roster to their co-resident or non-co-resident parents.
47
Results are consistent if we use the fraction of non-co-resident children at each age and gender who are born to
old and young cohort parents and use these age-gender based fractions to draw random samples in the Susenas data.
48
Coefficients for father’s exposure are statistically significant at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels in 47, 27, and 5
percent of the regressions. Coefficients for mother’s exposure are statistically significant more often. In 63, 42, and
13 percent of the regressions, the coefficients are statistically significant at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

29

6. Threats to identification and robustness checks
6.1 Possible general equilibrium effects
The analysis presented so far exploits variation across regions and birth cohorts to identify partial
equilibrium effects of school construction. This raises the concern that general equilibrium
effects might undo the direct program effect (Heckman, Lochner, and Taber, 1998). In our
situation, if school construction increases the young cohort’s education in high intensity regions,
this could affect individuals who are not exposed to school construction (either older cohorts or
young cohorts in low intensity regions). Depending on how these general equilibrium effects
work, they could potentially bias our results leading to either an over- or under-estimate of the
true effect. Whether the general equilibrium effects have a negative or positive effect depends on
the substitutability or complementarity between old and young cohorts.
School construction leads to more educated young workers. If those workers are
substitutes for the older cohorts in the labor market, then this increase could drive down wages
for the older cohorts who are competing with them for jobs in those locations. If that happens,
then the effects we observe in our specification for improved living standards for the young
relative to the old cohort would be over-estimating the true effect of the program. Duflo (2004)
provides evidence that these general equilibrium effects might have occurred in Indonesia,
although the magnitudes of the bias appear to be rather small. Focusing on the instrumental
variables specification she estimates, she finds that an increase of 10 percentage points in the
share of primary school graduates leads to a 2.9-3.8 percent decrease in wages for the old
cohorts. Given we observe an increase of only 2.6 percentage points in the likelihood of
completing primary school for men, the subsequent old cohort wage decreases would be less
than 1 percent. Adjusting our estimates by that magnitude does not significantly alter our results.

30

In addition, if we adjust by this magnitude the cost-benefit calculations discussed in Section 7, it
would not affect our overall interpretation of the benefits of school construction.49
Alternatively, if the young cohorts are complements for the old cohorts (for instance,
because they start more businesses and hire older cohort individuals or because they spend more
money on goods and services produced by the older cohorts), then the older cohorts benefit by
having more educated younger cohorts in their location. If these effects dominate the general
equilibrium impact, we would underestimate the true effect.
Unfortunately, the data do not allow us to distinguish between these competing stories of
complementarity and substitutability among old and young cohorts. Furthermore, the evidence
on general equilibrium effects from developed countries (Angrist, 1995; Crepon et al., 2013;
Bianchi, 2018) is unlikely to be helpful in understanding the developing country, Indonesian
context over the past four decades. In our case, we can show there are no systematic trend breaks
when comparing the old cohort with an even older cohort. While this is certainly not definitive,
the results for household expenditures in Appendix Figure A.5 highlight that there is not a
differential trend when comparing the old cohort (ages 12-17 in 1974) with an even older cohort
(ages 18-24 in 1974). If general equilibrium effects negatively impact older cohorts, we would
expect to see the oldest cohorts be the worst off but that is not what we observe.
6.2 Robustness checks
In this subsection, we present a set of specification checks highlighting the robustness of the
main results. Our identification assumption is that the change in outcomes across birth cohorts in

49

Recent research on large-scale government education investments in India finds that the general equilibrium
effects could be larger, with these effects working to depress the returns to education by 32 percent (Khanna, 2018).
However, the analysis of the Indian policy highlights that skilled workers are worse off while unskilled workers
benefit. In the Indonesian context, this evidence about unskilled workers benefiting implies older cohorts who were
more likely to be lower educated and unskilled would have benefited from these general equilibrium effects, thus
providing suggestive evidence that our difference-in-differences specification underestimates the true effect.

31

regions that built many schools would have been the same in the absence of the program as the
change across birth cohorts in regions that built fewer schools. However, educational patterns
between birth cohorts could vary systematically across regions because of issues such as mean
reversion. To test this assumption, we estimate placebo regressions comparing old cohorts (ages
12-17 in 1974) and even older cohorts (ages 18-24 in 1974). If the assumption is correct, then
any change in outcomes between cohorts in these groups, both of whom were not exposed to the
program, should not differ across regions. Appendix Figure A.6 presents the results from
estimating placebo regressions for each of the indexes for every family of outcomes (similar to
Figure 1). Across the first generation outcomes for females and males, the placebo regressions
show no statistically significant effects, which is suggestive evidence that the main difference-indifferences results are not driven by a failure of the identification assumption.50
In the main results, we follow Duflo (2001) by using a conservative definition of school
exposure. Individuals in the young cohort (born 1968-1972) benefit from full exposure to the
program, while those in the old cohort (born 1957-1962) did not benefit from school construction
at all. However, there are other birth cohorts, partly exposed and not exposed, that could be
included in the analysis. Appendix Table A.8 examines how the regression for first generation
years of schooling in Table 1 changes with alternative birth cohort definitions. Column 1 repeats
the original results and columns 2-5 add additional birth cohorts. In column 2, we add older
cohorts born between 1950 and 1956 who were not exposed to school construction. Column 3
adds individuals born between 1963 and 1967 who would have been primary-school aged in
1974 (ages 7-11) when the schools were built. To be conservative, we assume all of these cohorts

50

We do observe a statistically significant effect in the placebo regressions for second generation education. This
implies there may have been a time trend across regions that could have influenced educational outcomes for second
generation children. However, if children whose parents born 1957-1962 are experiencing more education compared
with children whose parents are born 1950-1956, then that likely means we are underestimating the true effect.

32

were not exposed, although in Appendix Figure A.2, it appears children ages 7-8 probably did
benefit from the program. Column 4 includes children born between 1973 and 1980 who were
born during and just after the schools were built and so they would have received full exposure
to the program.51 Finally, in column 5, we include all individuals born between 1950 and 1980.
Results using the different sample definitions are consistent, showing that exposure to school
construction increased years of schooling for men and women. In Appendix Figure A.7, we use
the extended cohort definition (all individuals born between 1950 and 1980) and re-estimate the
effect of school construction on indexes for families of outcomes (as in Figure 1). Results are
consistent, showing large positive benefits for men and women exposed to school construction.
All regressions using expenditure data are estimated with an inverse hyperbolic sine
transformation (IHS). While this is typical to analyze expenditures, in Appendix Table A.9, we
show robustness checks using alternative transformations. Columns 1-4 show total expenditures,
columns 5-8 education expenditures. Columns 1 and 5 repeat the results from rows 1 and 5 of
Table 3 using an IHS transformation. Column 2 uses the log of nominal expenditures; column 3
uses nominal expenditures. Results are similar in both cases. In column 4, we estimate household
per capita instead of total expenditure (using an IHS transformation) to capture potential changes
in household structure that could be correlated with exposure. Effects are smaller, but results
show that male and female exposure still increases household expenditures. Results for education
expenditures using a log transformation (column 6) or nominal values (column 7) leads to
different results due to the large number of zeroes for education expenditures (over 20,000
observations are dropped) and because education data are heavily skewed.

51

These Indonesian primary schools were initially expected to last for 20 years so the last cohort that could have
gained the full six years of primary school education and completed primary schooling by 1993 would have been
born in 1980. Note that with these 1973-1980 cohorts, parents could potentially have moved to give their children
access to these schools, although results are consistent with the earlier ones.

33

Finally, we re-estimate the results measuring the effect of school construction on
outcome indexes (as in Figure 1) using alternative control variables. Appendix Figure A.8 shows
results excluding the interaction of birth year dummies and water and sanitation programs. The
magnitudes and levels of statistical significance are consistent in this case.
7. Rate of return and fiscal impacts of school construction
Regression results highlight the many beneficial impacts for individuals exposed to school
construction and for the intergenerational transmission of those benefits. We conduct a costbenefit analysis to evaluate whether school construction was cost efficient for the Indonesian
government.52 Most analyses compare a program’s costs and overall welfare benefits of that
program for the affected population. We also do that. However, what is unique in our case is our
ability to use detailed data on tax revenues collected by the government to also measure if these
increases in government taxes collected offset the government’s costs of building the schools.
We start by measuring the costs of school construction. Total costs include the initial
investment to build the schools and train the teachers plus recurring commitments to pay teacher
salaries each year. The key point for the costs is that there were large and upfront costs at the
beginning of the program in 1973 and then subsequent smaller, but annual costs every year for
teacher salaries. School construction cost approximately 782 million 2016 US dollars, around 1.5
percent of the 1973 Indonesian GDP (Duflo, 2001). Schools were expected to recruit three
teachers and accommodate 120 students. Using estimates by Daroesman (1971), training three
teachers across 61,800 schools would have cost the government 11.7 million in 2016 dollars.53

52

Appendix C discusses in more detail the assumptions made in our cost-benefit analysis and the specific
parameters we include in the model.
53
On the cost side, we adjust a number of relevant parameters in our model to see how the cost-benefit calculations
respond, including the discount rate, the number of years the school is expected to last, the number of teachers and
students per school, whether there is real growth in a teacher’s salary, and the level of recurrent school
administrative costs in addition to teachers’ salaries.

34

We focus on two main benefits. The first are taxes paid directly to the government. We
have information on taxes each household paid, and we have information on total household
expenditures that we use to estimate the ten percent Value-Added-Tax (VAT) the government
would have collected on those purchases. The second benefit is improvements in the first
generation’s overall living standards.54 The key issue for the benefits is that the government or
individual earns the benefits each year and they accrue over many years, but these benefits do
not start until long after the schools are built.55
We develop a cost-benefit model to include these costs and benefits in the specific years
they would have been realized and then trace out the arc of when discounted benefits and costs
offset. Table 11 summarizes results and highlights how different assumptions about parameters
influence the level of costs and benefits, impact the year when benefits outweigh costs, and
affect the internal rate of return (IRR). Column 1 is a less conservative approach.56 Using these
parameters yields a total cost (school building, teacher training, and recurrent teacher salaries) of
2.55 billion in 2016 USD and a total tax benefit (direct taxes paid plus VAT taxes collected) of
9.00 billion in 2016 USD. This gives a net benefit of 6.56 billion, a 1998 breakeven year, and an
IRR of 10.5 percent. Moving beyond government taxes and focusing on the program’s impact on
improving living standards raises net benefits to 59.24 billion with an IRR of 20.7 percent.
From this baseline, we modify parameters and trace how those changes impact costs and
benefits. Column 2 includes real salary growth for teachers and costs are higher and net benefits

54

Second generation individuals receive more education due to school construction, which could lead to increased
future tax payments and improved living standards. However, we do not include these effects in our model.
55
On the benefit side, we adjust various parameters to test the sensitivity of our results. These include the discount
rate, the number of years the school is expected to last, the age individuals start paying taxes, an individual’s life
expectancy, the Indonesian economy’s growth rate, and the lifetime curvature in mean taxes paid at each age.
56
In this column, we assume a 5 percent discount rate, no real growth in teachers’ salary, no adjustment for the
lifetime curvature of an individual’s earnings (and subsequent taxes), no real growth in GDP per capita, 120 students
per classroom, schools last 20 years, individuals start paying taxes after age 18, school administration costs 1.25
times teachers’ salaries, 3 teachers per school, and an individual’s life expectancy is 60.

35

smaller. Column 3 adjusts for the lifetime curvature in an individual’s tax payments that peak
around ages 40-50. Tax and living standards benefits are smaller. Column 4 adjusts for real GDP
per capita growth of 3.25 percent. Taxes and living standards are measured in 2016, but those
had real growth prior to 2016 and this adjustment reduces net benefits. Column 5 represents what
we believe is a reasonable baseline case. We maintain previous parameter values but increase the
mean number of students per school from 120 to 180 (30 per grade), which is closer to what
happened when these schools were built. Tax benefits are higher than costs with an IRR of 8.1
percent, while living standards are substantially larger than costs with an IRR of 16.8 percent.
Column 6 assumes that schools last 40 years. Original 1973 government plans called for
schools to last 20 years, but since most schools are still in operation now, this is a reasonable
assumption. Benefits increase because there are more cohorts exposed to the program, but there
are more years to pay teacher salaries so costs also increases. Net benefits are higher, but the IRR
only increases slightly because of the timing of when additional costs are incurred. Column 7
increases the age when individuals start paying taxes; column 8 raises the recurrent cost
multiplier from 1.25 to 1.5. Both changes have minor impacts on net benefits. Column 9 adjusts
the number of teachers per school from three to six, and this substantially raises costs. Lastly,
column 10 adjusts life expectancy, which increased significantly over this period. Tax and living
standards benefits substantially outweigh costs.57
Appendix Figure A.9 graphs the discounted net tax and living standards benefits over
time and highlights the breakeven years for when benefits outweigh school construction costs.
Using the parameters from columns 5 and 10 in Table 11, we show two highly realistic scenarios

57

To have a situation in which tax benefits do not outweigh costs using the column 10 parameters, it is necessary to
adjust parameters so that recurrent costs must be greater than 1.9, the number of students must be less than 145, or
the discount rate must be larger than 5.7 percent. However, net living standards benefits still remain positive until
the following more drastic parameter adjustment of increasing the discount rate to larger than 12 percent is made.

36

that the government would have faced. Overall net tax benefits are not that different across the
two scenarios (5.42 and 7.76 billion), but the breakeven year in the scenario with more teachers,
higher recurrent costs, and a longer school lifetime is later. The net benefit to improved living
standards is also much higher the longer the schools last (133.5 billion) and the improvement to
the population’s welfare offsets the program costs by 2003.
Across a range of different parameter estimates, school construction leads to increased
government tax revenues that offset school construction costs in most cases within 40 years.
Even larger net benefits are observed when we include the population’s improved living
standards with net benefits ranging from 40 to 136 billion USD. Internal rates of return range
from 13-21 percent and benefits outweigh costs within 17-30 years after the schools are built.
8. Conclusion
This paper studies the long-term and intergenerational effects of one of the largest school
construction programs in history. We use a difference-in-differences estimation strategy
exploiting variation across birth cohorts and regions in the number of schools built. We combine
this with nationally representative data from Indonesia that contain information on a wide range
of outcomes related to education, employment, migration, living standards, taxes, and marriage
outcomes. We find that men and women exposed to the program attain more education, with
men’s education effects continuing beyond primary school. As adults, men exposed to school
construction are more likely to be formal workers and work in a non-agricultural sector. Both
men and women exposed to the program are more likely to have migrated from their birth
district, although evidence points to increases in local migration within the province. Households
in which either parent is exposed to school construction have higher living standards, more

37

assets, and pay more government taxes. Exposure to school construction substantially alters
marriage market outcomes with spouses being more educated and more likely to have migrated.
These benefits are transmitted to the next generation. Children with fathers or mothers
who are exposed to the school construction program obtain more education. Significant effects
are observed at all levels of schooling beyond primary school, but the largest impacts are seen in
tertiary education with effect sizes indicating a 20 to 25 percent increase in the likelihood of the
second generation child completing university. These second generation effects are significantly
larger if the mother, as opposed to the father, is exposed to the program, with additional benefits
accruing to daughters. We perform a detailed mediation analysis to explore the mechanisms that
drive the intergenerational transmission of schooling. Marriage market outcomes appears to a
play a crucial role, particularly whether the spouse has completed primary school, is literate,
works in the formal sector, or works outside of agriculture.
Our cost benefit analysis highlights that under all reasonable assumptions school
construction pays for itself in terms of additional expected government tax revenues, not to
mention the additional benefits of improved living standards. Furthermore, given the observed
intergenerational transmission of education, the likely long-run benefits are vast. To gain
additional insight into the intergenerational transmission of education, we perform an exploratory
analysis calculating the intergenerational elasticity (IGE) of education between children and
parents. In policy circles, especially in developing countries, there is considerable debate about
the optimal amount of intergenerational mobility. High mobility suggests equality of opportunity
whereby a parent’s outcome does not mechanically determine the child’s, but it is critical to
understand the mechanisms driving that intergenerational correlation (see Black and Devereux,
2011 and Mazumder, 2015 for a discussion of this literature). Low mobility that is due to

38

differential access to schooling suggests that public policy can play a role in equalizing
opportunities. Comparing the IGE across high and low program intensity areas and between
young and old cohorts in our Indonesian data, we find there is an increase in mobility for
children whose parents are exposed to school construction, highlighting the realized benefits of
this government education policy. The broader societal impacts and changes in intergenerational
transmission of human capital warrant further research.

39

References
Ajayi, Kehinde F. and Phillip H. Ross. 2017. “The Effects of Education on Financial Outcomes:
Evidence from Kenya.” Unpublished manuscript.
Akresh, Richard, Damien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga. 2013. “Cash Transfers, Parental
Investments, and Child Welfare: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation of the Role of
Conditionality” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6340.
Akresh, Richard, Damien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga. 2016. “Evidence from a
Randomized Evaluation of the Household Welfare Impacts of Conditional and
Unconditional Cash Transfers Given to Mothers or Fathers” World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 7730.
Akresh, Richard, Emilie Bagby, Damien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga. 2012. “Child
Labor, Schooling, and Child Ability.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5965.
Akresh, Richard. 2004. “School Enrollment Impacts of Non-traditional Household Structure.”
IZA Discussion Paper 1379.
Akresh, Richard. 2009. “Flexibility of Household Structure: Child Fostering Decisions in
Burkina Faso.” Journal of Human Resources, 44(4): 976-997.
Alderman, Harold, Jooseop Kim, Peter F. Orazem. 2003. “Design, Evaluation, and Sustainability
of Private Schools for the Poor: The Pakistan Urban and Rural Fellowship School
Experiments.” Economics of Education Review, 22(3): 265-274.
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2011. “Human Capital Development before Age Five.” In
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 13151486. New York: Elsevier.
Andrabi, Tahir, Jishnu Das, Asim Khwaja, and Tristan Zajonc. 2011. “Do Value-Added
Estimates Add Value? Accounting for Learning Dynamics.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3): 29-54.
Angrist, Josh. 1995. “The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.”
American Economic Review, 85(5): 1065-1087.
Attanasio, Orazio, Costas Meghir, and Emily Nix. 2017. “Human Capital Development and
Parental Investment in India.” NBER Working Paper 21740.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, Berk Ozler. 2011. “Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash
Transfer Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 26(4): 1709-1753.
Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel. 2016. “Worms at
Work: Long-Run Impacts of a Child Health Investment.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 131(4): 1637-1680
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Golderg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William
Pariente, Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2015. “A

40

Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six
Countries.” Science, 348(6236): 1260799.
Barro, Robert and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1995. Economic Growth. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Behrman, Jere and Mark Rosenzweig. 2002. “Does Increasing Women’s Schooling Raise the
Schooling of the Next Generation?” American Economic Review, 92(1): 323-334.
Behrman, Jere, Susan Parker, Petra Todd. 2011. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers for Schooling
Generate Lasting Benefits? A Five-Year Followup of PROGRESA/Oportunidades.”
Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 93-122.
Benhassine, Najy, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, Victor Pouliquen. 2015.
“Turning a Shove into a Nudge? A ‘Labeled Cash Transfer’ For Education.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(3): 86-125.
Benjamini, Yoav and Yosef Hochberg. 1995. “Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical
and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
Series B, 57(1): 289-300.
Bhalotra, Sonia and Atheendar Venkataramani. 2018. “Shadows of the Captain of the Men of
Death: Health Innovation, Human Capital Investment, and Institutions.” Unpublished
manuscript.
Bharati, Tushar, Seungwoo Chin, and Dawoon Jung. 2018. “Recovery from an Early Life Shock
Through Improved Access to Schools: Evidence from Indonesia.” Unpublished
manuscript.
Bianchi, Nicola. 2018. “The Indirect Effects of Educational Expansions: Evidence from a Large
Enrollment Increase in STEM Majors.” Unpublished manuscript.
Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow. 2000. “Does Schooling Cause Growth?” American Economic
Review, 90(5): 1160-1183.
Black, Sandra E. and Paul J. Devereux. 2011. “Recent Developments in Intergenerational
Mobility.” in Handbook of Labor Economics, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, editors,
Volume 4, Elsevier: 1487-1541.
Black, Sandra E., Aline Butikofer, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. Forthcoming. “This
is Only a Test? Long-run Impacts of Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout.” Review
of Economics and Statistics.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2005. “Why the Apple Doesn’t Fall
Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital.” American
Economic Review, 95(1): 437-449.
Burde, Dana and Leigh Linden. 2013. “Bringing Education to Afghan Girls: A Randomized
Controlled Trial of Village-Based Schools.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 5(3): 27-40.

41

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference with
Multiway Clustering.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29(2): 238-249.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Schanzenbach, and Danny
Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence
from Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1593-1660.
Chevalier, Arnaud. 2004. “Parental Education and Child’s Education: A Natural Experiment.”
IZA Discussion Paper No. 1153.
Clark, Damon and Heather Royer. 2013. “The Effect of Education on Adult Mortality and
Health: Evidence from Britain.” American Economic Review, 103(6): 2087-2120.
Crepon, Bruno, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe Zamora. 2013. “Do
Labor Market Policies Have Displacement Effects: Evidence from a Clustered
Randomized Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 531-580.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti. 2003. “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(4): 1495-1532.
Currie, Janet. 2011. "Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences." American Economic
Review, 101(3): 1-22.
Daroesman, Ruth. 1971. “Finance of Education.” Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 7(3):
61-95.
Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. 2015. “Education, HIV, and Early
Fertility: Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Review, 105(9):
2757-2797.
Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. 2017. “The Impact of Free Secondary
Education: Experimental Evidence from Ghana.” Unpublished manuscript.
Duflo, Esther. 2001. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in
Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment.” American Economic Review,
91(4): 795-813.
Duflo, Esther. 2004. “The Medium Run Effects of Educational Expansion: Evidence from a
Large School Construction Program in Indonesia.” Journal of Development Economics,
74(1): 163-197.
Evans, David and Muthoni Ngatia. 2018. “School Costs, Short-Run Participation, and Long-Run
Outcomes: Evidence from Kenya.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 8421.
Fiszbein, Ariel and Norbert Schady. 2009. “Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and
Future Poverty.” The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 1996. “Technical Change and Human-Capital
Returns and Investments: Evidence from the Green Revolution.” American Economic
Review, 86(4): 931-953.
42

Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. 2002. “Longer-Term Effects of Head Start.”
American Economic Review, 92(4): 999-1012.
Gertler, Paul, James Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, Arianna Zanolini, Christel Vermeersch, Susan M.
Chang, Sally Grantham-McGregor. 2014. “Labor Market Returns to an Early Childhood
Stimulation Intervention in Jamaica.” Science, 344(6187): 998-1001.
Geruso, Michael and Heather Royer. 2018. “The Impact of Education on Family Formation:
Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the UK.” NBER Working Paper 24332.
Glewwe, Paul and Karthik Muralidharan. 2016. “Improving Education Outcomes in Developing
Countries: Evidence, Knowledge Gaps, and Policy Implications.” Handbook of the
Economics of Education, Volume 5. Elsevier Publisher.
Gorseline, Donald. 1932. “The Effect of Schooling upon Income. Bloomington.” University of
Indiana Press.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Handa, Sudhanshu. 2002. “Raising Primary School Enrollment in Developing Countries: The
Relative Important of Supply and Demand.” Journal of Development Economics, 69(1):
103-128.
Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber. 1998. “General Equilibrium Effects:
A Study of Tuition Policy.” American Economic Review, 88(2): 381-386.
Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz.
2010. “The Rate of Return to the Highscope Perry Preschool Program.” Journal of Public
Economics, 94(1-2): 114-128.
Heckman, James, John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi. 2018. “Returns to Education:
The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings, Health, and Smoking.” Journal of Political
Economy, 126(S1): S197-S246.
Hicks, Joan, Marieke Kleemans, Nicholas Li, Edward Miguel. 2017. “Reevaluating Agricultural
Productivity Gaps with Longitudinal Microdata.” NBER Working Paper 23253.
Jacob, Brian, Lars Lefgren, and David Sims. 2010. “The Persistence of Teacher-Induced
Learning.” Journal of Human Resources, 45(4): 915-943.
Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 25(2): 515-548.
Kazianga, Harounan, Dan Levy, Leigh Linden, and Matt Sloan. 2013. “The Effects of ‘GirlFriendly’ Schools: Evidence from the BRIGHT School Construction Program in Burkina
Faso.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3): 41-62.
Khanna, Gaurav. 2018. “Large-scale Education Reform in General Equilibrium: Regression
Discontinuity Evidence from India.” Unpublished manuscript.

43

Kleemans, Marieke and Jeremy Magruder. 2018. “Labour Market Responses to Immigration:
Evidence from Internal Migration Driven by Weather Shocks.” Economic Journal,
128(613): 2032-2065.
Klenow, Peter and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 1997. “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
Economics: Has it Gone Too Far?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 12: 73-103.
Klenow, Peter and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2005. “Externalities and Growth.” Handbook of
Economic Growth, Volume 1A. Edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf.
Elsevier publishing.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83-119.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. 2009. “Incentives to Learn.” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 91(3): 437-456.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the
U.S.” Review of Economic Studies, 72(1): 189-221.
Malamud, Ofer, Andreea Mitrut, and Cristian Pop-Eleches. 2018. “The Effect of Education on
Mortality and Health: Evidence from a Schooling Expansion in Romania.” NBER
Working Paper 24341.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil. 1992. “A Contribution to the Empirics
of Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2): 407-437.
Manski, Charles. 1990. “Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects.” American Economic
Review, 80(2): 319-323.
Marazyan, Karine. 2011. “Effects of a Sibship Extension to Foster Children on Children’s
School Enrollment: A Sibling Rivalry Analysis for Indonesia.” Journal of Development
Studies, 47(12): 497-518.
Maurin, Eric and Sandra McNally. 2008. “Vive la Revolution! Long-Term Educational Returns
of 1968 to the Angry Students.” Journal of Labor Economics, 26(1): 1-33.
Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2015. “Estimating the Intergenerational Elasticity and Rank Association
in the US: Overcoming the Current Limitations of Tax Data.” Research in Labor
Economics, 43: 83-129
McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer. 2011. “The Effect of Female Education on Fertility and
Infant Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth.”
American Economic Review, 101(1): 158-195.
McEwan, Patrick. 2015. “Improving Learning in Primary Schools of Developing Countries: A
Meta-Analysis of Randomized Experiments.” Review of Educational Research, 85(3):
353-394.

44

Meghir, Costas, Marten Palme, and Emilia Simeonova. 2018. “Education and Mortality:
Evidence from a Social Experiment.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
10(2): 234-256.
Muralidharan, Karthik and Nishith Prakash. 2017. “Cycling to School: Increasing Secondary
School Enrollment for Girls in India.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
9(3): 321-350.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. “The Intergenerational Effects
of Worker Displacement.” Journal of Labor Economics, 26(3): 455-483.
Osili, Una Okonkwo and Bridget Terry Long. 2008. “Does Female Schooling Reduce Fertility?
Evidence from Nigeria.” Journal of Development Economics, 87(1): 57-75.
Oster, Emily and Rebecca Thornton. 2011. “Menstruation, Sanitary Products, and School
Attendance: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 3(1): 91-100.
Parker, Susan and Tom Vogl. 2017. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers Improve Economic
Outcomes in the Next Generation? Evidence from Mexico.” NBER Working Paper
24303.
Pop-Eleches, Cristian and Miguel Urquiola. 2013. “Going to a Better School: Effects and
Behavioral Responses.” American Economic Review, 103(4): 1289-1324.
Ravallion, Martin. 1988. “INPRES and Inequality: A Distributional Perspective on the Centre’s
Regional Disbursements” Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 24(3): 53–71.
Rizky, Mayang, Daniel Suryadarma, and Asep Suryahadi. 2018. “Effect of Growing-Up Poor on
Labour Market Outcome: Evidence from Indonesia.” Unpublished manuscript.
Romer, Paul. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political Economy, 89(5):
S71–S102.
Thomas, Duncan, Firman Witoelar, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Bondan Sikoki, John Strauss, Cecep
Sumantri, and Wayan Suriastini. 2012. “Cutting the Costs of Attrition: Results from the
Indonesia Family Life Survey.” Journal of Development Economics, 98(1): 108-123.
Walsh, J. R. 1935. “Capital Concept Applied to Man.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 49(2):
255–285.
World Bank. 1989. “Indonesia Basic Education Study.” World Bank Report 7841-IND.
Washington, D.C. Population and Human Resources Operations Division.
Young, Alwyn. 1994. “Lessons from the East Asian NICs: A Contrarian View.” European
Economic Review, 38(3-4): 964-973.
Young, Alwyn. 1995. “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East
Asian Growth Experience.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3): 641-680.
Young, Alwyn. 2013. “Inequality, the Urban-Rural Gap, and Migration.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128(4): 1727-1785.
45

Female

Male

.1

Standardized Treatment Effect

.075

.05

.025

0

-.025
Education

Living
Work/
Migration Standards

Tax

Housing/
Assets

Nutrition

First Generation

Health
investment

Health

Marriage
Market

Not on
Welfare
program

Education

Child
wellbeing

Second Generation

Figure 1. Effect of school construction on indexes of long-run outcomes
Notes: Following Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007), we define indexes for families of outcomes by defining a Z-score for each outcome
relative to the control group (defined in this case as the old cohort in low program intensity regions). Then, we average the Z-scores
across all outcomes in the same family to get an index, such as “Marriage Market”. Following Banerjee et al. (2015) to get standardized
treatment effects, we then standardize the Kling indexes relative to the mean and standard deviation of the control group. Each dot in
the figure represents the coefficient of the interaction of the number of INPRES schools built between 1973 and 1979 in one’s birth
district and a dummy for being born between 1968 and 1972. Solid lines represent 95% confidence intervals. The individual outcomes
making up the index for each family are listed in Tables 1-7 and Appendix Tables A.1 to A.5.
46

Female

Male

5

Effect size (p.p.)

4
3
2
1
0
-1
1

2

3

4

Primary

5

6

7

8

9

Lower Secondary

10

11

12

Upper Secondary

13

14

15

16

Tertiary

Figure 2. Effect of school construction on the probability of first generation individual attending at least n-years of schooling
Notes: Effect size measures the impact of one additional school constructed per 1,000 children on the probability of completing at
least n-years of schooling in percentage points. We show estimated regression coefficients and their respective 95% confidence
intervals.

47

Mother on Daughter
Mother on Son

Father on Daughter
Father on Son

5

Effect size (p.p.)

4
3
2
1
0
-1
1

2

3

4

Primary

5

6

7

8

9

Lower Secondary

10

11

12

Upper Secondary

13

14

15

16

Tertiary

Figure 3 Effect of school construction on the probability of second generation individual attending at least n-years of schooling
Notes: Effect size measures the impact of one additional school constructed per 1,000 children in the mother’s or father’s birth district
on the probability of a second generation individual (daughter or son) attending at least n-years of schooling in percentage points.
Each dot represents a coefficient in a separate regression. We show estimated regression coefficients and their respective 95%
confidence intervals.

48

Table 1. Effect of school construction on first generation’s education
Mean / SD
Outcome
Years of
schooling

Men
8.022
(4.230)

Women
7.105
(4.215)

Completed
Primary

Description
Based on highest education level and grade attended.
Standard durations of study are assumed; grade
retentions are not counted
Indicator defined as 1 if highest diploma completed is
higher than or equal to Primary

0.813
(0.390)

0.727
(0.446)

Completed Lower
Secondary

Indictor defined as 1 if highest diploma completed is
higher than or equal to Lower Secondary

0.385
(0.487)

0.312
(0.463)

Completed Upper
Secondary

Indicator defined as 1 if highest diploma completed is
higher than or equal to Upper Secondary

0.338
(0.473)

0.261
(0.439)

Completed
Tertiary

Indicator defined as 1 if highest diploma completed is
higher than or equal to Tertiary

0.095
(0.293)

0.077
(0.267)

Literate

Literacy is a binary outcome and is self-reported

0.953
(0.212)

0.909
(0.287)

Education index

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women
0.268***
0.234***
(0.047)
(0.042)
[0.000]
[0.000]
0.026***
0.041***
(0.006)
(0.006)
[0.000]
[0.000]
0.023***
0.008
(0.006)
(0.007)
[0.000]
[0.422]
0.026***
0.005
(0.006)
(0.006)
[0.000]
[0.422]
-0.001
-0.003
(0.003)
(0.003)
[0.741]
[0.422]
0.015***
0.033***
(0.004)
(0.006)
[0.001]
[0.000]
0.068***
0.063***
(0.012)
(0.011)

Aggregates all 6 outcomes and standardizes it to the
mean of the old cohort in low-program regions.
Effects are interpreted as standard deviation changes
from the mean.
Notes: Effects of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s population
and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year dummies.
Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10%
levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 6 outcomes and are shown in square brackets. FDR qvalues indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. There are 72,367 and 71,423 observations in the men’s
and women’s regressions, respectively.
49

Table 2. Effect of school construction on first generation’s work and migration
Mean / SD
Outcome
Work

Men
0.948
(0.223)

Women
0.638
(0.481)

40.981
(17.115)

36.227
(18.792)

Indicator defined as 1 if individual reported working as an
employee as opposed to being self-employed, family/unpaid work
or freelance work, conditional on working
Indicator defined as 1 for working in a sector outside of
agriculture; conditional on working

0.327
(0.469)

0.236
(0.425)

0.560
(0.496)

0.547
(0.498)

Indicator for working in trade, hotel, restaurant, transportation;
warehousing, information, communication; finance and
insurance, and service sectors, conditional on working
Indicator defined as 1 if the current district of residence is not the
same as the individual’s birth district

0.364
(0.481)

0.459
(0.498)

0.273
(0.445)

0.245
(0.430)

Local migration

Indicator defined as 1 if migration occurred within the
individual’s birth province

0.108
(0.310)

0.106
(0.307)

Work/Migration
index

Aggregates all 7 outcomes and standardizes it to the mean of the
old cohort in low-program regions. Effects are interpreted as
standard deviation changes from the mean.

Work hours

Formal worker

Non-agriculture
sector
Service sector

Migrant

Description
Indicator defined as 1 if individual worked in the past week or
has an occupation but was temporarily absent from work in the
past week
Hours worked in the past week conditional on working, i.e.
missing for non-working individuals

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women
0.006**
0.003
(0.003)
(0.005)
[0.080]
[0.953]
0.258
0.157
(0.158)
(0.208)
[0.101]
[0.953]
0.011***
-0.005
(0.004)
(0.005)
[0.032]
[0.953]
0.012***
0.002
(0.005)
(0.005)
[0.032]
[0.953]
0.010***
-0.000
(0.004)
(0.006)
[0.032]
[0.953]
0.007**
0.008**
(0.003)
(0.003)
[0.085]
[0.166]
0.005*
0.005**
(0.003)
(0.003)
[0.101]
[0.229]
0.038***
0.011
(0.008)
(0.008)

Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools constructed in region
of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s population and enrollment in 1971, and water and
sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are
shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 7
outcomes and are shown in square brackets. FDR q-values indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. There are 72,367
observations for men and 68,574 conditional on working. There are 71,423 observations for women and 45,560 conditional on working.

50

Table 3. Effect of school construction on first generation’s living standards
Mean / SD
Outcome
Total (Rp10k)

Food (Rp10k)

Description

Education
(Rp10k)

Women

Household’s average monthly expenditure; means are reported 391.649
375.616
in 10,000 Indonesian Rupiah (IDR) increments. Total
(352.495) (343.823)
expenditures are made up of food and non-food expenditures.
194.443
184.222
(120.447) (121.110)

Non-food
(Rp10k)
Non-food/Total

Men

197.206
191.393
(271.884) (261.111)
Share of non-food over total expenditures.

44.592
(13.376)

45.144
(13.751)

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women
0.021***
(0.007)
[0.010]
0.014**
(0.007)
[0.036]
0.027***
(0.008)
[0.004]
0.287***
(0.110)
[0.024]
0.160**
(0.064)
[0.024]
0.032***
(0.010)

0.032***
(0.007)
[0.000]
0.028***
(0.007)
[0.000]
0.039***
(0.008)
[0.000]
0.237***
(0.102)
[0.021]
0.193**
(0.076)
[0.011]
0.047***
(0.009)

Education expenditures fall under non-food expenditures and
13.971
12.202
include admission, tuition, extracurricular fees, textbooks,
(33.167) (30.346)
stationery, and tutoring
Living standards Aggregates total, food, and education expenditures and
index
excludes non-food expenditure and non-food/total ratio to
avoid collinearity in the regression. Standardizes it to the
mean of the old cohort in low-program regions. Effects are
interpreted as standard deviation changes from the mean.
Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s population and
enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year dummies.
Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10%
levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 5 outcomes and are shown in square brackets. FDR q-values
indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. There are 68,687 and 66,249 observations in the men’s and women’s
regressions, respectively. We apply an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation to all monetary values. Estimates can be interpreted as
percentage changes.
51

Table 4. Effect of school construction on first generation’s taxes
Mean / SD
Outcome

Description

Men

Women

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women

Total (Rp10k)

Self-reported tax expenditures include the following
components and “other”

4.749
(11.433)

4.552
(10.743)

0.078***
(0.017)
[0.000]

0.123***
(0.019)
[0.000]

Land & building
(Rp10k)

Taxes on land and/or building ownership

0.465
(2.742)

0.506
(2.446)

0.041*
(0.022)
[0.120]

0.075***
(0.021)
[0.000]

Vehicle (Rp10k)

Motorized and non-motorized vehicle license fees

3.610
(8.076)

3.398
(7.821)

0.154***
(0.047)
[0.003]

0.267***
(0.052)
[0.000]

Local (Rp10k)

Levies/retributions; examples include:
neighborhood/citizen associations, garbage, security,
cemetery, parking, fees

0.469
(2.259)

0.468
(2.074)

0.048
(0.033)
[0.148]

0.082**
(0.039)
[0.036]

Tax index

Aggregates all 4 outcomes and standardizes it to the mean of
0.036*** 0.059***
the old cohort in low-program regions. Effects are
(0.009)
(0.010)
interpreted as standard deviation changes from the mean.
Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s population and
enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year dummies.
Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10%
levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 4 outcomes and are shown in square brackets. FDR qvalues indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. Total taxes includes land and building, vehicle, local, and
other taxes. Other taxes include vehicle citations and income taxes, which are largely voluntary and represent a small contribution to
government budget. “Other” taxes represent less than 5% of household tax expenditures. There are 68,687 and 66,249 observations
in the men’s and women’s regressions, respectively. We apply an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation to all monetary values.
Estimates can be interpreted as percentage changes.
52

Table 5. Effect of school construction on first generation’s health outcomes
Mean / SD
Outcome

Description

No health
complaint

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women

Men

Women

Self-reported indicator defined as 1 if did not experience
a health complaint in the past month

0.690
(0.463)

0.646
(0.478)

0.004
(0.004)
[0.352]

0.003
(0.004)
[0.771]

Non-disrupted
days

Self-reported number of days in the past month
(maximum of 30 days) that a health complaint did not
disrupt daily activities

28.851
(4.012)

28.801
(4.064)

0.042
(0.028)
[0.266]

0.027
(0.033)
[0.771]

No severe health
complaint

Self-reported indicator defined as 1 if did not experience
a severe health complaint in the past month

0.951
(0.216)

0.949
(0.221)

0.005***
(0.002)
[0.025]

-0.001
(0.002)
[0.771]

Health outcomes
index

Aggregates all 3 outcomes and standardizes it to the
0.015**
0.004
mean of the old cohort in low-program regions. Effects
(0.007)
(0.007)
are interpreted as standard deviation changes from the
mean.
Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s population and
enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year dummies.
Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10%
levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 3 outcomes and are shown in square brackets. FDR qvalues indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. There are 72,367 and 71,423 observations in the men’s and
women’s regressions, respectively.

53

Table 6. Effect of school construction on first generation’s marriage market
Mean / SD
Outcome

Description

Age of first
marriage

Age of first marriage for ever-married
household members

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women

Men

Women

25.219
(5.022)

20.888
(4.788)

0.058
(0.053)
[0.867]

0.050
(0.059)
[0.745]

Spouse’s characteristics:
Years of
Based on highest education level and grade
schooling
attended. Standard durations of study are
assumed; grade retentions are not counted

7.635
(4.081)

7.426
(4.192)

0.180***
(0.046)
[0.001]

0.116***
(0.043)
[0.057]

Completed
Primary

Indicator defined as 1 if highest diploma
completed is higher than or equal to Primary

0.797
(0.402)

0.773
(0.419)

0.038***
(0.006)
[0.000]

0.025***
(0.005)
[0.000]

Literate

Literacy is a binary outcome and is selfreported

0.939
(0.239)

0.944
(0.230)

0.027***
(0.006)
[0.000]

0.016***
(0.004)
[0.001]

Work

Indicator defined as 1 if individual worked in
the past week or has an occupation but was
temporarily absent from work in the past
week

0.614
(0.487)

0.918
(0.275)

0.003
(0.005)
[0.867]

-0.001
(0.004)
[0.745]

Formal worker

Indicator defined as 1 if individual reported
working as an employee as opposed to being
self-employed, family/unpaid work or
freelance work, conditional on working

0.239
(0.427)

0.293
(0.455)

0.003
(0.005)
[0.867]

0.005
(0.005)
[0.745]

Non-agriculture
sector

Indicator defined as 1 for working in a sector
outside of agriculture; conditional on
working

0.555
(0.497)

0.517
(0.500)

0.006
(0.005)
[0.867]

0.005
(0.007)
[0.745]

54

Migrant

Indicator defined as 1 if the current district
of residence is not the same as the
individual’s birth district

0.260
(0.439)

0.277
(0.448)

0.007*
(0.004)
[0.387]

0.008**
(0.003)
[0.164]

No health
complaint

Self-reported indicator defined as 1 if did not
experience a health complaint in the past
month

0.694
(0.461)

0.646
(0.478)

-0.001
(0.004)
[0.867]

0.006
(0.005)
[0.745]

0.910
(1.059)

0.559
(0.868)

-0.012
(0.017)
[0.867]

-0.035**
(0.016)
[0.559]

Own characteristics:
Children 0-14
Number of children aged 0-14 living in the
household
Marriage market
index

Aggregates all 10 outcomes and standardizes
0.066***
0.050***
it to the mean of the old cohort in low(0.015)
(0.013)
program regions. Effects are interpreted as
standard deviation changes from the mean.
For the index, we reverse the sign for
children 0-14 to indicate a positive outcome.
Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of
schools constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s
population and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with
birth year dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical
significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 10 outcomes and
are shown in square brackets. FDR q-values indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. Spouse’s
characteristics are defined for household heads and spouses in the sample. The spouse’s years of schooling, completed
primary, literacy, work, no health complaint regressions have 64,422 and 55,468 observations for men and women,
respectively, because it is set to missing if the spouse does not currently live in the household (divorced, widowed). The
spouse’s formal worker and non-agriculture sector regressions have 39,550 and 50,892 observations because it is set to
missing if the spouse does not currently live in the household and/or does not work. The age of first marriage regression
has 70,571 and 69,623 observations because it is set to missing if the individual is never married. The children 0-14
regression has 68,687 and 66,249 observations and corresponds to the number of household heads and spouses in Table 3.

55

Table 7. Effect of school construction on second generation’s education
Mean / SD
Outcome

Description

Father

Mother

7.967
(4.340)

8.854
(4.278)

Completed
Primary

Child’s years of school based on highest education
level and grade attended. Standard durations of study
are assumed; grade retentions are not counted
Indicator defined as 1 if child’s highest diploma
completed is higher than or equal to Primary

0.637
(0.481)

0.728
(0.445)

Completed Lower
Secondary

Indictor defined as 1 if child’s highest diploma
completed is higher than or equal to Lower Secondary

0.413
(0.492)

0.504
(0.500)

Completed Upper
Secondary

Indicator defined as 1 if child’s highest diploma
completed is higher than or equal to Upper Secondary

0.217
(0.412)

0.300
(0.458)

Completed
Tertiary

Indicator defined as 1 if child’s highest diploma
completed is higher than or equal to Tertiary

0.041
(0.198)

0.064
(0.245)

Age-for-grade

Indicator for child starting primary school by age 7
and never repeating school up to Upper Secondary

0.835
(0.371)

0.789
(0.408)

Second
generation
education
index

Aggregates all 6 outcomes and standardizes it to the
mean of the old cohort in low-program regions.
Effects are interpreted as standard deviation changes
from the mean.

Years of
schooling

Effect of Program
Exposure by:
Fathers on Mothers on
Children
Children
0.097***
0.169***
(0.032)
(0.045)
[0.014]
[0.001]
0.000
0.001
(0.002)
(0.003)
[0.928]
[0.796]
0.006*
0.015***
(0.003)
(0.005)
[0.171]
[0.006]
0.009**
0.014***
(0.004)
(0.005)
[0.061]
[0.013]
0.004*
0.008**
(0.002)
(0.003)
[0.171]
[0.044]
0.011***
0.018***
(0.004)
(0.005)
[0.030]
[0.002]
0.030**
0.056***
(0.013)
(0.016)

Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of father or mother’s young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in father or mother’s region of birth. All regressions control for parent’s district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, child age
fixed effects, children’s population and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted
with birth year dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at parent’s region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance
at 1, 5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 6 outcomes and are shown in square brackets. FDR qvalues indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. The survey restricts questions on educational attainment to individuals
aged 5 and older. There are 120,838 and 105,523 observations in the father’s and mother’s regressions, respectively.

56

Table 8. Effect of school construction on second generation’s education, by parent and
child gender

Parents born between:
Panel A: Sons and Daughters
Father exposed
Mother exposed
Father = Mother (p-value)
Mean
Observations
Panel B: Sons Only
Father exposed
Mother exposed
Father = Mother (p-value)
Mean
Observations
Panel C: Daughters Only
Father exposed

Years of schooling
(1)
(2)
1957-1962 and 1968-1972
1950-1980
0.001
(0.038)
0.160***
(0.059)
0.046
8.674
44,105

0.044**
(0.021)
0.118***
(0.035)
0.050
7.827
246,466

-0.038
(0.049)
0.139**
(0.069)
0.076
8.575
24,366

0.042
(0.026)
0.094**
(0.040)
0.267
7.787
133,896

0.036
0.046**
(0.051)
(0.023)
Mother exposed
0.188***
0.140***
(0.072)
(0.038)
Father = Mother (p-value)
0.134
0.026
Mean
8.796
7.875
Observations
19,739
112,570
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the
father and mother’s birth district level using the multiway clustering method of Cameron,
Gelbach, and Miller (2011). Father exposed indicates an interaction of the number of INPRES
primary schools constructed in the father’s birth district and an indicator that the father is in the
young cohort. Mother exposed is defined similarly. Father = Mother indicates the p-value testing
the equality of coefficients of father exposed and mother exposed within each panel. The sample
in Panel A consists of both sons and daughters, Panel B sons only, and Panel C daughters only.

57

Table 9. Mediators of the effect of school construction on second generation’s years of schooling

Mediator:
Panel A: Father
Schools constructed
* Young cohort
Mediator
Observations
Mean
Panel B: Mother
Schools constructed
* Young cohort
Mediator
Observations
Mean

Dependent Variable: Second generation’s years of schooling
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Work/
Living
Tax
Housing/ Nutrition
Health
Health
Migration Standards
Asset
investment

(9)
Marriage

(10)
All

0.080** 0.082***
(0.031)
(0.031)
0.386*** 0.652***
(0.015)
(0.017)
120,838 120,838
7.967
7.967

0.084***
(0.030)
0.539***
(0.017)
120,838
7.967

0.082***
(0.028)
0.772***
(0.019)
120,838
7.967

0.095*** 0.086***
(0.032)
(0.031)
0.112*** 0.165***
(0.018)
(0.013)
120,838 120,838
7.967
7.967

0.096***
(0.032)
0.045***
(0.011)
120,838
7.967

0.056*
(0.028)
0.616***
(0.014)
120,838
7.967

0.055**
(0.026)

0.169*** 0.166*** 0.130***
(0.045)
(0.045)
(0.044)
0.353*** 0.852***
(0.014)
(0.019)
105,523
105,523 105,523
8.854
8.854
8.854

0.138***
(0.041)
0.721***
(0.022)
105,523
8.854

0.133***
(0.039)
1.037***
(0.019)
105,523
8.854

0.163*** 0.156***
(0.045)
(0.043)
0.183*** 0.189***
(0.020)
(0.014)
105,523 105,523
8.854
8.854

0.168***
(0.045)
0.062***
(0.015)
105,523
8.854

0.137***
(0.043)
0.602***
(0.023)
105,523
8.854

0.111***
(0.039)

(1)
None

0.097***
(0.032)

120,838
7.967

120,838
7.967

105,523
8.854

Notes: Each column shows a regression of the years of schooling for a second generation child on parent’s exposure to the school construction program
and includes a potential mediator variable. These mediator variables (as indicated by the column heading) are the indexes reported in Figure 1. Regressions
are as in Table 7. Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of father or mother’s young cohort dummy interacted with the number of
schools constructed in father or mother’s region of birth. All regressions control for parent’s district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, child age
fixed effects, children’s population and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth
year dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at parent’s region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10%
levels based on unadjusted p-values.

58

Table 10. Spouse’s characteristics as mediators of the effect of school construction on second generation’s years of schooling

Mediator:

Panel A: Father
Schools
constructed *
Young cohort
Mediator
Observations
Mean
Panel B: Mother
Schools
constructed *
Young cohort
Mediator
Observations
Mean

Dependent Variable: Second generation’s years of schooling
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Years of Completed Literate
Work
Formal
NonMigrant
Schooling Primary
worker
agriculture
sector

(9)
No health
complaint

(10)
All

0.097***
(0.032)

0.069**
(0.030)

0.044
(0.028)

0.049*
(0.027)

120,838
7.967

0.146***
(0.004)
116,550
7.942

1.381***
(0.042)
116,550
7.942

1.798***
(0.087)
116,550
7.942

0.169***
(0.045)

0.126***
(0.045)

0.115***
(0.043)

105,523
8.854

0.176***
(0.004)
91,384
8.780

1.567***
(0.040)
91,384
8.780

(1)
None

0.093***
(0.032)

0.068*
(0.036)

0.070**
(0.034)

0.090***
(0.032)

0.092***
(0.032)

0.020
(0.032)

-0.054** 0.627***
(0.024)
(0.031)
116,550
70,861
7.942
7.799

0.940***
(0.030)
70,861
7.799

0.330***
(0.027)
116,550
7.942

-0.037*
(0.020)
116,550
7.942

70,861
7.799

0.125***
(0.044)

0.153*** 0.130***
(0.046)
(0.047)

0.126***
(0.044)

0.152***
(0.046)

0.155*** 0.091**
(0.046)
(0.043)

1.906***
(0.079)
91,384
8.780

-0.456*** 0.677***
(0.063)
(0.035)
91,384
85,036
8.780
8.659

1.007***
(0.034)
85,036
8.659

0.452***
(0.032)
91,384
8.780

-0.092***
(0.027)
91,384
8.780

85,036
8.659

Notes: Each column shows a regression of the years of schooling for a second generation child on parent’s exposure to the school construction program
and includes a potential mediator variable. These mediator variables (as indicated by the column heading) are spouse’s characteristics from Table 6.
Regressions are as in Table 7. Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of father or mother’s young cohort dummy interacted with the
number of schools constructed in father or mother’s region of birth. All regressions control for parent’s district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects,
child age fixed effects, children’s population and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted
with birth year dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at parent’s region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1,
5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values.

59

Table 11. Cost-benefit analysis of school construction
Parameters
Discount rate (%)
Teachers salary growth (Y/N)
Lifetime curvature (Y/N)
GDP/capita growth (%)
Students/schools
School lifetime (years)
Start paying taxes after age:
Recurrent costs/salaries multiplier
Teachers/schools
Life expectancy

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

5.0
N
N
0
120
20
18
1.25
3
60

5.0
Y
N
0
120
20
18
1.25
3
60

5.0
Y
Y
0
120
20
18
1.25
3
60

5.0
Y
Y
3.25
120
20
18
1.25
3
60

5.0
Y
Y
3.25
180
20
18
1.25
3
60

5.0
Y
Y
3.25
180
40
18
1.25
3
60

5.0
Y
Y
3.25
180
40
22
1.25
3
60

5.0
Y
Y
3.25
180
40
22
1.5
3
60

5.0
Y
Y
3.25
180
40
22
1.5
6
60

5.0
Y
Y
3.25
180
40
22
1.5
6
70

Costs
Schools construction
Teachers training
Teachers' salaries

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0.78 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0.12 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1.65
2.95
2.95
2.95
2.95
5.08
5.08
6.10
12.19
12.19

Benefits
Paid by cohorts born in
Collected between years

- - - - - - - - - - - - - -1968-1980- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1987-2040- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

1968-2000
1987-2060

- - - - - - - - - - - -1968-2000- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1991-2060- - - - - 1991-2070

Tax receipts
Net Benefit (Benefits - Costs)
Breakeven year

9.00
6.56
1998

9.00
5.26
2001

7.32
3.58
2007

6.11
2.37
2017

9.16
5.42
2009

19.87
14.00
2013

18.14
12.27
2016

18.14
11.25
2018

18.14
5.15
2031

20.74
7.76
2031

Living standards
Net Benefit (Benefits - Costs)
Breakeven year

61.69
59.24
1990

61.69
57.95
1991

53.18
49.44
1992

43.64
39.90
1995

65.46
61.72
1994

142.00
136.12
1994

128.34
122.47
1998

128.34
121.45
1999

128.34
115.36
2003

146.49
133.50
2003

Internal Rate of Return (%)
Tax receipts
10.48
8.87
7.68
6.64
8.10
9.11
8.53
8.05
6.05
6.37
Living standards
20.68
19.38
17.69
14.83
16.84
17.57
15.77
15.26
13.08
13.15
Note: All values are in billions of US dollars in 2016. Assumptions on number of students and teachers per school, recurrent costs/salaries multiplier, and
school lifetime follow Duflo (2001). Schools construction costs are obtained from Duflo (2001), teachers training from Daroesman (1972), and teachers’
salaries from various sources (see Appendix C for more details). Benefits are paid by cohorts that could attend the full 6 years of primary education until
their death. Breakeven year is the first year when the present discounted value of benefits exceeds that of costs. Tax receipts consist of direct tax
expenditures plus 10% VAT on total expenditures. Living standards is proxied with total household expenditures. Internal rate of return is the discount
rate that equates the present discounted value of benefits and costs.

60

Online Appendix for

Long-term and Intergenerational Effects of Education:
Evidence from School Construction in Indonesia

Richard Akresh
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Daniel Halim
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Marieke Kleemans
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

November 20, 2018

A. Online Appendix Figures and Tables

Appendix Figure A.1. Spatial distribution of schools constructed per 1,000 children between 1973 and 1979
Notes: Number of schools constructed between 1973 and 1979 and children’s population in 1971 are obtained from Duflo (2001) and
the Indonesian 1971 Census. The legend indicates the range and distribution of schools constructed across the Indonesian archipelago.
The numbers in parentheses refer to the number of districts that fall in that range. The total number of districts, 290, reflects their
existence in 1993. Districts often split over time; by March 2016, there were 511 districts. In our analyses, we maintain the 1993 district
boundaries to allow matching with Duflo (2001)’s school construction data.

1

Years of schooling
male
.6

Treatment effect

.4

.2

0

-.2
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
10
11
age in 1974

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

female
.6

Treatment effect

.4

.2

0

-.2
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
10
11
age in 1974

Appendix Figure A.2. Effect of school construction on first generation individual's years of
schooling by age in 1974
Notes: Sample is restricted to individuals aged 2-24 in 1974 (born between 1950 and 1972). Each
dot represents the interaction coefficient of the number of INPERS primary schools constructed in
one’s birth district and an age in 1974 dummy. The age group 19-24 is omitted from the regression.
The dashed lines represent 95% confidence bands.

2

Appendix Figure A.3. Effect of school construction on second generation’s years of
schooling, using alternative upper-bound age restrictions
Notes: In the top panel, treatment effects indicate the effect of one additional school constructed
per 1,000 children in the mother’s or father’s birth district on the years of schooling for second
generation individuals. Each dot represents a coefficient in a separate regression. We show
estimated regression coefficients and their respective 95% confidence intervals. Sample is
restricted to children from age 5 up to the value on the x-axis. Bottom panel shows the number of
additional observations added to each regression when the upper-age limit is increased.

3

40
0.011

0.047

Father
Mother

Kernel Density

30

20

10
0.018

0.065

0
0

.08
.02
.04
.06
Estimated Treatment Effect on Child's Education

.1

Note: estimates from 1000 random sample drawings; 5th and 95th percentiles indicated.

Appendix Figure A.4. Distribution of estimated treatment effects on second generation’s
years of schooling from simulated exposure assignment
Note: To address the selection issue about co-resident second generation children observed in the
Susenas data, we use the IFLS to obtain the fraction of children at each age who are born to old
and young cohort parents among all children no longer living with their parents. We then use these
IFLS-based fractions to randomly assign non-co-resident children at each age in the Susenas data
to either old or young cohort parents and to exclude the others from the regression. We then
simulate this randomization assignment procedure 1,000 times and estimate the second generation
years of schooling regression. This figure plots the density distribution of estimated coefficients
from these 1,000 repetitions for father’s and mother’s exposure to the school construction. Solid
lines indicate the distribution of father’s effects and dashed lines indicate the distribution of
mother’s effects. Vertical lines indicate the 5th and 95th percentiles.

4

male
.06

Treatment effect

.04

.02

0

-.02

-.04
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
10
11
Age in 1974

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

female
.06

Treatment effect

.04

.02

0

-.02

-.04
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
10
11
age in 1974

Appendix Figure A.5. Effect of school construction on household expenditures by age in
1974
Notes: Sample is restricted to individuals aged 2-24 in 1974 (born between 1950 and 1972). Each
dot represents the interaction coefficient of the number of INPERS primary schools constructed in
one’s birth district and an age in 1974 dummy. The age group 19-24 is omitted from the regression.
The dashed lines represent 95% confidence bands.

5

Female

Male

.1

Standardized Treatment Effect

.075

.05

.025

0

-.025
Education

Work/
Living
Migration standards

Tax

Housing/
Assets

Nutrition

First Generation

Health
investment

Health

Marriage
Market

Not on
Welfare
program

Education

Child
wellbeing

Second Generation

Appendix Figure A.6. Placebo effect of school construction on indexes of long-run outcomes for individuals too old to benefit
from primary school construction
Notes: Similar to Figure 1, where we compare individuals born between 1957-1962 (old cohort) and 1968-1972 (young cohort), we now
estimate a placebo regression by restricting the sample to individuals born between 1950-1956 (an older cohort) and 1957-1962 (old
cohort). Each dot represents the interaction coefficient of the number of INPRES schools built between 1973 and 1979 in one’s birth
district and a dummy for being born between 1957 and 1962. The solid lines represent 95% confidence bands. This figure serves as a
placebo test since the old cohort was too old to be enrolled in primary school when the schools were constructed, and thus could not
benefit from the school construction. The individual outcomes making up the index for each family are listed in Tables 1-7 and Appendix
Tables A.1 to A.5.
6

Female

Male

.1

Standardized Treatment Effect

.075

.05

.025

0

-.025
Education

Work/
Living
Migration standards

Tax

Housing/
Assets

Nutrition

First Generation

Health
investment

Health

Marriage
Market

Not on
Welfare
program

Education

Child
wellbeing

Second Generation

Appendix Figure A.7. Effect of school construction on indexes of long-run outcomes extending the sample to all individuals
born between 1950 and 1980
Notes: Similar to Figure 1, but regressions now include all individuals born between 1950 and 1980. Each dot represents the
interaction coefficient of the number of INPRES schools built between 1973 and 1979 in one’s birth district and a dummy for being
born between 1968 and 1980. The solid lines represent 95% confidence intervals. The individual outcomes making up the index for
each family are listed in Tables 1-7 and Appendix Tables A.1 to A.5.
7

Female

Male

.1

Standardized Treatment Effect

.075

.05

.025

0

-.025
Education

Work/
Living
Migration standards

Tax

Housing/
Assets

Nutrition

First Generation

Health
investment

Health

Marriage
Market

Not on
Welfare
program

Education

Child
wellbeing

Second Generation

Appendix Figure A.8. Effect of school construction on indexes of long-run outcomes using alternative control variables
Notes: Similar to Figure 1, but regressions now exclude the interaction of birth year dummies and water and sanitation programs from
the control variables. Each dot represents the interaction coefficient of the number of INPRES schools built between 1973 and 1979 in
one’s birth district and a dummy for being born between 1968 and 1972. The solid lines represent 95% confidence intervals. The
individual outcomes making up the index for each family are listed in Tables 1-7 and Appendix Tables A.1 to A.5.

8

Net Benefits (Billions USD)

140

Scenario 5

Living Standards

Scenario 10

90

Living Standards
40

Taxes
Taxes

-10
1980

2000

2020
Year

2040

2060

2080

Appendix Figure A.9. Discounted net benefits of school construction in Indonesia
Note: We plot net benefits (the difference in discounted total benefits and total costs) over time.
Benefits are either tax receipts collected by the government or improved living standards of the
citizens. Net benefits are reported in billions of 2016 USD. We present two scenarios using the
parameters from the cost-benefit model in column (5) and column (10) of Table 11. Solid lines
indicate net benefits—in taxes and living standards—under Scenario 5. Dashed lines indicate net
benefits under Scenario 10.

9

Appendix Table A.1. Effect of school construction on first generation’s housing and assets
Mean / SD
Outcome

Description

Men

Women

0.425
(0.494)

0.438
(0.496)

Urban

Indicator for residing in an urban area

Rent equivalent
(Rp10k)

Actual monthly rent if house is rented, or estimated
rent value if house is owned or leased by the
employer
House’s floor area in square meters

42.991
(56.342)

43.085
(56.573)

79.894
(58.651)

81.355
(59.726)

Expenditure on electricity, water, gas, and kerosene

15.714
(20.983)

15.729
(21.796)

Floor area
(m2)
Utilities
(Rp10k)
Asset index

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women
-0.001
(0.004)
[0.822]
0.012
(0.008)
[0.293]
1.229**
(0.566)
[0.119]
0.051**
(0.022)
[0.102]
0.030*
(0.017)
[0.223]
0.021**
(0.009)

0.002
(0.004)
[0.576]
0.028***
(0.008)
[0.001]
1.480***
(0.510)
[0.011]
0.085***
(0.024)
[0.002]
0.040**
(0.015)
[0.020]
0.035***
(0.009)

PCA index on binary ownerships of motorcycle, car,
-0.035
-0.069
home phone, computer, TV, jewelry, refrigerator,
(1.868)
(1.882)
water heater, LPG gas tube, boat, and air conditioner
Housing/Assets Aggregates all 5 outcomes and standardizes it to the
index
mean of the old cohort in low-program regions.
Effects are interpreted as standard deviation changes
from the mean.
Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s population
and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year
dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1,
5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 5 outcomes and are shown in square
brackets. FDR q-values indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. There are 68,687 and 66,249
observations in the men’s and women’s regressions, respectively. We apply an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation to all
monetary values. Estimates can be interpreted as percentage changes.

10

Appendix Table A.2. Effect of school construction on first generation’s nutrition
Mean / SD
Outcome

Description

Calories

Household's accounts of units of food consumed in
the past week (e.g. 5 kg of rice) are converted into
nutritional intake by the Central Statistics Agency.
Following their procedure, we convert the weekly
intake to monthly intake. In the regressions, we
apply an inverse hyperbolic transformation for
reasons discussed above. The mean of calories
intake is reported in 1 kcal increments. The means
of protein, fat, and carbohydrate intakes are reported
in 1 kg increments.

Protein

Fat

Carbohydrates

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women

Men

Women

260.915
(106.001)

249.699
(109.833)

0.005
(0.004)
[0.301]

0.018***
(0.005)
[0.001]

7.116
(3.254)

6.831
(3.330)

0.006
(0.005)
[0.301]

0.018***
(0.005)
[0.001]

6.074
(3.110)

5.810
(3.150)

0.011**
(0.004)
[0.061]

0.023***
(0.006)
[0.000]

40.869
(17.728)

39.040
(18.245)

0.005
(0.004)
[0.301]

0.017***
(0.005)
[0.001]

Nutrition index

Aggregates all 4 outcomes and standardizes it to the
0.014
0.039***
mean of the old cohort in low-program regions.
(0.009)
(0.010)
Effects are interpreted as standard deviation changes
from the mean.
Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s population
and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year
dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1,
5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 5 outcomes and are shown in square
brackets. FDR q-values indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. There are 68,687 and 66,249
observations in the men’s and women’s regressions, respectively. We apply an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation in the
regressions. Estimates can be interpreted as percentage changes.

11

Appendix Table A.3. Effect of school construction on first generation’s health investment
Mean / SD
Outcome

Description

Men

Women

Total health
expenditure
(Rp10k)
Preventive
measures
(Rp10k)
Family planning
(Rp10k)

Total monthly household health expenditures, which
aggregates curative, medicine, and preventive health
expenditures
Consist of pregnancy checks, immunizations, medical
check-ups, family planning, and other expenditures, e.g.,
vitamins, massage, gym memberships
A sub-category under preventive health expenditures,
which includes costs of contraceptives and consultations

7.517
(34.130)

7.961
(35.245)

0.744
(3.225)

0.671
(3.135)

0.286
(0.872)

0.219
(0.856)

Private hospital
(Rp10k)

A sub-category under curative health expenditures and is
distinct from expenditures on public hospitals, clinics,
and traditional healers
Health insurance is distinct from life, accidental, vehicle,
and house insurances

2.101
(20.718)

2.200
(22.266)

3.821
(16.425)

3.635
(14.047)

Health insurance
(Rp10k)
Health investment
index

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women
0.071*
(0.038)
[0.114]
0.242***
(0.068)
[0.002]
0.321***
(0.061)
[0.000]
0.048**
(0.023)
[0.114]
0.083
(0.055)
[0.134]
0.065***
(0.015)

0.055
(0.041)
[0.185]
0.193***
(0.071)
[0.013]
0.226***
(0.071)
[0.008]
0.075***
(0.024)
[0.008]
0.142***
(0.048)
[0.009]
0.063***
(0.016)

Aggregates all 5 outcomes and standardizes it to the
mean of the old cohort in low-program regions. Effects
are interpreted as standard deviation changes from the
mean.
Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s population and
enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year dummies.
Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10%
levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 5 outcomes and are shown in square brackets. FDR qvalues indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. There are 68,687 and 66,249 observations in the men’s and
women’s regressions, respectively. We apply an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation to all monetary values. Estimates can be
interpreted as percentage changes.

12

Appendix Table A.4. Effect of school construction on first generation’s welfare program participation
Mean / SD
Outcome

Description

Cash Transfer

Effect of Program
Exposure on:
Men
Women

Men

Women

Unconditional cash transfer to compensate for the removal
of gas price subsidy for poor households

0.041
(0.197)

0.039
(0.194)

-0.002
(0.002)
[0.742]

-0.001
(0.002)
[0.914]

Rice for Poor

Monthly rice allowance for poor households

0.392
(0.488)

0.406
(0.491)

0.002
(0.004)
[0.850]

-0.009*
(0.005)
[0.200]

Poor Student's
Assistance

Cash transfer conditional on school enrollment

0.056
(0.363)

0.127
(0.333)

-0.001
(0.004)
[0.850]

0.000
(0.004)
[0.914]

Social Protection
Card

Card provided to poor households, which entitles them to
social welfare programs mentioned above

0.186
(0.389)

0.180
(0.384)

-0.001
(0.004)
[0.850]

-0.000
(0.004)
[0.914]

Welfare program
nonparticipation
index

Aggregates all 4 outcomes and standardizes it to the mean
0.006
0.010
of the old cohort in low-program regions. Effects are
(0.011)
(0.012)
interpreted as standard deviation changes from the mean.
For the index, we reverse the sign for the 4 welfare
programs to indicate a positive outcome.
Notes: Means indicate the fraction of program recipients. Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort
dummy interacted with the number of schools constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort
of birth fixed effects, children’s population and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region
of birth interacted with birth year dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote
statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 4 outcomes and are
shown in square brackets. FDR q-values indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. There are 68,687 and
66,249 observations in the men’s and women’s regressions, respectively.

13

Appendix Table A.5. Effect of school construction on second generation’s child wellbeing
Mean / SD
Outcome

Non-work days

Non-work hours

No health
complaint
Non-disrupted
days
No severe health
complaint

Description

Father

Mother

Number of days not worked in the past week by the
child unconditional on work, i.e. 7 for non-working
individuals
Number of hours not worked in the past week by the
child unconditional on work, i.e. 168 for non-working
individuals
Self-reported indicator defined as 1 if child did not
experience a health complaint in the past month

5.317
(2.670)

4.820
(2.865)

156.679
(19.704)

153.047
(21.597)

0.797
(0.402)

0.823
(0.382)

29.492
(2.086)

29.550
(2.067)

0.978
(0.147)

0.980
(0.140)

Self-reported number of days in the past month
(maximum of 30 days) that a health complaint did not
disrupt child’s daily activities
Self-reported indicator defined as 1 if child did not
experience a severe health complaint in the past month

Second generation Aggregates all 5 outcomes and standardizes it to the
wellbeing
mean of the old cohort in low-program regions. Effects
index
are interpreted as standard deviation changes from the
mean.

Effect of Program
Exposure by:
Fathers on Mothers on
Children
Children
0.044**
(0.021)
[0.136]
0.299*
(0.157)
[0.173]
-0.008***
(0.003)
[0.042]
-0.026*
(0.016)
[0.198]
-0.000
(0.001)
[0.751]
-0.004
(0.009)

0.031
(0.019)
[0.463]
0.215
(0.151)
[0.463]
0.004
(0.003)
[0.463]
0.007
(0.015)
[0.893]
-0.000
(0.001)
[0.893]
0.017**
(0.008)

Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of father or mother’s young cohort dummy interacted with the number of
schools constructed in father or mother’s region of birth. All regressions control for parent’s district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects,
child age fixed effects, children’s population and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth
interacted with birth year dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at parent’s region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical
significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values. FDR q-values are computed over all 5 outcomes and are shown in square
brackets. FDR q-values indicate the probability of false positives among significant tests. The survey restricts questions on labor market outcomes
to individuals aged 10 and older; questions on health outcomes are asked to all individuals. There are 100,293 and 94,067 observations in the
father’s and mother’s regressions for labor market outcomes; 129,971 and 108,607 observations in the father’s and mother’s regressions for
health outcomes.

14

Appendix Table A.6. Spouse’s characteristics as mediators of the effect of school construction on first generation’s living
standards

Mediator:

(1)
None

Panel A: Father
Schools
0.021***
constructed *
(0.007)
Young cohort
Mediator
Observations
68,687
Mean
8.011
Panel B: Mother
Schools
0.032***
constructed *
(0.007)
Young cohort
Mediator
Observations
Mean

66,249
7.152

(2)
(3)
Years of Completed
Schooling
Primary

Dependent Variable: Living standards
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Literate
Work
Formal
Nonworker agricultur
e sector

(8)
Migrant

(9)
No health
complaint

(10)
All

0.018**
(0.008)

0.020***
(0.008)

0.008
(0.009)

-0.009
(0.006)
64,416
8.068

39,545
8.007

0.009
(0.008)

0.007
(0.007)

0.010
(0.007)

0.020***
(0.008)

0.019**
(0.009)

0.017**
(0.008)

0.062***
(0.001)
64,416
8.068

0.337***
(0.009)
64,416
8.068

0.374***
(0.014)
64,416
8.068

0.002
(0.008)
64,416
8.068

0.371***
(0.014)
39,545
8.007

0.480*** 0.273***
(0.010)
(0.011)
39,545
64,416
8.007
8.068

0.016**
(0.008)

0.015**
(0.007)

0.017**
(0.007)

0.023***
(0.007)

0.018**
(0.007)

0.018**
(0.007)

0.021***
(0.007)

0.023***
(0.007)

0.012
(0.007)

0.063***
(0.001)
55,449
7.313

0.351***
(0.009)
55,449
7.313

0.380*** -0.057***
(0.015)
(0.013)
55,449
55,449
7.313
7.313

0.319***
(0.012)
50,884
7.323

0.412*** 0.293***
(0.009)
(0.012)
50,884
55,449
7.323
7.313

0.030***
(0.007)
55,449
7.313

50,884
7.323

Notes: Each column shows a regression of the first generation’s living standards on exposure to the school construction program and includes a potential
mediator variable. These mediator variables (as indicated by the column heading) are spouse’s characteristics in Table 9. Regressions are as in row 1
of Table 3. Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of father or mother’s young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in father or mother’s region of birth. All regressions control for parent’s district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s
population and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year dummies. Robust
standard errors clustered at parent’s region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels based on
unadjusted p-values.

15

Appendix Table A.7. Effect of school construction on second generation’s years of schooling on various samples
Susenas
(1)

Susenas with Extreme
Assumptions
(2)
(3)
Assume Not
Assume
Exposed
Exposed

(4)
All

IFLS
(5)
Stayers

(6)
Movers

Panel A: Father
Schools constructed *
0.097***
0.021
0.000
0.103
0.030
-0.020
Young cohort
(0.032)
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.104)
(0.109)
(0.251)
Observations
120,838
644,675
644,675
6,186
4,048
2,138
Mean
7.967
7.731
7.731
7.807
6.434
10.396
Panel B: Mother
Schools constructed *
0.169***
0.052***
0.030*
0.300**
0.539***
0.126
Young cohort
(0.045)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.147)
(0.128)
(0.239)
Observations
105,523
644,675
644,675
7,227
3,756
3,471
Mean
8.854
7.731
7.731
9.038
8.097
10.034
Note: Column (1) is from Table 11. Column (2) and (3) estimate extreme bounds in which all non-co-resident
children aged 0-40 are assumed to have parents who are either exposed or not exposed (Manski, 1990). Columns
(4)-(6) use the IFLS 2014 Round 5 data. We match parents to their co-resident children (“Stayers”) found in the
household roster and to their non-co-resident children (“Movers”) in the respective module.

16

Appendix Table A.8. Effect of school construction on first generation's years of schooling
(extended cohort definitions)
Cohorts Included:

(1)
1957-1962
and
1968-1972

(2)
…+
1950-1956

(3)
…+
1963-1967

(4)
…+
1973-1980

(5)
1950-1980

Panel A: Male
Schools constructed *
0.268***
0.267***
0.221***
0.211***
0.172***
Young cohort
(0.047)
(0.039)
(0.037)
(0.044)
(0.032)
Observations
72,367
98,895
98,781
138,617
197,951
Mean
8.022
7.500
7.938
8.478
8.047
Panel B: Female
Schools constructed *
0.234***
0.219***
0.209***
0.245***
0.210***
Young cohort
(0.042)
(0.044)
(0.039)
(0.044)
(0.045)
Observations
71,423
97,268
99,843
140,142
200,644
Mean
7.105
6.496
6.901
7.790
7.194
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote
statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values. Column (1) sample is
restricted to individuals born in the sample period 1957-1962 (old cohort) and 1968-1972 (younger
cohort) and is the sample used in the analysis in the rest of the paper. Columns (2) to (5) extend the
sample as indicated in the column headings. Panel A looks only at males and Panel B only at
females. School constructed denotes the number of INPRES schools constructed per 1,000 children
in one’s birth district. Young cohort is an indicator defined as 1 for being born after 1967.

17

Appendix Table A.9. Effect of school construction on first generation's household expenditures (various transformations)
Total expenditure
Education expenditure
IHS Total
Log
Nominal
IHS PerIHS
Log
Nominal
IHS Percapita
Total
capita
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Panel A: Father
Schools constructed *
0.021*** 0.021*** 9.882***
0.016**
0.160**
0.013
0.309
0.140**
Young cohort
(0.007)
(0.007)
(3.628)
(0.007)
(0.064)
(0.010)
(0.309)
(0.056)
Observations
68,687
68,687
68,687
68,687
68,687
48,123
68,687
68,687
Mean
391.649
391.649
391.649
391.649
13.971
13.971
13.971
13.971
Panel B: Mother
Schools constructed *
0.032*** 0.032*** 11.022*** 0.018***
0.193**
-0.010
-0.191
0.167**
Young cohort
(0.007)
(0.007)
(2.583)
(0.007)
(0.076)
(0.014)
(0.383)
(0.067)
Observations
66,249
66,249
66,249
66,249
66,249
39,492
66,249
66,249
Mean
375.616
375.616
375.616
375.616
12.202
12.202
12.202
12.202
Notes: Effect of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in region of birth. All regressions control for district of birth and cohort of birth fixed effects, children’s population
and enrollment in 1971, and water and sanitation program intensities that vary by region of birth interacted with birth year
dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance at 1,
5, and 10% levels based on unadjusted p-values. All expenditure values are defined at the household level and refer to the
household’s average monthly expenditure. Nominal values are reported in 10,000 Indonesian Rupiah (IDR) increments. In 2016,
the average daily exchange rates was 1 USD=13,308 IDR. Columns (1)-(4) examine total household expenditure; columns (5)(8) examine education expenditure. Inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformations are applied to total and per capita household
expenditures (columns 1 and 4) and to total and per-capita education expenditures (columns 5 and 8). Log transformations are
applied in columns (2) and (6). Column (1) and (5) are the preferred specification and are the same as Table 3, rows 1 and 5.

18

B. Data Appendix
Two critical data issues about the Susenas 2016 survey are relevant for our analysis. First,
to estimate the difference-in-differences specification described in Section 3.1, it is necessary to
have information about an individual’s residence at birth. Current residence could be endogenous
to the school construction program as households might move to provide access to schools to
their children. Location of birth and location where the individual obtains their education are
highly correlated. 1 However, birth location is not endogenous with respect to the school
construction since all of the individuals in the analysis were born before the program started.
Given the importance of knowing where the individual was born, it is unfortunate that most
household surveys in Indonesia only provide information about the individual’s current location
of residence. This lack of information about an individual’s birth location is the case for the
Indonesian Labor Force Survey (Sakernas), the Indonesian Demographic and Health Surveys
(DHS), and many other rounds of the Susenas data, making them unavailable to use to analyze
the impacts of the school construction program. However, the Susenas 2016 is one exception to
this, as there is information on every individual’s district of birth.
Second, it is important that the data include a sufficiently large sample of individuals
from these specific birth cohorts (1957-1962 and 1968-1972). The Indonesia Family Life Survey
(IFLS) does contain information on each individual’s region of residence at birth, thus satisfying
the first criteria we outline above. We use the IFLS data to estimate our main difference-indifference specification exploiting variation across birth cohorts and regions in the number of
schools built. The IFLS is a longitudinal survey, and the first round was collected in 1993/1994.
Subsequent rounds were collected in 1997, 2000, 2007/2008, and most recently in 2014/2015.
Tracking across rounds has been extremely successful, with rates between 92 to 95 percent for
each IFLS round (Thomas et. al., 2012). Almost 88 percent of households in survey round one
were subsequently interviewed in all of the five survey rounds. In columns 1-3 of Appendix
Table B.1, we use the most recent survey round collected in 2014/2015 (IFLS 5) and include all
individuals interviewed in that round in the regressions. In columns 4-6, we begin with the IFLS
5 and then add in any other individuals from the other four rounds who might no longer be
present in the final round of the panel survey. We estimate regressions with different control
variables to see if that has any influence on the results. Column 3 (IFLS 5 only) and column 6
(IFLS 5 plus last observed round) correspond with our main results for men and women in Table
1 row 1. We do not observe any statistically significant relationship between exposure to the
school construction and increased years of schooling.
The IFLS and Susenas data have two key differences that might be relevant to explain
this situation. First, the Susenas data is nationally representative covering all 34 provinces and all
511 districts in the country. IFLS is representative of only 83% of the Indonesian population and
covers individuals living in 13 out of 27 provinces in the country. Appendix Figure B.1 shows a
map of Indonesian districts with the districts shaded in gray indicating which ones the IFLS
survey covers. Comparing Figure 2 (map of Indonesia indicating the spatial distribution of
school constructed per 1,000 children) and Appendix Figure B.1 highlights that many of the
1

Based on the IFLS data, almost 92 percent of children at age 12 still live in the same district where they were born
(Duflo, 2001). Likewise, in the Susenas 2016, 93.2 percent of children at age 12 live in the same district where they
were born.

19

districts that had many schools constructed are not included in the IFLS survey. In column 7 of
Appendix Table B.1, we present results using the Susenas 2016 data but restricting the analysis
to only those districts covered in the IFLS survey. The coefficients from the regression with this
restricted sample are somewhat smaller (0.211 for men and 0.166 for women) compared to the
full sample from Table 1 (0.268 for men and 0.234 for women), but the results are still
statistically significant and economically meaningful. This is evidence that the different
geographic coverage of the IFLS and the Susenas is unlikely to explain the lack of relationship
between school construction and years of schooling in the IFLS data (columns 1-6). Second, note
that the number of observations in the IFLS regressions for women is only 2,546 if using only
IFLS 5 or 2,783 if using IFLS 5 plus the last observed round for any individual. 2 This compares
with 71,423 observations for women in the regression using the Susenas data. While the point
estimates for women are similar across the two datasets, this difference in sample size could
explain the much larger standard errors in the regressions using IFLS data.

2

Using the extended cohort of individuals born between 1950 and 1980 roughly triples the sample size (for men to
7,093 and 7,666 and for women to 7,382 and 8,018 in the IFLS 5 and IFLS 5 plus last observed round, respectively),
but the results are still not statistically significant.

20

Appendix Table B.1. Effect of school construction on first generation's education using IFLS data
Data source:

Dependent variable: Years of schooling
Panel A: Male
Schools constructed * Young cohort
Observations
Children population in 1971
Enrollment in 1971
Water and sanitation program
Panel B: Female
Schools constructed * Young cohort

IFLS 5 (2014/2015)

IFLS 5 + last observed round

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Susenas 2016
restricted to IFLS
districts
(7)

-0.144
(0.141)
2,389
X

-0.122
(0.148)
2,389
X
X

-0.032
(0.187)
2,389
X
X
X

-0.224
(0.160)
2,609
X

-0.186
(0.173)
2,609
X
X

-0.220
(0.204)
2,609
X
X
X

0.211***
(0.063)
54,646
X
X
X

0.037
(0.174)
2,546
X

0.053
(0.176)
2,546
X
X

0.207
0.215
0.229
0.318
0.166***
(0.214)
(0.151) (0.148) (0.198)
(0.056)
Observations
2,546
2,783
2,783
2,783
54,508
Children population in 1971
X
X
X
X
X
Enrollment in 1971
X
X
X
X
Water and sanitation program
X
X
X
Notes: Effects of program exposure are the regression coefficients of young cohort dummy interacted with the number of schools
constructed in region of birth. Standard errors clustered at region of birth are shown in parentheses. Stars denote statistical
significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels based on regular p-values. Columns 1-3 uses Indonesia Family Life Survey data, Round 5
(2014/2015). Columns 4-6 uses IFLS round 5 data plus the observation from the last observed round for any individual not in round
5. Column 7 uses Susenas 2016 data that is restricted to the IFLS districts, which cover 83% of the Indonesian population.

21

Appendix Figure B.1. Map of Indonesia with districts shaded in gray indicating coverage in Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS)
Notes: IFLS survey is representative of 83% of the Indonesian population and covers individuals living in 13 of the 27 provinces in the country.
The districts shaded in gray are included in the IFLS household survey, while the Susenas 2016 used in the main analysis in the paper is
nationally representative and includes all districts in the country.

22

C. Cost-benefit Calculations Appendix
Discount rate
World Development Indicators collects real interest rates in Indonesia between 1987 and 2017. It
averages 5.77 percent per year. Since it does not extend as far as our sample period in 1973, we
assume a constant annual discount rate of 5 percent.
Teachers’ salary growth
We first assume there is no real salary growth over the years and use Duflo (2001)’s reported
teacher’s salary in 1973. Subsequently, we allow for linear growth using teacher’s salary
observations in 1970 by Daroesman (1972), 1973 by Duflo (2001), Intercensal Surveys 1976 and
1995, and Labor Force Surveys 2000, 2005 and 2010. 3 Teachers are paid for the lifetime of the
schools
Lifetime curvature
Individuals’ tax payments and living standards generally follow an inverted-U shape, where they
peak at around age 40-50. In our Susenas data, we observe individuals at their peak. To model
the lifetime curvature of tax payments and living standards, we assume the same average effect
on taxes and living standards across ages but different means at different ages. A 20-year old
male, for instance, only spends $2,373 annually, compared to the mean in of our observed
sample, $3,531, as implied in Table 3.
GDP/capita growth
GDP per-capita growth is obtained from World Development Indicators. We took the average
between 1961 and 2017: 3.25 percent per year.
Number of students and teachers per school and recurrent costs/salaries multiplier
We follow Duflo (2001) in assuming 120 students/school, 3 teachers/school, and 25% recurrent
administrative costs in addition to teachers’ salaries. These imply a class size of 20 students
across 6 grades of primary education and 1 teacher per grade. The latter is reasonable given that
schools often run two sessions per day: morning and afternoon classes.
Individuals start paying taxes after age 18
We first assume that individuals start paying taxes after finishing Upper Secondary education at
age 18. We subsequently relax this assumption to age 22, after individuals finish Tertiary
education.
School lifetime
Daroesman (1971) and Duflo (2001) report that schools were expected to last for 20 years. We
first use this assumption. We subsequently relax this assumption to 40 years because many
INPRES schools are still in-use as of 2016.
Life expectancy

3

We drop Duflo (2001)’s reported salary in 1995 because it implies a 9 percent real growth per year and it is much
higher than the linear fit would have predicted. It is also higher than observations in 2000, 2005, and 2010.

23

World Development Indicators suggest an average of 56.6 years of life expectancy at birth for
individuals born between 1968 and 1980. Conditional on making it to primary school age, the
life expectancy is likely higher. We assume a life expectancy of 60 years throughout and then
relax this assumption in the final column.
Share of men and women in affected cohorts
We construct a weighted average of the treatment effects on men and women. The share of
women in the affected cohort is 0.498. For simplicity, we assume an equal share of men and
women.

24

