NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION OVER THE LONG RUN
Bryan Kelly
Dimitris Papanikolaou
Amit Seru
Matt Taddy
Working Paper 25266
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25266

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018, Revised February 2020

We thank Pierre Azoulay, Nicholas Bloom, Diego Comin, Carola Frydman, Kyle Jensen, and
seminar participants at AQR, Harvard, and the NBER Summer Institute for valuable comments
and discussions. We are grateful to Kinbert Chou, Inyoung Choi, Jinpu Yang and Jiaheng Yu for
excellent research assistance and to Enrico Berkes and Cagri Akkoyun for sharing their data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25266.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Bryan Kelly, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Matt Taddy. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Technological Innovation over the Long Run
Bryan Kelly, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Matt Taddy
NBER Working Paper No. 25266
November 2018, Revised February 2020
JEL No. E22,E32,N1,O3,O4
ABSTRACT
We use textual analysis of high-dimensional data from patent documents to create new indicators
of technological innovation. We identify significant patents based on textual similarity of a given
patent to previous and subsequent work: these patents are distinct from previous work but are
related to subsequent innovations. Our measure of patent significance is predictive of future
citations and correlates strongly with measures of market value. We identify breakthrough
innovations as the most significant patents – those in the right tail of our measure – to construct
indices of technological change at the aggregate, sectoral, and firm level. Our technology indices
span two centuries (1840-2010) and cover innovation by private and public firms, as well as nonprofit organizations and the US government. These indices capture the evolution of technological
waves over a long time span and are strong predictors of productivity at the aggregate and
sectoral level.
Bryan Kelly
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Ave.
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
bryan.kelly@yale.edu

Amit Seru
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
and NBER
aseru@stanford.edu

Dimitris Papanikolaou
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive, Office 4319
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Matt Taddy
Amazon
mataddy@gmail.com

Over the last two centuries, real output per capita in the United States has increased
substantially more than the growth of inputs to production, such as the number of hours worked
or the amount of capital used. Thus, much of economic growth is attributed to improvements
in productivity—which however appears to have slowed down in the recent decades (Gordon,
2016). Similarly, there are significant differences in productivity across firms or establishments,
which are rather persistent. Understanding the economic factors behind these differences in
productivity across time and space has been at the forefront of the economic agenda (Syverson,
2011). Models of endogenous growth ascribe most of these movements to fluctuations in the
rate of technological progress. However, both this link and the underlying economic forces
are hard to pin down due to difficulty in measuring degree of technological progress over time.
Our goal is to fill this gap by constructing indices of technological progress at the aggregate
and sectoral level that are consistently available—and comparable—over long periods of time.
Patent statistics are a useful starting point. Though not all innovations are patented,
patent statistics are by definition related to inventiveness.1 A major obstacle in inferring the
degree of technological progress from patent data is that patents vary greatly in their technical
and economic significance. While measures such as citations a patent receives in the future
have been used to address this obstacle, these metrics are not uniformly and consistently
available over time, making it difficult to compare citation counts of patents across cohorts.2
More recently, Kogan et al. (2017) propose a new measure of the private, economic value of
new innovations that is based on stock market reactions to patent grants. However, their
measure is only available for patents that are assigned to publicly traded firms after 1927.
Hence, time-series fluctuations in indices derived from their measure could be affected by shifts
in innovative activity between public firms and other entities—which include private firms,
research institutions or government agencies.
We apply state-of-the-art techniques in textual analysis on the high-dimensional data from
patent documents to construct indices of breakthrough innovations. Breakthrough innovations
represent distinct improvements in the technological frontier and which become the new
foundation upon which subsequent inventions are built. If citation data were objectively
determined and consistently available, a breakthrough innovation would receive a large number
1

Griliches (1998) writes on statistics that are based on patents: “they are available; they are by definition
related to inventiveness, and they are based on what appears to be an objective and only slowly changing
standard. No wonder that the idea that something interesting might be learned from such data tends to be
rediscovered in each generation.”
2
Patent citations are only consistently recorded by the USPTO in patent documents after 1945. Prior to
1945, citations sometimes appear inside the text of the patent document, but they are much less common than
in the post-war era. For instance, consider patent 388,116 issued to William Seward Burroughs on August 1888
for a ‘calculating machine’, one of the precursors to the modern computer. Burroughs’ patent has just three
citations as of March 2018. Similarly, patent 174,465 issued to Graham Bell for the telephone in February 1876
has the first recorded citation in 1956 (from patent 2,807,666). Until March 2018, it has received a total of 10
citations. These issues are not confined to the pre-1945 period: one of the first computer patents 2,668,661
issued in 1954 to George Stibitz at Bell Labs has just 15 citations as of March 2018.

2

of future citations. Given the absence of consistently available citation data, we instead
propose a measure that is similar in spirit that can be constructed by analyzing the text of
patent documents. We use advances in textual analysis to create links between each new
invention and the set of existing and subsequent patents. Specifically, we construct measures
of textual similarity to quantify commonality in the topical content of each pair of patents.
We then identify significant (high quality) patents as those whose content is distinct from prior
patents (is novel), but is similar to future patents (is impactful). Since our indicators of the
significance of a patent require no other inputs besides the text of the patent document, they
are consistently available for the entire history of US patents spanning nearly two centuries of
innovation (1840–2010).
We validate our indicator of a significance of a patent along several dimensions. We first
focus on the sample when citation data is available. We find that our indicator is significantly
correlated with patent citations. More importantly however, we find that our text-based patent
indicators are significant predictors of future citations—indicating that they provide a (much)
more timely assessment of a patent’s quality than citation counts. Within a few years of
a patent’s arrival, text-based similarity measures are able to reach an assessment of patent
quality that predicts citation counts decades henceforth.
To examine how our quality indicator performs in evaluating older patents, we identify a
set of major technological breakthroughs of the 19th and 20th century using the help of research
assistants. Our indicators of patent significance perform substantially better than citation
counts in identifying these major technological breakthroughs—especially when citations are
measured over the same horizon as our indicator, but often even when they are measured using
the entire sample. These breakthroughs include watershed inventions such as the telegraph,
the elevator, the typewriter, the telephone, electric light, the airplane, frozen foods, television,
plastics, computers and advances in modern genetics. This superior performance is not only
driven by the fact that citations are sparsely recorded prior to 1945. Even in the more recent
period, we find that our indicators often perform better than citations (over the same horizon)
in identifying major technological breakthroughs—including for instance, recent advances in
molecular biology and genetics.
As a further validation of our indicators we explore their relation to measures of private
values. We emphasize that we view our indicators as more likely to be measuring the scientific
value of a patent, given that it captures the extent to which novel contributions are adopted by
subsequent technologies. That said, prior work has documented a strong correlation between
patent citations (which form the inspiration for our measure) and measures of market value (e.g.
Hall et al., 2005; Kogan et al., 2017).3 Along these lines, we show that our quality indicator is
3

The scientific and private value of a patent need not coincide. For instance, a patent may represent only a
minor scientific advance, yet be very effective in restricting competition, and thus generate large private rents.
That said, models of innovation with endogenous markups (Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Grossman and Helpman,

3

significantly correlated with the Kogan et al. (2017) measure of each patent’s economic value.
Our most conservative specification compares two patents that are granted to the same firm
in the same year: in this case, a one standard deviation increase in our quality measure is
associated with a 0.4 to 1.2 percentage point increase in patent value.
Armed with a consistent measure of the significance of a patent, we next set out to analyze
long-run trends in innovation. We begin by identifying breakthrough innovations—patents
that lie at the right tail of our measure. We construct time-series indices that describe the
arrival intensity of breakthrough innovations, which requires us to compare patents of different
cohorts in terms of quality. To ensure that the time-variation in our measure is not driven
by changes in language—or measurement error due variances in the quality of the optical
recognition algorithm applied to the text document—we remove calendar year-specific average
from our measure. Our operating assumption is that such shifts in language (or measurement
error) likely affect all patents symmetrically. We then construct indices of breakthrough
innovation—at the aggregate, sectoral, and firm level—by counting the number of patents
each year whose quality is in the top fifth percentile of our quality measure (net of year fixed
effects). For comparison, we also construct corresponding indices using forward citation counts
(net of year fixed effects), measured either over specific horizons or over the entire sample.
Our aggregate innovation index uncovers three major technological waves: the second
Industrial Revolution (mid- to late 19th century), the 1920s and 1930s, and the post–1980
period. Examining the technology areas where these breakthrough innovations occurred, we
find that advances in electricity and transportation play a role in the 1880s; agriculture in the
1900s; chemicals and electricity in the 1920s and 1930s; and computers and communication in
the post-1960s. Our innovation index is a strong predictor of aggregate total factor productivity
during this period: a one-standard deviation increase in our index is associated with a 0.5 to 2
percentage points higher annual productivity growth over the next five to ten years.
We create sectoral indices of technological breakthroughs that span the entire sample
by mapping technology areas to industries. Sectors that have breakthrough innovations
experience faster growth in productivity than sectors that do not. In specifications that
examine within-industry fluctuations in productivity (that is, net of industry and time effects),
we find that a one-standard deviation increase in our innovation index is associated with 1
percentage point higher annual productivity growth over the next five years. In contrast to
our text-based breakthrough index, the citations-based index is not statistically significantly
related to industry productivity.
In sum, our paper provides a measure of technological innovation that is consistent across
time and space. Our text-based indicator of patent quality are complementary to forward
1991) imply that the markup a technology leader can charge is related to the improvement in quality relative
to the second-best alternative.

4

citations and have distinct advantages. First, it is consistently available for the entire 1840–2010
period, which allows us to construct indices of the level of technological change by comparing
patents across cohorts. Second, it incorporates information faster than patent citations. Our
indicator predicts future citations and, estimated over relatively short horizons post patent
filing date (up to 5 years), it often shows a stronger correlation with real outcomes than
citations measured over the same period.
Our work is connected to several strands of the literature. First, patent statistics offer a
promising avenue in constructing indices of technological progress. Shea (1999) constructs
direct measures of technology innovation using patents and R&D spending and finds a weak
relationship between TFP and technology shocks. The results in Shea (1999) likely illustrate a
shortcoming of simple patent counts, since they ignore the wide heterogeneity in the economic
value of patents (Griliches, 1998; Kortum and Lerner, 1998). Furthermore, fluctuations in the
number of patents granted are often the result of changes in patent regulation, or the quantity
of resources available to the US patent office (see e.g. Griliches, 1990; Hall and Ziedonis,
2001). As a result, a larger number of patents does not necessarily imply greater technological
innovation (for more details, see the discussion in Griliches, 1998). Alexopoulos (2011) proposes
an alternative measure that is based on books published in the field of technology. Though the
measure in Alexopoulos (2011) overcomes many of the shortcomings of patent counts, it is only
available at the aggregate level and for only the later part of the 20th century. By contrast,
our measure is available at the individual patent level and is available since the 1840s.
Second, our analysis is related to work on patent valuation (see, e.g. Pakes, 1985; Austin,
1993; Hall et al., 2005; Nicholas, 2008; Kogan et al., 2017). The advantage of using financial
data in inferring the (private) value of patents is that asset prices are forward-looking and
hence provide us with an estimate of the private value to the patent holder that is based
on ex-ante information. In particular, Pakes (1985) examines the relation between patents
and the stock market rate of return in a sample of 120 firms during the 1968–1975 period.
His estimates imply that, on average, an unexpected arrival of one patent is associated with
an increase in the firm’s market value of $810,000. Hall et al. (2005) finds that the current
stock of patent citations carries information for firms’ market valuations beyond that in past
R&D expenditures and simple patent counts. Our results are similar; measures of intangibles
constructed using our quality indicators contain information on firm values that is not captured
by R&D, patent counts, or citation counts. Closest to our paper, Kogan et al. (2017) propose
a new measure of the private, economic value of new innovations that is based on stock market
reactions to patent grants. Kline et al. (2017) extrapolate their measure to a broader sample
of patents to private firms. By construction, our indicators measure the scientific novelty and
impact of the patent, which need not perfectly coincide with the private value of a patent.
Our paper is part of a recent but growing effort in applying advances in textual analysis to
5

patent documents. Closest to our work is Balsmeier et al. (2018), who as part of a broader
effort in disambiguating assignee and inventor names, also construct a patent-level measure
of novelty starting in 1975. They define a novel patent as one that contains words that did
not previously appear in the entire set of patent documents in their sample period. As a
part of our definition of breakthrough patents over last two centuries, we also construct a
measure of novelty. While the two measures are related, our construction of novel patent is
somewhat different. We define a novel patent as one that is textually dis-similar from recent
patents, defined as those within five years of the patents application date, where our similarity
calculation overweighs uncommon words. As our analysis shows, breakthrough patents, which
builds on our measure of novelty, strongly relate with metrics that might be associated with
innovative activity.
Last, our paper makes a methodological contribution to estimating document similarity.
Specifically, a key challenge in analyzing the textual similarity between documents is separating
differences in writing style (language) from differences in content. Patent documents have the
advantage that they largely contain scientific and legal terms, whose use has changed only
slowly. However, given that our analysis spans almost two centuries of data, this is an important
concern. We follow the literature on text analysis and construct measures of similarity that
place more weight on important terms—that is, terms that are relatively uncommon across
documents based on the inverse document frequency (IDF) (for a survey of existing methods,
see e.g., Gentzkow et al., 2017). This static approach is ill-suited to our purposes; the process
of innovation is often associated with the introduction of new scientific terminilogy. Hence,
we introduce a dynamic modification to the existing approach that is crucial to our purposes.
Specifically, we instead weigh terms according to the frequency in which they appear in patent
documents up until the patent document is filed. As a result, the appropriate weight that terms
receive in our similarity calculation evolves over time as scientific terms become more common
or as natural language evolves.

I. Measuring the Significance of a Patent
In this section, we describe the construction of our metrics of patent significance. Throughout
the paper, we will use the terms significant and high-quality patent interchangeably. We
describe our data sources in Section A, then Section B describes our measure of similarity
between patent documents. Section C contains the bulk of our analysis, which focuses on
constructing a patent-level measure of quality that is based on textual similarity.

6

A. Data
We briefly overview our conversion of unstructured patent text data into a numerical format
suitable for statistical analysis. To begin, we build our collection of patent documents from two
sources. The first is the USPTO patent search website, which records all patents beginning
from 1976. Our web crawler collected the text content of patents from this site, which includes
patent numbers 3,930,271 through 9,113,586. The records in this sample are comparatively
easy to process as they are available in HTML format with standardized fields.
For patents granted prior to 1976, we collect patent text from our second main datasource,
Google’s patent search engine. For the pre-1976 patent records, we recover all of the fields
listed above with the exception of inventor/assignee addresses (Google only provides their
names), examiner, and attorney. Some parts of our analysis rely on firm-level aggregation of
patent assignments. We match patents to firms by firm name and patent assignee name. Our
procedure broadly follows that of Kogan et al. (2017) with adaptations for our more extensive
sample. In addition to the citation data we scrape from Google, we obtain complementary
information on patent citations from Berkes (2016) and the USPTO. The data in Berkes (2016)
includes citations that are listed inside the patent document and which are sometimes missed
by Google. Nevertheless, the likelihood of a citation being recorded is significantly higher in
the post-1945 than in the pre-1945. When this consideration is relevant, we examine results
separately for the pre- and post-1945 periods.
To represent patent text as numerical data, we convert it into a document term matrix
(DTM), denoted C. Columns of C correspond to words and rows correspond patents. Each
element of C, denoted cpw , counts the number of times a given one-word phrase (indexed by w)
is used in a particular patent (indexed by p), after imposing a number of filters to remove stop
words, punctuation, and so forth. We provide a detailed step-by-step account of our DTM
construction in Appendix V. Our final dictionary includes 1,685,416 terms in the full sample
of over nine million patents.

B. Measuring patent similarity
The basic building block for our patent-level quality measure using patent text is the textual
similarity between pairs of patents. Here, we discuss the construction of our textual similarity
measure in more detail.
1. Definition of patent similarity
A key consideration in devising a similarity metric for a pair of text documents is to appropriately
weigh words by their importance. It is more informative if terms such as ‘electricity’ and
‘petroleum’ enter more prominently into the similarity calculation than common words like
7

‘process’ or ‘inventor.’ In textual analysis, a leading approach to overweighting terms that
are most diagnostic of a document’s topical content is the “term-frequency-inverse-documentfrequency” transformation of word counts:
T F IDFpw ≡ T Fpw × IDFw .

(1)

The first component of the weight, term frequency (TF), is defined as
cpw
T Fpw ≡ P
,
k cpk

(2)

and describes the relative importance of term w for patent p. It counts how many times term
w appears in patent p adjusted for the patent’s length. The second component is the inverse
document frequency (IDF) of term w, which is defined as

IDFw ≡ log

# documents in sample
# documents that include term w


.

(3)

IDF measures the informativeness of term w by under-weighing common words that appear in
many documents, as these are less diagnostic of the content of any individual document.
The product of these two terms, T F IDF , describes the importance of a given word or
phrase w in a given document p. Words that appear infrequently in a document tend to have
low T F IDF scores (due to low T F ), as do common words that appear in many documents (due
to low IDF ). A high value of T F IDFpw indicates that term w appears relatively frequently
in document p but does not appear in most other documents, thus conveying that word w is
especially representative of document p’s semantic content.
For our purposes, this traditional weighting scheme is not ideal because it ignores the
temporal ordering of patents. In particular, we are interested in the novelty or impact of
patent p’s text content given the history of innovation leading up to the development of p.
Consider for example Nikola Tesla’s famous 1888 patent (number 381,968) of an AC motor,
which was among the first patents to use the phrase “alternating current,” a phrase used with
great frequency throughout the 20th century. Standard IDF would sharply de-emphasize this
term in the T F IDF vector representing Tesla’s patent because so many patents subsequently
used this phrase so intensively. T F IDF would therefore give a misleading, and quite inverted,
portrayal of the patent’s innovativeness.
To overcome this issue, we devise and analyze a modified version of the traditional T F IDF
measure. In particular, in place of (3), we instead construct a retrospective, or ‘point-in-time’
version of inverse document frequency. Therefore, we define the “backward-IDF ” of term w
for filing year t, (denoted by BIDFwt ) as the log frequency of documents containing w in any

8

patent filed prior to filing year t. More specifically, backward-IDF is defined as:

BIDFwt = log

# patents prior to t
1 + # documents prior to t that include term w


.

(4)

This retrospective document frequency measure evolves as a term becomes more or less widely
used over time, giving a temporally appropriate weighting to a patent’s usage of each term. It
reflects the history of invention up to, but not beyond, the new patent’s arrival.
Continuing with the Tesla example discussed above, consider measuring the similarity
between Tesla’s AC motor patent, and patent 4,998,526 assigned in 1990 to General Motors
Corporation for an “Alternating current ignition system.” An important question emerges:
What is the most sensible IDF to use when calculating T F IDF similarity of these two
patents. One possibility is to use BIDF for the year 1888 in the T F IDF of Tesla’s patent,
and BIDF as of 1990 for GM’s patent. However, over the 102 years between these two
patents, “alternating current” appears in tens of thousands of other patents. Thus, the use of
“alternating current” by GM would be greatly down-weighted with a 1990 BIDF adjustment,
and thus the co-occurrence of “alternating current” in these two patents would have a small
contribution to the pair’s similarity.
One of the central goals of this paper is to quantify the impact of patents on future
technological innovations. To best reflect quantify this impact, we instead calculate pairwise
similarity by applying to both patent counts the BIDF corresponding to the earlier of the two
patents. Thus, to calculate the similarity between the patent pair in this Tesla/GM example,
the term frequencies of both are normalized by the 1888 backward-IDF .
In sum, we construct the similarity between the patent pair (i, j) as follows. First, for both
patents we construct our modified-version of the T F IDF for each term w in patent i as
T F BIDFw,i,t = T Fw,i × BIDFw,t ,

t ≡ min(filing year for i, filing year for j)

(5)

and likewise for patent j. These are arranged in a W -vector T F BIDFi,t where W is the size
of the set union for terms in pair (i, j). Next, each T F BIDF vector is normalized to have
unit length,
Vi,t =

T F BIDFi,t
.
||T F BIDFi,t ||

(6)

Finally, we calculate the cosine similarity between the two normalized vectors:
ρi,j = Vi,t · Vj,t .

(7)

Our similarity measure is closely related to Pearson correlation, with the difference that
T F BIDF is not centered before the dot product is applied. Because T F BIDF is non-

9

negative, ρi,j lies in the interval [0,1]. Patents that use the exact same set of words in the same
proportion will have similarity of one, while patents with no overlapping terms have similarity
of zero.
Pairwise similarities constitute a high-dimensional matrix of approximate dimension 9
million × 9 million, which leads to over 800 terabytes of data. To reduce the computational
burden when studying similarities, we set similarities below 5% to zero and get roughly 20
terabytes of data. This affects 93.4% of patent pairs. Patents with such low text similarity are,
for all intents and purposes, completely unrelated, yet introduce a large computational load
in the types of analyses we pursue. Replacing these approximate zeros with similarity scores
of exactly zero achieves large computational gains by allowing us to work with sparse matrix
representations that require substantially less memory.4
2. Descriptive statistics and validation of similarity
Panel A of Figure 1 plots the distribution of our similarity score across patent pairs, and
focuses on pairs that are 0–20 years apart. The first observation is that the distribution of
pairwise similarities is highly skewed. Patents tend to be highly dissimilar, with only a small
fraction of pairs very closely related. The median similarity score across patent pairs is 7.8%,
whereas the average similarity score is 10.2%. In the right tail, the 90th and 95th percentiles
of similarity scores are 17.6% and 22.9%, respectively. In network terminology, the patent
system’s connectivity is sparse.
Citations provide a natural external measurement of patent linkages for assessing the
text-based similarity measure ρi,j . To this end, we examine whether patent pairs with high
ρi,j are more likely to be linked by a citation. We bin patent pairs i-j in terms of their cosine
similarity, and then compute the average propensity of a citation link—that is, we estimate
E [1i,j |ρi,j ], where 1i,j is a dummy variable that takes the value one if patent j cites patent i
(where patent i is filed prior to patent j). Panel B of Figure 1 plots the results. Indeed, patent
pairs that are linked by a citation are more similar. The likelihood that patent j cites the
earlier patent i is monotonically increasing in the similarity ρi,j between the two patents. Our
similarity score does not rely on any patent citation information, thus the results in Panel B
are a powerful external validity check for our measure.
3. Patent similarity: examples
Figure 2 provides a few examples of patents’ similarity network. To simplify the presentation,
and also illustrate the advantages of our method in the early parts of the sample, we focus on
4

Our empirical findings are insensitive to this threshold as they are driven primarily by the highest similarity
pairs. In experiments with similarity cutoffs ranging from 1% to 10%, we find results that are quantitatively
indistinguishable.

10

four patents from the 19th century. For each of these patents, the figure plots the set of prior
and subsequent patents (filed within a period of five years) that have a cosine similarity of
50% or greater with the focal patent.
The patent at the top left part of the figure (US 4,750) is one of the first patents associated
with the sewing machine, issued to 1846 to Elias Howe Jr. The patent is for the lockstitch, an
efficient and sturdy stitch mechanism, which continues to be used today. The figure shows
that this patent is not significantly connected to any prior patents. By contrast, it is relatively
closely related to sixteen patents, all for improvements in the sewing machine, that were filed
over the next five years. Many of these subsequent patents were owned by either Elias Howe,
or three companies, Wheeler & Wilson, Grover and Baker, and I. M. Singer, who together
formed the first patent pool in American industry in 1856 (Lampe and Moser, 2010).
The patent on the top right (US 493,426) is one of the earliest patents associated with
cinematography. The patent is issued to Thomas Edison, for exhibiting ‘photographs of moving
objects’, by Thomas Edison, and is essentially one of the first film projectors. The patent
is highly similar to two prior patents and twelve subsequent patents, filed within five years
apart. Most of the subsequent patents are related to cinematography–among them Among the
subsequent patents, three are fo a ‘kinetographic’ camera, one of the early precursors of the
film capera.
The patent at the bottom, left part of the figure (US 161,739) is one of the early patents
issued to Graham Bell, for multiplexing intermittent signals on a single wire, that eventually
led to the invention of the telephone. We can see that it is quite similar to four prior patents
filed over the previous five years, all of which are related to the telegraph. It is also related to
eleven patents filed over the next five years, one of which is Graham Bell’s famous ‘telephone’
patent (174,465). Last, the patent on the bottom right is a random patent (US 222,189) for
improvements in the cover of petroleum lamps. Within a five-year span, it is related to seven
prior patents and five subsequent patents, all of which refer to improvements in lamps.
In brief, our examples show that our similarity measure identifies meaningful connections
between patents. We next examine additional validation checks using an external measure of
connection—patent citations.

C. Measuring Significant Patents
We aggregate a patent’s pairwise similarity with other patents into a single indicator of
significance of a patent—also referred to as the quality of a patent. Our main idea is that a
significant patent is one that is both novel and impactful. Novel patents are those that are
conceptually distinct from their predecessors, and therefore rely less on prior art. Impactful
patents are those influence future scientific advances, manifested as high similarity with

11

subsequent innovations.
1. Significant patents: definition
Our definition of patent significance combines both novelty and impact. As a novel patent
is one that is distinct from prior art, we measure a patent’s novelty as the (inverse of) its
similarity with the existing patent stock at the time it was filed. We refer to this as “backward
similarity,” and define it as
BSjτ =

X

ρj,i ,

(8)

i∈Bj,τ

where ρi,j is the pairwise similarity of patents i and j defined in equation (7) and Bj,τ denotes
the set of “prior” patents filed in the τ calendar years prior to j’s filing. Patents with low
backward similarity are dissimilar to the existing patent stock. They deviate from the state
of the art and are therefore novel. We will consider a backward-looking window of τ = 5
years in our baseline quality measure—-henceforth denoted by BSj . That said, our results are
insensitive to other window choices.
Next, we measure a patent’s impact by its “forward similarity,” defined as
F Sjτ =

X

ρj,i ,

(9)

i∈Fj,τ

where Fj,τ denotes the set of patents filed over the next τ calendar years following patent j’s
filing. The forward similarity measure in (9) estimates of the strength of association between
the patent and future technological innovation over the next τ years.
A patent might have high forward similarity because it changes the course of future
innovation. Or, it might be part of scientific regime shift that was catalyzed by a predecessor
patent. The “alternating current” example highlights this difference. Nikola Tesla’s patent
has a high forward similarity because it dictated the course of future electronics, but was
very different from any prior patents. The General Motors patent’s similarity with future
AC-related patents merely reflects that it is part of a mainstream technology—it has a high
similarity both backward and forward. The distinction between these two patents emerges
when we compare forward versus backward similarity for a given patent.
Thus, our indicator of patent significance combines forward and backward similarity to
identify patents that are both novel and impactful in the following way:
qjτ

F Sjτ
=
.
BSj

(10)

Our indicator (10) attaches higher scientific value to patents that are both novel relative to
their predecessors and are influential for subsequent research. A patent may have high forward
12

similarity because it is a “follower” in a technology area with many other followers, in which
case it will have a high backward similarity as well. In normalizing by backward similarity,
our quality measure adjusts for this. Highly significant patents—those with a large influence
on future technologies and that deviate from the status quo—are more likely to represent
scientific breakthroughs.
Our indicator of the significance of a patent largely follows the logic behind indicators based
on future citations. Specifically, the numerator in (10) is the sum over similarity with future
patents—which is directly analogous to the sum of future citations. The numerator in (10)
scales the forward similarity score by the novelty of the patent—since, presumably, patents
should be citing the earliest relevant prior patents that are related to the invention, that is,
novel patents. However, given our interest in constructing time-series indices of innovation, one
worry is that time-series fluctuations in (10) are also affected by mechanical factors, such as
shifts in language; the fact that the retrospective document frequency measure (4) is changing
over time so terms become less novel over time; and the fact that the number of patents is
rapidly expanding over time. Given that these issues likely affect most patents symmetrically,
when constructing time-series indices in Section III, we will adjust (10) by removing time fixed
effects.
2. Significant patents: descriptive statistics
Figure 3 compares the cross-sectional distribution of quality, and citations, and its evolution
over time. We can immediately see that the vast majority of patents receive very few citations
in the pre-1947 period. For instance, even patents in the 90-th or 95-th percentile receive
almost no citations over the next 10 years. Even when we examine their total citations in the
entire sample, patents in the 95-th percentile typically receive between 2 to 10 citations in the
pre-1947 period—compared to 20 citations in the 1960s or 50 citations in the 1980s. Part of
this shift in the distribution of citations is mechanical, since the USPTO only started officially
recording citations after 1947. However, we see that shifts in the propensity for patents to cite
earlier patents could have played a role.

II. Validation
Next, we conduct three validation checks for our quality measure. First, we identify a list of
important patents and examine how they score in terms of our quality indicators. Second, we
relate our quality measure to forward patent citations, a common measure of patent quality in
the innovation literature. Last, we examine the correlation between our quality indicators and
market values.

13

A. Historically important patents
Our first validation exercise examines how historically important patents score in terms of our
quality indicator. We compile a list of approximately 250 historically important patents based
on online lists of ‘important patents’, for instance, the USPTO’s “Significant Historical Patents
of the United States” list. Our list targets indisputable important and radical inventions of
the last 200 years, beginning with the telegraph and internal combustion engine, and ending
with stem cells, Google’s Pagerank algorithm and gene transfer. The full list of patents and
sources is provided in Appendix Table A.7.
For each of these radical inventions we report their rank in terms of our patent quality
measure (10) and forward citations. We focus on horizons of 10 years after the filing date for
measuring quality and citations. For each patent, we compute its percentile rank based on
quality or citations; for instance, a value of 0.90 indicates that the patent is in the top 10%.
In addition to computing percentile ranks using the unconditional distribution, we perform
two adjustments with the aim of removing time-series variation in these indicators that is
unrelated to technical change. First, we rank patents based on cohort (issue year) demeaned
values of these indicators. Removing cohort fixed effects helps eliminate factors that affects
patents symmetrically, such as shifts in language; variation in the quality of the digitized
patent documents; or changes in citation patterns. Second, we compute ranks within cohort.
Though this comparison is not very useful in constructing a time-series index of technological
change, it clarifies the extent to which these indicators are useful for purely cross-sectional
comparisons.
Figure 4 summarize our findings. Panel A shows that, in terms of unconditional comparisons,
our similarity-based quality indicator significantly outperforms citations: the average rank
assigned to these important patents is 0.74, compared to 0.37 for citations. In Panel B, we see
that the difference shrinks when these indicators are demeaned using year-fixed effects, but is
not fully eliminated—0.78 for quality versus 0.70 for citations. Comparing Panel B to Panel C
shows that removing time fixed effects leads to similar results as comparing patents within
cohorts.
Appendix Table A.2 performs additional comparisons between our quality indicators and
citations for different measurement horizons. In sum, these historically important patents rank
at least as high using our patent quality measure than citations, even when the latter are
measured over the entire sample. A key driver of behind the out-performance of our text-based
quality indicators is that the texts of the underlying patent document have been uniformly
available throughout the entire sample. By contrast, patent citations have been consistently
recorded in patent documents only after 1945. Given our goal of constructing indices of
technological change entails comparisons across patent cohorts, our text-based indicators have

14

a significant advantage—which we exploit in Section III.

B. Patent Significance and Citations
The existing literature on innovation mostly relies primarily on patents’ citations to measure
their impact. We next investigate the power of our text-based quality measure for explaining
patent citations. In particular, we estimate the following specification at the patent level
(indexed by j):

log 1 + CIT ESj0,τ = α + β log qjτ + γ Zj + εj .

(11)

For this regression, we restrict attention to the sample of patents issued after 1945, as this is
the period for which citations are recorded consistently by the USPTO. We measure patent
quality and citations over the τ years since patent filing. The vector Zj includes dummies
controlling for technology class (defined at the 3-digit CPC level), grant year, assignee and the
interaction of assignee and year effects. Including assignee fixed effects reduces the number
of observations since many patents have no assignees. Nevertheless, in our most conservative
specification we compare patents in the same technology class that are granted to the same
assignee in the same year. Lastly, we cluster the standard errors by patent grant year.
Panel A of Figure 5 shows binned scatter plots of citations versus our text-based quality
measure and reveal a strong positive correlation between the two. We collect observations
into 50 bins (cutoff at every other percentile of the quality distribution). Within each bin, we
average citation and text-based quality measures after controlling for technology class and
assignee-by-grant year fixed effects, and consider contemporaneous forward windows of τ =1,
5, and 10 years for both citations and text similarity. Table 1 reports corresponding regression
estimates. The contemporaneous explanatory power of our patent quality for citations is
consistent across horizons τ and choice of controls Z. Importantly, the magnitude of these
correlations is substantial. Focusing on our most conservative specification, which compares
two patents filed in the same year, are in the same class, and are issued to the same entity
in the same year, we find that increasing the quality measure from the median to the 90th
percentile results in 0.7 (1.5) additional citations, relative to the median of 2 (3) citations,
when quality and citations are measured over the next 5 (10) years after the patent application
is filed.
In short, our text-based measure of patent quality is highly correlated with patent citations
over the same measurement horizon. Perhaps more interestingly, text-based quality measure is
predictive of future citations. The left-most figure in Figure 5, Panel B plots the predictive
relation between our text-based quality measured in the 0-1 year window after filing, versus all
citations in years 2 and beyond. Likewise, we plot quality over years 0-5 versus citations in years
6+, and quality over 0-10 versus citations in years 11+. In all cases, we find an unambiguously
15

strong positive association between our near-term quality measure and long-term future
citations.
Similarly, we estimate the same predictive relation via regression while controlling for the
information in lagged citations:


log 1 + CIT ESjτ + = α + β log qj0,τ + c log 1 + CIT ESj0,τ + γ Zj + εj .

(12)

This specification uses patent quality from years 0 through τ to forecast citations in year τ + 1
and beyond, controlling for citations in the 0 to τ window. As before, the control vector Z
includes fixed effects for year, technology class, and assignee. Our main coefficient of interest
is b, which captures the predictive relation between our impact measure and future citations.
The results in Table 3 show that our impact measure predicts future citations after controlling
for the number of citations over the same period for which text-based quality is measured. The
relation is statistically as well as economically significant. Focusing on the most conservative
specification that includes the full set of fixed effects, we see that an increase in the patent
quality from the median to the 90th percentile is associated with 20-25% more citations relative
to the median. Similar results obtain when we expand the sample to include patents issued
prior to 1945 (see Appendix Table A.3).
To explore their individual roles, we estimate a variant of equation (11) that decomposes
our quality measure into the numerator (impact) and the denominator (novelty). Table 2
shows that patent impact—as measured by the patent’s forward similarity—is positively and
significantly related to the number of times the patent gets cited over the same period. Second,
patents that are more novel, that is, they are more dissimilar to earlier patents, are also
more likely to be cited more in the future. Interestingly, the estimated coefficients on the log
backward and forward similarity are of similar magnitude—and opposite sign. These estimate
support the one-to-one ratio between the forward and the backward similarity that we use in
our baseline indicator of quality.
Our text-based measures are strongly related to the most commonly-used indicator of
patent quality, forward citations. Yet our quality measure has important advantages over
patent citations. First, unlike citations, text-based quality does not suffer from truncation bias.
Citations, on the other hand, are limited to the latter portion of the patent sample.
Second, citations tend to take small, discrete values (the median patent has one citation in
a 10-year forward window), while our quality measure is continuous. This property of citations
makes it a noisy measure for inferring patent quality, and the issue is exacerbated over short
horizons (the median citation count drops to zero with a five year post-filing window).
Third, our text-based measure has the advantage of not relying on the discretion of the
inventor or the patent examiner in choosing which prior patents to cite, or whether they are

16

aware of the existence of closely related patents. This could introduce biases and idiosyncratic
variation in the nature of which patents are cited and by whom. As an example, patent
6,368,227 for “Method of swinging on a swing”, issued to Steven Olson (aged 5) in April 2002,
has 11 citations as of June 2018. It is cited, for example, by patent 8,420,782 for “Modular
DNA-binding domains and methods of use”; patent 8,586,526 for “DNA-binding proteins and
uses thereof”; and patent 8,697,853 for “TAL effector-mediated DNA modification”. Many of
these citations were added by the patent examiner.
Fourth, the results of Table 3 indicate that our quality measure incorporates information
much more quickly than forward citations. To further illustrate this point, Figure 6 reports
the rate at which text-based quality (and also patent citations) behave over the measurement
horizon τ . Specifically, the figure plots the average patent quality q 0,t over different measurement
horizons (t = 1, . . . , 20 years) as a fraction of quality measured over the next 20 years q 0,20 .
We perform the same exercise for forward citations. We see that the amount by which the
total forward similarity F S0,t increases is strongly declining across horizons — that is, q0,t as a
fraction of q 0,20 is concave in t. By contrast, over short horizons, forward citations C0,t are
convex in t. We also see that, over short horizons (0–5 years), measured quality accounts for a
higher fraction of the total than citations, which is consistent with the view that our quality
measure incorporates information faster than forward citations.

C. Patent Significance and Market Values
In this section, we discuss the relation between patent quality and market valuations. Market
values are by definition private values; they measure the present value of pecuniary benefits
to the holder of the patent. By contrast, our quality measure is designed to ascertain the
scientific importance of the patent. The relationship market value and scientific importance
can be ambiguous. For instance, a patent may represent only a minor scientific advance
while being very effective in restricting competition, thus generating large private rents. The
relation between the private and the scientific value of innovation—as measured by patent
citations—has been the subject of considerable debate in the literature.5
As an estimate of the market value of a patent we use the measure of Kogan et al. (2017)—
henceforth KPSS. The KPSS measure, V̂j , infers the value of patent j (in dollars) from stock
market reaction to the patent grant. KPSS interpret this measure as an ex-ante measure of
the private value of the patent. To investigate how text-based patent quality associates with
5

For instance, Hall et al. (2005) and Nicholas (2008) document that firms owning highly cited patents have
higher stock market valuations. Harhoff et al. (1999) and Moser et al. (2011) provide estimates of a positive
relation using smaller samples that contain estimates of economic value. By contrast, Abrams et al. (2013)
use a proprietary dataset that includes estimates of patent values based on licensing fees and show that the
relation between private values and patent citations is non-monotonic.

17

estimated private value, we estimate the regression
log V̂j = α + β log qjτ + γ Zj + εj .

(13)

As before, we saturate our specifications with controls Zj , including fixed effects for grant
year, technology class, and, in this case, firm. The vector of control variables also includes
characteristics of the public firm that generates the patent, including the firm’s log market
capitalization prior to the patent grant (as larger firms may produce more influential patents)
and the firm’s log idiosyncratic volatility (fast-growing firms have more volatile returns and
may produce higher quality patents). Our most stringent specification also the interaction of
firm and year effects to account for the possibility that unobservable firm effects may influence
our results. We cluster standard errors by grant year to account for correlation in citations
among patents granted in the same given year. If multiple patents are issued to the same firm
in the same day, we collapse them to a single observation by averaging the dependent and
independent variables across patents.6
We present the results in Table 4. Columns (1) to (3) show a strong, statistically significant
relation between our text-based measure of impact and the KPSS measure of market value.
Their association strengthens as we increase the horizon over which we measure quality from 1
to 10 years after the filing date. In column (4), we include as an additional control the number
of forward citations the patent receives over the same horizon that quality is measured. Doing
so has little effect our point estimates, supporting the conclusion that our quality measure
incorporates information that patent citations fail to capture. In terms of magnitudes, our
estimates imply that an increase in log q from the median to the 90-th percentile is associated
with approximately 0.4–1.2% increase in market values. Though these estimates may appear
relatively modest, they are comparable in magnitude to the relation between patent values
and forward citations.
In sum, these results confirm our earlier findings that our patent quality indicators are
systematically related to market values, even controlling for patent citations. In Appendix
Table A.6, we provide additional evidence that the quality of firms’ patent portfolios correlates
with their market valuation ratios (Tobin’s Q), following the analysis of Hall et al. (2005).
Given that these estimates are based on data from the later part of the sample, when citation
data are broadly available, these results reinforce the view that our text-based measure captures
information about patent quality that is not fully incorporated in patent citations.
6

The KPSS measure does not differentiate between two patents that are issued to the same firm on the
same day—it effectively assigns an equal fraction of the total dollar reaction to multiple patents in a given day
to each patent. Estimating (13) at the patent level thus effectively overweighs firms that file a large number of
patents. That said, this choice does not materially affect our findings. Appendix Table A.5 shows that results
are very similar when estimating (13) at the patent level.

18

III. Measuring Innovation Over the Long Run
So far, our analysis has focused on developing and validating our patent quality measure. In
this section, we use our measure to create time-series indices of the intensity of technological
progress at the firm, sector, and aggregate economy levels, and investigate how these indices
associate with measured productivity growth.

A. Breakthrough Patents
Here, we construct indices of technological progress at firm, sector and aggregate level by
identifying and tracking breakthrough patents defined by our quality measure. Our findings so
far—particularly those in Section A—suggest that our quality measure is more useful than
forward citations in comparing patents across cohorts and is available over a longer time
period. In aggregating patent quality into time series indices, it is important to confront
shifts in language (or in the quality of the scanned patent documents) that may introduce
systematic errors and unduly influence the comparison of patents across cohorts. To address
this concern, we adjust our quality measure removing patent cohort year fixed effects. The
implicit assumption in doing so is that shifts in language are likely to symmetrically affect all
patents and will thus be absorbed by the fixed effect.
After this adjustment, we define a ‘breakthrough’ patent as one that falls in the top 10% of
the quality distribution (among all patents in all years). Our baseline results use quality with
a 10-year forward window. We also compare against an alternative definition of breakthrough
patents based on the 10% of patents with the most forward citations over the same horizon
(and likewise adjusted for year fixed effects).

B. Aggregate Index of Technological Progress
From our definition of breakthrough patents, we construct a time series of technological
improvements that spans the USPTO sample (1840–2010). Our index is defined as the number
of breakthrough inventions granted in each year, divided by the the US population. Panel A
of Figure 7 plots the resulting time-series of breakthroughs per capita. Our index displays
considerable fluctuations at relatively low frequencies. It identifies three main innovation
waves, lasting from 1870 to 1880; 1920 to 1935; and from 1985 to the present. These
periods line up with the major waves of technological innovation in the U.S. The first peak
corresponds to the beginning of the second industrial revolution, which saw technological
advances such as the telephone and electric lighting. The second peak corresponds to advances
in manufacturing, particularly in plastics and chemicals, consistent with the evidence of Field
(2003). The latest wave of technological progress includes revolutions in computing, genetics,
19

and telecommunication.
For comparison, Panel B plots the resulting time-series when our index methodology is
instead constructed from forward citations (over the next five years after the patent is filed, line
in black). We see that this series essentially identifies no innovation prior to 1940s. Only when
citations are measured over the entire sample (blue line) does the index take non-zero values in
the pre-WW2 period, but even then the levels dwarf the values of the index post-1980. Given
that the importance of inventions in the 1850–1940 era are at least comparable to the those in
the last two decades (see, e.g. Gordon, 2016), this pattern mostly reflects the limitations of
forward citations as a measure of quality.
Constructing an innovation index has proven challenging in the past. In one approach, Shea
(1999) constructs an index of total patent counts, scaled by population growth. This series
is plotted in Panel C. Total patents per capita is essentially flat from 1870–1930, dips from
1930–1980, and displays significant spike post-1980. There are reasons to be skeptical that such
an index indeed measures the degree of underlying progress, since it implicitly assumes that all
patents are equally valuable. Kortum and Lerner (1998) show that there is wide heterogeneity
in the economic value of patents. Furthermore, fluctuations in the number of patents granted
are often the result of changes in patent regulation, or the quantity of resources available to
the US patent office (see e.g. Griliches, 1990; Hall and Ziedonis, 2001). As a result, a larger
number of patents does not necessarily imply greater technological innovation. One common
adjustment to simple patent counts is to weigh patents by their forward citations. As we see
in Panel B however, such an index is contaminated by the fact that citation propensities vary
over time.
Kogan et al. (2017) construct a time-series index that is based on the estimated market
values of patents that are granted. Their index is plotted in Panel D. Their index has the
advantage that it provides a dollar estimate of the value of innovation output in a given year.
However, it has several shortcomings. First, it is based on a measure that is confined to the
universe of publicly traded firms. Consequently, it omits not only innovations by private firms,
non-profit institutions and the government, but also innovation prior to 1927 since reliable
information on stock prices is available only after this year. Further, a direct corollary is that
its time-series behavior may be influenced by shifts in the fraction of firms in the economy
that are public, or variations in the degree of market efficiency.
1. Breakdown across technology classes and specific examples
Panel A of Figure 8 plots the breakdown across technology class of these breakthrough patents.
We see that the technology classes in which breakthrough inventions originated has varied
quite a bit over the last 170 years. By contrast, we see that the composition of technology
classes among all patents has remained relatively stable over time.
20

In the 1840–70 period, we see that the most important inventions took place in engineering
and construction, consumer goods, and manufacturing. An example of an invention in
construction that scores high in terms of our quality measure is the ‘Bollman Bridge’ (patent
number 8,624), named after its creator Wendell Bollman, which was the first successful all-metal
bridge design to be adopted and consistently used on a railroad. In terms of manufacturing
processes, many of the important advances occur in textiles. Specifically, examples of the
important patents include various versions of sewing and knitting machines (patent numbers
7,931; 7,296; 7,509; and 60,310). Many of the important patents in consumer goods are also
related to new clothing items.
Starting around 1870, many more patents that score high in terms of our measure are
related to electricity, with some of the most important patents (based on our measure) relating
to the production of electric light (203,844; 210,380; 215,733; 210,213; 200,545; 218,167). Most
importantly, the same period saw the invention of a revolutionary method of communication:
the telephone. It is comforting that most of the patents associated with the telephone are
among the breakthrough patents we identify.7
Another industry that accounted for a significant share of the most important patents
during the 1860-1910 period is transportation. Many of the patents that fall in the top 5%
in terms of our measure include improvements in railroads (e.g., patents 207,538; 218,693;
422,976; and 619,320), and in particular, their electrification (patents 178,216; 344,962; 403,969;
465,407). Most importantly, the turn of the century saw the invention of the airplane. In
addition to the Wright brothers’ original patent (821,393), several other airplane patents also
score highly in terms of our quality indicator (1,107,231; 1,279,127; 1,307,133; 1,307,134). Our
measure also identifies other patents related to air transportation based on air balloons that are
similar to the Zeppelin (i.e., 678,114 and 864,672). Last, innovations in construction methods
continue to play a role in the 1870-1910 period. Among the patents that score in the top 1%
in terms of our quality indicator are those that are related to the use of concrete (618,956;
647,904; 764,302; 654,683; 747,652; and 672,176) as a material in the construction of buildings,
roads and pavements.
In the first half of the 20th century, chemistry emerges as a new area responsible for
important patents, many describing inventions of plastic compounds. Among our breakthrough
inventions is the patent for bakelite (942,699), the world’s first fully synthetic plastic. This
innovation opened the floodgates to a torrent of now-familiar synthetic plastics, including
the invention in the 1930’s of plasticized polyvinyl chloride (PVC) by Waldo Semon (patents
1,929,453 and 2,188,396) and nylon by Wallace H. Carothers (patent 2,071,250), all of which
7

Specifically, the following patents associated with the telephone rank in the top 5% in terms of our baseline
quality measure among the patents granted in the same decade: 161,739; 174,465; 178,399; 186,787; 201,488;
213,090; 220,791; 228,507; 230,168; 238,833; 474,230; 203,016; 222,390. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Invention_of_the_telephone#Patents

21

are score highly according to our measure. Other important patents in chemistry continue
through the 1950’s in the form of drug patents, including Nystatin (2,797,183); improvements
in the production of penicillin (2,442,141 and 2,443,989); Enovid, the first oral contraceptive
(2,691,028); and Tetracyline, one of the most prescribed broad spectrum antibiotics (2,699,054).
Subsequent to the 1950’s, a large fraction of the important patents identified by our measure
are in the area of Instruments and Electronics, and are related to the arrival of the Information
Age. One of the most important patents according to our measure is the invention of the first
microchip by Robert Noyce in 1961 (patent 2,981,877). During the 1970s, firms such as IBM,
Xerox, Honeywell, AT&T, and Sperry Rand are responsible for some of the major innovations
in computing. Xerox, for example, is responsible for several high-scoring inventions such as
patent 4,558,413 for a management system software; patent 4,899,136 for improvements in
computer user interface; patent 4,437,122 for bitmap graphics; and patents 3,838,260 and
3,938,097 for improvements in the interface between computer memory and the processor. In
the 1980s and 1990s, several important patents that pertain to computer networks emerge
among the set of breakthrough patents—for instance, patents 4,800,488; 4,823,338; 4,827,411;
4,887,204; 5,249,290; 5,341,477; 5,544,322; and 5,586,260.
Improvements in genetics comprise a significant fraction of high quality patents in the
1980–2000 period. A few early examples that fall in the top 1% of the unconditional distribution
according to our quality indicator are: patent 4,237,224 for recombinant DNA methods (that is,
the process of forming DNA molecules by laboratory methods of genetic recombination, such as
molecular cloning, to bring together genetic material from multiple sources); patents 4,683,202;
4,683,195, and 4,965,188 for the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method for rapidly copying
DNA segments with high fidelity and at low cost; patent 4,736,866 for genetically modified
animals; and patent 4,889,818 for heat-stable DNA-replication enzymes.

IV. Innovation and Measured Productivity
We next relate our innovation indices to measured productivity.

A. Aggregate Productivity
We begin by focusing on aggregate productivity growth. For the post-war sample, we use the
TFP measure constructed by Basu et al. (2006), which is available over the 1948-2018 period.
For the earlier sample, we measure productivity using output per hour using the data collected
by Kendrick (1961), which is available for the 1889 to 1957 period. Following Jorda (2005), we

22

estimate the following specification,
1
(xt+τ − xt ) = a0 + aτ log BreakthroughIndext + ρτ xt + cτ Zt + ut+τ ,
τ

(14)

where xt is log productivity, BreakthroughIndext refers to our innovation index, and Zt is a
vector of controls that includes the log number of patents per capita and the level of productivity.
We consider horizons of τ = 1 . . . 10 years and adjust the standard errors using the Newey-West
procedure. All independent variables are normalized to unit standard deviation. To ensure
that we are not capturing pre-existing trends, we also examine negative values of τ .
We plot the estimated coefficients in Figure 10. Panel A presents the results of estimating
(14) for the post-war sample. Focusing on horizons of five to ten years, we see that a onestandard deviation increase in our technology index is associated with an increase in TFP of
0.5 percent per year—which is substantial given that the standard deviation in measured TFP
growth over this period is 1.8%. Importantly, there is no statistically significant correlation
between past changes in productivity and our innovation index. Panel B shows the results for
the earlier sample. Again focusing on horizons of five to ten years, we see that a one-standard
deviation in our innovation index is associated with an increase in labor productivity growth
of approximately 1.5–2% per year—compared to an annual standard deviation of 5.2% for
labor productivity growth.

B. Sector-level Analysis
We next construct indices of innovation at the sector level. One issue that arises is how to map
patents to industries in a way that is independent of the presence of an explicit assignee. We
do so by exploiting the mapping between patent technology classifications (CPC) and various
industry classifications constructed by Goldschlag et al. (2016). Because this is a probabilistic
mapping (there is no one-to-one correspondence between CPC and industry codes), we assign
a fraction of each patent to industry codes based on the given probability weights associated
with its (4-digit) CPC technology classification. Goldschlag et al. (2016) provide mappings to
NAICS industry definitions, at different levels of granularity.8
We begin by constructing long time-series indices of innovation using the 3-digit NAICS
classification. Figure 9 plots our industry indices. Our industry indices reveal that the
origin of breakthrough patents has varied considerably over time, consistent with our prior
results. Inventions related to electricity were important in the late 19th and early 20th century.
8

Here, two caveats are in order. First, this mapping is based on post-1970 data, whereas our analysis spans
the entire period since the 1840s. Hence, there might be measurement error in our index since we assign a
fraction of patents to each of the industries that map to a CPC classification based the weights estimated from
only part of the sample. Second, this mapping is primarily available for manufacturing industries–which are
however the industries that patent most heavily.

23

Innovations in agriculture played an important role in the beginning of the 20th century, while
advances in genetically modified food have peaked in the last two decades. Chemical and
petroleum-related innovations were particularly important in the 1920s and 1930s. Computers
and electronic products have peaked since the early 1990s. We next examine whether our
industry indices are related to measured productivity.
Panel A Figure 11 presents our results for the period from 1987 to the present. We use
the estimates of productivity at the NAICS 4-digit level from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS), which covers 86 manufacturing industries. For this period, we then estimate a panel
analogue of equation (14),
1
(xt+τ − xt ) = a0 + aτ log BreakthroughIndexi,t + ρτ xi,t + cτ Zi,t + ui,t+τ ,
τ

(15)

where, as above, xi,t denotes (log) multi-factor productivity; BreakthroughIndexi,t is our
industry innovation index (count of breakthrough patents, scaled by population); and Zi,t is a
vector of controls that includes time and industry fixed effects, the log total number of patents,
scaled by population and the level of productivity. Standard errors are clustered by industry.
Given the shorter time-dimension of the data, we consider horizons of τ = 1 . . . 5 years. To
ensure that we are not capturing pre-existing trends at the industry level, we also examine the
relation between innovation and past productivity growth, that is, negative values of τ .
We find a strongly statistically positive relation between our innovation index and future
productivity growth—while the relation with past productivity growth is insignificant. In
terms of magnitudes, a one-standard deviation increase in our innovation index is associated
with approximately 1–1.2% higher productivity growth per year, over the next 5 years.
Panel B performs a similar exercise for the earlier sample. We use the labor productivity
data collected by Kendrick (1961), which covers 62 manufacturing industries for the years 1899,
1909, 1919, 1937, 1947, and 1954. Since the data is only available at discrete periods, we modify
our approach as follows: for each period (t, t + τ ), we regress the annualized difference in log
labor productivity on the log of the accumulated level of innovation (number of breakthrough
patents) in t ± 2 years—controlling for period, industry dummies, the log number of patents
during the same period, and the log level of productivity at t.9
Examining Panel B, we again see a strong and statistically significant relation between our
industry innovation indices and measured productivity: a one standard deviation increase in
our innovation index is associated with a 1.4% higher growth rate in measured productivity
over the next period.
For comparison, Figure 12 performs the same exercise using a corresponding index based on
9
To construct innovation indices for the Kendrick industries, which are defined at the SIC code level, we
use the concordance between 1997 NAICS and 1987 SIC codes from the Census Bureau. If NAICS industries
map into multiple SIC codes, we assign an equal fraction to each.

24

citations (measured over a 10 year horizon). Examining Panels A and B, we see that there is
no statistically significant relation between the citations-based index and industry productivity
in either sample period.

V. Conclusion
We use textual analysis of high-dimensional data from patent documents to create new
indicators of patent quality. Our metric assigns higher quality to patents that are distinct from
the existing stock of knowledge (are novel) and are related to subsequent patents (have impact).
These estimates of novelty and similarity are constructed using a new methodology that builds
on recent advances in textual analysis. Our measure of patent significance is predictive of
future citations and correlates strongly with measures of market value.
We identify breakthrough innovations as the most significant patents—that is, patents in
the right tail of our measure—to construct indices of technological change at the aggregate
and sectoral. Our technology indices span two centuries (1840-2010) and cover innovation by
private and public firms, as well as non-profit organizations and the US government. These
indices capture the evolution of technological waves over a long time span and are strong
predictors of productivity.

References
Abrams, D. S., U. Akcigit, and J. Popadak (2013). Patent value and citations: Creative
destruction or strategic disruption? Working Paper 19647, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992, March). A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction.
Econometrica 60 (2), 323–51.
Alexopoulos, M. (2011). Read all about it!! What happens following a technology shock?
American Economic Review 101 (4), 1144–79.
Austin, D. H. (1993). An event-study approach to measuring innovative output: The case of
biotechnology. American Economic Review 83 (2), 253–58.
Balsmeier, B., M. Assaf, T. Chesebro, G. Fierro, K. Johnson, S. Johnson, G.-C. Li, S. Luck,
D. O’Reagan, B. Yeh, G. Zang, and L. Fleming (2018). Machine learning and natural
language processing on the patent corpus: Data, tools, and new measures. Journal of
Economics & Management Strategy 27 (3), 535–553.

25

Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, and M. S. Kimball (2006). Are technology improvements contractionary?
American Economic Review 96 (5), 1418–1448.
Berkes, E. (2016). Comprehensive universe of u.s. patents (cusp): Data and facts. Working
paper, Northwestern University.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1997). Industry costs of equity. Journal of Financial
Economics 43 (2), 153–193.
Field, A. J. (2003). The most technologically progressive decade of the century. American
Economic Review 93 (4), 1399–1413.
Gentzkow, M., B. T. Kelly, and M. Taddy (2017, March). Text as data. Working Paper 23276,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldschlag, N., T. J. Lybbert, and N. J. Zolas (2016). An ‘algorithmic links with probabilities’
crosswalk for uspc and cpc patent classifications with an application towards industrial
technology composition. CES Discussion Paper 16-15, U.S. Census Bureau.
Gordon, R. (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since
the Civil War. The Princeton Economic History of the Western World. Princeton University
Press.
Griliches, Z. (1990). Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey. Journal of Economic
Literature 28 (4), 1661–1707.
Griliches, Z. (1998, January). Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey, pp. 287–343.
University of Chicago Press.
Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1991). Quality ladders in the theory of growth. Review of
Economic Studies 58 (1), 43–61.
Hall, B. and R. Ziedonis (2001). The patent paradox revisited: An empirical study of patenting
in the U.S. semiconductor industry, 1979-1995. The RAND Journal of Economics 32 (1),
101–128.
Hall, B. H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2005). Market value and patent citations. The
RAND Journal of Economics 36 (1), pp. 16–38.
Harhoff, D., F. Narin, F. M. Scherer, and K. Vopel (1999). Citation frequency and the value
of patented inventions. The Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (3), 511–515.
Jorda, O. (2005, March). Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections.
American Economic Review 95 (1), 161–182.
26

Kendrick, J. W. (1961). Productivity Trends in the United States. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.
Kline, P., N. Petkova, H. Williams, and O. Zidar (2017). Who profits from patents? Rent
sharing at innovative firms. Working paper.
Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and N. Stoffman (2017). Technological innovation,
resource allocation, and growth*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2), 665–712.
Kortum, S. and J. Lerner (1998). Stronger protection or technological revolution: what is
behind the recent surge in patenting? Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 48 (1), 247–304.
Lampe, R. and P. Moser (2010). Do patent pools encourage innovation? evidence from
the nineteenth-century sewing machine industry. The Journal of Economic History 70 (4),
898–920.
Moser, P., J. Ohmstedt, and P. Rhode (2011). Patents, citations, and inventive output evidence from hybrid corn.
Nicholas, T. (2008). Does innovation cause stock market runups? Evidence from the great
crash. American Economic Review 98 (4), 1370–96.
Pakes, A. (1985). On patents, r&d, and the stock market rate of return. Journal of Political
Economy 93 (2), 390–409.
Shea, J. (1999). What do technology shocks do? In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1998,
volume 13, NBER Chapters, pp. 275–322. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Syverson, C. (2011). What determines productivity? Journal of Economic Literature 49 (2),
326–65.

27

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Patent citations, impact and novelty, contemporaneous correlations
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-1 yr)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.432∗∗∗
(6.09)

0.255∗∗∗
(4.17)

0.174∗
(2.64)

0.127
(1.73)

0.072
6,017,673

0.106
5,981,174

0.177
4,492,964

0.235
4,054,639

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.295∗∗∗
(34.15)

0.962∗∗∗
(22.58)

0.780∗∗∗
(14.29)

0.752∗∗∗
(13.57)

0.195
4,964,003

0.243
4,930,423

0.330
3,535,656

0.375
3,169,209

log(1 + Forward citations, 0-10 yr)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

log(1 + Forward citations, 0-10 yr)

1.273∗∗∗
(46.97)

1.040∗∗∗
(61.98)

0.885∗∗∗
(33.32)

0.879∗∗∗
(30.91)

0.263
4,135,358

0.311
4,104,591

0.397
2,811,353

0.437
2,509,928

Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

log(Patent quality, 0-1yr)
R2
Observations
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-5 yr)
log(Patent quality, 0-5yr)
R2
Observations

R2
Observations
Grant Year FE
Tech Class FE
Assignee FE
Grant Year × Assignee FE

Y

Table reports the results of estimating equation (11) in the main text. The regression relates the log of (one
plus) the number of patent citations to our measures of patent impact (forward similarity) and lack of novelty
(inverse of backward similarity) constructed in equations (9) and (8), respectively. As controls, we include
dummies controlling for technology class (defined at the 3-digit CPC level), grant year, firm (assignee) and the
interaction of firm and year effects. Since patent citations are only consistently recorded after 1947, we restrict
the sample to the 1947–2016 period. As patents can be assigned to multiple assignees, observations are at
the patent–assignee level. Last, we cluster the standard errors by the patent grant year. See main text for
additional details on the specification and the construction of these variables.

28

Table 2: Patent citations, impact and novelty, contemporaneous correlations
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-1 yr)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

log(Patent impact (FS), 0-1yr)

0.389∗∗∗
(6.02)

0.247∗∗∗
(4.26)

0.170∗∗
(2.78)

0.127
(1.88)

log(Patent novelty (1/BS), 0-5yr)

0.351∗∗∗
(5.68)

0.221∗∗∗
(3.96)

0.149∗
(2.52)

-0.105
(1.61)

0.076
6,017,673

0.107
5,981,174

0.178
4,492,964

0.235
4,054,639

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

log(Patent impact (FS), 0-5yr)

1.169∗∗∗
(31.04)

0.917∗∗∗
(19.66)

0.740∗∗∗
(13.11)

0.708∗∗∗
(12.50)

log(Patent novelty (1/BS), 0-5yr)

1.075∗∗∗
(30.47)

0.833∗∗∗
(18.37)

0.671∗∗∗
(12.03)

0.638∗∗∗
(11.41)

0.200
4,964,003

0.247
4,930,423

0.331
3,535,656

0.376
3,169,209

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

log(Patent impact (FS), 0-10yr)

1.183∗∗∗
(52.15)

1.009∗∗∗
(50.70)

0.853∗∗∗
(29.05)

0.841∗∗∗
(27.06)

log(Patent novelty (1/BS), 0-5yr)

-1.092∗∗∗
(-46.07)

-0.910∗∗∗
(-43.81)

-0.769∗∗∗
(-25.77)

-0.757∗∗∗
(-23.88)

R2
Observations

0.267
4,135,358

0.315
4,104,591

0.399
2,811,353

0.438
2,509,928

Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

R2
Observations
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-5 yr)

R2
Observations
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-10 yr)

Grant Year FE
Tech Class FE
Assignee FE
Grant Year × Assignee FE

Y

This Table is the counterpart to Table 1, in which we disaggregate our measure of patent quality into patent
impact (forward similarity) and of novelty (inverse of backward similarity) constructed in equations (9) and (8),
respectively. Table reports the results of estimating equation (11) in the main text. The regression relates the
log of (one plus) the number of patent citations to our measures of patent impact (forward similarity) and lack
of novelty (inverse of backward similarity) constructed in equations (9) and (8), respectively. As controls, we
include dummies controlling for technology class (defined at the 3-digit CPC level), grant year, firm (assignee)
and the interaction of firm and year effects. Since patent citations are only consistently recorded after 1947, we
restrict the sample to the 1947–2016 period. As patents can be assigned to multiple assignees, observations are
at the patent–assignee level. Last, we cluster the standard errors by the patent grant year. See main text for
additional details on the specification and the construction of these variables.

29

Table 3: Patent quality and citations: predictive relation
log(1 + Forward citations, 2+ yr)
log(Patent quality, 0-1yr)
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-1 yr)
R2
Observations
log(1 + Forward citations, 6+ yr)
log(Patent quality, 0-5yr)
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-5 yr)
R2
Observations
log(1 + Forward citations, 11+ yr)
log(Patent quality, 0-10yr)
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-10 yr)
R2
Observations
Grant Year FE
Class
Assignee FE
Grant Year × Assignee FE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.201∗∗∗
(15.82)
0.656∗∗∗
(33.23)

1.009∗∗∗
(17.18)
0.604∗∗∗
(36.25)

0.940∗∗∗
(15.97)
0.514∗∗∗
(38.82)

0.981∗∗∗
(15.55)
0.506∗∗∗
(35.30)

0.314
6,017,673

0.368
5,981,174

0.479
4,492,964

0.517
4,054,639

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.635∗∗∗
(11.10)
0.614∗∗∗
(36.70)

0.724∗∗∗
(13.72)
0.581∗∗∗
(36.66)

0.722∗∗∗
(10.19)
0.540∗∗∗
(39.30)

0.782∗∗∗
(10.56)
0.547∗∗∗
(37.56)

0.319
4,964,003

0.377
4,930,423

0.472
3,535,656

0.506
3,169,209

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.186∗∗∗
(4.41)
0.573∗∗∗
(37.42)

0.391∗∗∗
(14.42)
0.539∗∗∗
(37.37)

0.401∗∗∗
(10.44)
0.510∗∗∗
(38.83)

0.418∗∗∗
(9.67)
0.512∗∗∗
(37.88)

0.300
4,135,358

0.363
4,104,591

0.448
2,811,353

0.482
2,509,928

Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Table reports the results of estimating equation (12) in the main text. The regression relates the log of (one
plus) the number of patent citations after time t to our measures of patent quality (10) measured over a horizon
[0, t] and citations measured over the same interval [0, t]. As controls, we include dummies controlling for
technology class (defined at the 3-digit CPC level), assignee and issue year effects. Since patent citations are
only consistently documented after 1947, we restrict the sample to the 1947–2016 period. Last, we cluster the
standard errors by the patent grant year. See main text for additional details on the specification and the
construction of these variables.

30

Table 4: Patent quality and value
log KPSS value
Log patent quality, 0-1 years

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0028
(-1.10)

0.0020
(0.96)

0.0041∗∗∗
(3.37)

0.0041∗∗∗
(3.37)
-0.0002
(-0.37)

0.947
559,669

0.956
558,329

0.965
539,309

0.965
539,309

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0035
(1.24)

0.0052∗∗∗
(2.91)

0.0084∗∗∗
(5.03)

0.0077∗∗∗
(4.59)
0.0044∗∗∗
(5.93)

0.951
496,844

0.959
495,541

0.967
478,049

0.967
478,049

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0112∗∗∗
(5.33)

0.0091∗∗∗
(6.01)

0.0120∗∗∗
(7.49)

0.0100∗∗∗
(5.99)
0.0091∗∗∗
(9.29)

0.953
430,211

0.960
428,948

0.966
413,458

0.966
413,458

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Log forward citations, 0-1 years
R2
Observations
log KPSS value
Log patent quality, 0-5 years
Log forward citations, 0-5 years
R2
Observations
log KPSS value
Log patent quality, 0-10 years
Log forward citations, 0-10 years
R2
Observations
Controls:
Grant Year FE
Class FE
Firm Size (market cap)
Firm Volatility
Firm FE
Grant Year × Firm FE

Table reports the results of estimating equation (13) in the main text. The regression relates the log of the
Kogan et al. (2017) estimate of the market value of the patent to our (log) measures of patent quality, which
combines the patent’s impact and novelty, constructed in equation (10). As controls, we include dummies
controlling for technology class (defined at the 3-digit CPC level), grant year, firm (CRSP: permco) and the
interaction of firm and year effects. Since multiple patents can be issued to a given firm in a given day (which
implies the same kpss value for these patents) we collapse the observations at the firm-date level. See Appendix
Table A.5 for the corresponding regressions at the patent level. We cluster the standard errors by the patent
grant year. All independent variables are normalized to unit standard deviation. See main text for additional
details on the specification and the construction of these variables.

31

Figure 1: Pairwise similarity and citation linkages

B. Probability of Citation Pair

A. Empirical CDF
0

10

1
0.8

10−1

0.6

10−2

0.4

10−3

0.2

10−4

0

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Cosine Similarity

1

10−5

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Cosine Similarity

1

Panel A plots the empirical CDF of our similarity measure ρi,j across patent citation pairs. Panel B plots
the conditional probability that patent j cites an earlier patent j as a function of the text-based similarity
score between the two patents, ρi,j , computed in equation (7) in the main text. For computational reasons, we
exclude similarity pairs with ρi,j ≤ 0.5%. Figure uses data only post 1945, since citations were not consistently
recorded prior to that year. We use data only post 1945, since citations were not consistently recorded prior to
that year.

32

Figure 2: Similarity Networks, Examples
Sewing
Machine (9,041)
Sewing
Machine (9,380)

Sewing
Machine (7,369)

Sewing
Machine (7,776)

Sewing
Machine (7,824)

Sewing
Machine (9,139)

Sewing
Machine (7,931)
Sewing
Machine (6,766)

Camera
lantern
(546,093)

Vitascope
(578,185)

Machine for exhibiting and taking
pictures (553,369)
Kinetographic
camera
(593,376)

Picture exhibitor
(380,977)

Phantoscope
(586,953)

Sewing Machine (4,750)
Apparatus for Exhibiting

Sewing
Machine (9,338)
Sewing
Machine (8,294)

Sewing
Machine (9,053)
Sewing
Machine (5,942)

Sewing
Machine (6,099)

33

Improvement in
telephonic telegraphreceivers (178,399)

Improvement
in protective
electric telegraphs
(121,971)

Improvement in
combined telegraph
sounders and
relays (130,426)

Improvement in
printing-telegraph
instruments
(130,261)

Sewing
Machine (9,365)

Telephone
relay (255,333)

Quadruplex
Telegraph
(254,297)

Improvement of
Transmitters and

Electric
Burglar-Alarm
(225,271)

Phantoscope
(536,569)

Improvement
in bases for
lamp-globes
(196,286)

Kinetographic
camera
(629,063)

Improvement in
globe-holders
(172,832)

Vitascope
(673,992)

Camera
(528,140)

Folding globe
(316,087)
Globe holder
for Argand
lamps (266,470)

Improvement in
metallic tops for
burner-globes (206,539)
Electric signal-bell
(228,851)

Telegraphs (161,739)

Objects (493,426)
Method of
producing
instantenous
photographs
(452,966)

Telegraph
repeater
(231,477)

Telegraphic
repeater
(250,774)

Receivers for Electric

Projecting
kinetoscope
(707,934)

Kinetographic
camera
(560,800)

Photographs of Moving

Sewing
Machine (7,296)

Sewing
Machine (8,282)

Roll holder camera and picture
exhibitor (542,334)

Improvement in

Globe for
incandescent
electric lamps
(285,784)

caps for lampImprovement in
lanterns (207,516)

globes (222,189)

Improvement in electro
magnetic alarms (197,416)
Improvement
in street-lamps
(188,142)

Improvement in
printing-telegraphs
(126,336)
Improvement
in telegraphy
(174,465)

Telephonic
system
(284,594)

Testing and
breaking
circuits
(260,043)

Improvement
in street-lamps
(205,607)

Electric
incandescent
lamp (258,747)
Improvement
in street-lamps
(206,573)

Lantern
(321,993)

Figure displays the similarity network for four patents: the patent for the first sewing machine (top left); one of the earlier patents for moving pictures (top right);
one of the early patents that led to the telephone (bottom left) and a randomly chosen patent from the 1800s (bottom right). In plotting the similarity links, we
restrict attention to patents pairs filed at most five years apart and with a cosine similarity greater than 50%.

Figure 3: Distribution of Quality and Citations over time

A. Patent Quality (0-10 yr forward)
101

100.5

1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

1960

1980

2000

1960

1980

2000

B. Patent Citations (0-10 yr forward)

101

100
1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

C. Patent Citations (full sample)

101

100
1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

 Median  P75

1940

 P90

 P95

Figure plots the cross-sectional distribution of our quality measure (Panel A) and forward citations (Panels B
and C) over time.

34

Figure 4: Important Patents: Quality vs Citations

Panel A. Comparison across cohorts: no adjustment
0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Panel B. Comparison across cohorts: remove year FE
0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Panel C. Comparison within cohorts
0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Figure compares the extent to which our quality indicator successfully identifies historically important patents,
and compares with patent citations. The figure plots the distribution of patent percentile ranks based on
our quality indicator (blue) and forward citations (light red) measured over a horizon of 10 years. A value
of x% indicates that a given patent scores higher than x% of all other patents unconditionally (panel A);
unconditionally, but adjust quality and citations by removing year-fixed effects (Panel B); or relative to patents
that are issued in the same year (panel C). The list of patents, along with their source, appears in Appendix
Table A.7

35

Figure 5: Patent quality and citations

Forward Citations, 0−10 years
5
10
0

.3

2

Forward Citations, 0−5 years
4

Forward Citations, 0−1 years
.4
.5
.6
.7

6

.8

15

A. Contemporaneous Relation

.15

.2

.25
Patent Quality, 0−1 years

.3

.8

1

1.2
1.4
Patent Quality, 0−5 years

1.6

1.8

1

2

3
Patent Quality, 0−10 years

4

2.5
3
Patent Quality, 0−10 years

3.5

5

10

Forward Citations, 6+ years
8
10
12

Forward Citations, 11+ years
4
6
8

16
Forward Citations, 2+ years
8
10
12
14

2

6

6

36

14

B. Predictive Relation

.15

.2
.25
Patent Quality, 0−1 years

.3

.8

1

1.2
1.4
Patent Quality, 0−5 years

1.6

1.8

1.5

2

4

Figure plots the relation between the number of forward citations to our quality measure (both in levels). Panel A relates our quality measure to patent citations,
when both are measured over the same horizon. The binned scatter plots control for fixed effects for technology class, and the interaction between assignee and
patent grant year. Panel B plots the predictive relation between our quality measure and future citations; in addition to technology and assignee-issue year fixed
effects, we also control for the number of citation the patent has received over the same horizon that our quality measure is computed.

Figure 6: Pairwise similarity and citation linkages

Mean Quality and Citations as a function of measurement horizon
(percent of total over 0–20 years)
1
0.9

Sum (0,t) / Sum (0,20)

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

2

4

6
 Quality

8
10
12
horizon τ (years)

14

16

18

20

 Forward Citations

Figure examines the speed at which information about the quality of the patent is reflected in our quality
measure and in forward citations. Specifically, we plot the mean across patents of the ratio of x0,τ where x
refers to either our quality indicator or forward citations measured over τ years subsequent to the patent,
scaled by x0,20 .

37

A. Breakthrough patents

B. Highly-Cited patents

(top 10% in terms of quality) per capita

(top 10% in terms of citations) per capita

0.1

# of breakthrough patents per 1000 people

# of breakthrough patents per 1000 people

Figure 7: Technological Innovation over the Long Run

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
year

0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

D. KPSS Index

0.8

4.5

0.7

4

0.6

3.5
KPSS Index, log

# of patents per 1000 people

C. Total patent count, per capita

1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
year

0.5
0.4
0.3

3
2.5
2

0.2

1.5

0.1
1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
year

1

1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
year

Panel A plots the number of breakthrough patents, defined as the number of patents per year that fall in the
top 10% of the unconditional distribution of our quality measures—defined as the ratio of the 10-yr forward to
the 5-yr backward similarity, net of year fixed effects. We normalize by US population. In Panel B we plot the
number of patents that fall in the top 10% of the unconditional distribution of forward citations—measured
over the next 10 years, net of year fixed effects—again scaled by US population. Panel C plots the total number
of patents, scaled by population, while Panel D plots the KPSS Index (the sum of the estimated market value
of patents scaled by the total capitalization of the stock market.

38

Figure 8: Breakdown by Technology Classes

Panel A: Breakthrough (Top 10%) Patents
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Decade
Panel B: All patents
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Decade

 Agriculture and Food (A0, A2)

 Chemistry and Metallurgy (C)

 Electricity and Electronics (H0)

 Engineering, Construction, and Mining (E0, E2, F0, F1)

 Health and Entertainment (A6)

 Instruments, Information (G, Y1)

 Lighting, Heating, Nuclear (F2, G2)

 Manufacturing Process (B0, B2, B3, B4, B8, D0, D1, D2)

 Transportation (B6)

 Weapons (F4)

39

 Consumer Goods(A4)

Figure 9: Innovation across industries: Breakthrough patents

Agriculture and Food (111–5, 311–2)

Construction (236, 237, 238)

Mining and Extraction (211, 212, 213)

3

4
0.8

6

3
3

0.6
2

4

1

1

0.2

2

2

0.4

2

Wood, Paper and Printing (321–3)

Furniture, Textiles and Apparel (313–5, 337)

1

Chemical Manufacturing (325)

Petroleum and Coal Products (324)

Mineral Processing (327)

Plastics and Rubber Products (326)

2000

1950

1900

1850

2000

1950

1900

1850

2000

1950

1900

1850

2000

1950

1900

1850

2000

1950

1900

1850

0

Metal Manufacturing (331, 332)

6
8
4

2

6
4

1

2

2

4

1

2

2

60
40

2

20

0.5

Panel plots the number of breakthrough patents across industries. Industries are defined based on NAICS codes. Breakthrough patents are
those that fall in the top 10% of our baseline quality measure (defined as the ratio of the 10-yr forward to the 5-yr backward similarity)
net of year fixed effects. We construct industry indices using the CPC4 to NAICS crosswalk constructed by Goldschlag et al. (2016).

2000

1950

2000

1950

1900

1850

2000

1950

1900

1850

2000

1950

1900

1850

1900

0

0
2000

2000

1
2

2
1950

1950

4

4

1900

1900

1.5

4
6

1850

8

1850

1950

1900

1850

2000

1950

1900

1850

2000

1950

1900

1850

2000

1950

1900

1850

2000

Medical Equipment (3391)

Transportation Equipment (336)

Electrical Equipment (335)

Computers and Electronic Products (334)

Machinery Manufacturing (333)

1850

40

0

Figure 10: Breakthrough Innovation Across Industries

Wood,
Paper,
Printing

Furniture, Textiles, Apparel

Agriculture,
Food

Transportation Equipment

1860

Machinery Manufacturing

Metal Manufacturing

1880
Machinery
Manufacturing
Wood, Paper, Printing

Construction

1900

Transportation
Equipment

Plastics, Rubber

Other

Mineral Processing

1920
Utilities
Electrical
Equipment
Chemical
Manufacturing

Mining, Extraction

1940
Electrical Equipment
Plastics, Rubber
Chemical Manufacturing

1960
Petroleum, Coal

Medical Equipment

1980
Agriculture, Food
Computers, Electronics
Computers, Electronics

1890

1940

1990

2000

We plot the per capita number of breakthrough patents across industries. Industries are defined based on
NAICS codes. Breakthrough patents are those that fall in the top 10% of our baseline importance measure
(defined as the ratio of the 10-yr forward to the 5-yr backward similarity) net of issue year fixed effects. We
construct industry indices using the CPC4 to NAICS crosswalk constructed by Goldschlag et al. (2016).

41

Figure 11: Breakthrough patents and Aggregate TFP

A. Post-war period—Total Factor Productivity (1948–2007)
1

%

0.5
0

−0.5
−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3
4
Horizon (h)

5

6

7

8

9

10

8

9

10

B. Early period—Kendrick Labor Productivity (1889–1957)
4

%

2
0
−2
−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3
4
Horizon (h)

5

6

7

Figure plots the response of measured productivity to a unit standard deviation shock to our technological
innovation index (in logs). In Panel A, productivity is measured using total factor productivity from Basu et al.
(2006). In Panel B, productivity is measured by output per manhour in manufacturing (Kendrick, 1961, Table
D-II). We include 90% confidence intervals, computed using Newey-West standard errors. All specifications
control for the lag level of productivity.

42

Figure 12: Breakthrough patents and Industry TFP

A. NAICS 4-digit Industries: 1987–2016 period
2

%

1

0

−1
−3

−2

−1

0

1
Horizon (h)

2

3

4

5

B. Kendrick Industries: 1899–1954 period
2

%

1
0
−1
−2
Pre

0

Post

Figure plots the response of industry total factor productivity to a unit standard deviation shock to our
technological innovation index. Panel A presents results for 86 manufacturing industries at the NAICS 4-digit
level using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The data for Panel B (Kendrick data) is from Table D-V
in Kendrick (1961), and includes information for the level of labor productivity (output per manhour) for 62
manufacturing industries for the years 1899, 1909, 1919, 1937, 1947, and 1954. For each period (t, s), we regress
the annualized difference in log labor productivity on the log of the accumulated level of innovation (number of
breakthrough patents) in t ± 2 years—controlling for period, industry dummies, the log number of patents
during the same period, and the log level of productivity at t. Standard errors are clustered by industry. To
construct industry innovation indices for NAICS industries, we use the probabilistic mapping from CPC codes
to NAICS codes from Goldschlag et al. (2016). To construct innovation indices for the Kendrick industries,
which are defined at the SIC code level, we use the concordance between 1997 NAICS and 1987 SIC codes from
the Census Bureau. If NAICS industries map into multiple SIC codes, we assign an equal fraction to each.

43

Figure 13: Breakthrough patents and Industry TFP—comparison to Citations

A. NAICS 4-digit Industries: 1987–2016 period
3
2

%

1
0
−1
−2

−3

−2

−1

0

1
Horizon (h)

2

3

4

5

B. Kendrick Industries: 1899–1954 period
2

%

1

0

−1

−2
Pre

0

Post

Figure performs the same exercise as Figure 11, except that we now construct the industry innovation indices
based on citation counts.

44

Appendix
We briefly overview our conversion of unstructured patent text data into a numerical format
suitable for statistical analysis. To begin, we build our collection of patent documents from two
sources. The first is the USPTO patent search website, which records all patents beginning
from 1976. Our web crawler collected the text content of patents from this site, which includes
patent numbers 3,930,271 through 9,113,586. The records in this sample are comparatively
easy to process as they are available in HTML format with standardized fields.
For patents granted prior to 1976, we collect patent text from our second main datasource,
Google’s patent search engine. For the pre-1976 patent records, we recover all of the fields
listed above with the exception of inventor/assignee addresses (Google only provides their
names), examiner, and attorney. Some parts of our analysis rely on firm-level aggregation of
patent assignments. We match patents to firms by firm name and patent assignee name. Our
procedure broadly follows that of Kogan et al. (2017) with adaptations for our more extensive
sample. In addition to the citation data we scrape from Google, we obtain complementary
information on patent citations from Berkes (2016) and the USPTO. The data in Berkes (2016)
includes citations that are listed inside the patent document and which are sometimes missed
by Google. Nevertheless, the likelihood of a citation being recorded is significantly higher in
the post-1945 than in the pre-1945. When this consideration is relevant, we examine results
separately for the pre- and post-1945 periods.
To represent patent text as numerical data, we convert it into a document term matrix
(DTM), denoted C. Columns of C correspond to words and rows correspond patents. Each
element of C, denoted cpw , counts the number of times a given one-word phrase (indexed by w)
is used in a particular patent (indexed by p), after imposing a number of filters to remove stop
words, punctuation, and so forth. We provide a detailed step-by-step account of our DTM
construction in Appendix V. Our final dictionary includes 1,685,416 terms in the full sample
of over nine million patents.
The next section provides additional details on the data construction, including the process
through which we convert the text of patent documents to a format that is amenable to
constructing similarity measures.

A. Text Data Collection, Additional Details
The Patent Act of 1836 established the official US Patent Office and is the grant year of patent
number one.10 We construct a dataset of textual content of US patent granted during the 180
year period from 1836-2015. Our dataset is built on two sources.
10

The first patent was granted in the US in 1790, but of the patents granted prior to the 1836 Act, all but
2,845 were destroyed by fire.

45

The first is the USPTO patent search website. This site provides records for all patents
beginning in 1976. We designed a web crawler collect the text content of patents over this
period, which includes patent numbers 3,930,271 through 9,113,586. We capture the following
fields from each record:
1. Patent number (WKU)

7. Assignee addresses

13. Backward citations

2. Application date

8. Family ID

14. Examiner

3. Granted date

9. Application number

15. Attorney

4. Inventors

10. US patent class

16. Abstract

5. Inventor addresses

11. CPC patent class

17. Claims

6. Assignees

12. Intl. patent class

18. Description

The only information available from USPTO that we do not store are image files for a patent’s
“figure drawing” exhibits.
For patents granted prior to 1976, the USPTO also provides bulk downloads of .txt files for
each patent. The quality of this data is inferior to that provided by the web search interface in
three ways. First, the text data is recovered from image files of the original patent documents
using OCR scans. OCR scans often contain errors. These generally arise from imperfections in
the original images that lead to errors in the OCR’s translation from image to text. Going
backward in time from 1976, the quality of OCR scans deteriorates rapidly due to lower quality
typesetting. Second, the bulk download files do not use a standardized format which makes it
difficult to parse out the fields listed above.
Rather than using the USPTO bulk files, we collect text of pre-1976 patents from our
second main datasource, Google’s patent search engine. Like post-1976 patents from USPTO,
Google provides patent records in an easy-to-parse HTML format that we collect with our
web crawler. Furthermore, inspection of Google records versus 1) OCR files from the USPTO
and 2) pdf images of patents that are the source of the OCR scans, reveals that in this earlier
period Google’s patent text is more accurate than the OCR text in USPTO bulk data. From
Google’s pre-1976 patent records, we recover all of the fields listed above with the exception of
inventor/assignee addresses (Google only provides their names), examiner, and attorney.

B. Cleaning Post-1976 USPTO Data
Next, we conduct a battery of checks to correct data errors. For the most part, we are able
to capture and parse of patent text from the USPTO web interface without error. When
there are errors, it is almost always the case that the patent record was incompletely captured,
and this occurs for one of two reasons. The first reason is that the network connection was
interrupted during the capture and the second is that the patent record on the UPSTO website

46

is itself incomplete (in comparison with PDF image files of the original document, which are
also available from USPTO via bulk download).
Our primary data cleaning task was to find and complete any partially captured patent records. First, we find the list of patent numbers (WKUs) that are entirely missing from our database, and re-run our capture program until all have been recovered. Many of the missing records
that we find are explicitly labeled as “WITHDRAWN” at the USPTO. Withdrawn information
can be found at https://www.uspto.gov/patents-application-process/patent-search/
withdrawn-patent-numbers. Next, we identify WKUs with an entirely missing value for the
abstract, claims, or description field. Fortunately, we find this to be very infrequent, occurring
in less than one patent in 100,000, making it easy for us to correct this manually.
Next, a team of research assistants (RA’s) manually checked 3,000 utility patent records,
1,000 design patent records, and 1,000 plant patents records against their PDF image files.
The RA task is to identify any records with missing or erroneous information in the reference,
abstract, claims, or description fields. To do this, they manually read the original pdf image
for the patent and our digitally captured record. We identify patterns in partial text omission
and update our scraping algorithm to reflect these. We then re-ran the capture program on all
patents and confirmed that omissions from the previous iteration were corrected.

C. Cleaning Pre-1976 Google Data
Fortunately, we find no instances of missing WKU’s or incomplete text from Google web
records. Next, we assess the accuracy of Google’s OCR scans by manually re-scanning a
random sample of 1,000 pre-1976 patents using more recent (and thus more accurate) ABBYY
OCR software than was used for most of Google’s image scans. We compare the ABBYY
scan to the pdf image to confirm the scan content is complete, the compare the frequency of
garbled terms in our scan versus that OCR text from Google. The distribution of pairwise
cosine similarities in our ABBYY text and Google’s OCR is reported below.

47

Cosine Similarity
mean

0.957

std

0.073

P1

0.701

P5

0.863

P10

0.900

P25

0.951

P50

0.977

P75

0.991

P90

0.996

P95

0.998

P99

0.999

N

1000

Only 10% of sampled Google OCR records have a correlation with ABBYY below 90%.
Next, we manually compare both our OCR scans and those from Google against the pdf
image. We find that garble rate for ABBYY OCRed is 0.025 on average, with standard
deviation of 0.029. We find that Google has only slightly more frequent garbling than our
ABBYY scans. Of the term discrepancies in the two sets of scans, around 52% of these
correspond to a garbled ABBYY records and 83% to a garbled Google record. We ultimately
conclude that Google’s OCR error frequency is acceptable for use in our analysis.

D. Conversion from Textual to Numeric Data
We convert the text content of patents into numerical data for statistical analysis. To do
this, we use the NLTK Python Toolkit to parse the “abstract,” “claims,” and “description”
sections of each patent into individual terms. We strip out all non-word text elements, such as
punctuation, numbers, and HTML tags, and convert all capitalized characters to lowercase.
Next, we remove all occurrences of 947 “stop words,” which include prepositions, pronouns,
and other words that carry little semantic content.11
11

We construct our stop word list as the union of terms in the following commonly used lists:
http://www.ranks.nl/stopwords
https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.1/en/fulltext-stopwords.html
https://code.google.com/p/stop-words/
http://www.lextek.com/manuals/onix/stopwords1.html
http://www.lextek.com/manuals/onix/stopwords2.html
http://www.webconfs.com/stop-words.php
http://www.text-analytics101.com/2014/10/all-about-stop-words-for-text-mining.html
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/disted/pubmedtutorial/020_170.html
https://pypi.python.org/pypi/stop-words
https://msdn.microsof,t.com/zh-cn/library/bb164590
http://www.nltk.org/book/ch02.html (NLTK list)

48

The remaining list of “unstemmed” (that is, without removing suffixes) unigrams amounts
to a dictionary of 35,640,250 unique terms. As discussed in Gentzkow, Kelly, and Taddy (2017),
an important preliminary step to improve signal-to-noise ratios in textual analysis is to reduce
the dictionary by filtering out terms that occur extremely frequently or extremely infrequently.
The most frequently used words show up in so many patents that they are uninformative for
discriminating between patent technologies. On the other hand, words that show up in only a
few patents can only negligibly contribute to understanding broad technology patterns, while
their inclusion increases the computational cost of analysis.12
We apply filters to retain influential terms while keeping the computational burden of our
analysis at a manageable level, and focus on the number of distinct patents and calendar years
in which terms occur. Table A.1 reports the distribution across terms for number of patents
and the number of distinct calendar years in which a term appears. A well known attribute of
text count data is its sparsity—most terms show up very infrequently—and the table shows
that this pattern is evident in patent text as well. We exclude terms that appear in fewer than
twenty out of the more than nine million patents in our sample. These eliminate 33,954,834
terms, resulting in a final dictionary of 1,685,416 terms.13
After this dictionary reduction, the entire corpus of patent text is reduced in a D × W
numerical matrix of term counts denoted C. Matrix row d corresponds to patent (WKU) d.
Matrix column w corresponds the wth term in the dictionary. Each matrix element cdw the
count of term w in patent d.

E. Matching Patents to Firms
Much of our analysis relies on firm-level aggregation of patent assignments. We match patents
to firms by merging firm names and patent assignee names. Our procedure broadly follows
that of Kogan et al. (2017) with adaptations for our more extensive sample.
The first step is extracting assignee names from patent records. For post-1976 data we
use information from the USPTO web search to identify assignee names. Due to the high
data quality in this sample, assignee extraction is straightforward and highly accurate. For
pre-1976, we use assignee information from Google patent search. While it is easy to locate
the assignee name field thanks to the HTML format, Google’s assignee names are occasionally
garbled by the OCR.
12

Filtering out infrequent words also removes garbled terms, misspellings, and other errors, as their
irregularity leads them to occur only sporadically.
13
The table also shows that there are some terms that appear in almost all patents. Examples of the
most frequently occurring words (that are not in the stop word lists) are “located,” “process,” and “material.”
Because these show up in most patents they are unlikely to be informative for statistical analysis. These terms
are de-emphasized in our analysis through the T F IDF transformation.

49

Next, we clean the set of extracted assignee names. There are 766,673 distinct assignees
in patents granted since 1836. Most of the assignees are firm names and those that are not
firms are typically the names of inventors. We clean assignee name garbling using fuzzy
matching algorithms. For example, the assignee “international business machines” also appears
as an assignee under the names “innternational business machines,” “international businesss
machines,” and “international business machiness.” Garbled names are not uncommon,
appearing for firms as large as GE, Microsoft, Ford Motor, and 3M.
We primarily rely on Levenshtein edit distance between assignees to identify and correct
erroneous names. There are two major challenges to overcome in name cleaning. The first
choosing a distance threshold for determining whether names are the same. As an example,
the assignees “international business machines” (recorded in 103,544) and “ibm” (recorded in
547 patents) have a large Levenshtein distance. To address cases like this, we manually check
the roughly 3,000 assignee names that have been assigned at least 200 patents, correcting
those that are variations on the same firm name (including the IBM, GE, Microsoft, Ford,
and 3M examples). Next, for each firm on the list of most frequent assignees, we calculate
the Levenshtein distance between this assignee name and the remaining 730,000+ assignee
names, and manually correct erroneous names identified by the list of assignees with short
Levenshtein distances.
The second challenge is handling cases in which a firm subsidiary appears as assignee. For
example, the General Motors subsidiary “gm global technology operations” is assigned 8,394
patents. To address this, we manually match subsidiary names from the list of top 3,000+
assignees to their parent company by manually searching Bloomberg, Wikipedia, and firms’
websites.
After these two cleaning steps, and after removing patents with the inventor as assignee, we
arrive at 3,036,859 patents whose assignee is associated with a public firm in CRSP/Compustat,
for a total of 7,467 distinct cleaned assignee firm names. We standardized these names by
removing suffixes such as “com,” “corp,” and “inc,” and merge these with CRSP company
names. Again we manually check the merge for the top 3,000+ assignees, and check that name
changes are appropriately addressed in our CRSP merging step. Finally, we also merge our
patent data with Kogan et al. (2017) patent valuation data for patents granted between 1926
and 2012.

F. Patent Quality and Firm Valuation Ratios
Here, we examine the extent to which our text-based patent quality measure accounts for
differences in firm value. Our analysis closely follows that of Hall et al. (2005), who estimate
the relation between a firm’s Tobin’s Q and its “knowledge stock.” Hall et al. (2005) define

50

knowledge stock as a depreciating balance of the firm’s investment in R&D, its number of
patents, or its patent citation count, according to the formula
SXf,t = (1 − δ) SXf,t−1 + Xf,t

(16)

where Xf,t represents either the flow of new R&D, successful patent applications, or citations
received by patents, for firm f in year t. SXf,t is thus the firm’s accumulated stock of X. We
use the same depreciation rate of δ = 15% as Hall et al. (2005).
We introduce a fourth knowledge stock variable based on our patent quality measure. First,
we define firm-level patent quality for firm f in year t as:
τ
qf,t
=

X

qjτ

(17)

j∈Jf,t

where, Jf,t is the set of patents filed for firm f in year t. We then create a “quality-weighted”
patent stock that accumulates (17) according to (16) (again using δ = 15%).14
Our firm-level regression specification, following Hall et al. (2005), is
log Qf,t



τ
τ
SCIT ESf,t
Sqf,t
SRDf,t
SP ATf,t
= log 1 + γ1
+ γ2
+ γ3
+ γ4
Af,t
SRDf,t
SP ATf,t
SP ATf,t

+at + D (SRDf,t = 0) + εf,t

(18)

where SRDf,t , SP ATf,t , SCIT ESf,t , and qf,t are the stocks of R&D expenditure, number of
patents, patent citations, and the patent quality measures constructed as in (16). We follow
the Hall et al. (2005) choices for scaling knowledge stock variables, scaling R&D stock by total
assets (At,t ), patent stock by R&D stock, and citation stock by patent stock. We scale our
patent quality stock by the stock of patents by count, giving it an interpretation as the average
quality of patents held by the firms. We estimate the market value regressions using quality
and citation stocks over horizons τ of 1, 5, or 10 years after the application date. For our
baseline results, we restrict the sample to patenting firms (that is, firms that have filed at
least one patent). As in Hall et al. (2005), at is the fixed effect for year t and accounts for
any time specific effect that moves around the value of all the firms in a given year. We also
include a dummy variable for missing R&D observations. Depending on the specification, we
also include industry-fixed effects, based on the 49 industry classification of Fama and French
(1997). We cluster standard errors by firm.
Our main coefficient of interest is γ4 which estimates the relationship between qualityweighted patent stock and firm value. Table A.6 presents the results. Examining column (2), we
see a strong and statistically significant relation between Tobin’s Q and the patent quality stock.
14

We have experimented with depreciation rates of 5, 10. 20 and 25% and found similar results.

51

A one-standard deviation increase in the (per-patent) quality stock is associated with a 0.15 log
point increase in Tobin’s Q—evaluated at the median—which is economically significant given
that the unconditional standard deviation in log Tobin’s Q is equal to 0.63. For comparison,
a one-standard deviation increase in the citation-weighted stock in column (3) is associated
with a 0.13 log point increase. Column (4) shows that the our quality indicator contains
information that is complementary to citations, both variables are statistically significant and
account for a comparable share of the overall variation in Q—approximately 0.1 and 0.11 log
points, respectively. Column (5) shows that both variables also account for within-industry
variation in Tobin’s Q. Last, columns (6) through (8) show that both indicators of quality are
jointly statistically and economically significant when we restrict attention to manufacturing,
pharmaceutical, and the high-tech industry.

52

Appendix Material
Table A.1: Distribution of document terms across patents
# Patents # Years
mean

124.03

3.33

std

12465.99

9.29

min

1

1

50%

1

1

75%

2

2

90%

7

6

95%

24

14

98%

69

24

max

8399814

182

Table reports the distribution across terms for number of patents and the number of distinct calendar years in
which a term appears.

53

Table A.2: Historically Important Patents: Quality vs Citations
Mean Percentile Rank

A. Comparison across cohorts, no adjustment
B. Comparison across cohorts, remove year FE
C. Comparison within cohorts

Quality

Citations

(0–5years)

(0–10years)

(0–5years)

(0–10years) (full sample)

0.739

0.742

0.334

0.369

0.548

(0.017)

(0.016)

(0.024)

(0.025)

(0.024)

0.774

0.780

0.680

0.699

0.758

(0.016)

(0.016)

(0.016)

(0.017)

(0.016)

0.772

0.779

0.425

0.490

0.688

(0.016)

(0.016)

(0.029)

(0.029)

(0.023)

Table compares the extent to which our quality indicator successfully identifies historically important patents, and compares with patent citations. The presents

54

mean patent percentile ranks based on our quality indicator (Column 1) and forward citations (Columns 2 and 3). A value of x% indicates that a given patent
scores higher than x% of all other patents unconditionally (row A); unconditionally, but adjust quality and citations by removing year-fixed effects (row B); or
relative to patents that are issued in the same year (row C). Standard errors are in parentheses. The list of patents, along with their source, appears in Appendix
Table A.7

Table A.3: Patent impact and novelty predicts citations (includes old patents)
log(1 + Forward citations, 2+ yr)
log(Patent quality, 0-1yr)
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-1 yr)

Observations
R

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.788∗∗∗

0.683∗∗∗

0.709∗∗∗

0.810∗∗∗

(9.42)

(11.20)

(11.03)

(12.90)

0.660∗∗∗

0.610∗∗∗

0.516∗∗∗

0.511∗∗∗

(32.77)

(37.00)

(40.97)

(37.35)

8460384

8422712

3619813

3173149

0.397

0.439

0.520

0.556

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.451∗∗∗

0.529∗∗∗

0.563∗∗∗

0.668∗∗∗

(8.17)

(11.38)

(9.15)

(10.38)

0.611∗∗∗

0.581∗∗∗

0.532∗∗∗

0.541∗∗∗

(35.22)

(36.02)

(34.24)

(33.01)

7432397

7397785

3165185

2756793

0.398

0.442

0.522

0.557

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.148∗∗∗

0.309∗∗∗

0.326∗∗∗

0.375∗∗∗

(4.44)

(13.25)

(9.07)

(9.43)

log(1 + Forward citations, 6+ yr)
log(Patent quality, 0-5yr)
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-5yr)

Observations
R2
log(1 + Forward citations, 11+ yr)
log(Patent quality, 0-10yr)
log(1 + Forward citations, 0-10yr)

Observation
R2

∗∗∗

0.561

0.531

0.503

0.508∗∗∗

(35.20)

(36.22)

(32.21)

(31.99)

6619620

6587879

2802615

2429734

0.338

0.388

0.476

0.515

Y

Y

Grant Year FE
Class

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

Y

Assignee FE

Y

Grant Year × Assignee FE

Y

Table reports the results of estimating equation (12) in the main text. The regression relates the log of (one
plus) the number of patent citations over a horizon [t, s] to our measures of patent quality (10) measured over
a horizon [0, t] and citations measured over the same interval [0, t]. As controls, we include dummies controlling
for technology class (defined at the 3-digit CPC level), application and grant year effects. Sample covers the
entire 1840–2015 period. Last, we cluster the standard errors by the patent grant year. See main text for
additional details on the specification and the construction of these variables.

55

Table A.4: Patent quality predicts citations (all patents)
log(1 + Forward citations, 2+ yr)
log(Patent impact (FS), 0-1yr)

log(Patent novelty (BS), 0-5yr)

log(1 + Forward citations, 0-1 yr)

Observations
R

2

log(1 + Forward citations, 6+ yr)
log(Patent impact (FS), 0-5yr)

log(Patent novelty (BS), 0-5yr)

log(1 + Forward citations, 0-5yr)

Observations
R

2

log(1 + Forward citations, 11+ yr)
log(Patent impact (FS), 0-10yr)

log(Patent novelty (BS), 0-5yr)

log(1 + Forward citations, 0-10yr)

Observation
R2
Grant Year FE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.111∗∗∗

0.952∗∗∗

0.858∗∗∗

0.908∗∗∗

(15.53)

(17.38)

(14.85)

(16.03)

-1.107∗∗∗

-0.908∗∗∗

-0.825∗∗∗

-0.873∗∗∗

(-15.33)

(-16.66)

(-14.14)

(-15.30)

0.658∗∗∗

0.602∗∗∗

0.513∗∗∗

0.509∗∗∗

(33.39)

(36.27)

(39.55)

(36.59)

5959978

5922791

2788578

2495354

0.310

0.366

0.462

0.501

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.621∗∗∗

0.681∗∗∗

0.651∗∗∗

0.718∗∗∗

(10.26)

(14.14)

(10.97)

(12.05)

-0.696∗∗∗

-0.679∗∗∗

-0.647∗∗∗

-0.716∗∗∗

(-11.41)

(-13.84)

(-10.79)

(-11.89)

0.623∗∗∗

0.581∗∗∗

0.536∗∗∗

0.545∗∗∗

(36.96)

(36.49)

(34.57)

(32.88)

4931983

4897863

2333989

2079027

0.321

0.375

0.468

0.504

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.204∗∗∗

0.371∗∗∗

0.366∗∗∗

0.398∗∗∗

(4.39)

(13.98)

(10.13)

(10.38)

-0.313∗∗∗

-0.393∗∗∗

-0.383∗∗∗

-0.418∗∗∗

(-6.98)

(-14.90)

(-10.54)

(-10.87)

0.582∗∗∗

0.540∗∗∗

0.514∗∗∗

0.517∗∗∗

(38.63)

(37.62)

(33.14)

(32.32)

4119206

4087993

1971429

1751975

0.306

0.362

0.448

0.483

Y

Class

Y
Y

Assignee FE

Y

Grant Year × Assignee FE

Y

Table reports the results of estimating equation (12) in the main text. The regression relates the log of (one
plus) the number of patent citations over a horizon [t, s] to our measures of patent quality (10) measured over
a horizon [0, t] and citations measured over the same interval [0, t]. As controls, we include dummies controlling
for technology class (defined at the 3-digit CPC level), application and grant year effects. Sample covers the
entire 1840–2015 period. Last, we cluster the standard errors by the patent grant year. See main text for
additional details on the specification and the construction of these variables.

56

Table A.5: Patent impact and value — patent-level regressions
log KPSS value

(0-1)

(0-5)

(0-10)

0.0015

0.0029∗∗

0.0042∗∗∗

(1.58)

(2.48)

(2.83)

R2

0.948

0.947

0.940

Breakthrough Patent (quality, top 5%)

0.0025

0.0051∗∗∗

0.0046∗

(1.13)

(2.71)

(1.94)

R2

0.948

0.947

0.940

log KPSS value

(0-1)

(0-5)

(0-10)

0.0016

0.0026∗∗

0.0032∗∗

(1.59)

(2.15)

(2.05)

-0.0003

0.0017∗∗∗

0.0039∗∗∗

(-0.68)

(2.85)

(4.15)

R2

0.948

0.947

0.940

log KPSS value

(0-1)

(0-5)

(0-10)

0.0026

0.0048∗∗

0.0038

(1.16)

(2.55)

(1.59)

Log patent quality

Log patent quality
Log forward citations

Breakthrough Patent (quality, top 5%)
Breakthrough Patent (citations, top 5%)

∗∗

0.0065∗∗∗

-0.0009

0.0033

(-0.64)

(2.42)

(3.33)

R2

0.948

0.947

0.940

N

1923629

1723891

1407564

Class FE

Y

Y

Y

Firm Size (market cap)

Y

Y

Y

Firm Volatility

Y

Y

Y

Grant Year × Firm FE

Y

Y

Y

Controls:

Table reports the results of estimating equation (13) in the main text. The regression relates the log of the
Kogan et al. (2017) estimate of the market value of the patent to our (log) measures of patent quality, which
combines the patent’s impact and novelty, constructed in equation (10). As controls, we include dummies
controlling for technology class (defined at the 3-digit CPC level) and the interaction of firm (CRSP: permco)
and grant year effects. The unit of observation is a patent. See Table 4 for a specification in which the unit of
observation is at the firm-patent grant date level. We cluster the standard errors by the patent grant year.
Independent variables are normalized to unit standard deviation. See main text for additional details on the
specification and the construction of these variables.

57

Table A.6: Market Value and Patent Quality
All Patenting Industries

log Q

Capitalized R&D / Assets

Capitalized # Patents / Capitalized R&D

58

R

2

HiTech

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.491∗∗∗

1.314∗∗∗

0.542∗∗∗

0.951∗∗∗

0.262∗∗∗

1.236∗∗∗

0.347∗∗∗

0.192∗∗∗

(17.20)

(9.04)

(16.53)

(10.93)

(8.54)

(7.65)

(7.13)

(3.52)

0.061∗∗∗

0.208∗∗∗

0.087∗∗∗

0.166∗∗∗

0.124∗∗∗

0.182

10.266

7.250

(5.48)

(6.82)

(9.98)

(8.94)

(9.13)

(0.64)

(1.16)

(0.67)

0.602∗∗∗

0.297∗∗∗

0.103∗∗∗

0.446∗∗∗

0.075∗∗∗

0.211∗∗∗

(7.02)

(6.89)

(6.17)

(5.08)

(2.80)

(3.65)

0.287∗∗∗

0.356∗∗∗

0.184∗∗∗

0.855∗∗∗

0.126∗∗∗

0.140∗∗∗

(14.81)

(9.52)

(8.99)

(7.89)

(2.97)

(4.63)

Patent portfolio, citation-weighted

N

Health

(1)

Patent portfolio, quality-weighted (novelty/impact)

R&D=0 Dummy variable

Manuf

-0.067∗∗∗

-0.062∗∗∗

-0.052∗∗∗

-0.054∗∗∗

-0.010

0.012

0.106∗∗

0.166∗∗∗

(-5.84)

(-5.60)

(-4.72)

(-4.97)

(-0.92)

(0.88)

(2.24)

(5.71)

70,769

70,769

70,769

70,769

70,769

51,753

9,529

15,425

0.189

0.227

0.223

0.237

0.317

0.250

0.133

0.203

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Year FE
Industry FE

Y

Table reports estimates of equation (18) in the text. The equation relates the logarithm of a firm’s Tobin’s Q to the stocks of R&D expenditure (SRDf,t ), number
of patents (SP ATf,t ), patent citations (SCIT ESf,t ), and the patent quality measures (Sqf,t ) — constructed using a depreciation rate of δ = 15%. We restrict the
sample to patenting firms, that is, firms that have filed at least one patent. We cluster standard errors by firm. All independent variables are normalized to unit
standard deviation. Manufacturing includes SIC codes 2000-3999. Health is healthcare services, medical equipment, and pharmaceuticals (industries 11-13 in the
Fama and French (1997) 49 industry classification). HiTech is telecommunications, computer hardware and software, and electronic equipment (industries 32,
35–37 in the Fama and French (1997) 49 industry classification).

Table A.7: Important Patents
Percentile Ranks
Patent

Year

Inventor

Invention

Citations

No Adjustment
Quality

(total)

(0-5)

Citations
(0-5)

(total)

Remove year FE
Quality
(0-5)

Source

Citations
(0-5)

(total)

59

1647

1840

Samuel F. B. Morse

Morse Code

2

0.00

0.00

0.29

0.01

0.65

0.81

Reference

3237

1843

Nobert Rillieux

Sugar Refining

0

0.24

0.00

0.00

0.77

0.65

0.44

Reference

3316

1843

Samuel F. B. Morse

Telegraphy Wire

0

0.78

0.00

0.00

0.98

0.65

0.44

Reference

3633

1844

Charles Goodyear

Vulcanized Rubber

3

0.97

0.00

0.38

0.99

0.65

0.88

Reference

4453

1846

Samuel F. B. Morse

Telegraph Battery

0

0.98

0.00

0.00

0.98

0.65

0.44

Reference

4750

1846

Elias Howe, Jr.

Sewing Machine

1

0.97

0.00

0.17

0.96

0.65

0.70

Reference

4834

1846

Benjamin Franklin Palmer

Artificial Limb

0

0.94

0.00

0.00

0.87

0.65

0.44

Reference

4848

1846

Charles T. Jackson

Anesthesia

0

0.90

0.00

0.00

0.75

0.65

0.44

Reference

4874

1846

Christian Frederick Schonbein

Guncotton

0

0.94

0.00

0.00

0.88

0.65

0.44

Reference

5199

1847

Richard M. Hoe

Rotary Printing Press

0

0.96

0.00

0.00

0.76

0.65

0.42

Reference

5711

1848

M. Waldo Hanchett

Dental Chair

1

1.00

0.00

0.17

0.98

0.65

0.70

Reference

5942

1848

John Bradshaw

Sewing Machine

0

1.00

0.00

0.00

0.97

0.65

0.44

Reference

6099

1849

Morey/Johnson

Sewing Machine

1

1.00

0.00

0.17

0.99

0.65

0.69

Reference

6281

1849

Walter Hunt

Safety Pin

0

1.00

0.00

0.00

0.97

0.65

0.42

Reference

6439

1849

John Bachelder

Sewing Machine

0

1.00

0.00

0.00

0.98

0.65

0.42

Reference

7296

1850

D.M. Smith

Sewing Machine

0

1.00

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.65

0.40

Reference

7509

1850

J. Hollen

Sewing Machine

0

1.00

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.65

0.40

Reference

7931

1851

Grover and Baker

Sewing Machine

0

1.00

0.00

0.00

0.99

0.65

0.40

Reference

8080

1851

John Gorrie

Ice Machine

0

0.99

0.00

0.00

0.27

0.65

0.40

Reference

8294

1851

Isaac Singer

Sewing Machine

0

1.00

0.00

0.00

0.98

0.65

0.40

Reference

9300

1852

Lorenzo L. Langstroth

Beehive

1

0.93

0.00

0.17

0.00

0.65

0.69

Reference

13661

1855

Isaac M. Singer

Shuttle Sewing Machine

1

0.98

0.00

0.17

0.03

0.63

0.63

Reference

15553

1856

Gail Borden, Jr.

Condensed Milk

0

0.99

0.00

0.00

0.78

0.64

0.34

Reference

17628

1857

William Kelly

Pneumatic Process of Making Steel

0

0.97

0.00

0.00

0.65

0.63

0.35

Reference

18653

1857

H.N. Wadsworth

Toothbrush

6

0.94

0.00

0.58

0.30

0.63

0.94

Reference

23536

1859

Martha Coston

System of Pyrotechnic Night Signals

1

0.89

0.00

0.17

0.82

0.64

0.58

Reference

26196

1859

James J. Mapes

Artificial Fertilizer

1

0.90

0.00

0.17

0.85

0.64

0.58

Reference

31128

1861

Elisha Graves Otis

Elevator

1

0.92

0.00

0.17

0.74

0.42

0.46

Reference

31278

1861

Linus Yale, Jr.

Lock

10

0.76

0.00

0.72

0.20

0.42

0.94

Reference

31310

1861

Samuel Goodale

Moving Picture Machine

0

0.98

0.00

0.00

0.96

0.42

0.18

Reference

Table A.7: Important Patents (cont)

Percentile Ranks
Patent

Year

Inventor

Invention

Citations

No Adjustment
Quality

Citations

Remove year FE
Quality

Source

Citations

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

60

36836

1862

Richard J. Gatling

Machine Gun

3

0.97

0.31

0.38

0.43

0.85

0.82

Reference

43465

1864

Sarah Mather

Submarine Telescope

0

0.96

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.41

0.40

Reference

46454

1865

John Deere

Plow

0

0.99

0.00

0.00

0.36

0.44

0.41

Reference

53561

1866

Milton Bradley

Board Game

2

1.00

0.00

0.29

1.00

0.49

0.81

Reference

59915

1866

Pierre Lallement

Bicycle

0

1.00

0.00

0.00

0.96

0.49

0.41

Reference

78317

1868

Alfred Nobel

Dynamite

4

0.88

0.00

0.46

0.27

0.64

0.92

Reference

79265

1868

C. Latham Sholes

Typewriter

1

0.96

0.00

0.17

0.81

0.64

0.69

Reference

79965

1868

Alvin J. Fellows

Spring Tape Measure

2

0.75

0.00

0.29

0.06

0.64

0.82

Reference

88929

1869

George Westinghouse

Air Brake

1

0.91

0.00

0.17

0.81

0.64

0.69

Reference

91145

1869

Ives W. McGaffey

Vacuum Cleaner

4

0.81

0.00

0.46

0.53

0.64

0.92

Reference

110971

1871

Andrew Smith Hallidie

Cable Car

1

0.76

0.00

0.17

0.71

0.42

0.67

Reference

113448

1871

Mary Potts

Sad Iron

3

0.72

0.00

0.38

0.63

0.42

0.87

Reference

127360

1872

J.P. Cooley, S. Noble

Toothpick-making machine

0

0.67

0.00

0.00

0.69

0.41

0.39

Reference

129843

1872

Elijah McCoy

Improvements in Lubricators for Steam-Engines

1

0.63

0.00

0.17

0.63

0.41

0.66

Reference

135245

1873

Louis Pasteur

Pasteurization

0

0.24

0.00

0.00

0.20

0.37

0.38

Reference

141072

1873

Louis Pasteur

Manufacture of Beer and Treatment of Yeast

1

0.15

0.00

0.17

0.11

0.37

0.66

Reference

157124

1874

Joseph F. Glidden

Barbed Wire

1

0.86

0.00

0.17

0.95

0.39

0.65

Reference

161739

1875

Alexander Graham Bell

Telephone

7

0.95

0.00

0.62

0.98

0.40

0.96

Reference

171121

1875

George Green

Dental Drill

2

0.52

0.31

0.29

0.54

0.84

0.79

Reference

174465

1876

Alexander Graham Bell

Telephone

6

0.99

0.50

0.58

1.00

0.92

0.95

Reference

178216

1876

Alexander Graham Bell

Telephone

0

0.97

0.00

0.00

0.99

0.42

0.38

Reference

178399

1876

Alexander Graham Bell

Telephone

2

0.98

0.31

0.29

0.99

0.85

0.79

Reference

186787

1877

Alexander Graham Bell

Electric Telegraphy

0

1.00

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.38

0.37

Reference

188292

1877

Chester Greenwood

Earmuffs

17

0.92

0.00

0.84

0.93

0.38

0.99

Reference

194047

1877

Nicolaus August Otto

Internal Combustion Engine

1

0.60

0.00

0.17

0.37

0.38

0.65

Reference

200521

1878

Thomas Alva Edison

Phonograph

12

0.94

0.50

0.77

0.87

0.92

0.98

Reference

201488

1878

Alexander Graham Bell

Telephone

2

1.00

0.00

0.29

1.00

0.36

0.78

Reference

203016

1878

Thomas Alva Edison

Speaking Telephone

15

1.00

0.50

0.82

1.00

0.92

0.99

Reference

206112

1878

Thaddeus Hyatt

Reinforced Concrete

0

0.83

0.00

0.00

0.48

0.36

0.36

Reference

220925

1879

Margaret Knight

Paper-Bag Machine

4

0.92

0.62

0.46

0.56

0.95

0.90

Reference

Table A.7: Important Patents (cont)

Percentile Ranks
Patent

Year

Inventor

Invention

Citations

No Adjustment
Quality

Citations

Remove year FE
Quality

Source

Citations

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

Improvement in carbon telephones

16

1.00

0.00

0.83

1.00

0.37

0.99

61

222390

1879

Thomas Alva Edison

Reference

223898

1880

Thomas Alva Edison

First Incandescent Light

20

1.00

0.00

0.87

1.00

0.43

0.99

Reference

224573

1880

Emile Berliner

Microphone

0

0.92

0.00

0.00

0.44

0.43

0.36

Reference

228507

1880

Alexander Graham Bell

Electric Telephone

3

1.00

0.50

0.38

1.00

0.93

0.85

Reference

237664

1881

Frederic E. Ives

Halftone Printing Plate

1

0.92

0.31

0.17

0.64

0.85

0.64

Reference

304272

1884

Ottmar Mergenthaler

Linotype

0

0.89

0.00

0.00

0.92

0.40

0.35

Reference

312085

1885

Edward J. Claghorn

Seat Belt

13

0.28

0.00

0.79

0.25

0.38

0.98

Reference

322177

1885

Sarah Goode

Folding Cabinet Bed

3

0.44

0.00

0.38

0.49

0.38

0.84

Reference

347140

1886

Elihu Thomson

Electric Welder

16

0.64

0.94

0.83

0.58

1.00

0.99

Reference

349983

1886

Gottlieb Daimler

Four Stroke Combustion Engine

4

0.99

0.00

0.46

0.99

0.39

0.89

Reference

371496

1887

Dorr E. Felt

Adding Machine

6

0.84

0.71

0.58

0.79

0.97

0.94

Reference

372786

1887

Emile Berliner

Phonograph Record

4

0.88

0.62

0.46

0.86

0.95

0.89

Reference

373064

1887

Carl Gassner, Jr.

Dry Cell Battery

3

0.73

0.00

0.38

0.59

0.38

0.84

Reference

382280

1888

Nikola Tesla

A. C. Induction Motor

2

0.93

0.31

0.29

0.95

0.84

0.76

Reference

386289

1888

Miriam Benjamin

Gong and Signal Chair for Hotels

0

0.66

0.00

0.00

0.55

0.40

0.34

Reference

388116

1888

William S. Burroughs

Calculator

3

0.80

0.00

0.38

0.78

0.40

0.84

Reference

388850

1888

George Eastman

Roll Film Camera

1

0.93

0.00

0.17

0.95

0.40

0.62

Reference

395782

1889

Herman Hollerith

Computer

1

0.45

0.31

0.17

0.31

0.85

0.61

Reference

400665

1889

Charles M. Hall

Aluminum Manufacture

2

0.86

0.31

0.29

0.89

0.85

0.76

Reference

415072

1889

William Starley, Herbert Owen

Tandem Bicycle

1

0.74

0.00

0.17

0.73

0.43

0.61

Reference

430212

1890

Hiram Stevens Maxim

Smokeless Gunpowder

0

0.65

0.00

0.00

0.75

0.45

0.34

Reference

430804

1890

Herman Hollerith

Electric Adding Machine

2

0.91

0.31

0.29

0.96

0.85

0.76

Reference

447918

1891

Almon B. Strowger

Automatic Telephone Exchange

81

0.74

0.00

0.98

0.91

0.46

1.00

Reference

453550

1891

John Boyd Dunlop

Pneumatic Tyres

1

0.75

0.31

0.17

0.92

0.85

0.61

Reference

468226

1892

William Painter

Bottle Cap

7

0.77

0.00

0.62

0.96

0.35

0.94

Reference

472692

1892

G.C. Blickensderfer

Typewriting Machine

4

0.23

0.31

0.46

0.58

0.84

0.88

Reference

492767

1893

Edward G. Acheson

Carborundum

12

0.07

0.00

0.77

0.33

0.44

0.98

Reference

493426

1893

Thomas Alva Edison

Motion Picture

1

0.56

0.00

0.17

0.92

0.44

0.60

Reference

504038

1893

Whitcomb L. Judson

Zipper

6

0.19

0.00

0.58

0.65

0.44

0.93

Reference

536569

1895

Charles Jenkins

Phantoscope

0

0.79

0.00

0.00

0.97

0.34

0.31

Reference

Table A.7: Important Patents (cont)

Percentile Ranks
Patent

Year

Inventor

Invention

Citations

No Adjustment
Quality

Citations

Remove year FE
Quality

Source

Citations

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

62

549160

1895

George B. Selden

Automobile

0

0.50

0.00

0.00

0.88

0.34

0.31

Reference

558393

1896

John Harvey Kellogg

Cereal

3

0.41

0.00

0.38

0.69

0.49

0.83

Reference

558719

1896

C.B. Brooks

Street Sweeper

2

0.37

0.50

0.29

0.65

0.93

0.75

Reference

558936

1896

Joseph S. Duncan

Addressograph

3

0.09

0.00

0.38

0.16

0.49

0.83

Reference

586193

1897

Guglielmo Marconi

Radio

4

0.76

0.71

0.46

0.89

0.97

0.88

Reference

589168

1897

Thomas A. Edison

Motion Picture Camera

0

0.36

0.00

0.00

0.46

0.48

0.31

Reference

608845

1898

Rudolf Diesel

Diesel Engine

8

0.67

0.00

0.66

0.73

0.47

0.95

Reference

621195

1899

Ferdinand Graf Zepplin

Dirigible

1

0.80

0.00

0.17

0.70

0.35

0.57

Reference

644077

1900

Felix Hoffmann

Aspirin

1

0.86

0.00

0.17

0.72

0.46

0.58

Reference

661619

1900

Valdemar Poulsen

Magnetic Tape Recorder

15

0.89

0.71

0.82

0.80

0.97

0.98

Reference

708553

1902

John P. Holland

Submarine

1

0.83

0.00

0.17

0.61

0.45

0.57

Reference

743801

1903

Mary Anderson

Windscreen Wiper

2

0.29

0.00

0.29

0.04

0.50

0.73

Reference

745157

1903

Clyde J. Coleman

Electric Starter

1

0.94

0.00

0.17

0.92

0.50

0.57

Reference

764166

1904

Albert Gonzales

Railroad Switch

0

0.77

0.00

0.00

0.68

0.50

0.30

Reference

766768

1904

Michael J. Owens

Automatic Glass Bottle Manufacturing

7

0.83

0.50

0.62

0.78

0.93

0.94

Reference

775134

1904

KC Gillette

Razor (with removable blades)

4

0.91

0.31

0.46

0.92

0.85

0.87

Reference

808897

1906

Willis H. Carrier

Air Conditioning

21

0.61

0.00

0.88

0.58

0.54

0.99

Reference

815350

1906

John Holland

Submarine

0

0.64

0.00

0.00

0.63

0.54

0.28

Reference

821393

1906

Orville Wright

Airplane

19

1.00

0.31

0.86

1.00

0.85

0.99

Reference

841387

1907

Lee De Forest

Triode Vacuum Tube

5

0.16

0.00

0.52

0.08

0.56

0.90

Reference

921963

1909

Leonard H. Dyer

Automobile Vehicle

0

0.58

0.00

0.00

0.71

0.54

0.26

Reference

942809

1909

Leo H. Baekeland

Bakelite

3

0.91

0.00

0.38

0.97

0.54

0.80

Reference

970616

1910

Thomas A Edison

helicopter (never flown)

2

0.98

0.00

0.29

0.99

0.58

0.71

Reference

971501

1910

Fritz Haber

Ammonia Production

1

0.99

0.31

0.17

1.00

0.85

0.54

Reference

1000000

1911

Francis Holton

Non-Puncturable Vehicle Tire

2

0.79

0.00

0.29

0.89

0.58

0.71

Reference

1005186

1911

Henry Ford

Automotive Transmission

3

0.55

0.00

0.38

0.65

0.58

0.80

Reference

1008577

1911

Ernst F. W. Alexanderson

High Frequency Generator

6

0.31

0.62

0.58

0.31

0.96

0.92

Reference

1030178

1912

Peter Cooper Hewitt

Mercury Vapor Lamp

1

0.89

0.00

0.17

0.96

0.55

0.54

Reference

1082933

1913

William D. Coolidge

Tungsten Filament Light Bulb

28

0.76

0.00

0.92

0.90

0.61

0.99

Reference

1102653

1914

Robert H. Goddard

Rocket

58

0.48

0.62

0.97

0.71

0.96

1.00

Reference

Table A.7: Important Patents (cont)

Percentile Ranks
Patent

Year

Inventor

Invention

Citations

No Adjustment
Quality

1103503

1914

Robert Goddard

Citations

Remove year FE
Quality

Source

Citations

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

Rocket Apparatus

29

0.39

0.62

0.92

0.59

0.96

0.99

Reference
Reference

1113149

1914

Edwin H. Armstrong

Wireless Receiver

11

0.86

0.31

0.75

0.96

0.85

0.97

1115674

1914

Mary P. Jacob

Brassiere

1

0.65

0.00

0.17

0.85

0.61

0.53

Reference

1180159

1916

Irving Langmuir

Gas Filled Electric Lamp

13

0.80

0.62

0.79

0.94

0.96

0.97

Reference

1203495

1916

William D. Coolidge

X-Ray Tube

11

0.69

0.62

0.75

0.88

0.96

0.96

Reference

1211092

1917

William D. Coolidge

X-Ray Tube

7

0.91

0.00

0.62

0.98

0.55

0.92

Reference

1228388

1917

Frederick C Bargar

Fire Extinguisher

2

0.51

0.00

0.29

0.74

0.55

0.68

Reference

1254811

1918

Charles F. Kettering

Engine Ignition

1

0.65

0.00

0.17

0.85

0.60

0.51

Reference

1279471

1918

Elmer A. Sperry

Gyroscopic Compass

9

0.93

0.00

0.69

0.98

0.60

0.95

Reference

1360168

1920

Ernst Alexanderson

Antenna

4

0.91

0.00

0.46

0.97

0.62

0.83

Reference

63

1394450

1921

Charles P Strite

Bread Toaster

2

0.60

0.00

0.29

0.82

0.62

0.66

Reference

1413121

1922

John Arthur Johnson

Adjustable Wrench

0

0.09

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.63

0.20

Reference

1420609

1922

Glenn H. Curtiss

Hydroplane

2

0.72

0.00

0.29

0.89

0.63

0.65

Reference

1573846

1926

Thomas Midgley, Jr.

Ethyl Gasoline

3

0.33

0.31

0.38

0.57

0.85

0.72

Reference
Reference

1682366

1928

Charles F. Brannock

Foot Measuring Device

4

0.22

0.00

0.46

0.37

0.51

0.78

1699270

1929

John Logie Baird

Television / TV

11

0.62

0.00

0.75

0.88

0.52

0.94

Reference

1773079

1930

Clarence Birdseye

Frozen Food

10

0.73

0.31

0.72

0.95

0.85

0.93

Reference

1773080

1930

Clarence Birdseye

Frozen Food

18

0.75

0.00

0.86

0.95

0.49

0.97

Reference

1773980

1930

Philo T. Farnsworth

Television

29

0.91

0.62

0.92

0.98

0.96

0.99

Reference

1800156

1931

Erik Rotheim

Aerosol Spray Can

30

0.76

0.31

0.93

0.97

0.85

0.99

Reference

1821525

1931

Nielsen Emanuel

Hair Dryer

11

0.13

0.00

0.75

0.55

0.50

0.93

Reference

1835031

1931

Herman Affel

Coaxial cable

15

0.46

0.77

0.82

0.90

0.98

0.96

Reference

1848389

1932

Igor Sikorsky

Helicopter

5

0.47

0.00

0.52

0.94

0.47

0.78

Reference

1867377

1932

Otto F Rohwedder

Bread-Slicing Machine

2

0.16

0.00

0.29

0.75

0.47

0.52

Reference
Reference

1925554

1933

John Logie Baird

Color Television

1

0.37

0.00

0.17

0.92

0.44

0.33

1929453

1933

Waldo Semon

Rubber

56

0.79

0.93

0.97

0.98

1.00

1.00

Reference

1941066

1933

Edwin H. Armstrong

FM Radio

0

0.38

0.00

0.00

0.93

0.44

0.10

Reference

1948384

1934

Ernest O. Lawrence

Cyclotron

96

0.27

0.00

0.99

0.87

0.42

1.00

Reference

1949446

1934

William Burroughs

Adding and Listing Machine

1

0.06

0.31

0.17

0.55

0.85

0.31

Reference

1980972

1934

Lyndon Frederick

Krokodil

1

0.76

0.00

0.17

0.98

0.42

0.31

Reference

Table A.7: Important Patents (cont)

Percentile Ranks
Patent

Year

Inventor

Invention

Citations

No Adjustment
Quality

2021907

1935

Vladimir K. Zworykin

Television

Citations

Remove year FE
Quality

Source

Citations

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

18

0.38

0.00

0.86

0.89

0.39

0.95

Reference

2059884

1936

Leopold D. Mannes

Color Film

15

0.20

0.50

0.82

0.59

0.92

0.93

Reference

2071250

1937

Wallace H. Carothers

Nylon

231

0.63

0.50

1.00

0.89

0.92

1.00

Reference

2087683

1937

PT Farnsworth

Image Dissector

1

0.68

0.00

0.17

0.92

0.36

0.23

Reference

2153729

1939

Ernest H. Volwiler

Pentothal (General Anesthetic)

2

0.81

0.00

0.29

0.96

0.33

0.38

Reference

2188396

1940

Waldo Semon

Rubber

59

0.97

0.00

0.97

1.00

0.32

0.99

Reference

2206634

1940

Enrico Fermi

Radioactive Isotopes

99

0.82

0.31

0.99

0.98

0.82

1.00

Reference
Reference

64

2230654

1941

Roy J. Plunkett

Teflon

49

0.43

0.89

0.96

0.93

0.99

0.99

2258841

1941

Jozsef Bir— Laszlo

Fountain Pen

20

0.02

0.77

0.87

0.23

0.97

0.94

Reference

2292387

1942

Hedwig Kiesler Markey

Secret Communication System

71

0.45

0.31

0.98

0.95

0.76

0.99

Reference

2297691

1942

Chester F. Carlson

Xerography

738

0.06

0.71

1.00

0.62

0.95

1.00

Reference

2329074

1943

Paul Muller

DDT - Insecticide

48

0.05

0.99

0.96

0.56

1.00

0.98

Reference

2390636

1945

Ladislo Biro

Ball Point Pen

27

0.34

0.97

0.92

0.79

1.00

0.95

Reference

2404334

1946

Frank Whittle

Jet Engine

35

0.13

0.94

0.94

0.23

0.99

0.97

Reference

2436265

1948

Allen Du Mont

Cathode Ray Tube

18

0.65

0.81

0.86

0.74

0.96

0.91

Reference

2451804

1948

Donald L. Campbell

Fluid Catalytic Cracking

9

0.65

0.50

0.69

0.74

0.81

0.77

Reference

2495429

1950

Percy Spencer

Microwave

15

0.22

0.87

0.82

0.21

0.98

0.89

Reference

2524035

1950

John Bardeen

Transistor

132

0.60

1.00

0.99

0.75

1.00

1.00

Reference

2543181

1951

Edwin H. Land

Instant Photography

116

0.44

0.99

0.99

0.63

1.00

1.00

Reference

2569347

1951

William Shockley

Junction Transistor

140

0.45

1.00

0.99

0.63

1.00

1.00

Reference

2642679

1953

Frank Zamboni

Resurfacing Machine

16

0.36

0.50

0.83

0.55

0.82

0.89

Reference

2668661

1954

George R. Stibitz

Modern Digital Computer

14

0.95

0.31

0.80

0.98

0.71

0.86

Reference
Reference

2682050

1954

Andrew Alford

Radio Navigation System

3

0.63

0.00

0.38

0.77

0.22

0.39

2682235

1954

Richard Buckminster Fuller

Geodesic Dome

86

0.48

0.77

0.99

0.60

0.94

0.99

Reference

2691028

1954

Frank B. Colton

First Oral Contraceptive

4

0.88

0.00

0.46

0.96

0.22

0.48

Reference

2699054

1955

Lloyd H. Conover

Tetracycline

38

0.92

0.98

0.95

0.97

1.00

0.97

Reference

2708656

1955

Enrico Fermi

Atomic Reactor

196

0.98

1.00

1.00

0.99

1.00

1.00

Reference

2708722

1955

An Wang

Magnetic Core Memory

76

0.70

0.97

0.98

0.78

1.00

0.99

Reference

258

0.44

0.62

1.00

0.43

0.88

1.00

Reference

1

0.74

0.31

0.17

0.82

0.71

0.13

Reference

2717437

1955

George De Mestral

Velcro

2724711

1955

Gertrude Elion

Leukemia-fighting drug 6-mercaptopurine

Table A.7: Important Patents (cont)

Percentile Ranks
Patent

Year

Inventor

Invention

Citations

No Adjustment
Quality

2752339

1956

Percy L. Julian

Preparation of Cortisone

Citations

Remove year FE
Quality

Source

Citations

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

11

0.84

0.62

0.75

0.88

0.88

0.81

Reference
Reference

2756226

1956

Brandl/Margreiter

Oral Penicillin

7

0.70

0.71

0.62

0.71

0.92

0.67

2797183

1957

Hazen/Brown

Nystatin

13

0.86

0.31

0.79

0.90

0.69

0.85

Reference

2816721

1957

R. J. Taylor

Rocket Engine

25

0.71

0.77

0.91

0.72

0.94

0.95

Reference

2817025

1957

Robert Adler

TV remote control

27

0.70

0.96

0.92

0.71

1.00

0.95

Reference

2835548

1958

Robert C. Baumann

Satellite

16

0.81

0.92

0.83

0.85

0.99

0.89

Reference

2866012

1958

Charles P. Ginsburg

Video Tape Recorder

30

0.77

0.97

0.93

0.81

1.00

0.96

Reference

2879439

1959

Charles H. Townes

Maser

24

0.72

0.96

0.90

0.77

0.99

0.94

Reference

122

0.82

1.00

0.99

0.89

1.00

1.00

Reference

8

0.83

0.31

0.66

0.89

0.69

0.72

Reference

2929922

1960

Arthur L. Shawlow

Laser

2937186

1960

Burckhalter/Seiwald

Antibody Labelling Agent

65

2947611

1960

Francis P. Bundy

Diamond Synthesis

62

0.71

0.00

0.98

0.77

0.19

0.99

Reference

2956114

1960

Charles P. Ginsburg

Wideband Magnetic Tape System

11

0.68

0.62

0.75

0.74

0.88

0.81

Reference

2981877

1961

Robert N. Noyce

Semiconductor Device-And-Lead Structure

152

0.96

1.00

1.00

0.98

1.00

1.00

Reference

3057356

1962

Greatbatch Wilson

Pacemaker

127

0.88

0.93

0.99

0.93

0.99

1.00

Reference

3093346

1963

Maxime A. Faget

First Manned Space Capsule-Mercury

19

0.89

0.87

0.86

0.93

0.97

0.91

Reference

3097366

1963

Paul Winchell

Artificial Heart

23

0.48

0.62

0.89

0.41

0.87

0.93

Reference

3118022

1964

Gerhard M. Sessler

Electret Microphone

39

0.70

0.50

0.95

0.70

0.80

0.97

Reference
Reference

3156523

1964

Glenn T. Seaborg

Americium (Element 95)

1

0.82

0.00

0.17

0.85

0.17

0.13

3174267

1965

Edward C Bopf, Deere & Co

Cotton Harvester

4

0.62

0.71

0.46

0.55

0.91

0.47

Reference

3220816

1965

Alastair Pilkington

Manufacture of Flat Glass

25

0.83

0.31

0.91

0.85

0.67

0.94

Reference

3287323

1966

Stephanie Kwolek, Paul Morgan

Kevlar

1

0.70

0.00

0.17

0.70

0.15

0.12

Reference

3478216

1969

George Carruthers

Far-Ultraviolet Camera

3

0.71

0.31

0.38

0.84

0.70

0.39

Reference
Reference

3574791

1971

Patsy Sherman

Scotchguard

81

0.66

0.84

0.98

0.82

0.97

0.99

3663762

1972

Edward Joel Amos Jr

Cellular Telephone

112

0.59

0.87

0.99

0.78

0.97

1.00

Reference

3789832

1974

Raymond V. Damadian

MRI

59

0.42

0.71

0.97

0.74

0.90

0.98

Reference

3858232

1974

William Boyle

Digital Eye

51

0.39

0.95

0.97

0.71

0.99

0.98

Reference

3906166

1975

Martin Cooper

Cellular Telephone

219

0.38

0.81

1.00

0.71

0.95

1.00

Reference

4136359

1979

Stephen Wozniak, Apple

Microcomputer

37

0.79

0.62

0.95

0.97

0.84

0.94

Reference

4229761

1980

Valerie Thomas

Illusion Transmitter

3

0.59

0.00

0.38

0.92

0.11

0.21

Reference

4237224

1980

Boyer/Cohen

Molecular chimeras

301

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

Reference

Table A.7: Important Patents (cont)

Percentile Ranks
Patent

Year

Inventor

Invention

Citations

No Adjustment
Quality

4363877

1982

Howard M. Goodman

Human Growth Hormone

Citations

Remove year FE
Quality

Source

Citations

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

51

0.99

0.71

0.97

1.00

0.88

0.96

Reference

4371752

1983

Gordon Matthews

Digital Voice Mail System

223

0.75

0.93

1.00

0.94

0.98

1.00

Reference

4399216

1983

Richard Axel

Co-transformation

482

0.99

0.97

1.00

1.00

0.99

1.00

Reference

4437122

1984

Walsh/Halpert

Bitmap graphics

178

0.99

0.90

1.00

1.00

0.97

1.00

Reference

4464652

1984

Apple

Lisa Mouse

112

0.70

0.98

0.99

0.89

1.00

0.99

Reference
Reference

4468464

1984

Boyer/Cohen

Molecular chimeras

109

1.00

0.50

0.99

1.00

0.74

0.99

4590598

1986

Gordon Gould

Laser

20

0.70

0.31

0.87

0.58

0.29

0.80

Reference

4634665

1987

Richard Axel

Co-transformation

183

0.99

0.62

1.00

0.99

0.77

1.00

Reference

66

4683195

1987

Kary B. Mullis

polymerase chain reaction

2884

0.97

1.00

1.00

0.97

1.00

1.00

Reference

4683202

1987

(several)

polymerase chain reaction

3328

0.95

1.00

1.00

0.94

1.00

1.00

Reference

4736866

1988

Leder/Stewart

transgenic (genetically modified) animals

370

1.00

0.81

1.00

1.00

0.90

1.00

Reference

4744360

1988

Patricia Bath

Cataract Laserphaco Probe

81

0.94

0.81

0.98

0.91

0.90

0.98

Reference

4799258

1989

Donald Watts Davies

Packet-switching technology

153

0.96

0.95

0.99

0.95

0.98

0.99

Reference

4816397

1989

Michael A. Boss

recombinant antibodies

567

0.97

0.81

1.00

0.98

0.90

1.00

Reference

1785

0.99

0.77

1.00

0.99

0.87

1.00

Reference

22

0.94

0.81

0.89

0.92

0.90

0.81

Reference

4816567

1989

Shmuel Cabilly

immunoglobulins

4838644

1989

Ellen Ochoa

Recognizing Method

4889818

1989

(several)

polymerase chain reaction

366

0.98

0.99

1.00

0.98

1.00

1.00

Reference

4965188

1990

(several)

polymerase chain reaction

1176

0.97

0.99

1.00

0.98

1.00

1.00

Reference
Reference

5061620

1991

Ann Tsukamoto

Method for isolating the human stem cell

252

0.99

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

5071161

1991

Geoffrey L Mahoon

Airbag

23

0.81

0.96

0.89

0.67

0.98

0.81

Reference

5108388

1992

Stephen L. Troke

Laser Surgery Method

125

0.97

0.00

0.99

0.97

0.04

0.99

Reference

5149636

1992

Richard Axel

Co-transformation

6

0.99

0.31

0.58

0.99

0.24

0.36

Reference

5179017

1993

Richard Axel

Co-transformation

131

1.00

0.96

0.99

1.00

0.98

0.99

Reference

5184830

1993

Saturo Okada, Shin Kojo

Compact Hand-Held Video Game System

201

0.98

0.98

1.00

0.98

0.99

1.00

Reference

5194299

1993

Arthur Fry

Post-It Note

76

0.87

0.00

0.98

0.73

0.04

0.97

Reference

5225539

1993

Gregory P. Winter

Chimeric, humanized antibodies

671

1.00

0.99

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

Reference

5272628

1993

Michael Koss

Core Excel Function

94

0.99

0.92

0.99

0.99

0.95

0.98

Reference

5747282

1998

Mark H. Skolnick

BRCA1 gene

15

0.98

0.71

0.82

0.97

0.72

0.67

Reference

248

0.91

0.84

1.00

0.61

0.84

1.00

Reference

5

0.95

0.00

0.52

0.83

0.01

0.26

Reference

5770429

1998

Nils Lonberg

human antibodies from transgenic mice

5837492

1998

(several)

BRCA2 gene

Table A.7: Important Patents (cont)

Percentile Ranks
Patent

Year

Inventor

Invention

Citations

No Adjustment
Quality

Citations

Remove year FE
Quality

Source

Citations

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

(0-5)

(0-5)

(total)

0.31

1.00

1.00

0.09

1.00

5939598

1999

(several)

Transgenic mice

262

1.00

Reference

5960411

1999

Hartman/Bezos/Kaphan/Spiegel

1-click buying

1387

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

Reference

6230409

2001

Patricia Billings

Geobond

7

0.86

0.62

0.62

0.75

0.33

0.46

Reference

6285999

2001

Larry Page

Google Pagerank

689

0.98

1.00

1.00

0.99

1.00

1.00

Reference

6331415

2001

Shmuel Cabilly

Antibody molecules

243

0.98

0.00

1.00

0.99

0.01

1.00

Reference
Reference

6455275

2002

Richard Axel

Co-transformation

7

0.97

0.31

0.62

0.98

0.12

0.52

6574628

2003

Robert Kahn, Vinton Cerf

Packet-Switching Knowbot

61

0.99

0.95

0.97

1.00

0.96

0.98

Reference

6955484

2005

Nicholas D. Woodman

Harness system for attaching camera to user

15

0.59

0.84

0.82

0.78

0.89

0.87

Reference

6985922

2006

Janet Emerson Bashen

LinkLine

47

0.81

0.95

0.96

0.93

0.98

0.98

Reference

67

