                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    FORESEEN RISKS

                                       João F. Gomes
                                      Marco Grotteria
                                      Jessica Wachter

                                     Working Paper 25277
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25277


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2018, Revised July 2009




We are grateful for comments by Jules van Binsbergen, Bernard Dumas, Vadim Elenev, Andrea
Ferraro, Nicola Gennaioli, François Gourio, Skander Van den Heuvel, Martin Oehmke, Adi
Sunderam, Urszula Szczerbowicz, Yao Zeng, and seminar participants at Bocconi, USC,
Wharton, The Federal Reserve Board, and the CAPR, American Finance Association, FIRS,
Adam Smith, German Bundesbank/ECB Systemic Risk, IDC Herzliya, RCFS/RAPS, and UNC-
Duke conferences. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by João F. Gomes, Marco Grotteria, and Jessica Wachter. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Foreseen Risks
João F. Gomes, Marco Grotteria, and Jessica Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 25277
November 2018, Revised July 2009
JEL No. G01,G18,G21,G32

                                           ABSTRACT

Large crises tend to follow rapid credit expansions. Causality, however, is far from obvious. We
show how this pattern arises naturally when financial intermediaries optimally exploit economic
rents that drive their franchise value. As this franchise value fluctuates over the business cycle, so
too do the incentives to engage in risky lending. The model leads to novel insights on the effects
of unconventional monetary policies in developed economies. We argue that bank lending might
have responded less than expected to these interventions because they enhanced franchise value,
inadvertently encouraging banks to pursue safer investments in low-risk government securities.


João F. Gomes                                     Jessica Wachter
University of Pennsylvania                        Department of Finance
Wharton School                                    2300 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104                            The Wharton School
gomesj@wharton.upenn.edu                          University of Pennsylvania
                                                  3620 Locust Walk
Marco Grotteria                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104
The Wharton School                                and NBER
University of Pennsylvania                        jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
grottm@wharton.upenn.edu
1         Introduction
Motivated by the financial crisis of 2007–2008 and subsequent Great Recession several
empirical studies find that major collapses in economic activity tend to occur in the aftermath
of large credit expansions.1 This evidence led some economists to argue that credit booms are
the primary cause of severe downturns. Specifically, studies argue that competitive pressures
to lend, combined with perverse incentives or behavioral biases, are the underlying source for
both uncontrolled credit expansions, and the subsequent downturns.2
        In this paper, we propose an alternative explanation of the link between credit booms
and economic crisis. We build a model in which the propensity of banks to engage in “riskier
lending” over the cycle is a result of exogenous variation in macroeconomic conditions and
their impact on the bank’s own franchise value. As a result, there is no concept of a credit
cycle that “causes” the business cycle. Instead, in our model, bank credit co-moves with –
and precedes – macro aggregates such as investment and output, even if these variables are,
by design, fully independent of bank lending behavior.
        Our model is motivated by a number of key facts related to banks’ behavior in the lead up
to the 2007–2008 crisis. First and foremost is the rising pessimism about future house prices
in the lead up to the crisis (Piazzesi and Schneider, 2009; Mian and Sufi, 2019) suggesting
credit risks were perceived to be rising during this period. Thus, instead of suffering from
irrational exuberance, our bank managers correctly forecast future economic growth and
optimally respond to changes in the economic environment. Moreover, they make investment
and financing decisions with the aim of maximizing shareholder value.3
    1
     See Borio and Lowe (2002); Reinhart and Rogoff (2009); Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2011); Schularick
and Taylor (2012); Mian and Sufi (2009); Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017); Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017).
   2
     Work by Minsky (1977) and Kindleberger (1978) already emphasizes the potential for overoptimism to
destabilize the economy. Behavioral explanations include neglected risks (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny,
2012) and extrapolative beliefs (Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998; Greenwood and Hanson, 2013).
   3
     Our model requires that risks be foreseen by some but not all investors, bank executives, or bank
employees. This is then consistent with evidence of Cheng, Raina, and Xiong (2014), Chernenko, Hanson,
and Sunderam (2016) and Richter and Zimmermann (2019) that some within the banking sector might have
been overoptimistic. The question to us is not why bank executives acted in a way that failed to avoid risk,
but rather why informed equity holders did not curtail, and perhaps even encouraged, risky practices.



                                                     1
       The key assumption in our model is that banks benefit from economic rents, arising from
a wedge between the expected return on assets and the cost of debt. Although this wedge is
formalized as subsidized deposit insurance, alternative, and equally compelling, sources of
rents could be imperfect competition in the banking sector or a limited regulatory oversight
relative to other institutions that provide similar services.4 Our main result, however, is that
regardless of their source, the economic value of these rents will fluctuate over time as local
and aggregate economic conditions change and this will generally lead banks to accept more
risks when franchise values are low.
       Our description of the banking sector builds on Merton (1978). Specifically, we treat
banks as entities with access to an exogenous supply of deposits, paying a deposit rate
priced to reflect the presence of a government guarantee. To this basic structure, we add an
investment decision: banks must decide in each period on the size and composition of their
loan portfolio. They invest their assets in a mixture of risky loans to the private sector and
safer floating-rate government notes.
       Government guarantees on deposits provide banks with a source of economic rents. The
discounted value of this stream of rents is effectively the bank’s franchise value and its
fluctuations over the business cycle drive lending behavior. During expansions, the franchise
value is generally large and banks protect it by avoiding excessive risks that may lead to
early bankruptcy. Over time however, as aggregate risks eventually build, franchise values
begin to fall while risk premia rise and the bank’s equity holders may find it preferable to
exploit the additional reward from investing in risky assets.
       Our model matches a number of key stylized facts about the behavior of US banks in the
lead up to the 2007-08 crisis. Notably, shareholder payouts and leverage rise in anticipation
of a crisis just as they did before 2008. Similarly market to book ratios begin to fall as the
likelihood of a crisis increases, again just as was seen in 2007-08.
       To study the links between bank lending and aggregate economic activity, we expand the
   4
    Buser, Chen, and Kane (1981) document that deposit insurance premia are subsidized in the US. Drechsler,
Savov, and Schnabl (2017) provide recent evidence for the lack of competition in the banking sector. A weak
regulatory oversight may capture the shadow banking sector in the period before the crisis.



                                                     2
baseline model to include a corporate sector that makes investment decisions. We assume
banks lend only to households, ensuring corporate behavior remains fully independent of
bank lending. We then confront our quantitative implications with recent evidence on the
relationship between bank lending and financial crises. In particular, we show our model
replicates the patterns in Schularick and Taylor (2012) and Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor
(2016) documenting that crises often follow periods of very fast credit growth, the finding
of Baron and Xiong (2017) that fast lending growth predicts bank equity crashes, and the
findings in Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017) on the strong predictability of future GDP growth by
the growth in household debt. Notably, we also document that, in the data, this predictability
holds only for countries and periods with deposit insurance, thus independently validating
our model’s main mechanism.
       Beyond these findings, our model also provides lessons for the evaluation of recent
unconventional monetary policy interventions. After the 2008 crisis, policy makers in many
advanced economies responded by providing the banking sector with additional guarantees
on funding. The dominant policy rhetoric was that poor bank balance sheets lied behind the
sharp reduction in credit. Although these interventions were designed to encourage private
sector lending, banks instead preferred to invest heavily in government bonds or increase
excess reserves in central banks. This behavior however is entirely consistent with our model,
since these stabilization policies effectively worked as subsidies, reducing the cost of financing
for banks, increasing their franchise values and reinforcing their incentives to hold safe assets.
       Our work is related to several bodies of literature on banking, corporate finance and
macroeconomics. Starting from the empirical evidence that the banking industry is both
highly regulated and subject to limited entry, an early literature suggests that competition
reduces banks’ franchise value and induces banks to assume more risk. Marcus (1984), Keeley
(1990), and Hellmann, Murdock, and Stiglitz (2000) use comparative statics to argue for a
link between franchise value and a preference for risky investments, motivated by increases
in competition in the banking industry.5 Like us, they build on the idea of risk shifting in
   5
    Boyd and De Nicoló (2005), however, presents an argument that less competition can lead banks to take
on greater risk.


                                                    3
Jensen and Meckling (1976), originally formulated as a conflict between overall claimholders
and equityholders in the context of corporations. The key difference in our work is that we
argue franchise values will also fluctuate endogenously over time with local and aggregate
economic conditions. This in turn induces important changes in bank lending behavior over
the business cycle.
       Our work also relates to more recent studies analyzing the specific impact of regulatory
policies on bank balance sheets, lending, and franchise values. Some of these studies are
mainly qualitative in nature (Acharya and Yorulmazer, 2007, 2008; Farhi and Tirole, 2012;
Sarin and Summers, 2016). Others are similar to ours in that they explicitly model the bank’s
maximization problem (Van den Heuvel, 2008; Kisin and Manela, 2016; Egan, Hortaçsu,
and Matvos, 2017; Gourio, Kashyap, and Sim, 2018; Begenau and Landvoigt, 2018; Elenev,
Landvoigt, and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2018) or work with quantitative accounting identities
(Atkeson, d’Avernas, Eisfeldt, and Weill, 2018). While these papers focus on ex-ante optimal
policy to deal with financial crises, our model offers a novel perspective on the unintended
consequences of policy that might either promote or destroy oligopolistic rents in the financial
sector.
       Finally, and more broadly, this paper is also connected to the recent literature examining
the causal links between credit market conditions and economic fluctuations. In particular, our
paper relates to Santos and Veronesi (2016) and Gomes, Grotteria, and Wachter (2018) who
show how endogenous co-movements between leverage and several macroeconomic aggregates
are the natural outcome of standard models without requiring financial frictions or behavioral
biases. This literature focuses on risk premia as driving asset prices and lending to rational
agents based on risk-sharing motives or on investment opportunities. These papers cannot,
however, explain the observed negative relation between household credit growth and future
adverse economic outcomes.6
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 surveys the key patterns in US
   6
     The distinction between growth in corporate lending and growth in household lending appears to be
important in the data: growth in corporate lending does not predict adverse outcomes, and is even associated
with positive economic conditions, at least in the short term. This suggests that growth in corporate lending
is driven by investment opportunities, perhaps in a way that is associated with changes in risk.


                                                     4
bank behavior in the lead-up to the 2007-2008 crisis that motivate our approach. Section 3
presents the baseline theoretical framework used to study the optimal composition of bank
lending in the presence of deposit insurance and time variation in economic rents. We augment
the model with a corporate sector and its results are quantitatively assessed in Section 4.
Section 5 then studies our key policy implications while Section 6 discusses novel empirical
evidence in support of the role deposit insurance in financial crises. Section 7 concludes.



2     Motivation: Beliefs and US Bank Behavior Leading
      up to the 2007-2008 Crisis
Our theoretical approach is motivated by a number of patterns in the behavior of US banks
in the lead up to the 2007–2008 crisis. In this section we survey some of the most important
ones. This evidence complements the findings of Jordà et al. (2016) and Mian et al. (2017),
which we discuss later and form the basis for our quantitative analysis. While this behavior
undoubtedly reflects a multitude of perhaps complementary forces, these facts help to highlight
the importance of the specific mechanism we describe in this paper.


2.1   Rising Pessimism
Pessimism concerning future house prices rose sharply from 2004 to 2007. As Figure 1 shows,
the percentage of respondents to the Michigan Survey of Consumers answering that “now is
a bad time to buy a house” reached a peak in 2007 (Piazzesi and Schneider, 2009; Mian and
Sufi, 2019). Thus, while it is possible that some investors may have failed to fully appreciate
the risks they faced (Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2018) there was clearly a general expectation that
economic conditions would deteriorate in the build up to the crisis. Clearly macroeconomic
risks were foreseen by many.




                                               5
2.2       Bank Dividends, Leverage and Investment
As Figure 2 shows bank dividend payouts were high before and even during the crisis. Even
more strikingly however, each of the 12 largest bank holding companies repurchased stock
extensively just before the crisis (Hirtle, 2016).7
       Figure 3 shows that average bank leverage increased steadily from 2004. Leverage was
relatively moderate in the early 2000s but increased significantly, especially after 2006. By
contrast the share of safe assets (Treasuries, agency securities, and cash) in banks’ balance
sheet decreased before the crisis. As Figure 4 shows the average holdings of these assets by
commercial banks decreased steadily until the 3rd quarter of 2008, then spiked back after the
subprime mortgage crisis spiraled into a full-blown financial collapse.
       Finally, the aggregate market-to-book ratio for US bank holding companies, dropped
precipitously before the crisis, as documented in Figure 5, once again suggesting investors
perceived risks to this sector to be rising significantly.
       Taken together, these facts suggest a picture of increased risk-taking by banks in the
face of rising pessimism about aggregate economic prospects in the years just before the
2007–2008 crisis. Next, we show how these facts can be reconciled in a model of optimal
bank behavior.
       The model matches the sharp increase in pessimism, dividend payouts, leverage, and lend-
ing and also accounts for the relation between the sharp increase in credit spreads and implied
volatilities observed in 2007 (Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2016; Krishnamurthy and
Muir, 2017). Although our aim is to provide a benchmark quantitative model that connects
a wide range of facts it remains far from providing a full account of all credit-cycle related
phenomena.8 We discuss further empirical implications in Section 4.2.
   7
     Unlike broker-dealers (Adrian and Shin, 2010), commercial banks seem to actively manage equity. Figure 6
shows the relation between asset and leverage (assets over equity) growth for commercial banks. Along the
45-degree line assets and leverage adjust one-for one so equity remains unchanged. The data however lines up
more closely to the vertical line suggesting banks adjust both equity and asset growth to keep leverage more
or less constant.
   8
     It does not, for example, account for the period of high lending and very low credit spreads that prevailed
roughly between 2004 and 2007.



                                                       6
3     Model
The model economy consists of three elementary units: a banking sector, a representative
investor/consumer and a productive sector. They all share a common exposure to an extreme
economic adverse event, or “crisis,” that occurs with a time-varying probability, pt . To avoid
clouding on our key underlying mechanism, we do not fully integrate these sectors in a general
equilibrium setting.
    The representative investor owns both banks and the production sector; all of these
entities’ decisions are made in a manner consistent with this agent’s pricing of risk. Banks
lend to households which may differ from the representative investor, and may also lend to
the firms in the productive sector. However, the productive sector faces no financial frictions
and may equivalently be financed with equity alone.


3.1   The Stochastic Discount Factor
We assume that all financial claims are owned and priced by an infinitely-lived representative
investor with an Epstein and Zin (1989) utility function. The representative agent’s utility is
identified by a time preference rate β ∈ (0, 1), a relative risk aversion parameter γ, and an
elasticity of intertemporal substitution ψ.


3.2   Consumption and Uncertainty
We assume the following stochastic process for the representative investor’s consumption:


                                  Ct+1 = Ct eµc +σc c,t+1 +ξxt+1 ,                         (1)


where ct is a standard normal random variable that is iid over time. Importantly, this process
allows for the possibility of a rare collapse in economic activity when consumption drops
by a large fraction, ξ, as in Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006). If a crisis materializes, an event
that occurs with probability pt , we set xt+1 = 1. Otherwise xt+1 = 0. The realization of xt+1 ,


                                                 7
conditional on pt , is independent of c,t+1 .
      The natural log of the crisis probability pt follows a first-order autoregressive process with
persistence ρp and mean log p̄:


                              log pt+1 = (1 − ρp ) log p̄ + ρp log pt + σp p,t+1 ,                  (2)


where pt is standard normal, iid over time, and independent of ct and xt .9 Let S(pt ) denote
the ratio of aggregate wealth to aggregate consumption. It is well-known that the stochastic
discount factor (SDF) satisfies
                                                                                        −1+θ
                                       θ −γ(µc +σc c,t+1 +ξxt+1 )       S(pt+1 ) + 1
                         Mt,t+1 = β e                                                            ,   (3)
                                                                            S(pt )

where the wealth-consumption ratio S(pt ) solves the equation
                                 "               1−γ                        #
                                           Ct+1                           θ
                              Et β θ                       S(pt+1 ) + 1            = S(pt )θ .       (4)
                                            Ct

      Following Barro (2006), we consider a government bill that is subject to default in times
of crisis. We let q denote the loss in case of default. The price of the government bill is thus
given by


                                       PGt = Et [Mt,t+1 (1 − qxt+1 )].                               (5)


The ex-post realized return on government debt is given by

                                              G       1 − qxt+1
                                             rt+1 =             − 1.                                 (6)
                                                         PGt

3.3      Banks
Key to our analysis is the definition of a bank:
  9
      In our simulations, we discretize the process (2) so that pt < 1.



                                                            8
Definition 1. A bank is a licensed investment management company whose risky investments
or loans are financed by equity and guaranteed deposits.

    In our model, a bank is able to extract rents from subsidized deposits and takes advantage
of stochastic investment/lending opportunities by responding optimally to unexpected changes
in the economic environment.10
    Every period, bank managers maximize the value of the equity holders by making optimal
investment and payout decisions. More specifically, managers decide how much capital to
allocate to a portfolio of risky loans and to holdings of government securities as well as on
the amount of equity to fund these investments. A bank’s risky loan portfolio consists of a
diversified pool of collateralized loans which is subject to bank specific and aggregate shocks.


3.3.1    The Bank’s Balance Sheet

Bank i enters time t with book equity BEit and deposits Dit . Following Merton (1978), we
assume Di,t+1 = Dit eg , namely that deposits grow at a constant rate.11,12
    When a bank is not in default (discussed below), it decides on the overall size of its
current loan portfolio (its assets) denoted by Ait and on how much to repay its equity holders,
Divit . A bank must also pay operational, or non-interest expenses, Φit in every period, so
that its resource constraint at time t is:


                                      Ait = BEit + Dit − Divit − Φit .                                         (8)


    The evolution of book equity over time depends on the ex-post rates of return between t
                                 A                         D
and t + 1 on the bank’s assets, ri,t+1 , and liabilities, rt+1 . Given these ex post returns, book
  10
     Deposit guarantees are funded with taxes on the aggregate economy and their impact is not internalized
by the bank managers.
  11
     It is easy to allow the demand for deposits to be stochastic but this feature is not essential to our results.
  12
     We calibrate g to equal expected consumption growth:
                                                             2             2
                                 g = log((1 − Ept )eµc +σc /2 + Ept eµc +σc /2+ξ ).                            (7)




                                                         9
equity in the next period equals

                                             A                  D
                             BEi,t+1 = (1 + ri,t+1 )Ait − (1 + rt+1 )Dit .                           (9)


3.3.2     Loans and the Return on Assets

Asset returns depend on the banks’ loan portfolio and overall economic conditions. If
ϕit ∈ [0, 1] is the share of bank i’s total assets that is allocated to a pool of private sector
            L
loans, and ri,t+1 is the ex-post rate of return on this portfolio, the return on the bank’s assets
equals:
                                   A            L                  G
                                  ri,t+1 = ϕit ri,t+1 + (1 − ϕit )rt+1 .                            (10)

   Each bank’s portfolio of private sector loans is made of a large number of individual
loans within a local economy. We think of these as collateralized loans (e.g. mortgages) to
households that are not the marginal investor and thus price no assets.13 We let the time-t
collateral value for each individual loan j = 1, . . . , n of bank i equal


                                      Wijt = eσc ct +ξxt +ωit +σj jt .                            (11)


Note that this value depends on the state of the aggregate economy (ct , xt ), a borrower-specific
shock, jt , and a measure of the health of local market conditions, ωit .
   As an example, the bank-specific variable ωit could represent a local determinant of house
prices. A persistent bank-specific determinant of loan performance ensures the cross-section
of banks will remain non-trivial. We assume ωit evolves according to the Markov process:


                                      ωi,t+1 = ρω ωit + σω ωi ,t+1 .                               (12)


We assume both jt and ωi t to be iid over time, independent of each other and also of ct , xt ,
  13
     Yeager (2004) shows the vast majority of the U.S. banks remain small and geographically concentrated
and 61% have operated within a single county. Mortgages (and other household loans) account for the
majority of most bank’s assets.



                                                     10
and pt . Shocks to all these variables will change both the collateral value of an individual
loan and the probability it will default.
   We assume a common face value of each individual loan of κ so that borrower j is said to
default at time t if Wijt < κ. In this case the bank recovers a fraction 1 − L of the collateral
value. In Appendix A we use the central limit theorem to integrate out borrower risk and
                                                                                           L
derive the distribution of the ex-post return on the bank’s pool of private sector loans, ri,t+1 .
                                          L
As a result, the ex-ante distribution of ri,t+1 depends only on pt and ωit .
   Figure 7 shows how the spread between the rates of return on these two investments
changes with macroeconomic conditions. Like other risky spreads this is increasing in the
probability of a crisis, pt . In addition, risk premia on the bank loan portfolio decline when
local market conditions improve, as measured by collateral values, ωit . An improvement in
local market conditions decreases the chance/severity of default in the loan portfolio, given a
crisis, and hence lowers the exposure to pt .


3.3.3   The Deposit Rate

Following Merton (1978), we assume that the interest rate on deposits is constant over time
and below the unconditional average of government bill rate, so that rD < E[rt+1
                                                                             G
                                                                                 ].
   As is well known, this wedge can readily arise when deposits provide liquidity services
as in Sidrauski (1967) or Van den Heuvel (2008). Here we prefer instead to invoke the
existence of deposit insurance guaranteeing that bank depositors receive at least partial
compensation in the event of a bank default. More generally, however, this wedge also arises
in any imperfectly competitive model where banks have the ability to earn excess rents on
their operations (Drechsler et al., 2017).
   Regardless of the precise reason, the notion that deposit rates are both sticky and below
the rates on money market accounts and government bills is well-grounded in data. Figure 8
shows the rate on the three-month Treasury bill and the average deposit rate earned on
large-denomination interest checking accounts over the last 20 years. Although not constant,
deposit rates are very slow moving and, on average, well below those on Treasuries.


                                                11
3.3.4     Regulation and Termination

Bank regulation takes two forms. First, banks face regulatory requirements on their use
of leverage: whenever the bank’s chosen debt-to-asset ratio at time t, Dt /At , exceeds the
regulatory threshold, χ, the bank must incur an additional cost f per unit of deposits.14
Generally, even a small cost will be enough to ensure that banks comply with the regulatory
constraint.
      Second, as in Merton (1978), we assume that regulators monitoring the bank intervene
and seize the bank’s operating license whenever the value of its book equity at the beginning
of the period, BEit , drops below 0. Formally, this means that whenever BEit < 0 a bank
cannot raise equity (Divit < 0) to avoid being shut down. If the bank is terminated, its assets
are seized, the deposits are paid and its equity holders receive nothing. As a result, from the
perspective of its equity holders, excessive risk taking by the bank may result in sub-optimal
termination.


3.3.5     The problem of the bank

It follows from the description above that the market value of bank i’s equity at time t is
given by:
                                        h
                                              ∗
                                                               i
                                              i −1
                                       Et PTs=t   Mt,t+s Divis , t < Ti∗
                                       
                               Vit =                                                         (13)
                                       0,                             t≥   Ti∗
                                       


where
                                          Ti∗ = inf{t : BEit < 0}                            (14)

denotes bank i’s (stochastic) termination time, and Mt,t+s denotes the SDF between times t
and t + s.15
 14
      Note that this cost is fixed except for the scale factor.
 15
                             Qt+s−1
      Specifically, Mt,t+s = τ =t Mτ,τ +1 , for the one-period SDF Mτ,τ +1 defined in (3).




                                                     12
    Conditional on survival at time t, the market value of bank i satisfies the recursion


  Vi (BEit , Ai,t−1 , Dit , pt , ωit ) =
                                      h                                                              i
                        max Divit + Et Mt,t+1 Vi (BEi,t+1 , Ait , eg Dit , pt+1 , ωi,t+1 )1BEi,t+1 >0 , (15)
                       ϕit ,Divit


subject to (9),

                                       A            L                  G
                                      ri,t+1 = ϕit ri,t+1 + (1 − ϕit )rt+1
                                    log pt+1 = (1 − ρp ) log p̄ + ρp log pt + σp p,t+1                       (16)
                                      ωi,t+1 = ρω ωit + σω ωi ,t+1 ,


and


                                Ait = BEit + Dit − Divit − Φ(Ait , Dit , Ai,t−1 ),


where                                                                            2
                                                                   Ait − Ai,t−1
                      Φ(Ait , Dit , Ai,t−1 ) = ηB Ai,t−1                               + f Dit 1Dit >χAit .
                                                                      Ai,t−1
The cost function Φ summarizes the non-interest expenses, inclusive of regulatory charges,
incurred by the bank. Operating expenses are assumed to depend on the growth of bank
assets over time.
    We greatly simplify the computation of the bank’s problem using two economic insights.
First, the problem is jointly homogeneous of degree 1 in assets and deposits, because both
the current stream of cash flows and the constraints are linear in Ai,t and Di,t−1 . Second, we
solve for the gap between (scaled) market and book equity:

                                                        Vi (BEit , Ai,t−1 , Dit , pt , ωit ) − BEit
                             ve(ai,t−1 , pt , ωit ) =                                               ,         (17)
                                                                            Dit

                Ait                     BEit
where ait =     Dit
                       and beit =       Dit
                                             .   Appendix B shows that (17) is indeed a function of lagged



                                                                 13
scaled assets (ai,t−1 ), crisis probability (pt ), and local conditions (ωit ).16 We refer to (17), the
(scaled) difference between market equity and book equity, as the bank’s franchise value.
       In our model, franchise value is driven by the ability of the bank to earn greater returns,
in a risk-adjusted sense, on its asset portfolio, than it is required to pay to its debtholders.
In what follows, we show that banks seek to protect this franchise value; this mitigates the
moral hazard problem resulting from deposit insurance. When franchise value falls, however,
incentives change.
       Figure 9 depicts scaled franchise value as a function of the crisis probability, pt , for
alternative values of (scaled) lagged assets. Franchise value is strictly decreasing in the crisis
probability. The negative relation between the franchise value and the crisis probability arises
endogenously. When pt rises, safe asset values rise because of precautionary savings. Risky
asset values might either rise or fall, depending on whether the negative effect of the crisis
probability on expected cash flows and on the risk premium outweighs the precautionary
savings effect. For the bank, there is an additional consideration: the bank can choose its
portfolio and therefore its level of risk in response to changes in pt . The net effect is that an
increase in pt leads to a decrease in franchise values.


3.4       Bank Risk-Taking
Figures 10 and 11 illustrate the two key choices of a bank. Figure 10 depicts the bank’s
decision with respect to the size of its overall loan portfolio, ait . Given an exogenous supply of
deposits, this is also the optimal leverage decision of the bank, with a higher ait corresponding
to lower leverage. As Figure 10 shows, current leverage choices will be generally increasing
in past leverage. This is because asset growth is costly. The nature of the bank’s operating
costs generates a plausibly strong persistence in lending and leverage decisions.
       Figure 10 also shows the rich dynamics generated by the model as the previous leverage
choice interacts with the crisis probability. For banks beginning the period with low leverage,
the optimal level of assets (relative to deposits) decreases as a function of the crisis probability;
  16
       Technically, (17) is well-defined only when BEit ≥ 0. See Appendix B for details.


                                                       14
for low values of the crisis probability the slope is relatively flat, and then steepens as the
probability rises. For banks beginning the period with moderate leverage, optimal assets
increase, and then decrease. Finally, for highly levered banks, optimal assets in the next
period are virtually flat in pt .
       How does the relatively simple model of Section 3 generate these patterns? All else equal,
assets are costly to the bank (this is modeled through the cost function Φ). However, the
main business of the bank, taking deposits and investing in assets, is profitable, so the bank
would like to avoid being shut down. Thus the bank would like to maintain positive book
equity, not only in the present, but also in the future (provided that the benefits are high,
and the costs are sufficiently low). When the probability of a crisis, pt , is low, this effect
dominates for all banks but the ones with the highest leverage. If a bank happens to start the
period with a high level of assets, it slowly reduces assets to gradually get to the (stochastic)
steady state.17 This is shown by the dotted line in Figure 10. If a bank happens to start the
period at moderate leverage, it increases assets (decreasing leverage). The higher is pt , the
more it seeks to increase assets. This effect, illustrated by the dashed line in Figure 10, is due
to precautionary motives specific to the bank – mainly the desire to have high book equity in
the future. Thus, when pt is low, the bank’s primary incentive is to stay in business, not just
in the present period, but in the future, to protect its franchise value. It is noteworthy that
this occurs despite the presence of the moral hazard problem due to deposit insurance.
       As the probability of a crisis rises, however, the bank’s incentives change in a dramatic way.
The probability of shutdown increases, and avoiding it entirely becomes too costly. The bank
shifts from being a “good bank”, making safe investments and seeking to stay in business, to
being a “bad bank,” in effect taking advantage of the subsidy offered to depositors. This
is illustrated by the kinks in the policy functions shown in Figure 10. The threshold for pt
at which this occurs depends on leverage from the previous period. For the bank with low
leverage the shift does not occur until the probability of a crisis is as high as 5%. For the
  17
    For low values of pt , at declines as a function of pt . This is because of the usual trade off between the
income and substitution effect. At higher pt , investment opportunities are less favorable and the bank returns
capital to its equity holders.



                                                      15
bank with the middle value, it occurs at 2%. For the bank with the highest leverage, all
values of pt lead it to maintain assets at their lowest value.18
   We can see the same mechanisms at work in the optimal portfolio allocation of the bank,
as Figure 11 shows. When the probability of a crisis is low, well-capitalized banks avoid risky
loans to households; these are made, however, by poorly capitalized banks (contrast the solid
line with the dotted and dashed lines in Figure 10). At a threshold level of pt , however, the
loan portfolio shifts toward the risky household loans. This shift occurs at the same point at
which the bank decides to hold less equity in Figure 10.
   What explains the shift from “good bank” to “bad bank” at higher levels of the crisis
probability? As discussed above, franchise value decreases in the crisis probability.19 At
higher levels of pt , the bank is not as incentivized to protect this lower value, and so engages
in risk shifting. That is, the claim of bank equity holders resembles a call option, which
benefits from increased volatility in a way that the overall assets do not. By increasing
leverage and investing in risky household loans, the bank “gambles for resurrection.” A good
outcome generates high returns for the equity holders. A bad outcome results in being shut
down; however, if shutdown is likely regardless, equityholders cannot be further penalized.
As for any call option, the sensitivity to volatility increases the more the underlying asset is
out of the money. Thus the greater is pt , the lower is franchise value, and the greater the
incentive to gamble for resurrection. Exacerbating this effect is an endogenous decline in the
market interest rate as pt rises, due to the precautionary motive of the representative agent.
It becomes costlier for the bank to protect its franchise value, even as the bank has less of
an incentive to do so. This realistic mechanism leads to behavior sometimes referred to as
“reaching for yield.” Furthermore, consistent with empirical evidence, in our model a credit
boom emerges when bank profitability is relatively high, so that accounting profitability
prior to the crisis is associated with higher systematic tail risk (Meiselman, Nagel, and
Purnanandam, 2018; Richter and Zimmermann, 2019).
 18
    Recall that this maximum leverage position is defined by need to pay a fine proportional to deposits
when leverage exceeds this value.
 19
    The argument in this paragraph shows why this is in fact an equilibrium outcome.



                                                  16
   Figure 12 summarizes our findings by showing the implications of optimal bank behavior
to its overall probability of default. For well-capitalized banks the expected failure rate
remains essentially at 0 as long as a crisis is somewhat unlikely. As pt rises however, risk
premia widens, expected returns on government debt fall and even well-capitalized banks can
no longer be assured of survival. Increased risk taking exposes these banks to more and more
systematic risk and raises overall default probabilities until they become indistinguishable
from pt itself.


3.5     Firms, Production and Output
As we will show, the model has realistic implications for the relation between leverage, risky
lending, and growth in GDP. These implications arise naturally from a production sector.
For simplicity, we assume a representative firm maximizing the present value of cash flows,
taking the investors’ stochastic discount factor (3) as given. We assume this sector faces no
financial frictions, and is all-equity financed.


3.5.1   Technology

A firm uses capital Kt to produce output Yt according to the Cobb-Douglas production
function
                                          Yt = zt1−α Ktα ,                               (18)

where α determines the returns to scale of production and zt is the productivity level. We
assume zt follows the process


                            log zt+1 = log zt + µc + c,t+1 + φξxt+1 .                   (19)


During normal-times, productivity grows at rate µc and is subject to the same shocks as
consumption (c,t+1 ). Importantly, this process implies that the productive sector is exposed
to the same Bernoulli shocks as consumers and banks through the term φξxt+1 . φ is the
sensitivity of TFP to an economic crisis.

                                                   17
3.5.2   Investment Opportunities

The law of motion for the firm’s capital stock is
                                                   h              i
                                           Kt+1   = (1 − δ)Kt + It eφξxt+1 ,                                   (20)


where δ is depreciation and It is firm’s investment at time t. Equation (20) captures the
depreciation cost necessary to maintain existing capital. Following the formulation of Gabaix
(2011) and Gourio (2012), it also captures the impact of a possible destruction of productive
capital during a crisis. This can proxy for either literal capital destruction (in the case of
war), or simply misallocation due to economic disruption.
   Finally, to allow us to match the relative volatility of investment and output in the data
the firm is assumed to face convex costs when adjusting its stock of capital (Hayashi, 1982).
To be precise, we assume that each dollar of added productive capacity requires 1 + λ(It , Kt )
dollars of expenditures, where
                                                                          2
                                                                      It
                                              λ (It , Kt ) = ηF                 Kt ,                           (21)
                                                                      Kt

and the parameter ηF > 0 determines the severity of the adjustment cost.
   Optimal production and investment decisions, can then be constructed by computing the
total value of the firm, V F , which obeys the recursion

                                     "                                                                         #
  V F (Kt , zt , pt ) =    max           zt1−α Ktα − It − λ (It , Kt ) + Et [Mt,t+1 V F (K,t+1 , z,t+1 , pt+1 )] ,
                          It ,Kt+1



subject to (20) and (21).




                                                            18
4        Crisis, Bank Lending and the Predictability of Macro
         Aggregates
The joint exposure of consumers, firms and banks to common aggregate shocks generates
interesting co-movements between the various macroeconomic aggregates and bank lending
over the business cycle. In this section we investigate the implications of a quantitative
version of our model for these movements with a special focus on the role of bank risk-taking
decisions.


4.1       Parameter Values
We begin by selecting a set of values for our model’s parameters. We calibrate the model at
an annual frequency. Tables 1-3 summarize our choices for the parameters used to solve the
problems of investors, banks and firms, respectively.
       The representative investor prices all risky claims in our economy. Thus, we choose
the preference parameters (β, γ, ψ) and consumption parameters to match key asset pricing
moments and well-established macro patterns. We take the values for the parameters γ and
ψ from the recent literature on asset pricing with rare events (e.g. Gourio (2012) and Gomes,
Grotteria, and Wachter (2018)), while the values chosen for the parameters µc , σc and β
follow from a long tradition in extant macro literature (e.g. Cooley and Prescott (1995))
       Due to their rare nature, precise calculations of the probabilities and distributions implied
by (2) are difficult. We generally follow Barro and Ursua (2008) and set the average
probability of an economic collapse p̄ to be 2% per annum and an associated drop in
consumption of ξ = 30%.20 Next, we set the autoregressive coefficient to be 0.8 (annually)
with an unconditional standard deviation of 0.42, values that are consistent with those used
by Gourio (2013). Finally, we assume the government bills experience a loss of q = 12%
during a crisis.
  20
     Our estimate of pt is slightly below Barro and Ursua (2008) estimates of an average probability of disaster
of 2.9% on OECD countries and 3.7% for all countries.



                                                      19
   To solve the problem of the bank, we set the loss given default on private loans to 60%
so that it matches the observed average recovery rate on secured senior debt (Ou, Chlu,
and Metz, 2011). The face value of an individual private loan κ is set so that the average
loan-to-value ratio equals 80%, the typical value for newly originated or refinanced residential
mortgages (Korteweg and Sorensen, 2016). The parameters governing the evolution of local
conditions, σω and ρω , are determined from volatility and persistence U.S. house prices, at
the individual state level. The value for the idiosyncratic component of volatility, σj , is
borrowed from Landvoigt, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2015) who estimated an annual volatility
of individual house prices between 8% and 11%.
   The regulatory capital requirement parameter χ is set to be 0.92, corresponding to an 8%
equity to asset ratio, in accordance to Basel rules. Finally, the value of the operating cost
parameter ηB is chosen to generate a plausible cross sectional dispersion in the asset-to-debt
ratio in the model that approximates that for US bank holding companies.
   Parameter values used to solve the problem of the firm are either in line with standard
choices in the macroeconomics literature (α and δ) or chosen to match specific facts, like the
relative drop in GDP during crises (φ) or the volatility of investment growth relative to the
volatility of output growth in the data (ηF ).


4.2    Quantitative Results
To quantify the links between bank lending and macroeconomic activity we focus on a well-
known set of empirical results that have been interpreted to indicate a causal relation between
credit and poor subsequent economic performance (e.g. Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018)). We
show that our model can quantitatively account for these findings, though the interpretation
is quite different.
   To do this, we first simulate 10,000 years of artificial data from our model economy with
a cross-section of 1,000 (ex-ante identical) banks (see Appendix C for details). Following
Schularick and Taylor (2012) we next define a crisis as an event where realized GDP growth
is in the bottom 4% of our simulated time series. This definition captures not only periods


                                                 20
in which xt = 1 but also a number during which the probability of a crisis, pt , rose sharply,
leading firms to reduce investment and thus output to fall. Importantly, it addresses the
key concern that the econometrician, in identifying crises, does not observe the variable xt ;
indeed there may be no clear line between xt = 1 events and events in which there is a large
positive shock to pt in terms of observables.21
    In what follows we define aggregate bank lending to the private sector as

                                                       X
                                                Lt =         ϕit ai,t
                                                         i


where ϕit ait is the dollar value of the private loans made by bank i in period t.
    Table 4 compares our model’s results with those in Schularick and Taylor (2012) regarding
the relation between increases in lending and the probability of a crisis event, by regressing
crisis occurrences on lagged values of bank loans. Both in the model and the data we see that
an increase in lending is a statistically significant predictor of a crisis with similar economic
magnitudes. The standard interpretation of the empirical evidence is that increased bank
lending causes a crisis. In our model, however, time-varying exogenous risk drives both, and
the relation between lagged bank lending and crises is merely a correlation.
    Figure 13 compares our model’s findings with the related evidence in Jordà, Schularick,
and Taylor (2016) showing that financial crises often follow periods of very fast credit growth.
Here we break down the frequency of a crisis across each quintile of lagged credit growth. As
the figure shows, both in the model and in the data, crises frequencies increase significantly
after periods of fast credit-to-GDP growth. Panel B, taken from our artificial dataset,
confirms that we can substantively replicate these same facts, even if we assume the crisis is
independent of changes in bank lending.22
    Next, we examine our model’s implications for the related findings in Mian, Sufi, and
   21
      We use this definition of crisis only for comparison with existing empirical results. In later sections of the
paper, we will continue to use the terminology “crisis” to refer to the exogenous event that xt = 1.
   22
      In the model, we look directly at growth in credit Lt , rather than growth in credit scaled by GDP. This
is because, as we have defined it, credit growth is stationary. However, theoretically, the ratio of loans to
GDP may not be stationary in our model.



                                                        21
Verner (2017), documenting the strong predictability of future GDP growth by the lagged
growth in household debt for 30 countries. Figure 14 replicates and updates their work to
show negative relation between growth in lagged household debt (scaled by GDP) and GDP
growth over a three-year window. In our model, the growth rate in bank loans also negatively
predicts the growth rate in GDP. Once again, this empirical exercise has no explicit link to
financial crises. In our model it is the increased probability of a crisis that leads to lower
growth.
   Finally, Table 5 compares predictions of the model with evidence in Baron and Xiong
(2017) that an increases in lending are associated with higher probability of bank crashes.
A probit regression of bank equity crashes on lagged increases in lending yields significant
coefficients in the data. Model coefficients are similar in magnitude. Thus in both model and
data, increases in lending significantly predict sharp declines in bank stock market valuations.
   Why is the model able to match this evidence? The key mechanism is the endogenous
fluctuating value of the bank’s franchise, which falls during periods of high probability of
crises. As a result, some banks, and in particular those with poor balance sheets, find it
optimal to gamble for resurrection, taking on risky household loans. Thus growth in risky
loans predicts crises (Schularick and Taylor, 2012), and future sharp declines in bank stocks
(Baron and Xiong, 2017). It also predicts lower GDP growth because non-financial firms,
perceiving the same economic instability, reduce their investment, leading to lower output
(Mian et al., 2017).
   More broadly, our model is qualitatively consistent with a number of other recent findings
linking credit growth, valuations, and financial crises. Consistent with Muir (2017), the
model predicts that when banks are close to default, equity valuations are low, and future
risk premia are high. Specifically, large declines in bank stocks (as opposed to a panic aspect
of a crisis), imply higher risk premia, as Baron, Verner, and Xiong (2019) show in recent work.
This large decline in bank stocks, through the channel of a higher probability of disaster,
depresses investment, and therefore GDP growth. Mean reversion in pt then implies that
credit offered by banks shrinks following expansions of credit. Baron et al. (2019) show that



                                              22
both of these results also hold in the data.23
       To conclude then, our quantitative model is broadly consistent with the observed empirical
patterns in bank credit that generally precedes economic collapses. In the model, however,
these patterns merely reflect optimal decisions taken in response to exogenous fluctuations in
the probability of a financial and economic collapse and thus, by construction, have no effect
on the odds that this event will occur.



5        Policy Evaluation
In response to the recent financial crisis, fiscal and monetary authorities unleashed an array
of polices aimed at influencing the behavior of the banking sector. These included the Capital
Purchase Program (CPP) and the first round of quantitative easing measures (QE1) in the
United States, and the long-term refinancing operations (LTRO) in Europe.
       Much of the recent theoretical literature on unconventional interventions prefers to
highlight the role of large-scale asset purchases of long-term government bonds and private
securities in the context of segmented markets. It concludes that these policies could generate
a large increase in bank credit to the private sector (Gertler and Karadi, 2015; Curdia and
Woodford, 2010; Del Negro, Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Kiyotaki, 2017; Williamson, 2012).
       While these models seem compelling, empirically, the ultimate impact of the extraordinary
amount of government support on bank lending is much less clear. In the US, institutions
that were included in the Capital Purchase Program did not increase their loans (Duchin
and Sosyura, 2014; Bassett, Demiralp, and Lloyd, 2017). Similarly, Carpinelli and Crosignani
(2018) conclude that LTROs in Europe were equally ineffective in boosting bank lending.
  23
    The model cannot explain every feature of intermediary valuations around crises. For example, it predicts
that, on average, declines in bank equity valuations should co-occur with rising household credit, and that
both should predict higher returns (and higher future crash risk). In the data, on the other hand, rising
household credit appears to lead declining valuations on average (Baron and Xiong, 2017). It may be that
bank equity holders did not fully incorporate the risks of lending; so that while the risks were foreseen by
some, they were not foreseen by all. The model does explain, however, that once a crisis is realized, it is
those banks that lent the most that are most affected, broadly consistent with Fahlenbrach, Prilmeier, and
Stulz (2017).



                                                     23
   By contrast, our model suggests to examine these interventions through their impact
on bank franchise value. In effect, several of these policies worked to provide banks with
funding at very favorable terms, in effect subsidizing the banking sector (CPP and LTROs
were explicitly designed to do just that). By highlighting an alternative mechanism that is
consistent with the available evidence, our paper offers a novel perspective on the impact of
these policies on banks.
   Formally, we examine the impact of government interventions by considering the effects of a
reduction in banks’ cost of funding below its current market value, reD < rD .24 Unsurprisingly,
in our model, as Figure 15 shows, this intervention directly leads to an increase in the
franchise value of banks, since they can now secure better terms to fund themselves. Figure
16 then shows that a further consequence of this intervention is that banks will now rely
(relatively) more on equity. This is because with increased franchise values, default will
trigger larger losses for equity holders. As a result this policy intervention will produce a
decline in expected bank failure rates.
   However, this increased conservatism by equity holders also manifests itself in the optimal
portfolio composition of banks. We can see in Figure 17 that the optimal asset composition
now generally tilts more towards government bonds and away from risky private loans. Only
poorly-capitalized banks eschew this behavior to remain fully invested in private sector loans.
   Thus policies that effectively subsidize bank equity holders by allowing them to tap debt
markets at below-market rates lead many banks to reduce overall risk taking. Moreover,
Figures 16 and 17 show that this effect is particularly strong when the likelihood of a crisis is
high.
   We believe these findings add a fresh perspective to the ongoing debate about the effects of
unconventional monetary policies on bank lending. In particular they suggest an explanation
for the perceived limited success of unconventional monetary policies in stimulating bank
credit to the private sector during the economic recovery after the recent financial crisis. As
Bocola (2016) shows, European banks mainly used LTROs to cheaply substitute liabilities,
  24
     Although our model offers a simple description of bank liabilities a lower cost of deposit should be
interpreted more broadly as a reduction in the bank’s cost of debt.


                                                   24
while in the US Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer (2016) describe a “flypaper effect” in which
banks chose to hold excess reserves with the central bank rather than expand credit to the
private sector.
       Our results are also consistent with the evidence of Rodnyansky and Darmouni (2017),
who find that U.S. banks with mortgage-backed securities on their books increased lending
relative to their peers after QE1. In our model this is unsurprising since those are the banks
who optimally chose ϕ = 1. These banks will remain the most eager to replace safe assets
with risky ones.



6        Evidence on the Role of Deposit Insurance
Rent-seeking behavior from banks is a crucial ingredient in delivering many of our results.
Although, in practice, this behavior can also arise from a lack of competition in the sector,
our model focuses on rents derived from explicit government guarantees on bank deposits.
As we have shown above, access to subsidized financing can meaningfully alter a bank’s
incentives to hold risky securities in its loan portfolio over time.
       In this section we provide independent supporting evidence on the link between the
availability of deposit insurance and economic crises. We combine several databases to create
a country-level unbalanced panel dataset that contains observations on aggregate household
and non-financial firm debt to GDP, macro quantities and the availability of deposit insurance
in both advanced and emerging economies. Effectively, this extends the sample used by Mian,
Sufi, and Verner (2017) to include more countries, a longer time period and data on the use
of deposit insurance.25
       Our basic procedure is adapted from Mian et al. (2017). Let ∆3 yt+h be the three year
change in log real GDP per capita in local currency between year t + h − 3 and t + h. Similarly,
define ∆3 dHH            F
           i,t−1 and ∆3 di,t−1 as the three year rates of growth in the household and firm debt

  25
    Our data adds together the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) “Long series on total credit to the
non-financial sectors”, the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) database and the Global
Financial Database.



                                                   25
to GDP ratios. Our baseline regression, reported in Panel A in Table 6, reports the estimates
for the following equation:


                           ∆3 yi,t+h = αi + βH ∆3 dHH             F
                                                   i,t−1 + βF ∆3 di,t−1 + uit ,                         (22)


when h = −1, . . . , 5. Consistent with prior evidence (Mian et al., 2017) we find that a 1
percentage point increase in household debt to GDP ratio is correlated with a 0.4 percentage
point drop in GDP per capita after 3 years.
       We next combine our data with the country-level database on deposit insurance schemes,
constructed by Demirgüç-Kunt, Karacaovali, and Laeven (2005). For countries where no
explicit scheme was reported before 2005, we hand collected the dates of enactment, if any.26
Overall, we find that in about 25% of our country-year observations there is no deposit
insurance scheme in place.
       We then interact a zero-one dummy variable for the presence of explicit deposit insurance
in the past three years to (22) and estimate the following equation:

                           DI
  ∆3 yi,t+h = αi + (βHH + βHH 1DI )∆3 dHH             DI         F
                                       i,t−1 + (βF + βF 1DI )∆3 di,t−1 + uit , (23)


for h = −1, . . . , 5.
       Panel B in Table 6 shows that the coefficients on the interaction between growth in
household credit and the presence of deposit insurance are generally statistically significant,
suggesting that the variation captured by our regressors is mostly concentrated in periods and
countries where deposit insurance is in place. Notably, the relation between credit and GDP
is essentially flat and not significant in countries without explicit government insurance.27
By contrast, we find that when deposit insurance schemes are present, a 1 percentage point
increase in household debt is correlated with a 0.51 percentage drop in GDP after 3 years.
  26
     While US introduced deposit insurance as early as 1934, it became common in most countries only in the
late 80s.
  27
     It is also noteworthy that there is no significant relation between firm credit and subsequent economic
growth. The relation is confined to growth in the riskiest form of credit, that is, household credit. This is
consistent with our model.


                                                     26
    While a detailed empirical assessment of the role of deposit insurance in crises is outside
the scope of this paper, Table 6 strongly suggests that the relation between credit growth
and crises is mediated through deposit insurance.



7         Conclusions
A large literature, motivated by empirical linkages between leverage and crises, argues that
excessive household leverage is a cause of subsequent crises, and specifically the crisis of
2008. However, leverage is itself an outcome of endogenous decision-making. While it may
be plausible that households, perhaps based on lack of experience, overoptimism, or simply
rule-of-thumb behavior, took more risk than, ex post, proved optimal, it is harder to believe
that banks, en masse, decided to lend to such households purely based on overoptimism, as
economic conditions worsened.
    This paper offers a quantitative resolution of this conundrum based on a dynamic model of
risk-shifting by banks. In our model, banks endogenously provide more leverage to households
in times of worsening economic conditions. The subsequent economic decline is in no way
caused by household’s over-leveraging. Rather, leverage and the subsequent crises are caused
by the same economic phenomenon: in this model, a time-varying likelihood of an economic
crisis.
    Our study suggests that recent policy toward banks might have effects counter to what
is intended. Banks’ decisions over time are driven by fluctuations in their franchise value.
Methods to strengthen banks, while conferring long-run benefits, might actually result in less
lending because they increase the franchise value. On the flip side, any policy with the side
effect that weakens banks might actually result in more undesirable lending, and further bank
instability, as banks gamble for resurrection. In both cases, ignoring the incentive effects of
policy on banks, which operate through fluctuating franchise values, could itself exacerbate
underlying risks.




                                              27
References

Acharya, V. V., Yorulmazer, T., 2007. Too many to fail-an analysis of time-inconsistency in
  bank closure policies. Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 1–31.

Acharya, V. V., Yorulmazer, T., 2008. Cash-in-the-market pricing and optimal resolution of
  bank failures. Review of Financial Studies 21, 2705–2742.

Adrian, T., Shin, H. S., 2010. Liquidity and leverage. Journal of Financial Intermediation 19,
  418 – 437, risk Transfer Mechanisms and Financial Stability.

Atkeson, A. G., d’Avernas, A., Eisfeldt, A. L., Weill, P.-O., 2018. Government guarantees
  and the valuation of american banks. Working Paper 24706, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. A model of investor sentiment. Journal of Financial
  Economics 49, 307–343.

Baron, M., Verner, E., Xiong, W., 2019. Salient crises, quiet crises, working paper, Cornell
  University, MIT, and Princieton University.

Baron, M., Xiong, W., 2017. Credit Expansion and Neglected Crash Risk*. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 132, 713–764.

Barro, R. J., 2006. Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 121, 823–866.

Barro, R. J., Ursua, J. F., 2008. Macroeconomic crises since 1870. Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity 39, 255–350.



                                               28
Bassett, W., Demiralp, S., Lloyd, N., 2017. Government support of banks and bank lending.
  Journal of Banking & Finance .

Begenau, J., Landvoigt, T., 2018. Financial Regulation in a Quantitative Model of the Modern
  Banking System, working paper, Stanford University and University of Pennsylvania.

Bocola, L., 2016. The pass-through of sovereign risk. Journal of Political Economy 124,
  879–926.

Borio, C., Lowe, P., 2002. Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus.
  BIS Working Paper p. 47.

Boyd, J. H., De Nicoló, G., 2005. The theory of bank risk taking and competition revisited.
  Journal of Finance 60, 1329–1343.

Buser, S. A., Chen, A. H., Kane, E. J., 1981. Federal deposit insurance, regulatory policy,
  and optimal bank capital. The Journal of Finance 36, 51–60.

Carpinelli, L., Crosignani, M., 2018. The effect of central bank liquidity injections on bank
  credit supply. Working paper, Bank of Italy.

Cheng, I.-H., Raina, S., Xiong, W., 2014. Wall street and the housing bubble. American
  Economic Review 104, 2797–2829.

Chernenko, S., Hanson, S. G., Sunderam, A., 2016. Who neglects risk? investor experience
  and the credit boom. Journal of Financial Economics 122, 248 – 269.

Cooley, T. F., Prescott, E. C., 1995. Economic growth and business cycles. In: Cooley, T. F.
  (ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Princeton University Press, pp. 1–38.



                                              29
Curdia, V., Woodford, M., 2010. Credit spreads and monetary policy. Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking 42, 3–35.

Del Negro, M., Eggertsson, G., Ferrero, A., Kiyotaki, N., 2017. The great escape? a
  quantitative evaluation of the fed’s liquidity facilities. American Economic Review 107,
  824–57.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Karacaovali, B., Laeven, L., 2005. Deposit insurance around the world:
  A comprehensive database. World bank policy research working paper, World Bank,
  Washington, DC.

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Palmer, C., 2016. How quantitative easing works: Evidence on
  the refinancing channel. Working Paper 22638, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2017. The deposits channel of monetary policy. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 132, 1819–1876.

Duchin, R., Sosyura, D., 2014. Safer ratios, riskier portfolios: Banks’ response to government
  aid. Journal of Financial Economics 113, 1 – 28.

Egan, M., Hortaçsu, A., Matvos, G., 2017. Deposit competition and financial fragility:
  Evidence from the us banking sector. The American Economic Review 107, 169–216.

Elenev, V., Landvoigt, T., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2018. A macroeconomic model with
  financially constrained producers and intermediaries, nBER Working Paper No. 24757.

Epstein, L. G., Zin, S. E., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of
  consumption and asset returns: a theoretical framework. Econometrica 57, 937–969.




                                              30
Fahlenbrach, R., Prilmeier, R., Stulz, R. M., 2017. Why Does Fast Loan Growth Predict
  Poor Performance for Banks? The Review of Financial Studies 31, 1014–1063.

Farhi, E., Tirole, J., 2012. Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and systemic bailouts.
  American Economic Review 102, 60–93.

Gabaix, X., 2011. Disasterization: A simple way to fix the asset pricing properties of
  macroeconomic models. The American Economic Review 101, 406–409.

Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2018. A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and Financial
  Fragility. Princeton University Press.

Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2012. Neglected risks, financial innovation, and
  financial fragility. Journal of Financial Economics 104, 452 – 468, market Institutions,
  Financial Market Risks and Financial Crisis.

Gertler, M., Karadi, P., 2015. Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic activity.
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, 44–76.

Gomes, J. F., Grotteria, M., Wachter, J. A., 2018. Cyclical dispersion in expected defaults.
  The Review of Financial Studies (Forthcoming).

Gourio, F., 2012. Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review 102, 2734–
  2766.

Gourio, F., 2013. Credit risk and disaster risk. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
  5, 1–34.

Gourio, F., Kashyap, A. K., Sim, J. W., 2018. The Trade offs in Leaning Against the Wind.
  IMF Economic Review 66, 70–115.

                                              31
Greenwood, R., Hanson, S. G., 2013. Issuer quality and corporate bond returns. Review of
  Financial Studies 26, 1483–1525.

Hayashi, F., 1982. Tobin’s marginal q and average q: a neoclassical interpretation. Economet-
  rica 50, 213–224.

Hellmann, T. F., Murdock, K. C., Stiglitz, J. E., 2000. Moral hazard in banking, and prudential
  liberalization, regulation: Are capital requirements enough? American Economic Review
  90, 147–165.

Hirtle, B., 2016. Bank holding company dividends and repurchases during the financial crisis.
  Staff Reports 24823, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Jensen, M. C., Meckling, W. H., 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs
  and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305–360.

Jordà, O., Schularick, M., Taylor, A. M., 2011. Financial crises, credit booms, and external
  imbalances: 140 years of lessons. IMF Economic Review 59, 340–378.

Jordà, O., Schularick, M., Taylor, A. M., 2016. Macrofinancial history and the new business
  cycle facts. In: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016, Volume 31 , University of Chicago
  Press, pp. 213–263.

Keeley, M. C., 1990. Deposit insurance, risk, and market power in banking. The American
  Economic Review 80, 1183–1200.

Kelly, B., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2016. Too-systemic-to-fail: What option markets
  imply about sector-wide government guarantees. American Economic Review 106, 1278–
  1319.


                                              32
Kindleberger, C., 1978. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. Basic
  Books, New York, NY.

Kisin, R., Manela, A., 2016. The shadow cost of bank capital requirements. Review of
  Financial Studies 29, 1780–1820.

Korteweg, A., Sorensen, M., 2016. Estimating loan-to-value distributions. Real Estate Eco-
  nomics 44, 41–86.

Krishnamurthy, A., Muir, T., 2017. How credit cycles across a financial crisis. Working Paper
  23850, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Landvoigt, T., Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., 2015. The housing market(s) of san diego.
  American Economic Review 105, 1–47.

Marcus, A. J., 1984. Deregulation and bank financial policy. Journal of Banking and Finance
  8, 557–565.

Meiselman, B. S., Nagel, S., Purnanandam, A., 2018. Judging banks’ risk by the profits they
  report. Working Paper, Johns Hopkins University .

Merton, R. C., 1978. On the cost of deposit insurance when there are surveillance costs. The
  Journal of Business 51, 439.

Mian, A., Sufi, A., 2009. The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from the
  u.s. mortgage default crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1449–1496.

Mian, A. R., Sufi, A., 2019. Credit supply and housing speculation. Working Paper 24823,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                             33
Mian, A. R., Sufi, A., Verner, E., 2017. Household debt and business cycles worldwide.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1755–1817.

Minsky, H. P., 1977. The financial instability hypothesis: An interpretation of keynes and an
  alternative to “standard” theory. Nebraska Journal of Economics and Business 16, 5–16.

Muir, T., 2017. Financial crises and risk premia. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132,
  765–809.

Nagel, S., Purnanandam, A., 2017. Bank risk dynamics and distance to default. Working
  Paper, University of Chicago .

Ou, S., Chlu, D., Metz, A., 2011. Corporate default and recovery rates, 1920-2010 (moody’s).
  Special Comment, Moody’s Investors Service pp. 1–66.

Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., 2009. Momentum traders in the housing market: Survey evidence
  and a search model. American Economic Review 99, 406–11.

Reinhart, C. M., Rogoff, K. S., 2009. This time is different: eight centuries of financial folly.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Richter, B., Zimmermann, K., 2019. The profit-credit cycle. Working Paper, University of
  Bonn .

Rietz, T. A., 1988. The equity risk premium a solution. Journal of Monetary Economics 22,
  117–131.

Rodnyansky, A., Darmouni, O. M., 2017. The effects of quantitative easing on bank lending
  behavior. The Review of Financial Studies 30, 3858–3887.



                                               34
Rouwenhorst, G., 1995. Asset pricing implications of equilibrium business cycle models. In:
  Cooley, T. F. (ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Princeton University Press,
  chap. 10.

Santos, T., Veronesi, P., 2016. Habits and leverage. Working Paper 22905, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Sarin, N., Summers, L. H., 2016. Understanding bank risk through market measures. Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity 47, 57–127.

Schularick, M., Taylor, A. M., 2012. Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage
  cycles, and financial crises, 1870-2008. American Economic Review 102, 1029–1061.

Sidrauski, M., 1967. Rational choice and patterns of growth in a monetary economy. The
  American Economic Review 57, 534–544.

Van den Heuvel, S. J., 2008. The welfare cost of bank capital requirements. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 55, 298–320.

Vasicek, O. A., 2002. Loan portfolio value. Risk 15, 130–133.

Williamson, S. D., 2012. Liquidity, monetary policy, and the financial crisis: A new monetarist
  approach. The American Economic Review 102, 2570–2605.

Yeager, T. J., 2004. The demise of community banks? local economic shocks are not to blame.
  Journal of Banking and Finance 28, 2135–2153.




                                              35
Appendix A                   Bank Lending
Following Vasicek (2002), and Nagel and Purnanandam (2017), we assume an exogenous
process for bank loans. Define a payoff on an individual loan based on the random variable


                                         Wijt = eσc ct +ξxt +ωit +σj jt ,                             (A.1)


where j indexes the borrower and i indexes the bank. Define a constant default threshold κ.
If we assume (A.1) is a two-period process that has the value 1 at time t − 1, then κ has the
interpretation of the loan-to-value ratio. The lender receives repayment


                       Repj (c,t , xt , ωt , j,t ) = κ1Wj,t ≥κ + (1 − L )Wj,t 1Wj,t <κ ,


for a constant L , interpreted as the loss given default. In what follows, we suppress the
bank-specific i subscript.
   Define


  Rep(c,t , xt , ωt ) = κProb(Wj,t ≥ κ|c,t , ωt , xt )
                                                             + (1 − L )E Wj,t 1Wj,t <κ |c,t , ωt , xt . (A.2)
                                                                                                     


It follows from the law of large numbers that

                                    n
                               1X
                           lim      Repj (c,t , xt , ωt , j,t ) = Rep(c,t , xt , ωt ).               (A.3)
                          n→∞ n
                                j=1


We assume, for simplicity, that the bank holds an equal-weighted portfolio of an arbitrarily
large number of loans. Equation A.3 justifies the use of (A.2) as the repayment on the loan
portfolio.




                                                        36
   We now discuss the computation of (A.2). Define


                                f (¯, ω̄, 0) = log(κ) − σc ¯ − ω̄
                                f (¯, ω̄, 1) = log(κ) − σc ¯ − ξ − ω̄.


Note that the function f is the inverse of the normal cumulative density function (cdf),
applied at the default probability. The probability of default conditional on no crisis at time
t equals


                  p(¯, ω̄, 0) = Prob (log Wjt < log κ | ct = ¯, ωt = ω̄, xt = 0)
                                                               
                                      1
                               = N        (log(κ) − σc ¯ − ω̄)
                                     σj
                               = N (f (¯, ω̄, 0)) ,


where N (·) denotes the normal cdf. Similarly, the probability of default conditional on a
crisis at time t equals


                  p(¯, ω̄, 1) = Prob (log Wjt < log κ | ct = ¯, ωt = ω̄, xt = 1)
                                                                  
                                      1
                               = N        (log(κ) − σc ¯ − ξ − ω̄)
                                     σj
                               = N (f (¯, ω̄, 1)) .


Note that p(¯, ω̄, 1) > p(¯, ω̄, 0). Default is more likely if a crisis occurs. It is also the case
that f (¯, ω̄, 1) > f (¯, ω̄, 0); there is a higher effective threshold for avoiding default if a crisis
occurs.




                                                   37
   To compute repayment (A.2), note that

                                
  E Wj,t 1Wj,t <κ |c,t , ωt , xt =
                                          
                                                         σ2
                                                             Z    f (c,t ,ωt ,0)                 (z−σj )2
                                            σc c,t +ωt + 2j
                                          e                                        (2π)−1/2 e−              dz       xt = 0
                                          
                                                                                                    2

                                                                 −∞
                                                           σj2
                                                                  Z   f (c,t ,ωt ,1)                 (z−σj )2
                                          eσc c,t +ξ+ωt + 2                           (2π)−1/2 e−
                                          
                                                                                                        2       dz   xt = 1,
                                                                      −∞


where we use the result that, for any a,
                           Z a           2        σj2
                                                      Z           a         (z−σj )2
                                  zσj − z2
                                e          dz = e  2                   e−      2        dz.                              (A.4)
                                   −∞                            −∞

   A loan portfolio is thus an asset whose time-t payoff is defined by the random variable
(A.2). Consider a time-t investment in the time-(t + 1) loan portfolio. The price of the loan
portfolio equals
                           P L (pt , ωt ) = Et [Mt,t+1 Rep(c,t+1 , xt+1 , ωt+1 )] .                                     (A.5)

It follows that the ex-post return on the portfolio of loans equals

                                       L       Rep(c,t+1 , xt+1 , ωt+1 )
                                      rt+1 =                              − 1.                                           (A.6)
                                                    P L (pt , ωt )

Note that pt and ωt are sufficient statistics for the distribution of the return on the loan
portfolio.



Appendix B                  Franchise value
Define scaled franchise value:

                                                  V (BEit , Ai,t−1 , Dit , pt , ωit ) − BEit
                       ve(ai,t−1 , pt , ωit ) =                                              ,                           (B.1)
                                                                     Dit

where we conjecture that the left-hand side is a function of ai,t−1 , pt and ωit . The definition
(B.1) holds as long as BEit ≥ 0. In this Appendix, we derive a recursion for (B.1), thereby

                                                          38
verifying the conjecture.
    First, substituting (8) into (15) implies that, conditional on BEit ≥ 0,


  Vi (BEit , Ai,t−1 , Dit , pt , ωit ) =
                               max BEit + Dit − Ait − Φ(Ait , Dit , Ai,t−1 ) +
                               ϕit ,Ait
                                     h                                                             i
                                   Et Mt,t+1 V (BEi,t+1 , Ait , Dit eg , pt+1 , ωi,t+1 )1BEi,t+1 >0 , (B.2)


subject to (9) and (16). Otherwise Vit = 0.
    Define scaled market value and conjecture that this is a function of beit , ait , pt , and ωit :


                         vi (beit , ai,t−1 , pt , ωit ) = V (BEit , Ai,t−1 , Dit , pt , ωit )/Dit .              (B.3)


We further define
                                                                                       2
                                                                    ait − ai,t−1 e−g
                                                                
                                                           −g
                       φ(ait , ai,t−1 ) ≡ ηB ai,t−1 e                                       + f 1a−1
                                                                                                  it <χ
                                                                                                        .
                                                                       ai,t−1 e−g

                                  Φ(Ait ,Dit ,Ai,t−1 )
Note that φ(ait , ai,t−1 ) =             Dit
                                                       .
    Recursively define vi (beit , ai,t−1 , pt , ωit ) as


  vi (beit , ai,t−1 , pt , ωit ) = max beit + 1 − ait − φ(ai,t−1 , ait ) +
                                φit ,ait

                                                           Et Mt,t+1 eg v(bei,t+1 , ait , pt , ωt+1 )1bei,t+1 >0 , (B.4)
                                                                                                               


subject to
                                 bei,t+1 = e−g (1 + ri,t+1
                                                     A                  D
                                                                             
                                                           )ait − (1 + rt+1 ) ,                                  (B.5)

and (16), for beit ≥ 0; otherwise vit = 0. Dividing both sides of (15) by Dit and applying the
law of motion for deposits shows that the definitions (B.4) and (B.3) are consistent, verifying
the conjecture.



                                                                39
   Finally, define ve(ai,t−1 , pt , ωit ) as the solution to the recursion


  ve(ai,t−1 , pt , ωit ) = max 1 − ai,t−1 − φ(ai,t−1 , ait ) +
                       φit ,ait

                                                Et Mt,t+1 eg (bei,t+1 + ve(ai,t , pt+1 , ωi,t+1 ))1bei,t+1 >0 , (B.6)
                                                                                                            


subject to (B.5) and (16). Then
                                                  
                                                   ve(a
                                                        i,t−1 , pt , ωit ) + beit  beit ≥ 0
                    v(beit , ai,t−1 , pt , ωt ) =
                                                                 0               otherwise

It follows that, provided that beit ≥ 0, we can define scaled franchise value as


                                  ve(ai,t−1 , pt , ωt ) = v(beit , ai,t−1 , pt , ωt ) − beit .




                                                              40
Appendix C                   Solution Algorithm
We discretize the stochastic processes for the probability of crisis p, the collateral value ω,
and the i.i.d. c shocks following the method developed by Rouwenhorst (1995). For p we use
a 10-node Markov chain, while for ω, and c we use 5 nodes.
       We then calculate asset prices. The equilibrium wealth-consumption ratio is found solving
the fixed-point problem in (4). Under the assumptions described in the main text, the
wealth-consumption ratio is function of p only. The investor’s stochastic discount factor is
computed from (3). Prices and returns for the Treasury bill and the loans to households are
derived from the Euler equations presented in (5) and (A.5), respectively.
       With this information at hand, we solve the problem of the bank. We solve for scaled
franchise value on the discretized state space, by iterating on (B.4). The bank takes prices
as given, and jointly decides on its capital and portfolio allocation to maximize the sum of
current cash-flows and continuation value.
       The solution to the firm’s problem is given in Appendix C of Gomes, Grotteria, and
Wachter (2018).
       We obtain model-implied moments by simulating 10,000 banks for 10,000 periods. The
burn-out sample consists of the first 1,000 periods. Simulations yield a series for the exogenous
state variables ωj,t , pt , the endogenous state variables, aj,t and firm capital, as well as a series
of shocks that determine the ex-post return on the bank investments and the ex post output
of the firm.28 Using these series, we can calculate all quantities of interest based on the
functions for the value of the bank and the value of the firm.




  28
    We assume, for simplicity, that when a bank defaults, an identical bank is created with the same state
variables. This implies we do not need to keep track of past defaults (the bank’s optimal decisions depend only
on the current value of the state variables). This assumption allows us to maintain a stationary distribution
of banks.


                                                      41
                     Table 1. Parameter Values – Representative Investor

     Description                                                Parameter         Value
     Elasticity of intertemporal substitution                       ψ               2
     Relative risk aversion                                         γ               3
     Rate of time preference                                        β             0.987
     Average growth in log consumption (normal times)               µc             0.01
     Volatility of log consumption growth (normal times)            σc            0.015
     Average probability of crisis                                  p              0.02
     Impact of crisis on consumption size                           ξ         log(1 − 0.30)
     Persistence in crisis probability                              ρp             0.8
     Volatility of crisis probability                               σp             0.42
     Government bill loss given crisis                              q              0.12

Notes: The table shows the parameter values used to solve the representative investor’s
problem. The investor has Epstein and Zin (1989) utility with risk aversion γ, elasticity of
intertemporal substitution ψ, and time discount factor β. Her consumption process is given
by
                                 Ct+1 = Ct eµc +c,t+1 +ξxt+1 ,
where xt+1 is a crisis indicator that takes a value of 1 with probability pt . We assume that the
logarithm of pt follows a Markov process with persistence ρp and volatility σp . Conditional
on a crisis realization, government bills experience a loss of q per unit invested. The model is
calibrated at annual frequency.
                               Table 2. Parameter Values – Bank

         Description                                                           Parameter           Value
         Return on deposits                                                         rD             0.48%
         Loss given default on loans to households                                  L               0.40
         Loan-to-value ratio                                                         κ              0.80
         Volatility of local market component of collateral                         σω              0.02
         Persistence of local market component of collateral                        ρω              0.90
         Volatility of household component of collateral                            σj              0.10
         Capital regulation requirement                                              χ              0.92
         Adjustment cost on capital                                                 ηB                3

Notes: The table shows the parameter values used to solve the problem of an individual
bank. Each bank i has access to a portfolio of n infinitesimal one-period loans with the same
loan-to-value ratio (κ) at issuance. Let j = 1, . . . , n index borrowers for bank i. Let

                                     Wijt = eσc ct +ξxt +ωit +σj jt

denote the time-t collateral value for borrower j of bank i (assuming a time-t − 1 value of 1).
If a loan defaults, the bank recovers 1 − L of its collateral value Wijt . The dividends for
bank i are:
                        Divit = BEit + Dit − Ait − Φ(Ait , Dit , Ai,t−1 ).
where Φ(·) are non-interest costs, inclusive of regulatory charges. They are given by:
                                                                      2
                                                        Ait − Ai,t−1
               Φ(Ait , Dit , Ai,t−1 ) = ηB Ai,t−1                           + f Dit 1Dit >χAit .
                                                           Ai,t−1

The bank i deposits grow exogenously according to:

                                           Di,t+1 = Di,t eg .

The model is calibrated at annual frequency.
                      Table 3. Parameter Values – Representative Firm

                     Description                      Parameter   Value
                     Returns to scale                     α        0.40
                     Depreciation rate                     δ       0.08
                     Sensitivity to crises                 φ        2
                     Adjustment cost on capital           ηF        5

Notes: The table shows the parameter values used to solve the firm’s problem. The firm has
a Cobb-Douglas production function of the form

                                       Yt = zt1−α Ktα ,

where the logarithm of the firm productivity level, zt , follows a random walk process given
by:
                            log zt+1 = log zt + µc + c,t+1 + φξxt+1 .
                                                              h          i
The law of motion for each firm’s capital stock is: Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It eφξxt+1 . The model
is calibrated at annual frequency.
                           Table 4. Predicting crises in data and model

                             LPM – Data          LPM – Model                 Logit – Data   Logit – Model
 ∆Lt−1                          -0.0182             0.1579                     -0.0917         3.4280

 ∆Lt−2                           0.260              0.1580                         6.641       3.4335

 ∆Lt−3                          0.0638              0.0200                         1.675       0.5877

 ∆Lt−4                         -0.00423             0.0807                         0.0881      1.9856

 ∆Lt−5                          0.0443              0.0347                         0.998       0.9774


 Sum of lag coefficients         0.345              0.4513                         9.311       10.4122
 R2                             0.0126              0.0048                         0.0379      0.0047

Notes: The table reports the coefficients and R2 for the crises prediction equation as estimated
by Schularick and Taylor (2012). Let the crisis event be identified by a binary variable equal
to 1 if a crisis occurs and 0 otherwise. The first two columns report estimates from the
following linear probability model (LPM)
                                                  5
                                                  X
                                crisisit = β0 +         βj ∆Lt−j + it .
                                                  j=1


The third and fourth columns report estimates from the following logit model:
                                                           P5
                                                   eβ0 +    j=1   βj ∆Lt−j
                              P (crisis = 1) =                                 ,
                                                         β0 + 5j=1 βj ∆Lt−j
                                                             P
                                                  1+e
where crises in the data are as identified by Schularick and Taylor (2012) and L stands for
the total dollar value of bank loans in real terms. The data cover 14 developed countries
between 1870 and 2008. In the model, a crisis is defined based on contemporaneous GDP
growth so that the frequency equals that in the data (4%) and Lt is defined as the sum of
the dollar value of bank loans for each bank, scaled by that bank’s deposits.
Table 5. Credit expansion predicts increased crash risk in the bank equity index: data and model

                                              1 yr     2 yr      3yr
                                                       Data
                              ∆Bank credit    0.027    0.033    0.054
                                              [2.40]   [3.11]   [4.27]

                                                    Model
                              5th pct         0.055 0.044 0.053
                              50th pct        0.119 0.118 0.120
                              95th pct        0.199 0.199 0.205

Notes: This table reports coefficients from a probit regression of bank equity index crashes
on lagged credit expansion. We examine horizons of 1, 2, and 3 years. The crash dummy
takes value 1 if there is a drop of -30% in the next 1, 2 or 3 years and 0 otherwise. The crash
indicator is regressed on ∆Bank credit, i.e. the three-year change in bank credit, expressed in
standard deviation units. The empirical coefficients are computed by Baron and Xiong (2017).
In the model, we simulate 100 times 2000 years of artificial data with a burnout sample of
500 years and 500 banks. In each simulated sample we estimate the probit regression model.
We report the median, 5th, and 95th percentile of the distribution of estimated coefficients.
                                  Table 6. Dependent Variable: ∆3 yt+h


                                          Panel A: Benchmark Estimates
                  ( -1)         (0)          (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)
 ∆3 dHH
     i,t−1      0.15∗∗          0.06         -0.07      -0.25∗∗∗      -0.41∗∗∗       -0.45∗∗∗   -0.42∗∗∗
                (0.07)         (0.07)       (0.07)        (0.07)       (0.07)         (0.08)     (0.09)
 ∆3 dFi,t−1      -0.04        -0.10∗∗      -0.11∗∗∗      -0.06∗∗        -0.02          0.01      0.05∗
                (0.04)         (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.03)       (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.03)
 R2               0.02         0.06          0.10         0.10          0.14          0.15       0.13
                                        Panel B: Control for Deposit Insurance
                      ( -1)         (0)        (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)
     HH
 ∆3 di,t−1             0.30         0.29       0.23         0.11         -0.04         -0.09      -0.04
                     (0.23)       (0.22)      (0.17)       (0.13)       (0.12)        (0.12)     (0.12)
 ∆3 dFi,t−1           -0.03        -0.13     -0.15∗∗      -0.12∗∗        -0.07         -0.03       0.02
                     (0.09)       (0.08)      (0.07)       (0.05)       (0.05)        (0.06)     (0.06)
 ∆3 dHH
     i,t−1 1DI        -0.18        -0.28      -0.37∗     -0.45∗∗∗      -0.47∗∗∗      -0.47∗∗∗   -0.49∗∗∗
                     (0.24)       (0.24)      (0.20)       (0.16)       (0.15)        (0.15)     (0.15)
 ∆3 dFi,t−1 1DI       -0.01         0.04       0.05         0.07          0.06         0.04       0.03
                     (0.09)       (0.09)      (0.07)       (0.06)       (0.06)        (0.06)     (0.07)
 R2                   0.03         0.06        0.11         0.13         0.17          0.18       0.16

Notes: Let yit be the log real GDP per capita in local currency and dHHit  and dFit be the household
and firm debt to GDP ratios, respectively. 1DI is an indicator function equal to 1 if the country had
explicit deposit insurance enacted in time t − 3. For deposit insurance, dates before 2005 are from
Demirgüç-Kunt et al. (2005). For countries without a deposit insurance by 2005, scheme dates have
been hand collected. Panel A presents the estimated coefficients and R2 of the following equation
                              ∆3 yi,t+h = αi + βH ∆3 dHH             F
                                                      i,t−1 + βF ∆3 di,t−1 + uit ,

for h = −1, . . . , 5. Each column gradually leads the left-hand-side variable by one year. Panel B
presents the estimated coefficients and R2 of the following equation
                                       DI
              ∆3 yi,t+h = αi + (βHH + βHH 1DI )∆3 dHH             DI         F
                                                   i,t−1 + (βF + βF 1DI )∆3 di,t−1 + uit ,

for h = −1, . . . , 5. Each column gradually leads the left-hand-side variable by one year. Reported
R2 values are from within-country variation. We control for country fixed effects. Standard errors
in parentheses are dually clustered on country and year. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate significance at the
0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 level, respectively. The panel is unbalanced and data are from 1960 to 2015.
 Bad time to buy a house (%)




                               40

                               35

                               30

                               25

                               20

                               15
                                    2002   2004   2006   2008   2010    2012         2014

 Fig. 1. Rising Pessimism. The figure shows the fraction of households answering the question
“Generally speaking, do you think now is a good time or a bad time to buy a house?” with “now is
 a bad time.” Data are from the Michigan Survey of Consumers.
                                                                                                      1.2
                                Dividends          0.4
0.25                            Repurchases                                                            1                                                0.3
 0.2                                               0.3
                                                                                                      0.8

0.15                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                   0.2                                                0.6

 0.1                                                                                                  0.4
                                                   0.1                                                                                                  0.1
0.05                                                                                                  0.2

  0                                                  0                                                 0                                                 0
       Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010         Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010          Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010         Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010



                                                   1.5                                                0.3
                                Dividends
0.25                            Repurchases                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                     0.25
 0.2
                                                     1                                                0.2
0.15                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                     0.15
 0.1                                               0.5                                                0.1
                                                                                                                                                        0.2
0.05                                                                                                 0.05

  0                                                  0                                                 0                                                 0
       Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010   Jan 2005 Jan 2006 Jan 2007 Jan 2008 Jan 2009             Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010         Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010




                                Dividends
 0.4                            Repurchases        0.5                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                      0.3
                                                   0.4                                                                                                  0.3
 0.3
                                                   0.3                                                0.2
 0.2                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                   0.2
                                                                                                      0.1
 0.1                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                   0.1

  0                                                  0                                                 0                                                 0
       Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010         Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010   Jan 2005 Jan 2006 Jan 2007 Jan 2008 Jan 2009             Jul 2005   Jan 2007   Jul 2008   Jan 2010




Fig. 2. Dividends and Repurchases by large bank holding companies. The figure shows
the dividends and share repurchases made by large bank holding companies in the United States
between 2005 and 2009. Values are in percentage of the total assets.
    95


    90


    85


    80


                  1995              2000             2005              2010              2015

Fig. 3. Market Leverage for Bank Holding Companies. The figure shows the aggregate
market leverage for bank holding companies. Leverage is computed as the sum of total liabilities
across banks divided by the sum of market capitalization and total liabilities across banks.
   0.35

     0.3

   0.25

     0.2

   0.15

     0.1
               1995             2000            2005            2010            2015

Fig. 4. Relative size of Treasury and cash in the bank portfolio. The ratio is computed
as the sum of Treasury and agency securities and cash assets divided by the sum of total assets
across commercial banks in the United States. Data are from the Federal Reserve H.8 Assets and
Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States, and refer to the period ranging from 1992 to
2019.
    3.5

      3

    2.5

      2

    1.5

      1

    0.5

      0
                   1995              2000              2005              2010              2015

Fig. 5. Market to Book Value of Equity for Bank Holding Companies. The market to
book ratio is the sum of market capitalization across bank holding companies divided by the sum of
equity book value across bank holding companies.
    5

    4

    3

    2

    1

    0

   -1
    -25        -20       -15       -10       -5         0         5        10        15        20

Fig. 6. Total Assets and Leverage growth of Commercial Banks. The figure represents
assets growth plotted against leverage growth for commercial banks in the United States. Leverage
is defined as assets divided by the difference of assets and liabilities. Data are from the Federal
Reserve H.8 Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States, and refer to the
period ranging from 1973 to 2014.
    0.04


    0.03


    0.02


    0.01


                  0.01       0.02        0.03        0.04        0.05        0.06       0.07        0.08


Fig. 7. Excess Return on Private Loans. The figure shows the ex-ante expected rate of return
                  L , relative to the rate of return earned on a one-year government bill, r G for
on bank loans, rt+1                                                                               t+1
each level of the probability of crisis, pt , and alternative values of the current-period collateral, ωt .
The expected return and the probability are in annual terms.
                   7
                                                                      3m Treasury bill
                   6                                                  Checking deposits
Average rate (%)




                   5

                   4

                   3

                   2

                   1

                   0
                       2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018

Fig. 8. Rates on deposits and Treasury bills The figure shows the deposit rate on checking
accounts (US average) and the yield on the 3-month Treasury bill from March 1999 to May 2018.
Treasury bill rates are from FRED. Data on checking deposits before 2009 are from Drechsler et al.
(2017) while after 2009 are from FDIC.
     0.4

    0.38

    0.36

    0.34

    0.32

     0.3

    0.28
                0.01       0.02        0.03       0.04       0.05       0.06       0.07       0.08


Fig. 9. Bank
          ! Franchise Value. The figure shows the bank’s franchise value, scaled by deposits,
       Vt
        e
vet =       . Alternative levels of crises probability pt are plotted on the x-axis. Different lines
       Dt
                                                            
                                                        At−1
represent different lagged asset-to-debt ratio at−1 =          . ωt is fixed to 0.
                                                        Dt−1
    1.15
    1.14
    1.13
    1.12
    1.11
     1.1
    1.09

                 0.01       0.02       0.03       0.04       0.05       0.06        0.07       0.08


Fig. 10. Optimal Bank Lending. The figure shows the optimal amount of bank assets (lending),
scaled by deposits. Alternative levels of crises probability pt areplotted on the x-axis. Different
                                                              At−1
lines represent different lagged asset-to-debt ratio at−1 =          . ωt is fixed to 0.
                                                              Dt−1
      1

    0.8

    0.6

    0.4

    0.2

      0
                0.01       0.02        0.03        0.04       0.05        0.06        0.07        0.08


Fig. 11. Portfolio Allocation. The figure shows the policy for portfolio allocation of an
individual bank (ϕt ). Alternative levels of crises probability pt areplotted on the x-axis. Different
                                                                 At−1
lines represent different lagged asset-to-debt ratio at−1 =             . ωt is fixed to 0. ϕ equal to 1
                                                                 Dt−1
represents investment in the portfolio of household loans, while ϕ equal to 0 stands for investment
in the government T-bill.
    0.12

      0.1

    0.08

    0.06

    0.04

    0.02

        0
                 0.01        0.02       0.03        0.04       0.05       0.06        0.07       0.08


Fig. 12. Bank default probability. The figure shows the endogenous default probability of
an individual bank after optimally deciding on the amount of capital and its portfolio allocation.
Alternative levels of crises probability
                                     pt are plotted on the x-axis. Different lines represent different
                                       At−1
lagged asset-to-debt ratio at−1 =            . ωt is fixed to 0.
                                       Dt−1
                                          Panel A: Data




                                          Panel B: Model




Fig. 13. Frequency of crises by credit growth. The top figure shows the empirical average
frequency of a crisis in year t conditioning on a given quintile of credit-to-GDP growth rates from
year t − 5 to t. Data are from Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2016). For each country, we compute
the growth rate in the ratio of total loans to GDP between year t − 5 and t. Empirically, a crisis is
a systemic financial crisis, as identified by Jordà et al. (2016). The bottom figure reproduces the
relation in data simulated from the model using quintiles of credit growth rates from year t − 5 to t.
Results are from simulating the model with 10,000 banks for 10,000 periods. A crisis occurs when
the 1-year GDP growth rate is in the bottom 4% of its distribution.
                                         Panel A: Data




                                        Panel B: Model
              10



               5



               0



              -5



             -10
               -40         -20           0          20           40         60   80


Fig. 14. GDP and Household Debt growth. The top figure shows the empirical rela-
tionship between the (demeaned) GDP growth rate from year t to t + 3 and the growth rate
of the household debt to GDP ratio from year t − 4 to t − 1. Data are from the Bank of
International Settlements and cover 39 countries between 1961 and 2012. The bottom fig-
ure reproduces the same relationship in the model using however the growth rate of aggre-
gate bank’s loans (to household) from year t − 5 to t. Results are from simulating the model
with 10,000 banks for 10,000 periods. The solid line is the estimated regression line from
                            ∆3 yi,t+3 − ∆3 yi = αi + βH ∆3 dHH
                                                            i,t−1 + uit ,
where y is GDP and dHH   is the measure of credit to households.
    0.42
                                                                                           Low
     0.4                                                                                   High

    0.38
    0.36
    0.34
    0.32
     0.3

                0.01        0.02       0.03       0.04       0.05        0.06       0.07       0.08


Fig. 15. Impact of subsidies
                                on bank franchise value. The figure shows bank franchise value
                                 
scaled by deposits, vet = Vet /Dt , as a function of crisis probability pt for two different levels of
bank subsidies. We set at−1 = 1.12 and ωt = 0. The case of low subsidies is our benchmark model.
For the high subsidies scenario we lower the benchmark deposit rate by 6 basis points.
   1.14

   1.13

   1.12

   1.11

     1.1         Low
                 High
   1.09
                 0.01       0.02        0.03        0.04        0.05       0.06        0.07        0.08


Fig. 16. Impact of subsidies on bank leverage. The figure shows the optimal ratio of assets to
deposits at = (At /Dt ) as a function of crisis probability pt for two different levels of bank subsidies.
We set at−1 = 1.12 and ωt = 0. The case of low subsidies is our benchmark model. For the high
subsidies scenario we lower the benchmark deposit rate by 6 basis points.
     1

   0.8

   0.6

   0.4

   0.2
                                                                                         Low
     0                                                                                   High

              0.01       0.02        0.03       0.04       0.05        0.06       0.07       0.08

Fig. 17. Impact of subsidies on bank’s optimal portfolio composition. The figure shows
the portfolio allocation of an individual bank (ϕt ) for high and low subsidies (solid and dashed
line respectively) and different levels of the probability of criss pt keeping fixed the last period
asset-to-debt ratio at−1 = (At−1 /Dt−1 ) to 1.123, and ωt = 0. ϕ equal to 1 represents investment in
the portfolio of household loans, while ϕ equal to 0 stands for investment in the government T-bill.
The case of low subsidies is our benchmark model. For the high subsidies scenario we lower the
benchmark deposit rate by 0.06%.
