NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VOLATILITY RISK PASS-THROUGH
Riccardo Colacito
Mariano Max Croce
Yang Liu
Ivan Shaliastovich
Working Paper 25276
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25276

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We are grateful to The Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Riccardo Colacito, Mariano Max Croce, Yang Liu, and Ivan Shaliastovich. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Volatility Risk Pass-through
Riccardo Colacito, Mariano Max Croce, Yang Liu, and Ivan Shaliastovich
NBER Working Paper No. 25276
November 2018
JEL No. F3,G12
ABSTRACT
We develop a novel measure of volatility pass-through to assess international propagation of
output volatility shocks to macroeconomic aggregates, equity prices, and currencies. An increase
in country's output volatility is associated with a decrease in its output, consumption, and net
exports. The average consumption pass-through is 50% (a 1% increase in output volatility
increases consumption volatility by 0.5%) and it increases to 70% for shocks originating in
smaller countries. The equity volatility pass-through is 90%, whereas the link between volatility
of currency and fundamentals is weak. A novel channel of risk sharing of volatility risks can
explain our empirical findings.
Riccardo Colacito
Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Campus Box #3490
Chapel Hill, NC 27559
and NBER
ric@unc.edu
Mariano Max Croce
Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Campus Box #3490
Chapel Hill, NC 27559
and NBER
mmc287@gmail.com

Yang Liu
University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
yangliu5@hku.hk
Ivan Shaliastovich
Wisconsin School of Business
University of Wisconsin
53706 Madison, WI
ivan.shaliastovich@wisc.edu

1

Introduction

The end of the Great Moderation period has highlighted once more the relevance of
uncertainty shocks as key determinants of both economic activity and wealth in whole
global economy. In this paper, we estimate and explain the international transmission of
output volatility shocks to both currencies and international quantity dynamics. More
precisely, focusing on a large cross section of major industrialized countries, we identify
news to the conditional volatility of output, consumption, and real exchange rates. From
this investigation we document several novel empirical findings. First, consumption and
output volatilities are imperfectly correlated within countries. This implies that the
growth rate of consumption in each country can experience changes in its conditional
volatility that go beyond the arrival of endowment volatility shocks. Second, consumption volatility is more cross-country correlated than output volatility, suggesting that the
output volatility shocks of one country propagate to the consumption of other countries.
To formalize the international propagation of output volatility shocks, we construct
an index of volatility pass-through between two countries. Our index is equal to zero
if a local output volatility shock results exclusively in an increase of local consumption
volatility, without spilling over to the other country. Conversely, our index takes the
value of one if a local output volatility shock results in an equal adjustment of consumption volatility in both countries. Our novel index measure allows us to address the
following aspects of international risk sharing: (i) quantify the pass-through of macroeconomic uncertainty shocks across countries; (ii) examine the role of the country size
(Hassan (2013)); (iii) relate volatility spillovers to external imbalances (Della Corte, Riddiough, and Sarno (2016)); and (iv) show the evidence for macroeconomic uncertainty
risk sharing in international asset prices and currencies (Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011, 2014), Della Corte, Sarno, and Tsiakas (2009, 2011), Mueller, Stathopoulos,
and Vedolin (2017)).
We find that the pass-through of output volatility is sizeable, especially when the
uncertainty shocks originate from the smallest countries in our cross section. Specifically,
when we focus on G7 countries, the pass-through is on the order of 50%, regardless of
the country in which the output volatility shock materializes. This figure is as large
as that of the pass-through of output level shocks. When we also include the next 10
countries according to their share of world GDP (henceforth G17), we find that the passthrough from bigger countries to smaller countries declines, whereas the pass-through
of a volatility shock originating from small countries to large ones becomes as great as
70%. That is, smaller countries can better share volatility shocks compared to larger

1

countries, by redistributing a bigger fraction of their uncertainty shocks to their trading
partners.
We also study the connection between output volatility and asset prices by focusing
on the propagation of output volatility shocks to both equity returns and exchange rate
changes. We find that the financial pass-through, that is, the pass-through of output
vol shocks to equity returns volatility is very significant and it has increased over time,
similarly to the consumption volatility pass-through. We relate this trend to increasing
financial integration and risk-sharing in our model.
Our last empirical finding refers to the disconnect between the volatility of consumption differentials and the volatility of exchange rates. We document that the correlation
of these volatilities is about 20% for the set of countries that we consider in our empirical investigation. Equivalently, the time-variation of exchange rate volatility is only
partially driven by time-variation in the volatility of consumption aggregates. This is
a novel observation that goes beyond the low correlation of the levels of consumption
differentials and exchange rates (the Kollmann (1991) and Backus and Smith (1993)
puzzle).
In the second part of this manuscript, we show that our main findings are an anomaly
in the context of an equilibrium risk-sharing model with time-additive preferences. In
contrast, when agents have recursive preferences, news about both future growth rates
and future uncertainty are priced, and thus they can jointly affect trade and volatility
dynamics in a manner more consistent with the data.
Specifically, we consider an economy with two countries, each populated by one
agent with Epstein and Zin (1991) preferences (henceforth EZ preferences). Each agent
is endowed with the stochastic supply of one country-specific good, whose dynamics
are characterized by the presence of time-varying volatility shocks. Preferences feature
a bias for the consumption of the domestic good. Trade occurs in frictionless goods
markets and in financial markets featuring a complete set of state- and date-contingent
securities.
Preferences are calibrated so that our agents dislike volatility of their continuation
utilities. Since continuation utilities are a reflection of the entire future streams of consumption, we say that agents dislike long-run consumption variance. When news shocks
hit the economy, agents have an incentive to trade in order to reduce the uncertainty of
their future utility. Specifically, a country affected by a positive news shock will receive a
smaller share of resources and have lower volatility of continuation utility going forward,
but it will also have higher short-run consumption volatility.
When news pertains to future expected growth rates, the international reallocation
2

of resources results in an international exchange of both short-run and long-run consumption volatility across countries. That is, variances are characterized by negative
comovements. We call this force the reallocation effect. News to output volatility, in
contrast, produces a positive comovement in consumption volatilities across all countries:
changes in output volatility spread in the cross section of countries, with the reallocation channel only partially mitigating the effects of local shocks on local consumption
volatility.
The recursive risk-sharing arrangement that we described above is the key driver of
our main results. Since agents dislike time variation in the volatility of their consumption, they actively trade with each other in order to dampen the associated change in the
volatility of consumption following an output volatility shock. This reallocation results
in a marked degree of volatility pass-through, which brings our model closer to the data.
Because of the concavity of the utility function with respect to country size, the
reallocation channel is more pronounced for small countries than for large countries. As
a result, our model predicts that shocks to output volatility should come with a larger
pass-through when they affect small countries, consistent with the data. In a model with
CRRA preferences, however, this result is missing, as volatility shocks are not directly
priced and the associated risk-sharing motive is absent.
Furthermore, the model can account for the small extent of positive comovement
between the volatility of consumption differentials and the volatility of exchange rate
fluctuations thanks to two opposite forces. Volatility shocks tend to create a positive correlation between the two volatilities, as they increase the uncertainty of all the variables
in the economy. Long-run shocks, in contrast, generate a large negative comovement.
To better understand the role of long-run shocks, we note that they are responsible
for most of the fluctuations of the wealth distribution, that is, our reallocation channel.
As the wealth distribution becomes more unequal, our countries depend more on each
other in order to share risks. In equilibrium, they engage in more active trading, and
their stochastic discount factors become more correlated. By no arbitrage, the real
exchange rate becomes less volatile. Simultaneously, the reallocation effect makes the
cross-country difference of the consumption growth rates more volatile, as the passthrough of consumption volatility is not symmetric across countries with different wealth
shares.
In a model without shocks to output volatility (e.g., Colacito and Croce (2013)), the
volatility of the exchange rate and that of the international differential of consumption
growth rates would be strongly negative because of the dominance of the reallocation
channel. In contrast, exogenous output volatility shocks increase the conditional volatil3

ity of all macroeconomic aggregates and hence endogenously produce positive comovements. Under our benchmark calibration, these opposite forces end up producing a
positive but moderate correlation between consumption differentials and exchange rate
volatility.
The resulting correlation is not as low as in the data and we speculate that introducing frictions may be a valuable venue for future progress. Although our attention
is focused on a frictionless risk-sharing setting with symmetric countries, we regard the
introduction of frictions, heterogeneity, and market incompleteness into our model as an
important direction for future research in this area (see, e.g., Maggiori (2017); Gabaix
and Maggiori (2015); Ready, Roussanov, and Ward (2017); Lustig, Roussanov, and
Verdelhan (2011; 2014); Sandulescu, Trojani, and Vedolin (2017); Lustig and Verdelhan
(2018); Bakshi, Cerrato, and Crosby (2017)). These frictions may be important in addressing the empirical link with international capital flows (Gourinchas and Rey (2007),
Gourio, Siemer, and Verdelhan (2014)).
Related literature. Our study is related to the growing body of literature that has
investigated the macroeconomic foundations of international financial markets’ fluctuations (see, inter alia, Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), Farhi and Gabaix (2016), Verdelhan
(2010), Stathopoulos (2017), Mueller, Stathopoulos, and Vedolin (2017), Della Corte
et al. (2016), Heyerdahl-Larsen (2015), Pavlova and Rigobon (2007; 2010; 2013)). In
particular, we contribute to the understanding of how country size matters for the propagation of international shocks, as recently emphasized by Hassan (2013), and Hassan,
Mertens, and Zhang (2015; 2016). We differ from these papers by explicitly introducing
time-varying uncertainty in macroeconomic fundamentals and studying its effects on the
optimal international risk-sharing arrangement.
Additionally, several papers have documented the relevance of higher-order moments
in sharpening our understanding of currency dynamics. Gavazzoni, Sambalaibat, and
Telmer (2013) argue that non-Gaussian dynamics of the stochastic discount factors are
needed to reconcile the riskiness of currencies with the level of the interest rates. Berg
and Mark (2018) show that the cross-country high-minus-low conditional skewness of
the unemployment gap is a measure of global macroeconomic uncertainty and it constitutes a factor that is robustly priced in currency excess returns. Zviadadze (2017)
augments a VAR of US consumption growth, inflation, and three-month nominal yield
with a common stochastic volatility component and analyzes the relationship between
the term structure of currency carry trade and US macroeconomic risk. Relative to her
analysis, we are interested in how relative GDP volatility shocks propagate into relative
4

consumption volatility in the cross section of G-17 countries and propose a model that
accounts for the way that volatility risk is internationally shared. Farhi, Fraiberger,
Gabaix, Ranciere, and Verdelhan (2015), Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014), and Chernov, Graveline, and Zviadadze (2018) study the role of downside risk for currency risk
premia. We regard the introduction of rare events as an important generalization of this
framework.
More broadly, our analysis relates to the recent literature examining the role of uncertainty both in the data and in economic models (see, among others, Bloom (2009);
Della Corte, Sarno, and Tsiakas (2011); Justiniano and Primiceri (2008); Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015); Kollmann (2016); Jones, Manuelli, Siu, and Stacchetti (2005);
and Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajsek (2014)). In an early contribution, Ramey and Ramey
(1995) show that countries with higher volatility of GDP have lower growth in the future. Consistent with their cross-sectional evidence, we find that higher domestic output
volatility is associated with a decline in relative consumption in the future. We differ
from these studies for our attention to the propagation of vol shocks across countries, as
opposed to the within-country propagation of vol shocks to the level of macroeconomic
aggregates.
The international long-run risk literature has already documented the ability of longlasting consumption news shocks to account for several empirical regularities of international asset prices (see, among others, Colacito (2008); Colacito and Croce (2013); and
Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013)). We differ from this literature in at least two dimensions. First, we provide novel evidence on the diffusion of fundamental output volatility
shocks to consumption and currencies. Second, we provide an equilibrium explanation
of our findings through the lens of a frictionless risk-sharing scheme in which volatility
shocks are priced.
Organization of the paper. In the next section we describe our empirical strategy
and our novel findings concerning the cross section of volatilities of major industrialized
countries. Sections 3 and 4 describe our model and its implications. Section 5 concludes the paper. The appendix contains additional robustness checks and the model’s
extensions.

2

Empirical Evidence

In this section we lay out our econometric approach to analyze the implications of relative
movements in macroeconomic volatilities within and across major industrialized coun5

tries. Focusing on the volatility of output shocks, we provide novel empirical evidence
on the extent to which these volatility risks are transmitted to the relative volatility of
consumption. We refer to this concept as the volatility pass-through. Further, we provide
evidence linking volatility movements to output levels, trade dynamics, and volatilities
of equity returns and exchange rates. Our novel evidence has important implications for
understanding the risk sharing across countries, and it represents a challenge for many
existing international finance models.

2.1

Data Description

Sources and sample. Our empirical analysis is based on the cross section of the
following 17 major industrialized countries, ranked by GDP size: the United States,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, Australia, Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. In this study, we refer to the group of the first seven countries as G7 and to the
expanded set of countries as G17. We collect the national accounts, population, and
CPI data for these countries from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (henceforth OECD) database. The exchange rates, quoted as the US dollar
price of the foreign currency, are from the Federal Reserve Economic Database (henceforth FRED) database. The macroeconomic data are seasonally adjusted, real, and per
capita.
To be consistent with the endowment economy that we analyze in sections 3 and 4,
we abstract away from both investment and public expenditure and compute aggregate
output as the sum of consumption and net exports. Since our model is based on a
frictionless risk-sharing scheme, we follow the common practice of letting our quarterly
dataset range from 1971:q1 to 2013:q4, a period of substantial financial integration
across all major industrialized countries (see, among others, Quinn (1997), Obstfeld
(1998), Taylor (2002), and Quinn and Voth (2008)).1
Cross-sectional similarities and differences. In table 1 we show key moments of
our international data. For ease of exposition, we report cross-sectionally aggregated
moments, as opposed to country-level values, within the G7 and G17 country groups.
For G7 countries, we report simple averages of our aggregates. For G17 countries, we
present both simple and GDP-weighted cross-sectional averages of our moments. To
1

Due to data availability and quality issues, the data for Belgium, Norway, and Spain start in 1981;
for New Zealand in 1986; and for Portugal in 1991. Our Bayesian methods can easily be applied to an
unbalanced panel.

6

Table 1: Data Summary Statistics
G7 Avg.
G17 Avg.
Simple
Simple
Weighted

G17 Quintile
1st
4th

Consumption growth
Mean
Std. Dev.
AR(1)

1.91
1.75
0.11

1.63
1.99
0.07

1.89
1.67
0.17

1.26
1.34
-0.16

2.02
2.47
0.31

Output growth
Mean
Std. Dev.
AR(1)

1.94
2.21
0.00

1.71
2.97
-0.09

1.93
2.02
0.07

1.43
2.01
-0.26

2.00
4.43
0.09

∆Net Exports over Output:
Mean
Std. Dev.
AR(1)

0.03
1.60
0.00

0.08
2.48
-0.09

0.04
1.45
0.07

-0.30
1.79
-0.26

0.34
3.24
0.09

Within-Country Correlations:
Consump. and output growth
Consump. and output vol

0.67
0.54

0.51
0.47

0.71
0.65

0.35
0.26

0.72
0.80

Across-Country Correlations:
Consump. growth
Output growth
Consump. vol
Output vol

0.27
0.15
0.51
0.32

0.24
0.14
0.47
0.30

0.25
0.14
0.45
0.30

0.13
0.06
0.35
0.18

0.33
0.20
0.66
0.45

Notes: This table shows summary statistics for consumption growth, output growth, change in
net-export-to-output ratio, and the correlations of consumption and output volatilities within
and across countries. ‘G7 Avg.’ (‘G17 Avg.’) refers to simple (both simple and GDP-weighted)
averages of key moments for G7 (G17) countries. The rightmost two columns show the first
and fourth quintiles of the moments of interest in the G17 cross section. Macroeconomic
variables are seasonally adjusted, real, and per capita. Means and volatilities are annualized,
in percentages. Quarterly observations are from the 1971:Q1–2013:Q4 sample.

assess the extent of cross-country heterogeneity, for each moment we also report the 1st
and 4th quintiles within the G17 group.
We highlight three relevant facts. First, the moments for the G7 group are very
similar to the typical estimates for the United States. As an example, consumption
growth has a mean of about 2% per year and a volatility of about 1.75%. In the G17
aggregate, the average growth rate declines, whereas the unconditional volatility of both
output and consumption increases. In both cases, however, changes are relatively mod-

7

est. Both quarterly consumption and output growth are almost serially uncorrelated.
Second, the average change in the net-export-to-output ratio is distributed nearly
symmetrically around zero. In the group of G17 countries, this moment ranges from
−30% to +34%. Since smaller countries have more volatile output than bigger countries,
they also tend to have more volatile net-export-to-output ratios.
Third, in both the G7 and G17 groups, consumption growth rates feature low international correlations.2 Further, output and consumption growth rates are imperfectly
correlated within countries. These empirical findings on risk sharing, alongside with
other macroeconomic and financial market moments, are going to be important targets
to assess our economic model.
In the next sections, we describe in detail our identification of the time-varying
volatility components and address their comovements within and across countries.

2.2

Volatility Measurement and Comovements

We extract the volatility of the series of interest, zt , by estimating the following specification:
zt = µ(1 − ρ) + ρzt−1 + eσt (z)/2 ηt ,
σt (z) = µσ (1 − ν) + νσt−1 (z) + σw wt ,

(2.1)

where σt (z) is a latent process equal to the logarithm of the variance of macroeconomic
shock to zt . The innovations ηt and wt are independent Gaussian shocks to the level and
the volatility of zt , respectively. The parameters ρ and ν govern the persistence of zt and
σt (zt ), respectively, whereas µ and µσ represent the average level and volatility of zt and
σt (zt ), respectively. The parameter σw captures the volatility of volatility. According
to our specification, the variance of zt is guaranteed to take on positive values. In
untabulated tests we directly estimated volatility in levels, with very similar results. For
this reason, in the remainder of this manuscript we refer to σt as either log-volatility or
volatility interchangeably.
Similar volatility specifications are employed in Cogley and Sargent (2005) and Primiceri (2005) in the context of macroeconomic volatility, and in Della Corte, Sarno, and
Tsiakas (2009) for the financial volatility modeling. For robustness, we have also entertained more general specifications which allow for i) a correlation between the level
and volatility shocks, and ii) additional explanatory variables in the level equation. The
2
The quantity anomaly in Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994) does not apply to our dataset, as our
measured output excludes both investment and government expenditure.

8

correlations of the filtered volatility series across these specifications with the benchmark
exceed 90% for all the countries, and all the key implications for the pass-through are
unchanged, as shown in the Appendix A.
We estimate the system of equations (2.1) following the Bayesian methods in Kim,
Shephard, and Chib (1998). For each country, we fit our volatility specification to
aggregate consumption and output growth separately. To check the robustness of our
results, we also employ a specification in which the volatility parameters are restricted to
be common across countries and are jointly estimated in our cross section of countries.
For parsimony, a complete summary of the estimation details is provided in the appendix.
Volatilities: aggregate time pattern. In figure 1, we show our fitted volatilities
aggregated across both G7 and G17 countries. For the G17 group, we also plot the first
and the fourth cross-sectional volatility quintiles. Consistent with the findings reported
in table 1, consumption volatility is systematically lower than output volatility. Further,
our estimation procedure captures the well-documented Great Moderation phenomenon,
as both our estimated consumption and output volatilities slowly decline from the 1980s
to the mid-2000s. These findings are consistent with those documented by Lettau,
Ludvigson, and Wachter (2008), Stock and Watson (2002) and McConnell and Quiros
(2000) for the United States.
Consistent with the unconditional evidence in table 1, G17 countries have a larger
average volatility level relative to the G7 group. In both country groups, our conditional
estimates exhibit substantial and persistent fluctuations over time. More broadly, the
time pattern of the estimated aggregate volatilities shares similar characteristics across
G7 and G17 countries. These results suggest that our novel findings on international
volatility comovements are quite general, as they apply to a large international cross
section. We note that the correlation between our measure of output volatility for the
US and the VIX is 0.5. More broadly, we find such a positive but imperfect degree
of correlation using realized volatilities in our entire cross section of countries. Thus
our assessment of macroeconomic volatility is related to and yet distinct from financial
volatility.
Volatilities: comovements. Uncertainty shocks appear to be modestly correlated
across countries for both consumption and output, and the correlation structure of the
volatilities mimics that of the levels.
Specifically, table 1 shows that the cross-country correlation of endowment volatilities
is about 0.30, a number close to the cross-country correlation of the levels of the growth

9

Figure 1 - Macroeconomic Volatilities. This figure shows estimates of macroeconomic
volatilities of real consumption and output growth. Volatilities, eσt /2 , are estimated at a
country level according to equation (2.1). The G7 line shows the equally weighted crosssectional average for G7 countries. “G17” reports the equally weighted average across all the
G17 countries. “Weighted” reports the GDP-weighted average across G17 countries. Dashed
lines show the first and fourth quantiles of the volatilities in the G17 cross section. Quarterly
observations range from 1971:Q1 to 2013:Q4.

rates. The cross-country correlation of consumption volatilities is slightly higher than
that of output volatilities, once again consistent with that observed for the growth rates
of the levels. Within each country, in contrast, the volatilities of consumption and output
comove strongly with each other. Their correlation is 0.70, a figure similar to that of
the consumption and output growth rates.
In our next step, we adopt a VAR approach to (i) better characterize the joint
dynamics of both levels and volatilities, and (ii) quantify the pass-through of volatility
shocks.

2.3

Volatility Risk Pass-Through

Relative volatility shocks. To evaluate the dynamic impact of shocks to relative
volatility (σt (∆yi ) − σt (∆yU S )) across countries, we jointly estimate the following N
countries VAR(1):
Ỹt,i = µ̃Y,i + Φ̃Ỹt,i + Σ̃ũt,i ,

10

i = 1, 2, ..., N

(2.2)

where


Ỹi,t


σt (∆yi ) − σt (∆yU S )




∆yi − ∆yU S


,
=
σ
(∆c
)
−
σ
(∆c
)
t
i
t
U
S




∆c
−
∆c


i
US
∆(N X/Y )i − ∆(N X/Y )U S

(2.3)

where ∆yi − ∆yU S , σt (∆ci ) − σt (∆cU S ), ∆ci − ∆cU S , and ∆(N X/Y )i − ∆(N X/Y )U S
denote the difference between country i and the US in growth rates of endowments;
the volatilities of consumption growth rates; the growth rates of consumption; and the
net-export-to-output ratios, respectively. We note that N is equal to 6 for G-7 countries
and 16 for G-17 countries.
In Appendix A.1, we show that our key results are robust both to different specifications and estimation procedures, and to the choice of a global benchmark, rather than
considering just the US. Furthermore, our results are virtually unchanged when we account for heterogenous exposure to a common global volatility process across countries.
Since we adopt the US as the baseline home country throughout our main text analysis, this specification allows us to focus on relative bilateral adjustments computed
with respect to a common benchmark. To sharpen the system’s identification, we assume that the fundamental persistence and volatility parameters Φ̃ and Σ̃ are common
across countries, whereas the intercepts µ̃Y,i are allowed to be country specific. Under
these assumptions, we can estimate the VAR parameters by pooling the demeaned data
across countries. We estimate the system of VAR equations as Seemingly Unrelated
Regressions.
Using our estimated VAR, we can trace the relative response of the macroeconomic
variables to an increase in output volatility in the foreign country relative to the US.
In the main text, we report the results under a lower diagonal Cholesky decomposition
of the variance-covariance matrix for the setting in which output volatility shocks are
ranked before the other macroeconomic aggregates of interest. Our main results also
hold when volatility is ranked after the output growth (see Appendix A, table A1). In
this sense, we do not take a stand on whether volatility shocks causes level shocks or
viceversa, but rather we assess the role of volatility shocks orthogonal to level shocks.
In figure 2, we show the estimated impulse responses for the G7 countries to a relative
volatility shock. In table 2, we report the contemporaneous responses of all the variables
in the system to this type of shock. These numbers correspond to the entries in the first
column of the matrix Σ̃ in equation (2.2). We perform this analysis for both the G7 and
11

0.15
0.1

0

-1

0.05
0

-2
0

5

10

0
5

0.2

"c-"c*

<("c)-<("c*)

#10 -3

0.2

"y-"y*

<("y)-<("y*)

1

0.15
0.1
0.05
0

#10

5

5

10

5

10

0
-5
-10

10

0

-3

0.04

<(rex
)-<(rex
*)
d
d

"(NX/Y)-"(NX/Y)*

10

-15
0

1

#10

5
-4

0

-1

-2

0.02
0
Data
Model

-0.02
-0.04

0

5

10

Periods

0

Periods

Figure 2 - Responses to a Relative Volatility Shock. This figure shows the estimates
of the relative responses of the volatility and growth rate of output (∆y), the volatility and
growth rate of consumption (∆c), and the change of net-export-to-output ratio (∆N X/Y ),
and the volatility of excess returns (rdex ) to a one-standard-deviation increase in the volatility
of output in the foreign country relative to the US. Dashed (dotted) lines refer to the point
estimates (95% credible interval) of the VAR(1) specified in equation (2.3) with the addition
ex ). Solid lines show the output from
of equity returns volatility differential, σt (rUexS,t ) − σt (ri,t
our model under the benchmark quarterly calibration reported in table 4.
the remaining G17 countries (hereafter, the bottom-10 G17). Our empirical evidence
highlights several important cross-sectional aspects of volatility shocks across countries.
First, when country i experiences an increase in its output volatility relative to
the US, both its relative consumption and output growth rates fall. The estimated
effects are large and almost always statistically significant. For example, in our G7
specification, foreign output growth falls by nearly half a percentage point relative to
the US upon the realization of a one-standard-deviation relative volatility shock. These
findings complement the one-country evidence in Bansal, Kiku, Shaliastovich, and Yaron
(2014) and Bloom (2009) in showing that an increase in domestic volatility decreases
real economic activity. For the same country group, the fall in the relative level of
consumption growth is about 0.20%, that is, half of that of output. This mitigation
happens through net imports, as the country with the highest volatility shock experiences
a deterioration of its current account.
Second, following a relative increase in output volatility, the volatility of consumption
increases as well. We find it convenient to explore this effect in greater detail by defining

12

Table 2: Volatility Risk Pass-Through
Panel A: Contemporaneous adjustments to relative volatility shocks
σ(∆y)
∆y
σ(∆c)
∆c
∆(N X/Y )
US/G7 Countries:
0.21
-0.46
[0.20; 0.22]
[-0.77; -0.17]

Passthrough

0.10
[0.09; 0.11]

-0.20
[-0.44; 0.03]

-0.25
[-0.49; -0.02]

0.52
[0.48; 0.56]

US/Bottom-10 G17 Countries:
0.21
-0.57
0.08
[0.21; 0.22]
[-0.95; -0.19]
[0.07; 0.09]
Panel B: Pass-through and size

-0.16
[-0.41; 0.09]

-0.39
[-0.73; -0.06]

0.61
[0.56; 0.65]

Origin of Vol. Shock:
U.S.
Foreign Country
0.49
0.57
[0.43; 0.54]
[0.51; 0.63]

US/G7 Countries:

US/Bottom-10 G17 Countries:

0.51
[0.45; 0.57]

0.72
[0.66; 0.78]

e 1j ) of the VAR(1)
Notes: Panel A shows the estimates of the contemporaneous responses (Σ
specified in equations (2.2)–(2.3) with respect to a shock to relative output volatility. Responses
of output growth, consumption growth, and net-exports-to-output ratio are annualized, in
percentages. Volatility pass-through is defined as in equation (2.4). Panel B reports passthrough measures based on the estimates of the VAR in equations (2.6)–(2.7) with respect to
volatility shocks affecting either the US or the remaining countries. We report 95% credible
intervals in brackets. Our quarterly data range from 1971:q1 to 2013:q4.

a volatility pass-through index as follows:
Pass-through := 1 −

∂(σt (∆ci ) − σt (∆cU S ))
.
∂(σt (∆yi ) − σt (∆yU S ))

(2.4)

Since our analysis is based on country pairs, this index is equal to zero if an increase
in (log) output volatility in one country results in a one-for-one increase in its own
(log) consumption volatility.3 If instead an output volatility shock results in an equally
redistributed increase in consumption volatility across the two countries, the volatility
pass-through is one.
In an economy with time-additive preferences defined over one good, perfect risksharing implies a pass-through of one, as consumption is equalized across all possible
3

Since the volatilities in our VAR specification are in log-units, we note that the pass-through index
is equivalent to 1 minus the elasticity of consumption volatility to GDP volatility. This means that,
for example, a pass-through index of 0.75 can be interpreted as the ratio of consumption volatilities
increasing by 0.25% in response to a 1% increase in the ratio of GDP volatilities.

13

states and hence σt (∆ci ) − σt (∆cU S ) = 0 ∀t. Vice versa, in an endowment economy in
which countries are subject to autarky, that is, they cannot trade, our index is equal to
zero, as Ci,t = Yi,t ∀i, t and hence (σt (∆ci ) − σt (∆cU S )) = (σt (∆yi ) − σt (∆yU S )) ∀i, t.
We can compute the pass-through index directly from the estimate of the VAR in
equations (2.2)–(2.3), as
e 3,1 /Σ
e 1,1 .
Pass-through = 1 − Σ

(2.5)

Our estimates suggest that the volatility pass-through is about 50% for G7 countries,
meaning that if country i receives a country-specific output volatility shock of 1%, its
own consumption volatility goes up by just 0.5%. This index increases further to 60%
when we focus on smaller countries, suggesting that the international sharing of volatility
shocks is more relevant for this set of countries.4
Country-specific shocks. The specification of the VAR in equation (2.3) is parsimonious, and provides direct evidence on the magnitude of the pass-through of the volatility
shocks in the data. In this section, we extend our analysis to (i) provide information on
the size and correlation of shocks across countries, and (ii) document size effects for the
pass-through; that is, difference in responses to volatility shocks arising from big versus
small countries. The former is relevant for model calibration purposes, while the latter
extends our understanding of volatility shock risk-sharing in the data.
Specifically, we propose an extended VAR,
Yt,i = µY,i + ΦYt−1,i + Σut,i ,

(2.6)

in which we disentangle foreign and U.S. variables:
h
i
Yi,t0 = σt (∆yi ) σt (∆yU S ) ∆yi ∆yU S σt (∆ci ) σt (∆cU S ) .

(2.7)

As before, the persistence and scale matrices are common across countries, whereas the
intercepts pick out country-specific differences in the means. For parsimony, we consider
the smallest set of variables required for both calibration reasons and for the assessment
of the volatility pass-through. As a result, we exclude both the change in net exports
4

In untabulated results, we have checked the robustness of our findings to alternative definitions of
GDP. Our evidence on the pass-through index is robust to the inclusion of investments (it is about
50%), and it becomes slightly larger if we also include public expenditure (about 78%). Since the model
that we propose abstracts away from investments and public expenditures, we use the numbers reported
in table 2 as our benchmark.

14

and the consumption growth rates from this VAR.
The estimation results used to guide our calibration are discussed in the next section
and are reported in table 4. In panel B of table 2, we report the implied volatility
pass-through due to either a one-standard-deviation increase in US output volatility or
a one-standard-deviation in foreign output volatility for both the G7 and the bottom-10
G17 countries. Specifically, according to our VAR specification in equations (2.6)–(2.7),
the pass-through for US-originated shocks is
e 6,2 − Σ
e 5,2 )/Σ
e 2,2 .
Pass-throughU S = 1 − (Σ

(2.8)

For non-US shocks, we adopt the same expression, but we change the order of variables
in our VAR from what reported in (2.7) to
h
i
Yi,t0 = σt (∆yU S ) σt (∆yi ) ∆yU S ∆yi σt (∆cU S ) σt (∆ci ) ,
and retain the definition of pass-through provided in (2.8).
The additional insight provided by this estimation is that the pass-through is sensitive
to the size distribution of the countries that we analyze.When we focus on the G7 group,
all countries tend to have a similar size and a pass-through in the common range (51%–
54%), regardless of the origin of the volatility shock. In contrast, when we focus on the
US versus the bottom-10 G17 countries, i.e., a cross section with more dispersion in size,
the origin of the shock matters. We find that the volatility pass-through is larger if the
volatility shock originates from the smaller economies.
According to our estimates, the bottom-10 G17 countries have a pass-through of
72% when they receive an adverse output volatility shock. When the US receives a
volatility shock, in contrast, the pass-through to these smaller countries is just 51%, a
number comparable to that estimated for the other G7 countries. All together, these
results suggest a novel empirical finding: after a spike in endowment uncertainty, small
countries mitigate their consumption volatility better than large countries.
To highlight further the scope of our findings, we compare our volatility pass-through
measure to a measure of level pass-through defined as 1−∂(∆ci − ∆cU S )/ ∂(∆yi − ∆yU S ).
Untabulated results show that our volatility pass-through measures are as sizeable as
their level pass-through analogues.
Financial pass-through. We enrich further our analysis by studying the pass-through
ex
of endowment volatility shocks to the volatility of equity excess returns, ri,t
. Specifiex
cally, we estimate σt (ri,t+1
) according to equation (2.1) and add it as the last variable to
15

1

Consumption Vol Pass-Through

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4
2000

2005

2010

Financial Vol Pass-Through

2000

2005

2010

Figure 3 - Time-Varying Pass-Through. This figure shows time-varying measures of passthrough for both consumption and equity excess returns. The consumption volatility passthrough index is computed as specified in equation (2.4) on a rolling-window sample that comprises 100 observations. The financial pass-through refers to the impact of output vol shocks
on equity return volatility. Quarterly observations are from the 1971:Q1–2013:Q4 sample. All
data refer to G7 countries.
our VAR vector of states in equation (2.3). The financial pass-through is then defined
e 3,1 with Σ
e 6,1 in equation (2.5).
similarly to the consumption pass-through by replacing Σ
On average the financial pass-through is quite large: our estimated value for the
financial pass-through is about 0.9 (with a confidence interval of [0.83;0.95]), that is,
almost twice as large as our estimated consumption pass-through index.5
Further, we find that the amount of pass-through varies over time, and it is increasing
over our sample. To measure time-variation in volatility pass-through, we re-estimate
our extended VAR in a rolling-window fashion, and compute conditional estimates of the
pass-through index. In figure 3, we show that the pass-through of both consumption and
equity return volatility has been increasing over time. This is an interesting empirical
observation that, through the lens of our model, can be attributed to increasing financial
integration and risk sharing.
We further analyze whether the time-variation in the pass-through is related to
macroeconomic factors, such as global recessions. We construct a recession index that
counts the number of G7 countries in recession in a given quarter.6 We then regress our
detrended pass-through measures on the average number of countries in recession over
the same rolling window used to compute the pass-through indices. For robustness, we
5

The unconditional estimate of the financial pass-through is consistent with the impulse response
evidence in the bottom-right panel of figure 2. Results are nearly identical whether we focus on US/G7
countries or US/Bottom-10 G17 Countries.
6
We classify a country as being in a recession if it has experienced negative real output growth for
at least two consecutive quarters.

16

Table 3: Volatility Disconnect
G7 Avg.
G17 Avg.
Simple
Simple
Weighted
Levels Disconnect
corr(∆cdt+1 , ∆et+1 )
b t+4 , ∆b
corr(∆cd
et+4 )
Volatility Disconnect
corr(σt (∆cdt+1 ), σt (∆et+1 ))
b t+4 ), σt (∆b
corr(σt (∆cd
et+4 ))

G17 Quintile
1st
4th

-0.14
-0.14

-0.11
-0.17

-0.13
-0.14

-0.19
-0.29

-0.04
-0.05

0.20
0.27

0.21
0.25

0.20
0.26

-0.01
-0.02

0.42
0.52

Notes: This table shows correlations between the level and conditional volatility of consumption
i|U SD
S
i
growth differentials (cdit ≡ ∆cU
), respectively. In
t − ∆ct ) and exchange rate growth (∆et
both cases, the US is considered the benchmark home country. Cumulative growth rates are
denoted by ‘c’. ‘G7 Avg.’ (‘G17 Avg.’) refers to simple (both simple and GDP-weighted)
averages of key moments for G7 (G17) countries. The rightmost two columns show the first and
fourth quintiles of the moments of interest in the G17 cross-section. Consumption is seasonally
adjusted, real, and per capita. Volatility estimates are based on the specification reported in
equation (2.1). Quarterly observations are from the 1971:Q1–2013:Q4 sample.

also replace our global recession index by the NBER recession dummy. In all cases, we
find that the time-variation in the pass-through measures are unexplained by recessions
and is stable over business cycle frequencies.
The volatility disconnect. Given our focus on the dynamics of volatility, we push
our analysis one step further and study the connection between the conditional variance of consumption growth differentials and the conditional variance of exchange rate
movements. To the extent to which consumption differentials capture risk-sharing opportunities, time-varying uncertainty in consumption differentials should be an important
determinant of time-varying exchange rate uncertainty.
As shown in the bottom portion of table 3, empirically this correlation is very modest
and ranges between 20 and 30%. In absolute value, these magnitudes are similar to
those for the level shocks (top portion of the same table). We call this novel empirical
fact the volatility disconnect, in the spirit of the literature (Backus and Smith (1993)).7
We consider this empirical result as a further interesting restriction for international
macroeconomic models.
To summarize, our evidence shows that output volatility shocks decrease relative output and consumption across countries and increase consumption volatility. In relative
terms, the effects for the consumption growth rate are smaller than for output growth
7
In untabulated tests, we estimated a similar level of disconnect also with the volatility of output
differentials. These results are available upon request.

17

rates, and the consumption volatility response is larger if output volatility shocks originate in a larger country. Equivalently, the pass-through from large to small countries
is smaller than the pass-through from small to large countries. Both the consumption
and equity returns volatility pass-through indices have increased over the last 20 years.
Furthermore, we find a strong disconnect between currency volatility and consumption
differentials volatility. In the next section, we develop an economic model that helps
us to understand to which extent risk-sharing can, or fails to, explain our volatility
evidence.

3

Model

The economy consists of two countries, home (h) and foreign (f ), and two goods, X
and Y . Agents’ preferences are defined over consumption aggregates of the two goods
as follows.
Consumption aggregate. Let xit and yti denote the consumption of good X and good
Y in country i ∈ {h, f } at date t. Let α ∈ (0, 1). The consumption aggregates in the
home and foreign countries are
Cth = xht

α

yth

1−α

 1−α  α
and Ctf = xft
ytf ,

(3.1)

respectively. The parameter α captures the degree of bias of the consumption of each
representative agent. In what follows we assume that the home country is endowed
with good X, while the foreign country is endowed with good Y . Following some of the
international macrofinance articles surveyed by Lewis (2011), we assume that α is larger
than 0.5. This allows us to build consumption home bias into the model.
Preferences. As in Epstein and Zin (1993), agents’ preferences are recursive but not
time separable:
"

i 1−1/ψ

Uti = (1 − δ) · Ct

+ δEt

h

i
Ut+1

1−γ i 1−1/ψ
1−γ

1
# 1−1/ψ

,

∀i ∈ {h, f } .

(3.2)

The coefficients γ and ψ measure the relative risk aversion (RRA) and the IES, respectively.
In contrast to the constant RRA case, these preferences allow agents to be risk averse
in future utility as well as future consumption. The extent of such utility risk aversion
18

depends on the preference for early resolution of uncertainty, measured by γ − 1/ψ > 0.
To better highlight this feature of the preferences, we focus on the ordinally equivalent
transformation
1−1/ψ
U
Vt = t
1 − 1/ψ
and approximate it with respect to θ ≡

γ−1/ψ
1−1/ψ

around θ0 = 1:

1−1/ψ

Vt

1
 1−θ  1−θ
C
+ δEt Vt+1
= (1 − δ) t
1 − 1/ψ

(3.3)

1−1/ψ

δ
θ
C
+ δEt [Vt+1 ] −
V art [Vt+1 ] .
≈ (1 − δ) t
1 − 1/ψ
2 Et [Vt+1 ]


θ
Et [Vt+1 ]



Note that the sign of
depends on the sign of (γ − 1/ψ). When γ = 1/ψ,
the agent is utility-risk neutral and preferences collapse to the standard time-additive
case. When the agent prefers early resolution of uncertainty, that is, when γ > 1/ψ,
the coefficient θ is positive: uncertainty about continuation utility reduces welfare and
generates an incentive to trade off future expected utility, Et [Vt+1 ], for future utility
risk, V art [Vt+1 ].
This mean-variance trade-off is absent when agents have standard time-additive preferences, and it represents the most important element of our analysis, given our focus
on the propagation of uncertainty shocks.
Since there is a one-to-one mapping between utility, Uti , and lifetime wealth, that is,
i
the value of a perpetual claim to consumption, Wc,t
,

 1
i
Uti = (1 − δ)(Cti + Wc,t
) 1−1/ψ ,

∀i ∈ {h, f },

(3.4)

the optimal risk-sharing scheme can also be interpreted in terms of the mean-variance
trade-off of wealth. For this reason, in what follows we use the terms “wealth” and
“continuation utility” interchangeably.
Endowments. We choose to endow each country with a stochastic supply of its mostpreferred good. Endowments are specified in the spirit of Colacito and Croce (2013),
with the important difference of accounting also for time-varying risk:
∆ log Xt = µx + z1,t−1 + eσx,t /2 σεx,t − cit−1
∆ log Yt = µy + z2,t−1 + eσy,t /2 σεy,t + cit−1 ,

19

(3.5)

where the process cit ≡ τ log (Xt /Yt ) with τ ∈ (0, 1) introduces cointegration and guarantees the existence of the equilibrium, and the components z1 and z2 are highly persistent AR(1) processes,
zj,t = ρzj,t−1 + σz εj,t , ∀j ∈ {1, 2} .
(3.6)
Throughout the paper, we refer to ε1,t and ε2,t as long-run shocks, due to their longlasting impact on the growth rates of the two endowments. Similarly, we call εx,t and
εy,t short-run shocks.
We focus on time-varying short-run risk, as captured by the following process:
σj,t = ρσ σj,t−1 + σsr εσj,t , ∀j ∈ {x, y} .

(3.7)

Shocks are jointly log-normal:
ξt ≡

h

ε1,t ε2,t εx,t εy,t εσ1,t εσ2,t

i

∼

i.i.d.N (0, Σ),

and the matrix Σ is assumed to be block-diagonal to allow for cross-country correlation
of shocks of the same type.
Markets. At each date, trade occurs in a complete set of one-period-ahead claims to
state-contingent consumption. Financial and goods markets are assumed to be frictionless. The budget constraints of the two agents can be written as
xht
xft

+
+

pt yth
pt ytf

Z
+
ζ t+1

Z
+
ζ t+1


Aht+1 ζ t+1 Qt+1 (ζ t+1 ) = Aht + Xt

(3.8)


Aft+1 ζ t+1 Qt+1 (ζ t+1 ) = Aft + pt Yt ,

where pt denotes the relative price of goods X and Y (the terms of trade), Ait (ζ t )
denotes country i’s claims to time t consumption of good X, and Qt+1 (ζ t+1 ) gives the
price of one unit of time t + 1 consumption of good X contingent on the realization of
ζ t+1 at time t + 1. In equilibrium, the market for international state-contingent claims
clears, implying that Aht + Aft = 0, ∀t. In our analysis, all assets are denominated in
units of the numeraire good. We regard the extension to a setup in which the currency
of denomination of international assets matters as an important direction for future
research (see Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger (2017) and Du, Pflueger, and Schreger
(2017)).

20

Prices. The stochastic discount factor in consumption aggregate units is

i
=δ
Mt+1



i
Ct+1
Cti

− ψ1

i1−γ
Ut+1
 i1−γ 
Et Ut+1

! 1/ψ−γ
1−γ
.

(3.9)

Since markets are assumed to be complete, the log growth rate of the real exchange rate
is
∆et = log Mtf − log Mth

(3.10)

(1−α)xh
t
.
αyth

and the relative price of the two goods is pt =

Allocations. Under complete markets, we can compute efficient allocations by solving
the associated Pareto problem. The planner attaches date 0 nonnegative Pareto weights
h
µ
µf = 1 − µ to the consumers and chooses the sequence of allocations
n = µ and o
+∞
xht , xft , yth , ytf
to maximize
t=0

Λ = µ · U0h + (1 − µ) · U0f ,
subject to the following sequence of economy-wide feasibility constraints:
xht + xft = Xt
yth + ytf = Yt ,

∀t ≥ 0,

where the state-dependent notation is omitted for the sake of clarity. In characterizing
the equilibrium, we follow Anderson (2005) and formulate the problem using the ratio
of time-varying pseudo-Pareto weights, St = µt /(1 − µt ), as an additional state variable.
This technique enables us to take into account the nonseparability of the utility functions.
The first-order necessary conditions imply the following allocations:


(1 − α)(St − 1)
= αXt 1 +
,
1 − α + αSt


α(St − 1)
h
yt = (1 − α)Yt 1 +
,
α + (1 − α)St
xht



α(St − 1)
= (1 − α)Xt 1 −
1 − α + αSt


(1 − α)(St − 1)
f
yt = αYt 1 −
,
α + (1 − α)St

xft


(3.11)

where
St = St−1 ·

Mth
Mtf

·

h
Cth /Ct−1
f
Ctf /Ct−1

21

!
,

∀t ≥ 1

(3.12)

and S0 = 1, as we start the economy from an identical allocation of wealth and endowments. This is consistent with the ergodic distribution of the model, which implies that
on average the two countries consume an identical share of world resources because of
symmetry.
We make three remarks. First, St is a key driver of the share of world consumption
allocated to the home country, SW Ct ,
SW Ct =

St
xht + pt yth
=
.
Xt + p t Yt
1 + St

(3.13)

The higher St is, the larger is the home country. Second, as in Colacito and Croce
(2013), when the home country receives good news for the endowment of good X, there
is a persistent reduction in the domestic share of world consumption. This countercyclical adjustment is consistent with equation (3.12): as good news for the supply of
good X relative to good Y materializes, the home country experiences a drop in its
marginal utility. Therefore, it is optimal to reallocate resources to the foreign country.
In the decentralized economy, the home country optimally substitutes part of its current consumption with exports to its foreign trading partner. Third, St introduces an
endogenous time-varying volatility term into consumption growth, since allocations are
nonlinear functions of this component. In section 4.3, we discuss the importance of this
channel in the context of our explanation of the volatility disconnect anomaly.

3.1

Calibration and Solution Method

We report our benchmark calibration in table 4. Panel A refers to parameters that have
already been employed in this class of models and are standard in the literature (see,
among others , Colacito and Croce (2013), and Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013)).
We set the intertemporal elasticity of substitution to 1.5, as in Colacito and Croce
(2013). Because of the presence of volatility risk, we can obtain a volatile stochastic
discount factor with a risk aversion coefficient of 7, a value particularly conservative in
this literature. The subjective discount factor is chosen so as to keep the average annual
risk-free rate close to 1% when possible.
The consumption home bias is set to 0.96, a number that falls in the middle of the
range observed for our countries. For example, in our sample the US home bias is 0.95,
as imports comprise an average of 5% of US consumption goods (Erceg, Guerrieri, and
Gust (2008)). Balta and Delgado (2009) document a stronger consumption home bias for
the European countries in our dataset and suggest a value of α = 0.97. Setting λ = 0.97
22

Table 4: Calibration
Description
Parameter
Panel A: Standard Parameters
Relative Risk Aversion
γ
Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution
ψ
Subjective Discount Factor
δ4
Degree of Home Bias
α

Value
7
1.50
0.98
0.96

µ ·√4
σ· 4
ρ4
σz /σ

2.00%
1.87%
0.953
6.90%

Cross-correlation of Short-Run Shocks
Cross-correlation of Long-Run Shocks

ρX
ρz

00.15
00.92

Panel B: Time-Varying Short-Run Risk
Persistence of Short-Run Volatility

ρσ

Volatility of Short-Run Volatility

σsr

0.90
[0.89; 0.93]
0.15
[0.15; 0.16]
0.30
[0.13; 0.45]
-0.12
[-0.15; -0.05]

Mean of Endowment Growth
Short-Run Risk Volatility
Long-Run Risk Autocorrelation
Relative Long-Run Risk Volatility

Cross-correlation of Short-Run Volatility

ρσ,σ∗

Short-Run Volatility Correlation with
Short-Run Shocks

ρσ,∆y

Notes: All parameters are calibrated at quarterly frequency. In panel B, the entries for the
data are from the VAR specified in equations (2.6)–(2.7). Numbers in brackets denote the 95%
credible intervals. Data are from the OECD dataset and refer to G-17 countries. The sample
spans the post–Bretton Wood period, 1971:q1–2013:q4.

would improve our quantitative results, as it would make our risk-sharing channel even
more relevant. We prefer to work with α = 0.96 in order to obtain conservative results.
Annualized average output growth is set to 2%, consistent with the empirical findings
in table 1. Unconditional volatilities are calibrated to produce an unconditional output
volatility of 1.90%, as in the data. The long-run components are calibrated in the
spirit of the international long-run risk literature, as they are both highly persistent and
correlated across countries (Colacito and Croce (2013)). Since we set σz /σ = 0.07%,
the implied consumption growth rate is almost i.i.d., as in the data. Short-run output
growth shocks, in contrast, are as poorly cross-country correlated as output growth in
our dataset (see table 1).
In table 4, panel B, we report the parameters that govern the volatility process of
23

short-run shocks, that is, the novel and most important element of our investigation.
These parameters are calibrated to be consistent with our empirical results. Specifically,
we pick values typically in the middle of the Bayesian 95% credible intervals of the VAR
system specified in equations (2.6)–(2.7).
Consistent with our data, volatility shocks are as poorly correlated across countries
as short-run growth shocks. We allow for negative within-country correlation between
volatility and short-run growth shocks so that higher volatility is associated with economic slowdowns. Conditional volatilities are as persistent as in the data.
Given these parameters, we use perturbation methods to solve our system of equations. We compute an approximation of the third order of our policy functions using
the dynare++ package. As documented in Colacito and Croce (2013), a third-order
approximation is required to capture endogenous time-varying volatility due to the adjustments of the pseudo-Pareto weights. All variables included in our dynare++ code
are expressed in log-units.
Both the calibration and the solution methods are standard in the literature. In what
follows we discuss only the performance of our model for the dynamics of conditional
volatilities, that is, the main objective of our investigation. For commonly targeted
unconditional moments, we refer the reader to table B1 in the appendix. For the sake of
completeness, this table also shows the same moments for the case in which we abstract
away from volatility shocks, and for the setting with CRRA preferences.

4

Main Results

In this section, we present the main results of our theoretical analysis. We start by
describing the risk-sharing motives of both level and volatility shocks. To our knowledge,
we are the first to connect recursive risk sharing to evidence on consumption volatility
dynamics both within country and in the cross section of countries. We then assess
the quantitative performance of our model by means of simulations and show that a
frictionless recursive risk-sharing scheme can rationalize our empirical findings.

4.1

Risk-Sharing Motives

Risk sharing of level shocks. In figure 4(a), we report the response of the variables
of interest to a short-run level shock (left panels) and to a long-run level shock (right
panels) to the growth rate of the endowment of the home country. Note that on impact
the short-run shock is sizeably larger than the long-run shock (figure 4(a), first row of

24

<("y)

EZ

CRRA

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

<("c)

0

5

10

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

"c

#10

5

10

-4

2

0

" (NX/Y)

0

5

10

5

10

5

10

5

10

#10 -4

-2
0
#10

5

10

0

-5

#10 -5

5

5

0

0

-5

-5
0

5

10

0

#10 -3

#10 -3

2

sdf

10

0

-2

2

0

0

-2

-2
0

5

10

Periods

0

Periods
HOME

(a) Level Shocks (EZ only)

5

0
0

2

0

FOREIGN

(b) Vol Shock (EZ vs CRRA)

Figure 4 - Impulse Responses. Panel (a) shows the percentage impulse response functions
of output growth (∆y), consumption growth volatility (σ(∆c)), consumption growth (∆c),
change of net-export–output ratio (∆N X/Y ), and stochastic discount factors (sdf ) to a shock
to the home endowment for both the home country (solid line) and the foreign country (dashed
line). Level shocks materialize only in the home country, and only at time 1. Shocks are not
orthogonalized; we consider a positive σ shock in the short-run, and a positive σx shock for
the long-run. In panel (b) we consider an endowment volatility shock which is orthogonalized
within and across countries, i.e., it affects only the home country and it does not change the
growth rate level. All parameters are calibrated to the quarterly values reported in Table 4.

panels). However, the long-run shock is highly persistent, and it ultimately affects the
growth rate of the home endowment for a large number of periods.
Consistent with Colacito and Croce (2013), the growth rates of consumption increase
in both countries in response to a positive short-run shock, whereas they move in opposite
directions in response to a positive long-run shock (figure 4(a), third row of panels). The
asymmetric response of consumption growth rates to a long-run endowment shock is the
result of the agents’ extreme sensitivity to persistent news to the growth rates of their
endowments.

25

When a shock of this nature materializes, the home country’s marginal utility drops
substantially (figure 4(a), bottom-right panel). To restore the equality of the marginal
utilities of consumption across countries, an international redistribution of resources
must take place. Specifically, the home country increases its exports, while the foreign
country increases its imports (figure 4(a), fourth row of panels). Equivalently, the ratio
of the pseudo-Pareto weights St declines, as dictated by equation (3.12).
Since the long-run shock is a pure news shock, that is, a shock that results in a larger
amount of home endowment only in future time periods, the international redistribution of resources takes place through a drop in home consumption and an increase in
foreign consumption. As pointed out in Colacito and Croce (2013), this immediate response of the consumption level simultaneously comes with an opposite swap of long-run
consumption variance (as measured by σt (Ut+1 )). Specifically, the home country optimally reduces its current consumption share, St /(1 − St ), in exchange for a reduction in
σt (Ut+1 ) (see Figure C1, top-right panel). Consistent with equation (3.3), the reduction
of long-term uncertainty improves welfare.
Risk sharing of vol shocks. Figure 4(b) shows the response of our main set of
variables of interest to a volatility shock in the home country. For comparability, we
report the responses from both our benchmark model and a model with standard timeadditive CRRA preferences.
We first point out that the responses of consumption, net exports, and stochastic
discount factors in the model with EZ preferences are the mirror image of those obtained
for a positive long-run endowment shock, since a positive volatility shock is a negative
news shock.
Second, we note that the relative response of the volatilities of consumption growth
rates in the two countries differs across the two preference specifications. With CRRA
preferences, volatility news shocks are not directly priced and hence marginal utilities
do not move. There is no reallocation of resources across countries, and as a result the
increase in volatility of the domestic endowment is almost entirely absorbed by domestic
consumption. According to our definition of volatility pass-through, in this situation our
index takes on a value close to zero.
In the specification with EZ preferences, the risk-sharing motive that we described
in the previous section partially offsets the increased amount of volatility in the economy. To represent the effects of volatility shocks in the model, we consider volatility
frontiers which depict the equilibrium volatility-related quantities as a function of the
Pareto weight St . In figure 5(a), we show the change in consumption volatility following
26

the adverse output volatility shocks at home (left panel), and home relative to abroad
(right panel). In figure 5(b), we consider reallocation effects, and show the equilibrium
consumption volatility, as a function of the size, at home and abroad. As shown in the
left panel, upon the arrival of an adverse volatility shock, the short-run consumption
volatility frontier of the home country shifts upward by a lesser extent than under CRRA
preferences. Since our agents are averse to conditional variance, their trade is arranged
to reduce the time variation of their own conditional volatilities. Furthermore, these
countries tend to keep their volatilities aligned to each other. As shown in the right
panel of figure 5(a), the cross-country difference of the conditional volatilities increases
by a smaller amount under EZ preferences than in the CRRA setting. We address this
finding in further detail in our discussion of our volatility pass-through results below.

4.2

Volatility Comovements and Pass-through

Unconditional comovements. We use simulations to quantify the ability of the
model to reproduce our empirical findings for the dynamics of volatility. We find it
useful to consider first a setting with standard CRRA preferences, as in this case shocks
do not produce any sizeable endogenous reallocation of volatility from one country to
the other. Equivalently, the pseudo-Pareto weights are almost constant (Colacito and
Croce (2013)), similarly to the autarky scenario in Cole and Obstfeld (1991). In this
situation, the correlation between consumption and output volatility within each country
is almost perfect, as the volatility of consumption moves one-to-one with the volatility
of the output growth rate.
In contrast to the CRRA case, our model with recursive preferences is able to produce a less-than-perfect contemporaneous correlation between output and consumption
volatility. This result is driven by the fact that level shocks are an important endogenous driver of consumption volatility independently of our exogenous output volatility
shocks. As shown in table 5, without volatility shocks, the cross-country correlation of
the consumption profiles would be almost perfectly negative. This channel counterbalances the tendency for consumption profiles to be more correlated than output. At the
equilibrium, our model produces a final correlation of 35%, a figure that is well within
the confidence region of our cross section of countries.
The international correlation of the consumption volatilities is 50%, a number slightly
higher than that observed in the data. Recall that the exogenous international correla27

Home Country - Foreign Country

0.11

0.09

0.07

0.05
-1.00

CRRA
EZ
-0.50

0.00

log(St)

0.50

1.00

Change in σt(∆ct+1) after a volatility shock

Change in σt(∆ct+1) after a volatility shock

Home Country
0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05
-1.00

CRRA
EZ
-0.50

0.00

log(St)

0.50

1.00

(a) Changes in σt (∆ct+1 )

(b) Vol Frontiers and Reallocation

Figure 5 - Response to an Adverse Volatility Shock to Good X. In figure (a), the
left panel reports the change in the conditional volatilities of consumption growth in the home
country after an adverse shock to the volatility of the good X. The right panel reports the
change in the cross-country difference of conditional volatility of consumption growth for the
same shock. In each panel, the dashed (solid) line refers to the case of EZ (CRRA) preferences.
Across all cases, we keep all other exogenous state variables fixed at their unconditional mean.
In figure (b), we depict the equilibrium conditional volatility of the consumption growth of the
home country. The solid line refers to the frontier at the steady state. The dashed lines show
the shift of the frontier after an adverse volatility shock of the good X. The log of the relative
size of the home country is denoted by log(S).

tion of the output volatility shocks is set to 30%. Since the pseudo-Pareto weights are
almost fixed under CRRA, the log-consumption bundles in each country are a constant
weighted average of the two goods, and hence their volatilities are more correlated than
those of the two underlying endowment processes.

28

Table 5: Comovements and Pass-Through
Panel A: Unconditional comovements
Avg.
Quintiles
BenchNo TVV
CRRA
st
th
[1 ;4 ]
mark
(σσ = 0)
(γ = 7)
corr(σt (∆ct+1 ), σt (∆yt+1 )
0.65
[0.26; 0.80]
0.88
–
0.98
∗
corr(σt (∆ct+1 ), σt (∆ct+1 ))
0.45
[0.35; 0.66]
0.35
-0.93
0.50
Panel B: Pass-through and size
SWC
US vol shock
Foreign vol shock
US/G7 Countries:
Data
[0.44; 0.51]
[0.43; 0.54]
[0.51; 0.63]
Model (EZ)
0.50
0.53
0.53
Model (CRRA)
0.50
0.30
0.30
US/Bottom-10 G17 Countries
Data
Model (EZ)
Model (CRRA)

[0.72; 0.77]
0.72
0.72

[0.45; 0.57]
0.39
0.38

[0.66; 0.78]
0.70
0.37

Notes: In panel A, we report correlations between the conditional volatility (σt ) of consumption
and output growth within and across countries. Conditional volatilities are obtained by estimating equation (2.1) country by country. The data refer to G-17 countries and are described
in section 2.1. Panel B reports estimated pass-through coefficients (see equation (2.4)) with
respect to both domestic (US) and foreign volatility shocks for both the G7 and bottom-10
G17 countries. For each country, we compute the moments of interest over the post–Bretton
Wood period, 1971:Q1–2013:Q4. For each moment, we report first and fourth cross-country
quintiles. The entries from the model are obtained from 100 repetitions of small samples. Our
benchmark quarterly calibration is reported in table 4.

Pass-through. Overall, unconditional comovements do not allow us to discriminate
between the CRRA and EZ settings, as both models produce results that lie within the
empirical ranges. This conclusion changes when we focus on conditional responses and, in
particular, on our pass-through index. When we compare countries of similar size, that is,
the US versus the remaining G7 countries, only the model with EZ preferences generates
a pass-through of 50%, as in the data. This result is particularly relevant because it
is obtained with a simultaneous response of the current account that replicates that
observed in the data, as shown in figure 2. Under CRRA preferences, however, the passthrough is very limited, as volatility news shocks are not an independent determinant
of risk-sharing motives.
Furthermore, when we alter the relative consumption share in the model and set
the home country consumption to be about three times larger than that of the foreign
country, as in the comparison between the US and the bottom-10 G17 countries, our
model can replicate the asymmetry documented in the data. Specifically, our model
29

predicts that when a volatility shock hits a big country, the pass-through is limited.
Vice versa, small countries can better share shocks to their endowment volatility as
documented by their higher pass-through.
Figure 5(b) helps us in understanding this result as it shows that the consumption
volatility frontier is downward sloping and convex.8 When an adverse volatility shock
affects good X, the volatility frontier shifts upward both for the home and the foreign
country. Because of home bias, however, the shift is stronger for the home country.
Under the optimal risk sharing scheme, the home country receives a positive transfer
and becomes larger, and hence faces less consumption growth volatility going forward,
whereas the opposite applies to the foreign country. This adjustment keeps the consumption volatility of the two countries closer to each other and makes our pass-through
index sizeable. When the home country has a share of world consumption of about 30%,
this phenomenon is more pronounced and makes the pass-through stronger (figure 5(b),
right panel). In the CRRA case, however, the relative country size does not play any
major role in determining the extent of volatility pass-through, a result that is at odds
with the data.
Financial pass-through. To compute our financial pass-through index in the model,
we compute the equilibrium returns of a claim to a dividend cash-flow specified as follows:
∆dt = µ + k(∆ log Xt − µ) + σd d,t ,

∆d∗t+1 = µ + k(∆ log Yt − µ) + σd ∗d,t ,

which is a levered claim to local output plus a pure local cash-flow shock.9 We set k = 2
and σd = 8.5% in order to have an equilibrium equity premium under complete markets
of 6% and a Sharpe-ratio of 0.30.
As shown in figure 2 (bottom-right panel), our benchmark model tracks very well
the response of the returns volatility differential upon the arrival of an output volatility
shock. As a result, this model is able to deliver a financial pass-through of 0.87, which
is very close to the data.
Our empirical evidence suggests that volatility pass-through has increased over time
(see figure 3). In order to address this fact, we consider the hypothesis that this timevariation has been driven by increased financial integration. As in Cole and Obstfeld
8

As we explain in detail in Appendix C, the shape of the frontier follows directly from the properties
of our aggregator across goods. Since the Inada conditions apply, as a country becomes small, the sensitivity of its consumption bundle to transfers of resources increases. As a result, our risk sharing-driven
reallocation increases the volatility of the consumption bundle for small countries. This mechanism is
more pronounced as size approaches zero, i.e., it makes the consumption volatility frontier convex.
9
As in Bansal and Yaron (2004), d is uncorrelated to all other fundamental shocks and is not priced.

30

Table 6: Change in Pass-Through Indexes
Benchmark
Consumption vol pass-through
0.40
Financial vol pass-through
0.57

CRRA
0.20
0.00

Notes: The entries from the model are obtained from 100 repetitions of small samples. Our
benchmark quarterly calibration is reported in table 4. We report the difference between
the pass-through index under complete markets and financial autarky setting in both cases
SWC=50%.

(1991), we focus on two extreme regimes: one in which markets are complete, and one
in which each country is in financial autarky (Aht = Aft = 0 ∀t). The equilibrium under
financial autarky can be computed by replacing equation (3.12) with St = 1 ∀t.
As shown in figure 2 (bottom-right panel), our benchmark model tracks very well
the response of the returns volatility differential upon the arrival of an output volatility
shock. As a result, this model is able to deliver a financial pass-through of 0.87, which is
very close to the data. Most importantly, the model with recursive preferences predicts
that the volatility pass-through should increase substantially with financial integration
both for consumption and equity returns (Table 6). With time-additive preferences,
volatility shocks are not directly priced and hence financial integration cannot produce
any change in the extent of financial pass-through.

4.3

Risk Sharing and the Volatility Disconnect Anomaly

In table 7, we compare our empirical findings on the disconnect between exchange rates
and consumption differentials to our simulation results. In the top panel, we show
that our benchmark model is able to replicate the slightly negative correlation between
consumption growth differentials and exchange rate movements observed in the data
over both a quarterly and an annual horizon. As in the model with constant volatility
(Colacito and Croce (2013)), news shocks are sufficient to break the perfect correlation of
the consumption differentials and the exchange rate. Consistent with the observation in
Backus and Smith (1993), under CRRA preferences this correlation is counterfactually
high.
The model with the CRRA preferences also delivers a perfect positive correlation
between the conditional variances of consumption differentials and the exchange rate
(bottom portion of table 7, rightmost column). Interestingly, this correlation switches
to large and negative in the recursive utility model without time-varying volatilities
(our ‘No TVV’ case), which is the model analyzed by Colacito and Croce (2013). The
31

Table 7: Volatility Disconnect Anomaly and Risk Sharing
G-17 Data
Aver.
Quintiles
[ 1st ; 4th ]
Levels Disconnect
corr(∆cdt+1 , ∆et+1 )
b t+4 , ∆b
corr(∆cd
et+4 )
Volatility Disconnect
corr(σt (∆cdt+1 ), σt (∆et+1 ))
b t+4 ), σt (∆b
corr(σt (∆cd
et+4 ))

Benchmark

Model
No TVV
(σσ = 0)

CRRA
(γ = 7)

-0.13
-0.14

[ -0.19; -0.04 ]
[ -0.29; -0.05 ]

-0.25
-0.21

-0.27
-0.24

1.00
1.00

0.20
0.26

[ -0.01; 0.42 ]
[ -0.02; 0.52 ]

0.56
0.47

-0.75
-0.75

1.00
1.00

Notes: This table reports key moments for real consumption growth differentials (∆cd =
∆c − ∆c∗ ) and exchange rate growth (∆e). Foreign variables are marked by ‘∗ ’; cumulative
growth rates are denoted by ‘b’. Conditional log-volatilities are denoted by σt . The empirical
moments are obtained by estimating equation (2.1) country by country, as detailed in section
2.2. The data refer to G-17 countries and are described in section 2.1. For each country,
we compute the moments of interest over the post–Bretton Wood period, 1971:Q1–2013:Q4,
as detailed in section 2.1. For each moment, we report (i) its GDP-weighted average across
countries; and (ii) its first and fourth cross-country quintiles. The entries from the model
are obtained from 100 repetitions of small samples. Our benchmark quarterly calibration is
reported in table 4.

predictions of both of these restricted models are at odds with the data: the empirical
estimates suggest a positive but weak correlation of about 20-30%. Our full model,
on the other hand, delivers a positive and mild correlation of about 50%, which is
closer to the data. These findings highlight the role of the recursive utility and output
volatility shocks to resolve the volatility disconnect anomaly. To explain the economic
mechanisms behind the results, we consider separate impact of volatility and level shocks
on the conditional variances of consumption differential and the exchange rates. These
responses are depicted in figure 6.
Volatility shock. A volatility shock in the home country produces a positive comovement between the volatility of the exchange rate and that of the differential of consumption growth rates. This is because the two countries share the risk associated with an
increase in macroeconomic uncertainty, as explained in the previous section. Hence, in
the absence of level shocks, we would have a perfect connection between exchange rate
and consumption differential volatility. This is true both in the recursive utility and the
CRRA model.
Short-run shocks. We note that short-run shocks are irrelevant in this context, as
32

EZ Preferences

CRRA Preferences

SR Vol Shock

0.08
0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

0

2
−3

5

4

6

8

0

10

5

0

−5
5

2

4

6

8

10

8

10

8

10

SR Level Shock

x 10

0

0
−3
x 10

2

4

6

8

−5

10

LR Level Shock

5

0

−5

0
−3

SR Level Shock

x 10

SR Vol Shock

0.08

0
−3
x 10

2

0

2

4

6

LR Level Shock

0

0

2

4

6

8

−5

10

Periods

σ(∆e)

4

6

Periods

σ(∆c−∆cf)

Figure 6 - Impulse Response Functions and Volatility Disconnect. This figure shows
the percentage response of the volatility of consumption growth differentials (dashed line) and
exchange rate growth rate volatility (thick line) to a volatility shock in the home country (top
panels), a short-run shock in the home country (middle panels), and a long-run shock in the
home country (bottom panels). The left (right) panels report the response functions for our
benchmark model with EZ (CRRA) preferences.

they result in a negligible response of the two volatilities, since investors’ marginal
utilities are not particularly sensitive to this type of shock (figure 6, middle-left panel).
Long-run shocks. In contrast to short-run shocks, in a recursive-utility environment
a long-run shock to the home country generates a significant negative comovement between the two volatilities and lowers their unconditional correlation (figure 6, bottom-left
panel). Over an annual horizon, this channel enables our model to produce a correlation
within our empirical range (table 7, bottom two lines). In a model with CRRA preferences, long-run shocks have no impact on the two conditional volatilities. Hence, all the
effect is driven by volatility shocks, which leads to a perfect positive correlation between
the conditional volatilities of consumption differential and the exchange rates.
To explain the origin of this negative comovement, it is useful to decompose the

33

variance of the consumption differential growth rate into its subcomponents:
V art (∆ct+1 − ∆c∗t+1 ) = V art (∆ct+1 ) + V art (∆c∗t+1 )
(4.1)
q
−2 · V art (∆ct+1 ) · V art (∆c∗t+1 ) · corrt (∆ct+1 , ∆ct+1 ).
At the equilibrium, the conditional correlation of consumption growth rates is almost
time invariant.10 As a result, the dynamics of the variance of consumption differentials
is mostly determined by the sum of the variances of the consumption growth rates across
countries, as depicted in the left panel of figure 7.
Because of the convexity of the short-run volatility frontier (Figure 5(b)), the sum
of the variances of the growth rates of consumption is increasing in wealth inequality,
that is, it is U-shaped with respect to the log-ratio of the Pareto weights (figure 7, left
panel). As a result, starting from an equal distribution of wealth, σt (∆ct+1 − ∆c∗t+1 )
increases upon the arrival of a long-run shock (figure 6, bottom-left panel).
Given our assumption of complete markets, the variance of the exchange rate growth
can be decomposed as follows:
V art (∆et+1 ) = V art (∆mt+1 − ∆m∗t+1 ) = V art (∆mt+1 ) + V art (∆m∗t+1 )
q
−2 V art (∆mt+1 ) · V art (∆m∗t+1 ) · corrt (∆mt+1 , ∆mt+1 ).
In a model with long-run growth news, most of the volatility of the stochastic discount
rates is driven by the continuation utilities. In Appendix C (top-right panel of figure C1), we show that the utility variance frontier is linear, meaning that the drop in
the conditional volatility of the utility of one country is almost entirely offset by the
increase in volatility of the other country. As a result, V art (∆mt+1 ) + V art (∆m∗t+1 ) is
close to being time invariant and the conditional volatility of the exchange rate is mostly
explained by the endogenous time variation in the correlation of the stochastic discount
factors (figure 7, right panel).
With recursive preferences, the reallocation prompted by long-run shocks keeps the
continuation utilities of the two agents aligned to each other, that is, it introduces a
positive cross-country comovement of continuation utilities and hence stochastic discount
factors.11 Because our utility function satisfies the Inada’s conditions, the strength of the
reallocation channel is enhanced when one of the two countries is small. Equivalently,
10

This correlation is driven by the positive comovement between the short-run shock of a country
and the adjustment in the share of consumption of the other country. In equilibrium, this correlation
increases modestly in wealth inequality.
11
When a country receives good news for the long run, its utility increases immediately, reflecting the

34

< t(" ct+1-" c*t+1)

#10 -3

10.2

< t(" et+1)

0.065

10.1

0.064

10
0.063
9.9
0.062
9.8
0.061

9.7

volatility
fixed correlation

9.6

0.06
-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

-1

log(S t )

-0.5

0

0.5

1

log(S t )

Figure 7 - Conditional Volatilities Disconnect. The left panel plots the conditional
volatility of the difference between the growth rate of consumption in the home and foreign

countries, σt ∆ct+1 − ∆c∗t+1 . The right panel depicts the conditional volatility of the growth
rate of the exchange rate, σt (∆et+1 ). Both volatilities are plotted against the logarithm of
the ratio of the pseudo-Pareto weights, St . Across all cases, both the exogenous long-run
components and the exogenous volatility processes are fixed at their unconditional mean. In
each panel, the solid line refers to the conditional volatility obtained at the equilibrium, whereas
the dashed line refers to the conditional volatility obtained by holding the correlations fixed
at their unconditional mean in equations (4.1)–(4.2).

the correlation of the stochastic discount factors increases with wealth inequality. As a
result, the exchange rate volatility has an inverse U-shape with respect to the log-ratio
of the Pareto weights (see the right panel of figure 7). Thus starting from an equal
distribution of wealth, the impulse response of the exchange rate volatility is negative,
in sharp contrast to the response of the volatility of the consumption differentials.
Without volatility shocks (Colacito and Croce, 2013), the endogenous response of
volatilities to long-run shocks dominates and results in a counterfactual negative correlation between exchange rate and consumption differential conditional volatility. Our
recursive risk-sharing of volatility shocks overcomes this problem, but it is admittedly
unable to reproduce the full disconnect observed in the data.12
total discounted impact of the news. The other country benefits from the international redistribution
of resources, which determines an increase in its share of consumption. Given the persistent nature
of the consumption shares, the other country also experiences an increase in the present value of its
consumption and, thus, its utility. As a consequence, the extent of comovement of the continuation
utilities (and of the stochastic discount factors in general) increases.
12
In the data, the attenuation bias may result in a lower estimated value for the correlation of interest,

35

Welfare Implications. We conclude this section by assessing the relevance of volatility shocks for welfare. Specifically, we compare the average welfare under both our
benchmark model and that without uncertainty shocks (No TVV case) and find that
each agent would be willing to give up to 2.58% of life-time consumption in order to
avoid uncertainty shocks.13 This figure confirms that uncertainty shocks are relevant
determinants of risk.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we construct a measure of bilateral volatility pass-through and we use it
to document the sizeable extent of international propagation of output volatility shocks.
Furthermore, we provide novel empirical evidence regarding the disconnect between the
volatility of consumption differentials and the volatility of exchange rates. We show
that these findings constitute a puzzle from the standpoint of a frictionless model with
CRRA preferences. We then develop a frictionless general equilibrium model featuring
long-run growth news shocks, volatility shocks, and two countries populated by agents
with recursive preferences and demonstrate that our model can replicate these empirical
findings.
Future developments should focus on extending this setting to international real
business cycle models in an effort to better understand the role of international investment flows and international frictions in the origination and international propagation
of volatility shocks. The investigation of the roles of trading frictions, portfolio composition, and market incompleteness are other promising directions for future research.

since volatilities are measured with error. This could partially explain the gap between this correlation
in our benchmark model and its empirical counterpart. We thank Tarek Hassan for pointing this out.
13
Since our two countries are calibrated in a symmetric way, this number applies to both of them.

36

References
Anderson, E., (2005), The dynamics of risk-sensitive allocations, Journal of Economic Theory
125(2), 93–150.
Backus, D. K. and G. Smith, (1993), Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic
economies with non-traded goods, Journal of International Economics 35, 297–316.
Bakshi, G., M. Cerrato, and J. Crosby, (2017), Implications of incomplete markets for international economies, Review of Financial Studies .
Bansal, R., D. Kiku, I. Shaliastovich, and A. Yaron, (2014), Volatility, the macroeconomy, and
asset prices, Journal of Finance 69, 2471–511.
Bansal, R. and I. Shaliastovich, (2013), A long-run risks explanation of predictability puzzles
in bond and currency markets, Review of Financial Studies 26, 1–33.
Bansal, R. and A. Yaron, (2004), Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.
Berg, K. A. and N. C. Mark, (2018), Global macro risks in currency excess returns, Journal of
Empirical Finance .
Bloom, N., (2009), The impact of uncertainty shocks, Econometrica 77, 623–89.
Chernov, M., J. Graveline, and I. Zviadadze, (2018), Crash risk in currency returns, Journal
of Fiancial and Quantitative Analysis .
Cogley, T. and T. J. Sargent, (2005), Drifts and volatilities: monetary policies and outcomes
in the post-WWII US, Review of Economic Dynamics 8, 262–302.
Colacito, R., (2008), Six anomalies looking for a model. a consumption based explanation of
international finance puzzles, Working paper, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Colacito, R. and M. M. Croce, (2013), International asset pricing with recursive preferences,
Journal of Finance 68, 2651–86.
Cole, H. and M. Obstfeld, (1991), Commodity trade and international risk sharing: How much
do financial markets matter?, Journal of Monetary Economics 28, 3–24.
Della Corte, P., S. J. Riddiough, and L. Sarno, (2016), Currency Premia and Global Imbalances,
The Review of Financial Studies 29.
Della Corte, P., L. Sarno, and I. Tsiakas, (2009), An Economic Evaluation of Empirical Exchange Rate Models, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2491–530.
Della Corte, P., L. Sarno, and I. Tsiakas, (2011), Spot and forward volatility in foreign exchange, Journal of Financial Economics 100, 496 – 513.
Du, W., C. Pflueger, and J. Schreger, (2017), Sovereign debt portfolios, bond risks, and the
credibility of monetary policy, Working Paper .
Epstein, L. G. and S. Zin, (1991), Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior of
consumption and asset returns: An empirical analysis, Journal of Political Economy 99,
263–86.

37

Erceg, C., L. Guerrieri, and C. Gust, (2008), Trade Adjustment and the Composition of Trade,
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32, 2622–50.
Farhi, E., S. Fraiberger, X. Gabaix, R. Ranciere, and A. Verdelhan, (2015), Crash risk in
currency markets, Working paper.
Farhi, E. and X. Gabaix, (2016), Rare disasters and exchange rates, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 131(1), 1–52.
Gabaix, X. and M. Maggiori, (2015), International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1369–420.
Gavazzoni, F., B. Sambalaibat, and C. Telmer, (2013), Currency risk and pricing kernel volatility, Working paper.
Gilchrist, S., J. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek, (2014), Uncertainty, financial frictions and investment
dynamics, Working paper, NBER.
Gourinchas, P. O. and H. Rey, (2007), International financial adjustment, Journal of Political
Economy 115, 665–703.
Gourio, F., M. Siemer, and A. Verdelhan, (2014), Uncertainty and international capital flows,
Working paper.
Hassan, T., (2013), Country size, currency unions, and international asset returns, The Journal
of Finance 68, 2269–308.
Hassan, T., T. Mertens, and T. Zhang, (2015), Currency manipulation, Working Paper .
Hassan, T. A., T. M. Mertens, and T. Zhang, (2016), Not so disconnected: Exchange rates
and the capital stock, Journal of International Economics 99, S43–S57.
Heyerdahl-Larsen, C., (2015), Asset Prices and Real Exchange Rates with Deep Habits., Review
of Financial Studies 27, 3280–317.
Jones, L., R. Manuelli, H. Siu, and E. Stacchetti, (2005), Fluctuations in convex models of
endogenous growth I: Growth effects, Review of Economic Dynamics 8, 780–804.
Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng, (2015), Measuring uncertainty, American Economic
Review 105, 1177–216.
Justiniano, A. and G. E. Primiceri, (2008), The time-varying volatility of macroeconomic
fluctuations, American Economic Review 98, 604–41.
Kim, S., N. Shephard, and S. Chib, (1998), Stochastic volatility: Likelihood inference and
comparison with ARCH models, Review of Economic Studies 65, 361–93.
Kollmann, R., (1991), Essays on international business cycles, University of Chicago .
Kollmann, R., (2016), International business cycles and risk sharing with uncertainty shocks
and recursive preferences, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control forthcoming.
Lettau, M., S. Ludvigson, and J. Wachter, (2008), The declining equity premium: What role
does macroeconomic risk play?, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1653–87.

38

Lettau, M., M. Maggiori, and M. Weber, (2014), Conditional risk premia in currency markets
and other asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics 114, 197 – 225.
Lewis, K., (2011), Global Asset Pricing, Annual Reviews of Financial Economics 3.
Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan, (2011), Common risk factors in currency markets,
Review of Financial Studies 24, 3731–77.
Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan, (2014), Countercyclical currency risk premia,
Journal of Financial Economics 111(3), 527–553.
Lustig, H. and A. Verdelhan, (2007), The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and
consumption growth risk, Americal Economic Review 97, 89–117.
Lustig, H. and A. Verdelhan, (2018), Does incomplete spanning in international financial markets help to explain exchange rates?, Working Paper .
Maggiori, M., (2017), Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve currencies, American Economic Review .
Maggiori, M., B. Neiman, and J. Schreger, (2017), International currencies and capital allocation, Working Paper .
McConnell, M. and G. P. Quiros, (2000), Output fluctuations in the united states: What has
changed since the early 1980s?, American Economic Review 90, 1464–76.
Mueller, P., A. Stathopoulos, and A. Vedolin, (2017), International correlation risk, Journal
of Financial Economics .
Obstfeld, M., (1998), The global capital market: Benefactor or menace?, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 12, 9–30.
Pavlova, A. and R. Rigobon, (2007), Asset prices and exchange rates, Review of Financial
Studies 20, 1139–1181.
Pavlova, A. and R. Rigobon, (2010), An asset-pricing view of external adjustment, Journal of
International Economics 80, 144–156.
Pavlova, A. and R. Rigobon, (2013), International macro-finance, Handbook of Safeguarding
Global Financial Stability: Political, Social, Cultural, and Economic Theories and Models
2, 169–176.
Primiceri, G. E., (2005), Time varying structural vector autoregressions and monetary policy,
Review of Economic Dynamics 72, 821–52.
Quinn, D. P., (1997), The correlates of change in international financial regulation, American
Political Science Review 91(3), 531–551.
Quinn, D. P. and H.-J. Voth, (2008), A century of global equity markets correlations, American
Economic Review 98, 535–40.
Ramey, G. and V. Ramey, (1995), Cross-country evidence on the link between volatility and
growth, American Economic Review 85, 1138–51.

39

Ready, R., N. Roussanov, and C. Ward, (2017), Commodity trade and the carry trade: A tale
of two countries, Journal of Finance .
Sandulescu, M., F. Trojani, and A. Vedolin, (2017), Model-free international sdfs in incomplete markets, Working Paper, University of Geneva, University of Lugano, and Boston
University .
Stathopoulos, A., (2017), Asset prices and risk sharing in open economies, Review of Financial
Studies .
Stock, J. and M. Watson, (2002), Has the business cycle changed and why, in Gertler, M. and
K. Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 2002 , MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Taylor, A. M., (2002), A century of current account dynamics, Journal of International Money
and Finance 21, 725–48.
Verdelhan, A., (2010), A habit-based explanation of the exchange rate risk premium, The
Journal of Finance 65(1), 123–45.
Zviadadze, I., (2017), Term structure of consumption risk premia in the cross section of currency returns, Journal of Finance .

40

Appendix A . Volatility Estimation
We use an auxiliary mixture sampler to estimate the model specified in (2.1) and extract latent
volatility components, following Kim, Shephard, and Chib (1998). Specifically, we rewrite the
observation equation,
log((zt − µ − ρzt−1 )2 ) = σt + log(ηt2 ).

(A1)

The distribution of log(ηt2 ) can be well approximated by a mixture of Gaussian distributions:
2
p(log(ηt2 )) = Σni=1 πi ϕ(ηt ; µ,ηi , ση,i
),

(A2)

where ϕ is the probability density function of a Gaussian distribution with mean µη,i and
standard deviation ση,i . In the Markov Chain Monte Carlo procedure, st ∈ [1, T ] is drawn
to indicate one Gaussian distribution to sample log(ηt2 ). Conditioning on st , the model is in
Gaussian linear state-space form, and a standard forward-filtering, backward-sampling scheme
can be applied. The algorithm thus takes the form:
1. Initialize µ, ρ, µσ , ν, σω , st
2. Sample σt from p(σt |z, µ, ρ, µσ , ν, σω , st , z)
2 )
3. Sample st from p(st = i) ∝ πi ϕ(log((zt − µ − ρzt−1 )2 ); σt + µη,i , ση,i

4. Sample µ, ρ, µσ , ν, σω from p(µ, ρ, µσ , ν, σω |σt , z)
5. Repeat 2–4 until convergence
In our empirical implementation the priors are very loose: µ ∼ N (0.005, 2), ρ ∼ N (0.3, 100),
µσ ∼ N (−10, 20), ν ∼ N (0.9, 0.5), and σω ∼ IG(2, 0.5). We sample 20,000 times and discard
the first 5,000. The posterior mean of σt is the volatility used in the empirical analysis.

Appendix A.1 . Robustness of Empirical Results
In this section, we verify that our key empirical evidence on the volatility risk sharing is robust
to several modifications of our benchmark analysis. In table A1, Panel A, we show that our
results remain unchanged when we let the volatility processes be the ‘least primitive’ processes
in the context of the Cholesky decomposition, by replacing equations (2.3) and (2.7) with


Ỹi,t

∆yi − ∆yU S







∆ci − ∆cU S




= ∆(N X/Y )i − ∆(N X/Y )U S  ,




σt (∆yi ) − σt (∆yU S )


σt (∆ci ) − σt (∆cU S )

(A3)

and
h
i
0
Yi,t
= ∆yi ∆yU S σt (∆yi ) σt (∆yU S ) σt (∆ci ) σt (∆cU S ) ,

41

(A4)

respectively. We have tested other orders as well, with similar results. We omit them for the
sake of brevity.
In Panel B, we re-estimate the volatility processes in equation (2.1) and account for the
potential correlation of level shocks, ηt , and volatility shocks, ωt . The sampling of the volatility
parameters follows an acceptance-rejection Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. In Panel C, we reestimate the volatility processes by including the lag of output growth, consumption growth,
and the net-exports-to-output ratio in the set of our forecasting variables used in the first
equation in (2.1). In Panel D, we assess our VAR results by looking at the US against the
remaining G7/Bottom10 countries, assuming that they all share the same parameters of the
system of equations (2.1). In Panel E, we run our benchmark empirical estimation adopting
a 2-lag VAR specification. In Panel F, we augment our benchmark VAR specifications by
introducing market excess returns to control for shocks to risk premia as follows:


Ỹi,t

riex − rUexS







σt (∆yi ) − σt (∆yU S )




∆yi − ∆yU S


=
,


σt (∆ci ) − σt (∆cU S )




∆ci − ∆cU S


∆(N X/Y )i − ∆(N X/Y )U S

h
0
Yi,t
= riex rUexS σt (∆yi ) σt (∆yU S ) ∆yi ∆yU S

i
σt (∆ci ) σt (∆cU S ) .

(A5)

(A6)

As shown in table A1, our main empirical results are quite robust across all of these specifications. For example, the measures of the relative volatility pass-through (second column)
are in the 0.50 − 0.65 range, consistent with our benchmark estimates. The size effect on
pass-through, i.e., the pass-through being larger when volatility shocks originate in smaller
countries, is also a robust finding.
In table A2, we provide further robustness checks for our main results. In Panel A, we show
that our VAR results are not specific to the US by substituting the US with a global aggregate.
Specifically, we replace US variables with cross-sectional averages of the corresponding variables
across G17 countries.

In Panel B, we augment our benchmark VAR specifications by introducing a global

42

Table A1: Robustness of Pass-Through Results (I)
Relative Vol Shock:
US

Origin of Vol Shock:
Foreign

Panel A: Different Cholesky Order
US/G7
0.52
0.49
0.56
[0.47; 0.56]
[0.43; 0.54]
[0.50; 0.62]
US/Bottom-10 G17
0.61
0.50
0.73
[0.56; 0.66]
[0.44; 0.57]
[0.66; 0.79]
Panel B: Correlated Level and Vol Shocks
US/G7
0.51
0.55
0.57
[0.47; 0.55]
[0.50; 0.60]
[0.50; 0.63]
US/Bottom-10 G17
0.65
0.58
0.86
[0.61; 0.68]
[0.53; 0.64]
[0.80; 0.92]
Panel C: Controlling for GDP, Consumption, and NX
US/G7
0.60
0.55
0.65
[0.55; 0.64]
[0.50; 0.61]
[0.60; 0.71]
US/Bottom-10 G17
0.66
0.57
0.76
[0.62; 0.71]
[0.51; 0.63]
[0.70; 0.82]
Panel D: Pooled Vol Estimation
US/G7
0.50
0.47
0.57
[0.46; 0.54]
[0.42; 0.51]
[0.50; 0.64]
US/Bottom-10 G17
0.61
0.51
0.72
[0.56; 0.65]
[0.45; 0.57]
[0.66; 0.78]
Panel E: VAR(2)
US/G7
0.59
0.50
0.63
[0.55; 0.62]
[0.55; 0.60]
[0.58; 0.68]
US/Bottom-10 G17
0.65
0.57
0.74
[0.61; 0.69]
[0.51; 0.64]
[0.68; 0.80]
Panel F: Controlling for Risk Premia
US/G7
0.52
0.50
0.57
[0.48; 0.56]
[0.44; 0.55]
[0.50; 0.63]
US/Bottom-10 G17
0.63
0.50
0.78
[0.58; 0.68]
[0.43; 0.56]
[0.71; 0.84]
Notes: The second column refers to pass-through of relative output volatility shocks estimated
from modified versions of the VAR specified in equations (2.2)–(2.3). The rightmost two
columns report pass-through with respect to volatility shocks affecting either the US or the
remaining countries (based on modified versions of equations (2.6)–(2.7)). In each panel, we
report results from a specific robustness check. In Panel A, variables are sorted as in equations
(A3)–(A4). In Panel B, we allow for a non-zero correlation between level and vol shocks in the
estimation of the system of equations (2.1). In Panel C, we modify the first equation of (2.1)
by including lagged output and consumption growth and the net-exports-to-output ratio. In
Panel D, we estimate macroeconomic volatility assuming that the volatility parameters are the
same across countries other than the US. In Panel E, we estimate our VARs with 2 lags. In
Panel F, we add equity returns to our VAR, as specified in equations (A5)–(A6). We report
95% credible intervals in brackets. Our quarterly data range from 1971:q1 to 2013:q4.

43

volatility component as follows:


Ỹi,t

Yi,t0


σt (∆yglobal )




σt (∆yi ) − σt (∆yU S )




∆yi − ∆yU S


=
,


σt (∆ci ) − σt (∆cU S )




∆ci − ∆cU S


∆(N X/Y )i − ∆(N X/Y )U S

h
i
= σt (∆yglobal ) σt (∆yi ) σt (∆yU S ) ∆yi ∆yU S σt (∆ci ) σt (∆cU S ) .

(A7)

(A8)

We consider both an average measure computed across our 17 countries, and a measure
based on the first principle component (henceforth “PC”) of country volatilities from
our cross-section.
Since our VAR specifications impose that the parameters of interest must be the
same across countries, this estimation procedure implicitly assumes that all countries
have the same exposure to the global volatility component. We relax this assumption by
replacing total output volatility with idiosyncratic (i.e., purely country-specific) volatility
in equations (2.3) and (2.7), as specified below:


Ỹi,t


σ
bt (∆yi ) − σ
bt (∆yU S )




∆yi − ∆yU S


,
=
σt (∆ci ) − σt (∆cU S )




∆ci − ∆cU S


∆(N X/Y )i − ∆(N X/Y )U S

(A9)

and
h
i
Yi,t0 = σ
bt (∆yi ) σ
bt (∆yU S ) ∆yi ∆yU S σt (∆ci ) σt (∆cU S ),

(A10)

where the idiosyncratic volatility for country i, σ
bt (∆yi ) is the residual of the following
regression:
σt (∆yi ) = σ i + βσi σt (∆yglobal ) + σ
bt (∆yi ).
(A11)
We report our results in Panel C.
All of these specifications confirm our two main findings: (i) among large countries,
the pass-through is about 0.50; and (ii) the pass-through is economically and statistically
larger for smaller countries.

44

Table A2: Robustness of Pass-Through Results (II)
Relative Vol Shock:
Panel A: Global Benchmark
Global Benchmark/G7
Global Benchmark/Bottom-10 G17

0.54
[0.49; 0.58]
0.69
[0.63; 0.75]

Origin of Vol Shock:
US
Foreign
0.59
[0.45; 0.72]
0.61
[0.45; 0.77]

0.53
[0.48; 0.58]
0.69
[0.63; 0.75]

Panel B: Controlling for Global Vol
US/G7 (Average)

0.52
0.51
0.54
[0.48; 0.57]
[0.45; 0.57]
[0.48; 0.61]
US/Bottom-10 G17 (Average)
0.61
0.52
0.70
[0.57; 0.66]
[0.45; 0.59]
[0.63; 0.77]
US/G7 (PC)
0.53
0.53
0.53
[0.49; 0.57]
[0.48; 0.59]
[0.47; 0.60]
US/Bottom-10 G17 (PC)
0.63
0.58
0.68
[0.59; 0.68]
[0.52; 0.65]
[0.61; 0.74]
Panel C: Heterogenous Exposure to Global Vol
US/G7 (Average)
0.56
0.55
0.57
[0.51; 0.60]
[0.50; 0.61]
[0.50; 0.64]
US/Bottom-10 G17 (Average)
0.66
0.59
0.73
[0.61; 0.70]
[0.52; 0.65]
[0.66; 0.80]
US/G7 (PC)
0.54
0.53
0.55
[0.49; 0.58]
[0.47; 0.59]
[0.48; 0.62]
US/Bottom-10 G17 (PC)
0.63
0.59
0.67
[0.58; 0.68]
[0.52; 0.65]
[0.61; 0.74]
Notes: The second column refers to pass-through measures obtained from variations of the
VAR specified in equations (2.2)–(2.3) with respect to a shock to relative output volatility.
The rightmost two columns report pass-through measures based on the modified estimates of
the VAR in equations (2.6)–(2.7) with respect to volatility shocks affecting either the US or the
remaining countries. In Panel A, we substitute US data with data from a global benchmark
defined as the average of the corresponding series across all countries. In Panel B, we add
a global vol measure to our VAR, as specified in equations (A7)–(A8). We consider both
a cross-country average (Average) of volatility and a measure obtained through a principal
components approach (PC). In Panel C, we focus on the VAR specified in equations (A9)–
(A10) with country-specific volatility processes estimated as in equations (A11). We report
95% credible intervals in brackets. Our quarterly data range from 1971:q1 to 2013:q4.

Appendix B . Standard Moments from the Model
In table B1, we focus on unconditional moments typically targeted in the international
finance literature. Our benchmark calibration conforms well with our data, both with
and without volatility shocks. The adoption of CRRA preferences generates well-known
puzzles: (i) the market price of risk is excessively low; (ii) the risk-free rate is too high;
and (iii) international trade is modest. In our model the net exports are not as volatile
45

corr(∆c, ∆c∗ )
σ(∆c)(%)
σ(∆c)/σ(∆y)
ACF 1(∆c)

Table B1: Standard Unconditional Moments
G-17 Data
Model
Avg.
Quintiles
BenchNo TVV
[ 1st ; 4th ]
mark
(σσ = 0)
0.25
[0.13; 0.33]
0.38
0.37
1.67
[1.34; 2.47]
1.85
1.82
0.88
[0.57; 0.82]
0.93
0.94
0.17
[-0.16; 0.31]
0.06
0.07

CRRA
(γ = 7)
0.74
1.64
0.83
0.08

σ(M )/E(M )(%)
σ(∆e)(%)

–
10.50

–
[10.2; 11.4]

47.86
12.80

47.85
12.65

11.49
8.31

E(rf )(%)
σ(rf )(%)
corr(rf , rf ∗ )
σ(∆(N X/Y ))/σ(∆y)

1.35
1.79
0.51
0.70

[1.44;
[1.61;
[0.37;
[0.67;

2.17
0.33
0.91
0.32

2.19
0.33
0.92
0.32

14.91
3.47
0.98
0.16

2.41]
2.27]
0.56]
0.97]

Notes: This table reports key moments for real consumption (C), output (Y ), the exchange
rate (E), the risk-free rates (Rf ), the net-export-to-output ratio (N X/Y ), and the stochastic
discount factor (M ). Small letters refer to log-units; changes are denoted by ‘∆’; foreign
variables are marked by ‘∗ ’. We denote expectation, standard deviation, correlation, and first
order auto-correlation by E, σ, corr, and ACF 1, respectively. The data refer to G-17 countries
and are described in section 2.1. For each country, we compute the moments of interest over the
post–Bretton Wood period, 1971:Q1–2013:Q4, as detailed in section 2.1. For each moment, we
report (i) its GDP-weighted average across countries; and (ii) its first and fourth cross-country
quintiles. The entries from the model are obtained from 100 repetitions of small samples. Our
benchmark quarterly calibration is reported in table 4.

as in our G17 dataset, but they are twice as volatile compared to the CRRA case.

Appendix C . Volatility Frontiers
Given our interest in the volatility pass-through and in the volatility disconnect anomaly,
we pay particular attention to the response of the volatility of consumption growth rates,
σt (∆cit+1 ), to the three sources of risk that are present in the economy. Without loss of
generality, we focus on the conditional volatility of the growth rate of consumption of
the home country.
The consumption growth in the home country can be expressed in terms of the
primitive endowment processes and the share dynamics:
∆ct+1 = ∆caut
t+1 + f (St+1 ) − f (St ),

46

(C1)

where ∆caut
t+1 := α∆Xt+1 + (1 − α)∆Yt+1 is the consumption growth rate that would
prevail under financial autarky, and

f (S) := log

α
1−α

"

2α−1

#

S

+ log
1+

α
α
S
1−α

1+

1−α
1−α
S
α

captures the effects of relative size, as measured by St 14 . Note that under financial
autarky there is no dynamic redistribution of resources across countries, that is, the
reallocation effect is absent. Also, it can be easily shown that f 0 > 0, f 00 < 0, f 000 > 0,
and that limS→∞ f 0 = 0. Equivalently, the f function is increasing and concave in size,
S, and it is relatively flatter (steeper) for larger (smaller) countries.
A first-order approximation of consumption growth at date t + 1 about date t’s ratio
of pseudo-Pareto weights yields
2

0
2
σt2 (∆ct+1 ) ≈ σt2 (∆caut
t+1 ) + [f (St )] σt (St+1 − St ),

(C2)

0
+2 · covt (∆caut
t+1 , f (St ) · (St+1 − St )).

The variance of consumption growth is thus driven by the variation in the fundamental
endowment processes, variation in size, and the covariance between the two. To help
illustrate the economic role of these channels, we consider two polar cases.
In the first case, assume that either there are no news shocks (i.e., σσ = σz = 0)
or they are not priced (i.e., agents have CRRA preferences). Let the risk aversion
coefficient be strictly greater than one, meaning that the risk-sharing motive is strong
enough. The covariance term in equation (C2) is negative for S ∈ (0, ∞) because
the size of the home country increases upon the arrival of a relative negative shock
(see equation (3.12)). Furthermore, this negative covariance is greater than [f 0 (St )]2 ·
σt2 (St+1 −St ) because the volatility of consumption under complete markets, σt (∆ct+1 ), is
smaller than the volatility of consumption under portfolio autarky, σt (∆caut
t+1 ). This is a
common prediction of frictionless risk-sharing models (see, inter alia, Cole and Obstfeld
(1991)).
As a result, with respect to only short-run shocks: (i) the reallocation channel reduces
consumption growth volatility; (ii) this effect is stronger for smaller countries, since
f 00 < 0; and (iii) the consumption volatility frontier is upward sloping with respect to
country size. These findings are consistent with the model of Hassan (2013), in which
small countries feature a lower consumption volatility than large countries.
14
This result is obtained from equations (3.1) and (3.11). See Cole and Obstfeld (1991) and Colacito
and Croce (2013) for the derivations.

47

Volatility Frontiers

1.80

1.60

7.36
1.80

1.75

1.55

1.75

1.55

1.70

1.50

1.70

1.50

σt(∆ct+1)

σt(∆ct+1)

Consumption Volatilities

7.44

EZ (all shocks)
CRRA (all shocks)
-0.50

0.00

log(St)

0.50

EZ (all shocks)
CRRA (all shocks)

1.60

1.40

3.71

1.00

1.23

3.74

σt(Ut+1)

1.27

1.40

3.77

1.31

1.80

1.40

1.80

1.75

1.35

1.75

1.35

1.70

1.30

1.70

1.30

σt(∆ct+1)

σt(∆ct+1)

1.60
-1.00

1.60

1.45

1.65

1.45

1.65

7.40

1.25

1.65

1.65

1.25

EZ (all shocks)
1.60
-1.00

EZ (all shocks)

EZ (no LR shocks)
-0.50

0.00

log(St)

0.50

1.40

EZ (no LR shocks)

1.60

1.20

3.71

1.00

3.74

σt(Ut+1)

1.20

3.77

Figure C1. Variance Frontiers. The left panels report the the conditional volatility of the
growth rate of consumption in the home country (σt (∆ch,t+1 )) as a function of the logarithm
of the ratio of pseudo-Pareto weights (st ). In the right panels we replace the logarithm of
the ratio of pseudo-Pareto weights with the associated conditional volatility of the normalized

continuation utility in the home country (i.e., σt Uh,t+1 /(Xtα Yt1−α ) ). In the left panels,
the left (right) axis reports the values for our benchmark (alternative) calibration. In the
right panels, the values for our benchmark (alternative) calibration are reported on the left
and bottom (top and right) axes. Across all cases, we keep both the exogenous long-run
components and the exogenous volatility processes fixed at their unconditional mean.

The second extreme case that we consider is the one in which there are only news
shocks. By definition, pure news shocks realized at time t + 1 do not change the level of
∆caut
t+1 . As a consequence, the covariance term in equation (C2) is null. If news shocks are
priced, they promote an international reallocation of resources at time t+1, implying that
the conditional volatility of St+1 is strictly larger than zero. Equivalently, the reallocation
channel increases the conditional volatility of consumption. Since f 00 < 0, the intensity
of this channel is stronger for small countries. Thus, the volatility of consumption growth
inherits the properties of f 0 (S) and the frontier is downward sloping in country size.
In our benchmark calibration with recursive preferences, news shocks are of firstorder importance for the international reallocation of resources, which explains why
our equilibrium consumption volatility frontier is downward sloping (figure C1, top-left
panel). As a result, if a country experiences either a positive short-run shock or a positive
48

long-run shock, its relative size decreases and the volatility of its consumption growth
rate rises, whereas the opposite holds for the other country (figure 4(a), second row).
Since the recursive risk-sharing mechanism of this economy is characterized by the
agents’ willingness to trade off size for a smoother future consumption profile, σt (Ut+1 ),
savings are dynamically adjusted to achieve long-run consumption smoothing at the cost
of increasing short-run consumption volatility, σt (∆ct+1 ) (figure C1, top-right panel).
Consistent with our analysis of equation (C2), this trade-off is absent when we use
CRRA preferences, as news shocks are not priced and hence the consumption volatility
frontier is upward sloping (figure C1, top panels, solid lines). This trade-off also disappears when we retain recursive preferences but remove long-run shocks. In this case,
short-run level shocks dominate and the consumption volatility frontier is again upward
sloping (figure C1, bottom panels), implying that long-run consumption smoothing coexists with smoother short-run consumption profiles.
A second important insight from figures 4(a) and C1 is that the absolute change in
volatility for the country that is affected by a positive level shock (i.e., negative adjustment in its pseudo-Pareto weight) is larger than the absolute change in the volatility for
the other country. Equivalently, the short-run consumption volatility frontier is convex,
due to the convexity of f 0 (recall that f 000 > 0). As a result, the variation of the share of
world consumption produces greater variability in the consumption aggregate of smaller
countries, an important feature that allows us to explain our evidence on the volatility
pass-through.

49

