NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVIZED PEER REFERRALS FOR TUBERCULOSIS SCREENING:
EVIDENCE FROM INDIA
Jessica Goldberg
Mario Macis
Pradeep Chintagunta
Working Paper 25279
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25279
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 01238
November 2018
This project was approved by IRB committees at the University of Maryland (College Park,
MD,USA), Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, MD, USA), and the Institute for Financial
Management and Research (Chennai, India) and registered with the AEA Trial Registry
(AEARCTR-0000773). It was also reviewed and approved by the Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR). The work was funded by grants from the World Bank Strategic Innovation
Fund (SIEF), the International Growth Centre (IGC India Central), the Johns Hopkins Center for
Global Health, the Maryland Population Research Center, the University of Chicago Trust
(India), and Jaithirth (Jerry) Rao. We appreciate the assistance of Thomas Bossuroy and Drew
von Glahn, the World Bank TTLs. Field work and data collection were conducted by JPAL-South
Asia, where Pratyusha Govindaraju, Putul Gupta, Shaheen Madraswala, and Niloufer Taber
capably managed the project with the help of dedicated teams. Tara Kaul and Sai Luo provided
outstanding research assistance. We are grateful for useful comments from Junaid Ahmad,
Marcella Alsan, Dan Bartels, Jacob Bor, Erich Battistin, Richard Chaisson, Berkeley Dietvorst,
Pascaline Dupas, Susan Godlonton, Jonathan Golub, Alaka Holla, Ronald Mutasa, Jeffrey Smith,
Janardan Prasad Singh, K. Sudhir, Abby Sussman, Sergio Urzua, and participants at several
seminars and conferences. Dr. Kuldeep S. Sachdeva and Dr. Amar Shah (Revised National
Tuberculosis Control Programme), Dr. K. K. Chopra (New Delhi Tuberculosis Centre), Dr.
Ashwani Khanna and Dr. Shivani Chandra (Delhi State TB Office), and members of the Delhi
State and the National Operational Research Committees offered advice and feedback about the
design and implementation of the study. We appreciate the assistance of the district and state TB
officers in the areas where we operated. We are especially grateful to Sandeep Ahuja, Shelly
Batra, and their committed team at Operation ASHA. All errors and omissions are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jessica Goldberg, Mario Macis, and Pradeep Chintagunta. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Incentivized Peer Referrals for Tuberculosis Screening: Evidence from India
Jessica Goldberg, Mario Macis, and Pradeep Chintagunta
NBER Working Paper No. 25279
November 2018, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. I1,O1
ABSTRACT
We study whether and how peer referrals increase screening, testing, and identification of patients
with tuberculosis, an infectious disease responsible for over one million deaths annually. In an
experiment with 3,176 patients at 122 tuberculosis treatment centers in India, we find that small
financial incentives raise the probability that existing patients refer prospective patients for
screening and testing, resulting in cost-effective identification of new cases. Incentivized referrals
operate through two mechanisms: peers have private information about individuals in their social
networks to target for outreach, and they are more effective than health workers in inducing these
individuals to get tested.
Jessica Goldberg
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3115C Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
goldberg@econ.umd.edu

Pradeep Chintagunta
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
Chicago, IL
pradeep.chintagunta@ChicagoBooth.edu

Mario Macis
Johns Hopkins University
Carey Business School
100 International Drive, Office 1333
Baltimore, MD 21202
and IZA
and also NBER
mmacis@jhu.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/773

1

Introduction

Targeted communication of accurate, actionable information about infectious diseases is essential for protecting individuals and societies. This paper studies the role of
peer networks in sharing information about tuberculosis (TB), based on referral strategies that are well-understood in labor market contexts and more recently applied to
technology diffusion, but not commonly used in public health settings.
Tuberculosis, a highly contagious, airborne respiratory disease, is responsible for
more fatalities than any other infectious disease; in 2018, it caused about 1.5 million
deaths (World Health Organization, 2019).1 About 10.4 million people worldwide, three
million of them in India alone, developed active TB in 2018.2 The disease is most
This project was approved by IRB committees at the University of Maryland (College Park, MD,
USA), Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, MD, USA), and the Institute for Financial Management
and Research (Chennai, India) and registered with the AEA Trial Registry (AEARCTR-0000773). It
was also reviewed and approved by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). The work was
funded by grants from the World Bank Strategic Innovation Fund (SIEF), the International Growth
Centre (IGC India Central), the Johns Hopkins Center for Global Health, the Maryland Population
Research Center, the University of Chicago Trust (India), and Jaithirth (Jerry) Rao. We appreciate
the assistance of Thomas Bossuroy and Drew von Glahn, the World Bank TTLs. Field work and data
collection were conducted by JPAL-South Asia, where Pratyusha Govindaraju, Putul Gupta, Shaheen
Madraswala, and Niloufer Taber capably managed the project with the help of dedicated teams. Tara
Kaul and Sai Luo provided outstanding research assistance. We are grateful for useful comments from
Junaid Ahmad, Marcella Alsan, Dan Bartels, Jacob Bor, Erich Battistin, Richard Chaisson, Berkeley
Dietvorst, Pascaline Dupas, Susan Godlonton, Jonathan Golub, Alaka Holla, Ronald Mutasa, Jeffrey
Smith, Janardan Prasad Singh, K. Sudhir, Abby Sussman, Sergio Urzua, and participants at several
seminars and conferences. Dr. Kuldeep S. Sachdeva and Dr. Amar Shah (Revised National Tuberculosis
Control Programme), Dr. K. K. Chopra (New Delhi Tuberculosis Centre), Dr. Ashwani Khanna and
Dr. Shivani Chandra (Delhi State TB Office), and members of the Delhi State and the National
Operational Research Committees offered advice and feedback about the design and implementation
of the study. We appreciate the assistance of the district and state TB officers in the areas where we
operated. We are especially grateful to Sandeep Ahuja, Shelly Batra, and their committed team at
Operation ASHA. All errors and omissions are our own.
1
There were 1.1-1.3 million TB deaths among HIV-negative people and 223,000-281,000 TB deaths
among HIV-positive people; the latter are classified as HIV deaths in official reports (World Health
Organization, 2017).
2
Between 1 and 2 billion people globally are estimated to have “latent” TB (Chaisson, 2018). These
individuals are infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis but do not have symptoms of the disease and
cannot spread the infection to others. However, without treatment, individuals with latent TB have a

2

common among vulnerable populations in poor countries in Africa and Asia (World
Health Organization, 2019). Mortality from untreated TB is high (45% for HIV-negative
and nearly 100% for HIV-positive individuals (World Health Organization, 2019)) and
the disease is highly debilitating even among those who survive it, with serious—often
devastating—consequences for human productivity.
Despite the high personal cost of illness and the availability of highly effective treatment that is free to patients in developing countries, a large share of those infected with
TB do not receive timely diagnoses or appropriate treatment. In India, about 40% of TB
cases are not reported to the public health authorities (Cowling et al., 2014), as would
be necessary to facilitate treatment and contact tracing. Even though the symptoms of
TB are widely known in India, they are also associated with other diseases, including
asthma, upper respiratory infection, and cancer. Also, the efficacy of TB treatment
may not be well-understood, particularly by the marginalized populations who are most
at-risk for the disease. This implies that many individuals who have TB symptoms
may underestimate the expected benefits of formal diagnosis with and treatment for
the disease. Additionally, active case-finding to identifying TB patients has proven very
costly. One reason is that even in contexts with high TB prevalence, large numbers of
individuals must be screened to identify individuals with symptoms that require testing
(herafter, we use the term “symptomatics” to refer to individuals whose symptoms of
TB are confirmed by health workers, and distinguish them from “suspects,” who are
individuals identified by peers as those who would benefit from testing but who have
not yet been screened by health workers for the presence of symptoms). For example,
Charles et al. (2010) report findings from a large-scale study in southern India. More
than 18,000 individuals were screened, resulting in the identification of 640 individuals
with symptoms consistent with TB.3
In this work, we study whether outreach by existing patients who are benefiting
from treatment of their own TB can contribute to reducing these imperfect information
problems and improving case-finding. Individuals receiving appropriate medical care
5%–15% lifetime probability of developing active TB (World Health Organization, 2017).
3
In Charles et al. (2010), the prevalence of so-called “chest symptomatics” was 2.7% in rural areas
and 4.9% in urban areas.

3

have information about personal and logistical aspects of TB screening, testing and
treatment based on their own experience as patients. They are likely to have social ties
to others who would benefit from testing and treatment, both because they share risk
factors and because the disease is contagious. In particular, they may have connections
to at-risk people who are hard for health workers to identify and reach in a timely manner. Existing patients might also be able to credibly vouch for the quality of the health
care provider and the benefits of treatment, providing personal testimonials that could
be more compelling to some prospective patients than information from health workers.4 Thus, peer referrals can potentially complement or supplement outreach by public
health workers along two dimensions: they can increase the scope and scale of outreach,
and improve the ability to identify and persuade at-risk individuals. Therefore, we designed an experiment to investigate the potential of peer referrals from existing patients
to resolve informational barriers to screening and case detection, much as referrals are
used in labor markets to identify high-quality employees.
We partnered with Operation ASHA, a non-governmental organization (NGO) that
runs Directly Observed Treatment Short Course (DOTS) centers in several cities in
coordination with the Indian Government’s TB control program, the Revised National
Tuberculosis Programme (RNTCP), to implement a randomized controlled trial of financial incentives and peer outreach strategies for identifying and testing previously
unserved individuals with symptoms of TB.5 We randomly assigned 122 DOTS centers
treating 3,176 existing patients and located across nine cities to either a control group
where new patient intake followed Operation ASHA’s standard procedures, or one of nine
active case-finding strategies. Our experimental outreach strategies varied the presence
and conditionality of incentives for making referrals, and whether prospective patients
were approached directly by TB patients in their own social networks or by health workers following up on leads generated by current TB patients. While financial incentives
4

Conveying otherwise-hidden information to prospective patients makes the peer referral mechanism
we study distinct from community- or network-based targeting, where the objective is typically to
aggregate information from the network to share with a third party.
5
India launched its National Tuberculosis Programme (NTP) in 1961. Later, in order to standardize TB treatment and implement the DOTS strategy, the Revised National Tuberculosis Control
Programme (RNTCP) was started in 1997. Over the next nine years, it expanded across the country.

4

have been used to shape health behaviors in other contexts,6 introducing experimental
variation in the degree and nature of existing patients’ engagement in outreach is a
novel contribution to the literature on referrals and allows us to disentangle the effect
of private information about prospective targets from the effect of information conveyed
by peers.
Our results indicate that existing TB patients have valuable information about other
individuals in their social network–but outside their own household–who would benefit
from TB screening and testing, and are effective in conveying it to their peers, particularly when they are offered financial incentives. Relative to encouragement alone,
financial incentives to existing patients doubled the number of new suspects who came
in for screening. On average, providing incentives resulted in one new patient screened
for every 10 existing patients, compared to one new patient screened every 22 existing
patients in the absence of incentives. These additional screenings were well targeted:
incentives also had statistically significant effects on other measures of case-finding, including the numbers of new suspects sent for testing on the basis of their symptoms, of
those symptomatics who were actually tested, and of patients with active TB identified
and subsequently, started on a treatment regimen.
Direct outreach by peers was more effective in identifying prospective patients for
screening, and ultimately finding individuals with TB, than the alternative of outreach
by health workers. In fact, outreach by existing patients resulted in an average of one
new suspect screened for every 8 existing patients, and one new symptomatic tested
for every 11 existing patients. These were more than double the levels of case-finding
when outreach was conducted by health workers. Further, incentives strongly complemented peer outreach: on average, incentivized peer outreach resulted in one new patient
screened for every 5.6 existing patients, and one new symptomatic sent for testing for
every 7.4 existing patients. Incentives appear to have increased the effort that existing
patients exerted in both convincing contacts to get screened for TB and identifying those
contacts who were more likely to have the disease.
6

See Baird et al. (2012); Kohler and Thornton (2011); Walque et al. (2012); Thornton (2008); Kremer
et al. (2009); Miller et al. (2012); Basing et al. (2011) for examples.

5

Because of the effectiveness of small financial incentives and the comparatively lower
cost of time for existing patients than health workers, incentivized peer outreach in TB
screening is highly cost-effective when compared to health-worker outreach. We estimate
that peer outreach results in the screening of new symptomatics at 20% of the cost of
outreach by health workers, and it identifies new TB cases at 28%–38% of that cost.
The reach of peers extends well beyond immediate family members (who in this study
were excluded by design), including neighbors, co-workers, and friends. Incentives and
peer outreach each demonstrated the potential to increase identification of marginalized
patients. The prospective patients identified by current patients who received incentives
for referrals were more socially and economically disadvantaged than those identified by
current patients who did not receive financial incentives, and new prospective patients
identified through peer outreach were more socially disconnected than those from the
health worker outreach arms.
Our study demonstrates that, in its context, the necessary conditions for large-scale,
community-based referral schemes to be effective in identifying patients with TB exist.
Existing patients have useful information; they are able to pass on that information
and to target at-risk individuals; and they are willing to do this in return for small,
cost-effective payments. We emphasize the establishment of these necessary conditions
in terms of existing patients’ access to information and their ability and willingness to
share it, rather than the ability of peer referral schemes to tackle the scale of India’s
TB problem. Although India has the highest TB burden in the world, infection is still
a relatively rare occurrence and it would require a prohibitively large sample to identify
a large number of TB-positive individuals.
Our work contributes to large literatures in economics that considers the effects of
social networks on individuals’ economic outcomes and behaviors (Jackson, 2011). The
role of peers has been documented in the context of technology diffusion, particularly
in agriculture (Beaman et al., 2018a; Fafchamps et al., 2018), in the targeting of social
protection programs and microfinance loans (Alatas et al., 2016; Hussam et al., 2017),
and in the dissemination of information about a public health insurance program (Berg

6

et al., 2019).7 Moreover, firms that sell goods or services often rely on referrals from current customers—who have private information about quality—to market their products
to new ones (Kumar et al., 2010; Godes and Mayzlin, 2009). Firms also use referrals
to attract and screen workers (Bryan et al., 2010; Heath, forthcoming; Kugler, 2003).
The potential role of referrals in attracting candidates with specific characteristics in
employment settings has been measured in experimental studies in India (Beaman and
Magruder, 2012) and Malawi (Beaman et al., 2018b), as well as in experimental and
nonexperimental studies in the United States (Burks et al., 2015; Friebel et al., 2018).
Although our application shares some features with labor or product markets and
with health applications that have been studied previously, our context is distinct from
the settings in which referrals have been most intensively studied. First, stigma about
TB may make the costs of sharing information about treatment higher than those of
sharing information about jobs or products. Second, the highly contagious nature of the
disease means there are public as well as private benefits to increased identification of
individuals with TB. This implies that results from marketing or employment contexts
may not generalize to a health context.8 Moreover, in the context of job market referrals,
referrers typically both identify targets and perform the outreach, whereas the design of
our field experiment allows us to disentangle these two distinct channels through which
referrals may operate.9 Our work also complements related research by Berg et al. (2019)
7

A growing set of studies document the respective effects of social interactions, networks, and peers
on health behaviors including obesity (Christakis and Fowler, 2007), smoking (Christakis and Fowler,
2008), and the use of hygiene products (Oster and Thornton, 2012), as well as on choices associated
with HIV treatment (Balat et al., 2018), hospital (Pope, 2009), and health insurance (Sorensen, 2006).
8
In labor markets, homophily might lead to undesirable outcomes from referrals by limiting diversity
in hiring (Beaman et al., 2018b; Hoffman, 2017) or inducing nepotism (Wang, 2013), which in some
cases could cause referrals to have negative net welfare effects. In our context, homophily is likely to
benefit disadvantaged populations because our referrer population is marginalized and thus likely to
reach out to other marginalized individuals. At the same time, it is possible that excessive reliance
on a referrals mechanism might disadvantage individuals who do not enjoy large social networks. This
highlights the importance of analyzing, as our study does, precisely which types of individuals are
recruited through the various referral schemes.
9
We are aware of only one marketing study that contrasts the effectiveness of outreach by current
customers (analogous to patients in our context) and independent agents (Godes and Mayzlin, 2009).
In that study, outcomes cannot be directly associated with specific individuals on either side of the
interaction since the relationship being measured is between aggregate sales in a market and the total

7

that studied the effect of incentives paid to agents hired to disseminate information
about public health insurance in Southern India. Incentive pay for agents increased
potential customers’ knowledge of the insurance product and increased take-up. A key
distinction between this context and the one we study is that in Berg et al. (2019),
the health insurance product was designed to be beneficial for the entire population,
while TB screening and testing only benefits those with symptoms of or exposure to the
disease – a relatively rare (and hard to identify) population even in a high-TB burden
setting. Therefore, incentives in the Berg et al. (2019) context may increase effort in
the extensive and intensive margins, while incentives for outreach to TB patients affect
effort along both of those dimensions and also in targeting.
In addition to contributing to the academic literature on networks, referrals, and
incentives, our study is relevant to public health policy. It is closely aligned with and
designed to study potential improvements to the strategies used to fight TB by both
the World Health Organization (WHO) and India’s RNTCP.10 Furthermore, other communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS and COVID-19 present challenges related to
informational barriers that are similar to those posed by TB. These diseases also disproamount of word-of-mouth content spread by customers and agents in that market.
10
To improve outreach and reduce its cost, recent WHO guidelines encourage high TB-burden countries to incorporate community-based outreach in national campaigns to prevent and treat TB. These
guidelines, called the ENGAGE-TB approach (Haileyesus Getahun et al., 2012), include a specific emphasis on the role of communities in assisting in the detection of TB, especially in its early stages. The
guidelines emphasize referrals by community health workers and volunteers; the referral strategies we
test in this study are consistent with the WHO recommendations. Following the recent WHO guidelines, public health scholars and practitioners have begun to explore peer referrals as a case-finding
tool. Some studies focus on HIV case finding among high-risk communities (see, e.g., Glasman et al.
(2016); Gwadz et al. (2017); Shangani et al. (2017)), and one study considers identification of malaria
cases (Faye, 2012). In the context of TB, Joshi et al. (2017) implement a peer-led screening project in
Nepal, where 30 volunteers received intensive training to perform TB screening, collect sputum samples, accompany the newly diagnosed patients to obtain treatment, and support them during treatment.
Similar strategies were implemented in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Munyanga Mukungo
and Kaboru, 2014; André et al., 2018). These studies, which do not include experimental control groups
and are not designed to investigate mechanisms, included intensive training of groups of selected former
TB or HIV patients who deployed as community health workers, often for prolonged periods of time.
Methodologically, our study differs from existing research in using an RCT to identify causal impacts
of various referral and incentive schemes and to distinguish between competing barriers to information
sharing. Operationally, it mobilizes existing patients during the course of their treatment and requires
minimal training.

8

portionately affect vulnerable, marginalized populations and, in the case of HIV/AIDS,
carry social stigma. Insights from conducting outreach to TB patients may prove useful
in these contexts and even suggest ways strategies for using targeted information to
combat newly emerging infectious diseases.
In the next section, we present the simple conceptual framework we used to design
the experiment and guide our analysis. In Section 3, we describe the context and the
experimental design. In Section 4, we present results, and in Section 5, we offer our
conclusions.

2

Conceptual Framework

Referrals can be used to overcome imperfect information when individuals have private
knowledge that may be obtained from and shared through their social networks. The
best-known examples are in labor markets, where current employees may have better
information than firms about the characteristics of prospective new workers (Bryan
et al., 2010; Heath, forthcoming; Kugler, 2003; Beaman and Magruder, 2012; Beaman
et al., 2018b; Burks et al., 2015; Friebel et al., 2018).
The conceptual framework that guides our experimental design is grounded in our
focus on the choices of existing patients, who face potential costs and benefits from
referring others for TB screening. The framework is based on Beaman and Magruder
(2012), who applied it to the more traditional context of job referrals. The framework
fixes ideas about how incentives affect current patients’ expected benefits of making
referrals, and provides a formal description of the margins of effort through which current
patients can influence the behavior of their contacts. It provides high-level motivation
for considering the interaction of incentives and outreach modality.
We assume that each existing patient EPi undergoing TB treatment at a certain
health care provider is endowed with a given number of contacts j = 1, ..., ni . From
the perspective of EPi , the individual making the referral, each of his contacts j is a
potential subject of the referral and is characterized by:

9

1. A net benefit dij that EPi receives when referring contact j to the provider,11
defined as dij = gij - sij - cij , where gij is the value of any utility generated
by the interaction (such as the “warm glow” described by Andreoni (1990) that
EPi might experience from knowing he helped contact j improve her health),
sij denotes any disutility of the interaction due to the stigma and discrimination
associated with TB, and cij is the time and effort cost of identifying, interacting
with, and providing contact j with information about TB, screening opportunities,
etc. Thus, the net benefit dij can be positive or negative, depending on whether
its positive or negative components prevail.
2. A fixed payment from a third party, fi , received for referring contact j, if j presents
for TB screening, irrespective of the test results.
3. A contingent payment from the third party, pi , received only if contact j tests
positive for TB. Implicitly, pi is conditional on j getting screened and tested, and
testing positive.
4. The subjective probability πj that contact j has TB, as assessed by EPi after
observing signals such as whether j presents symptoms consistent with the disease.
5. The probability λij (Xj ,qij ) that contact j will present for screening, which is a
function of j’s characteristics, Xj , as well as qij , the quality of information that is
available to j about the costs and benefits of screening and treatment, which can
be influenced by her interactions with EPi .
An individual EPi will make a referral if his net expected benefit from the referral
is positive; that is, if:
dij + λij (fi + πj × pi ) > 0
11

(1)

In our framework, existing patients consider a single prospective referral at a time. They do not
consider tradeoffs between referring different contacts, which we operationalize by explicitly allowing
an unlimited number of referrals. Although this set-up is realistic in our context (as we show below,
the modal number of names provided and referrals made by each patient, conditional on giving any
names or making any referrals at all, is one), allowing existing patients to consider multiple referrals
at the same time could have different implications.

10

Due to lack of awareness of the social benefits of making referrals, and possibly
because of the stigma associated with TB (Kelly, 1999; Atre et al., 2011), the net
reward dij for making a referral is likely to be small or negative. This would explain
why, in the absence of other incentives, referrals in this context are rare—in contrast to
the job referral context, where the social reward for a referral is typically positive.12
Motivated by this simple framework, our experiment includes manipulations of payments to EPs as well as outreach modalities varying EPs’ involvement in the referral
process. Our experiment includes an “encouragement” condition without any financial
incentives; this increases the salience of the social importance of testing anyone with
TB symptoms and therefore, the perceived positive component of dij ; this might motivate the existing patient to identify potential targets as well as exert effort to improve
qij , thereby increasing the probability that person j presents to get screened. We also
included payments to the referrer, which may be entirely fixed (fi > 0 and pi = 0)
or depend on the prospective patient’s TB test results (pi > 0).13 Knowing that their
contact is receiving an incentive (conditional or unconditional) might also provide suspects j with social cover for seeking screening, which might counteract the stigma sij
associated with visiting the health center (Thornton (2008) made this argument in the
context of incentivized HIV testing and learning the test results).
When the reward is fixed, the incentive for referring contacts depends only on their
willingness to be screened for TB, and not directly on whether they have symptoms consistent with TB. If a person’s willingness to get screened and tested (λij ) increases with
πj , the likelihood of having the disease, then existing patients have private incentives
to target referrals to contacts most likely to be infected even under a system of fixed
payments only. However, existing patients and their contacts could behave strategically
12

In other health applications, financial incentives have been used to overcome pecuniary and nonpecuniary costs of behavioral change (Baird et al., 2012; Kohler and Thornton, 2011; Walque et al.,
2012; Thornton, 2008; Kremer et al., 2009; Miller et al., 2012; Basing et al., 2011).
13
As we describe later in more detail, we calibrate the payment structure in our experiment such that
the total expected value of third-party payments for a new referral is the same for existing patients
assigned to pure fixed-payment incentives or to a combination of a fixed payment plus a contingent
reward. Equalizing expected payments allows us to remove income effects and isolate the incentive
effect of the different incentive schemes.

11

to take advantage of fixed payments. The introduction of contingent payments allows
us to determine the extent of such opportunistic behavior. When contingent payment
is introduced, EPi ’s expected payment depends directly on his information about a
contact’s characteristics, and EPi has stronger incentives to make use of his knowledge
about his contact’s health. Therefore, the probability that any prospective patient actually has TB is greater when that individual is referred by an existing patient eligible for
contingent payments pi , rather than by an existing patient eligible for a fixed payment
fi of equal expected value.
Referrals can be operationalized in one of two ways. The first involves personal
contact between EPi and j. Alternatively, EPi could provide contact information for
j to a third party, such as a health worker. The health worker could either reveal
EPi ’s identity as the impetus for the contact or conceal it. These strategies vary in
their implications for qij , the quality of information received by j, and sij and cij , the
social and effort cost to EPi of referring j. Direct conversation between EPi and j can
transmit both objective (symptoms of TB, location of testing center and health care
provider, duration of regimen, etc.) and subjective (personal experience with health
workers, experience with side effects of medication, etc.) information. That information
may carry additional weight because of the preexisting relationship between EPi and
j. In contrast, outreach by a health worker transmits objective information but not the
subjective experience of a personal contact. The perceived quality of the information
conveyed by the health worker may be enhanced when the health worker indicates to j
that she visits at the behest of EPi . Whether the ultimate quality of information received
by j is higher or lower for outreach by existing patients or health workers depends on
the weight j places on subjective versus objective information and on the effectiveness
and accuracy of (and effort exerted by) existing patients relative to health care workers
in communicating about TB screening. If prospective TB patients value subjective
information highly or trust their contacts substantially more than they trust health
workers, then outreach by existing patients could raise qij by more than outreach by
health workers, making it more likely that the prospective patient presents for screening.
Variation in whether outreach is conducted by existing patients or health workers

12

also manipulates cij and sij , the economic and social costs to EPi of referring j. While
personal contact between EPi and j may facilitate the exchange of information about
the benefits of treatment, EPi incurs time costs for the interaction, which may increase
in the quality of information conveyed. Peer outreach also potentially reveals EPi ’s
status as a TB patient to j and therefore increases EPi ’s social costs. If, instead, a
health worker reaches out to j and conceals EPi ’s identity, this removes the stigma cost
term sij but does not necessarily affect the positive component of dij because EPi may
still enjoy the “warm glow” of having helped someone (and is free to personally tell j of
the referral if he so chooses). Thus, if stigma is an important deterrent to referrals, then
we expect more referrals in experimental conditions that conceal the existing patient’s
identity. If the intensity of peer outreach increases qij , then peer referral should be
more effective when peers are incentivized to exert more effort and provide high-quality
information.
The predictions we have discussed thus far relate to how changes in the value of fixed
and contingent third-party payments affect the probability that an existing patient i
refers a social contact j for TB screening. We now consider two additional implications
of our framework and experimental design. The first regards the characteristics of
the social contacts j = 1, ..., ni who are referred for TB screening. While current
TB patients likely face lower outreach costs than health workers because the patients
regularly interact with people who share their TB risk factors, their contacts vary in
vulnerability and marginalization. On one hand, more vulnerable individuals may be
more likely to have TB but less likely to have access to information about testing and
treatment. On the other, social costs associated with referring a more vulnerable or
marginalized contact may be higher because of lower social reward or higher time cost
for the interaction. Therefore, both types of incentives may change the composition of
referred contacts by increasing the chance that vulnerable individuals are identified.
While this framework characterizes the mechanisms through which existing patients’
effort can affect referrals and how effort is affected by incentives, it also illustrates the
difficulty of distinguishing between margins of effort: either increasing qij or choosing
contacts with higher values of πj raises the expected benefit to the current patient,

13

and does so as a linear function of the contingent payment. The model also illustrates
the challenges of separating the costs associated with potentially revealing one’s own
TB status from any benefits such revelation may have in increasing λij , the probability
that a contact gets screened. Rather than derive predictions from the model, we use
it to map the experimental treatments to the current patients’ choice problem, and to
provide intuition for the mechanisms through which outreach modality and incentives
affect current patients’ expected benefits from making referrals.

3
3.1

Context and Experimental Design
Context

Tuberculosis is a disease caused by bacteria that spread from person to person through
the air. TB typically affects a person’s lungs, although it can affect other body parts
such as the brain and kidneys as well. The TB bacteria attack the body, destroying
tissue. Symptoms of pulmonary TB include chest pain, persistent cough, coughing of
blood and phlegm, weakness and fatigue, night sweats, and weight loss. The disease
is debilitating and has a high mortality rate when untreated. As noted earlier, TB is
currently the ninth leading cause of death worldwide and the leading cause of death
from a single infectious agent.
Tuberculosis can be treated and cured by multi-drug regimens that have been available since the 1950s. Treatment consists of several antibiotics that kill the TB bacteria;
a typical treatment course takes six months and patients take medicines two to three
times per week. The Indian Government (in partnership with the WHO) provides these
medicines at no cost to patients.14 15
14

Laurence et al. (2015) report that in India, the cost of a full course of medication for drug-susceptible
TB was $US 15 per patient as of 2005; on average across low-income countries, the cost was $US 49
per patient.
15
Although patients typically start to feel better after taking the medicines for a few weeks, it is
important to take them as prescribed and to complete the entire treatment course in order to be cured.
Failure to complete the treatment not only results in failure to be cured, but it may facilitate the growth
of bacteria resistant to the medicines, leading to Drug-Resistant TB (DR-TB), Multi-Drug-Resistant
TB (MDR-TB), or even rarer and harder-to-treat strains. DR-TB and MDR-TB are more difficult

14

Tuberculosis is a major public health problem in India. The nation has the largest
number of TB cases in the world and accounts for more than one-quarter of the global
TB burden. Almost three million people develop active TB each year and the disease
caused 435,000 deaths in India in 2016. The country is among the WHO’s “high-burden”
countries for TB, MDR-TB, and TB/HIV co-infections (World Health Organization,
2017). The Indian Government’s TB control initiative, the RNTCP, is coordinated by
TB officers appointed at the district and state levels. TB services are delivered through
the existing health infrastructure in which community centers serve as treatment clinics
to administer DOTS to patients and monitor treatment. Non-governmental and private
providers are systematically and actively engaged under the RNTCP. In 2008, about
3,000 NGOs and 20,000 private practitioners were part of the RNTCP effort.
Our study partner, Operation ASHA, operates about 200 community-based DOTS
centers in several cities in 11 Indian states. Operation ASHA employs community health
workers, known as “providers” or “counselors,” whose job description includes detection
of and outreach to new symptomatics as well as monitoring of drug therapy for patients
in treatment. Although Operation ASHA is an NGO, it works within the existing structure of the RNTCP. When prospective patients (“suspects”) are identified by Operation
ASHA’s health workers as presenting symptoms consistent with TB (“symptomatics”),
they are directed to a government testing center for a sputum test. Those who test
positive for TB enroll in one of Operation ASHA’s clinics, where their medication is
dispensed at no charge to them, according to DOTS standards and conforming with
RNTCP guidelines and protocols.16
(and more expensive) to treat than drug-susceptible TB because the bacteria are resistant to one or
more drugs.
16
Patients present at the clinic to take their medication according to treatment regimen and start
date. As part of the proprietary biometric monitoring system employed by Operation ASHA, counselors
verify patients’ fingerprints before dispensing medication. At the end of the prescribed treatment period,
all patients are tested (at government testing centers) to determine whether they have been cured.

15

3.2

Experiment setup

Our study consisted of a randomized controlled trial implemented in 122 DOTS centers
in 10 cities across three states (Delhi NCR, Madhya Pradesh, and Rajasthan). The
intervention was implemented by JPAL-South Asia in five waves between January 2016
and October 2017.
We augmented Operation ASHA’s established use of community health workers and
DOTS treatment by incorporating various types of referrals of new suspects by existing
patients. Specifically, we used a cross-randomized design to test, respectively, three
types of incentives for referrals and three types of outreach to prospective TB patients
(described in detail below). The baseline sample included all Operation ASHA patients
receiving treatment for drug-susceptible TB who were at least two weeks into their
medication course when the baseline surveys commenced. We expanded the sample
to include patients who had completed their six-month treatment in the three months
before the start of the baseline surveys. Existing patients were either in the intensive
phase (IP) of treatment, where they came to the clinic three times per week, or in the
continuing phase (CP) of treatment (typically following IP), which required them to
come to the clinic once a week.17 In cases where the patient was a minor, the survey
questions and interventions were addressed to the legal guardian. The experiment was
rolled out in five waves between March 2016 and October 2017. To address the possibility
of spillover effects between patients, we randomized by center.18 A total of 3,176 patients
were included in our study.19
17

Patients suffering from MDR-TB, Extremely Drug-Resistant (XDR-TB), or Totally Drug-Resistant
(TDR-TB) were not included in the sample.
18
The potential for spillovers across centers was much more limited. Operation ASHA chooses where
to locate its centers in order to make their location as convenient as possible for patients and spread
them out geographically to maximize their total reach and minimize possible overlap between potential
patient populations across areas.
19
The Operation ASHA patient lists we received included 4,203 patients. Of these, 3,402 (81% of
the total) were surveyed at baseline and enrolled in the study. Reasons why some patients were not
surveyed included: a move to another city or district, inability to track them after three enumerator
visits, or a diagnosis of MDR-, XDR-, or TDR-TB. There was no economically or statistically significant association between the proportion of listed patients who could not be surveyed at baseline and
experimental conditions (see Appendix Table A1). The baseline included 226 patients in 10 clinics
who were subsequently omitted from the analysis because a change in Operation ASHA’s relationship

16

For treatment and control centers, each existing patient was visited by a survey
enumerator in a private location such as the patient’s home. Enumerators obtained
informed consent and administered a baseline survey. Information was collected on the
existing patient’s socioeconomic characteristics, physical and psychological health, and
TB treatment, as well as on information-sharing networks. At the end of the survey,
patients at treatment and control centers were prompted to think about individuals
outside their households who they believed might be affected by TB. (“Please think of
people you know who have TB symptoms.”) According to RNTCP protocol, immediate
family members of TB patients are automatically tested for TB, and as such, were
excluded from our referral schemes because they were already known to the system.
Then, for treatment centers only, all patients were told, “We are promoting outreach
for tuberculosis to encourage more people to get tested and treated, and we invite you
to join this effort.” They could do this by recommending TB testing for people they
knew socially and believed to have symptoms; these new suspects would receive referral
cards with information about the screening process. An example of the referral card
distributed by existing patients is provided in Figure 1. The cards contained information
about Operation ASHA, names and addresses of local providers and treatment clinics, a
list of TB symptoms, and an ID number used by Operation ASHA and the research team
to link the card to the referrer and to distribute incentives according to the study design.
New suspects were asked to bring these referral cards to Operation ASHA centers, where
they would be screened by health providers and sent for further testing (if required) as
per RNTCP mandates.
This process, from a suspect’s arrival at an Operation ASHA health center to testing
and, if necessary, treatment, was recorded in a referral register at the center that was
updated with the relevant outcome at each step, including the result of the screening,
whether the new symptomatic got tested, the results of the test (for symptomatics
who got tested), and whether the newly identified TB-positive individual enrolled in
treatment.
with the leadership at the government testing center in Bhubaneshwar (Odisha) meant we were not
permitted to access administrative endline data for these patients.

17

New suspects were always told that they had been targeted for outreach by someone
who knew them personally, and shown where their information would be recorded on
the card that linked them back to the contact who provided the referral. While they
were asked to bring referral cards with them to Operation ASHA, they – like any other
individual – could seek care at Operation ASHA (or a public sector facility) without
providing a referral card or other documentation. Operation ASHA continued to conduct
outreach, screening, and enrollment of new patients following its regular procedures
throughout the duration of the study, including enrolling new patients who did not have
referral cards. Any new suspect who was approached by or on behalf of an existing
patient in this study, but who was concerned about having their visit to Operation
ASHA linked to the contact who referred them, could present for screening and receive
identical care without submitting the referral card.20 To the extent that this occurred,
we will underestimate the extent of case-finding as a result of the outreach and incentive
conditions tested in this study.

3.3

Experimental variation: incentive conditions

The first type of experimental variation was in the reward offered for each new suspect
who sought screening and presented a referral card linked to an existing patient. In
one-third of centers, there was no financial reward, only encouragement to participate
for the good of the community. In these centers, both fi and pi (see Section 2) were
thus zero. In another third of centers, existing patients were offered Rs. 150 for each
new suspect who got screened at their behest. This treatment condition corresponds to
fi = 150 and pi = 0. This amount equals about $US 3 and is roughly equivalent to the
median daily income in India.21
In the remaining third of centers, existing patients were offered Rs. 100 for each new
suspect who got screened and an additional Rs. 150 if the suspect tested positive for TB.
20

As described in more detail below, all new suspects were surveyed at intake by J-PAL enumerators,
and the survey included questions about their perception of and experience with Operation ASHA.
There were no reports of problematic interactions or negative perceptions.
21
Diofasi and Birdsall (2016) report median daily incomes of $US 2.50 in rural India and $US 3.50
in urban India.

18

This corresponds to fi = 100 and pi = 150. The fixed payment provided some insurance
to the referrer; the size of the fixed payment and the bonus was calibrated such that
the conditional and unconditional incentives were of equal expected value based on the
rate of positive tests in a pilot study conducted between June and September 2012. As
we will show, these turned out to be roughly the same in the full study.
Note that while all incentive treatments designate financial rewards to be paid to the
existing patient, it is possible that existing patients and the new suspects they identified
chose to divide the money between themselves according to a sharing rule of their own
selection. This does not undermine our research design; such side payments are simply
an element of the social reward that forms part of the expected benefit (or cost) of
making a referral. The policy-relevant estimate of the effect of incentives allows for side
payments to take place naturally at the discretion of existing patients and new suspects.

3.4

Experimental variation: outreach conditions

The second type of experimental variation was in the modality of the referral itself. We
compare peer outreach to two types of health-worker-facilitated outreach. In the onethird of centers assigned to the peer-outreach conditions, referral cards were given to
existing patients. They were asked to approach people they knew socially and believed
to have TB symptoms, inform them about TB’s consequences and treatment, give them
cards, and encourage them to get tested. Existing patients had up to 30 days to deliver
the cards, and new suspects had an additional 30 days to present themselves at an
Operation ASHA center for screening.22 The enumerators asked existing patients to
emphasize to the new suspects the importance of bringing the card when coming for
screening, though treatment by Operation ASHA was never conditional on bringing a
referral card and new patients identified outside of our study were screened for symptoms
and treated identically by health workers despite not bringing referral cards. Existing
patients were also told they were free to request additional cards, if needed; this was
done to avoid creating a perception of scarcity that might have resulted in different
22

A new suspect who arrived outside the 60-day window would still be screened, tested, and treated
if necessary, but the existing patient would not receive credit for the referral per study protocols.

19

opportunity costs of providing cards in the various experimental conditions.
The health-worker outreach conditions represent the current best practice regarding
outreach and treatment of communicable disease, and they are conceptually closest to
community-based targeting schemes. In these treatment centers, existing patients were
asked to provide names and contact information of people in their social network who
might benefit from getting tested for TB, so that a health worker could follow up by
visiting these individuals.23 Existing patients were shown the referral cards and told that
the Operation ASHA health worker would deliver the cards to the people they named.
As in the peer conditions, existing patients were told they had 30 days to provide names
and the new suspects were to present for screening within 30 days after receiving cards
from a health worker.
Half of the health-worker outreach centers were assigned to the “referrer-identified”
condition, in which existing patients were told their names would be used when the
health worker approached new suspects on their behalf; the specific language was, “I
have come to see you because [Name], who cares about you, asked me to visit”. Like the
peer-outreach condition, the referrer-identified condition carries a risk of stigma because
the current patient is revealed to be associated with a TB treatment organization, and
that association would otherwise be hidden in the normal course of business because it is
thought by patients and staff at Operation ASHA to raise suspicions of infection.24 The
remaining health-worker outreach centers were assigned to the “anonymous” condition,
in which existing patients were told their names would not be revealed to the individuals
they referred. Instead, health workers would tell the new suspects, “I have come to see
you because someone who cares about you asked me to visit”.
To ensure that existing patients in the peer-outreach conditions received the same
23

Contact information could be an address, instructions about how to reach a contact’s home, a
phone number, or other information available to existing patients that would enable health workers to
visit their contacts. This flexibility was intended to reduce barriers to making referrals.
24
The full script was: “My name is [Operation ASHA health worker’s name], I am here from Operation
ASHA. Operation ASHA is [description of Operation ASHA]. I have come because [Name of existing
patient OR “someone who cares about you”] asked me to visit. This person knows about TB, and
thought you would benefit from learning how to get tested and treated for TB. Here is a referral card
[hand out card].”

20

level of priming as those in the health worker outreach conditions, patients in the peeroutreach conditions were also asked to provide names and contact information of people
they knew who might benefit from getting screened for TB.25
While effort by peers is an outcome of the study, we monitored the Operation ASHA
health workers closely to ensure they visited all the contacts named by the existing
patients. Health workers were told that the JPAL team would survey each contact and
ask whether they had been visited by an Operation ASHA representative and given the
referral cards. Health workers were compensated for their participation in the outreach
and monitoring activities required by the study. They received fixed monthly payments
if the JPAL team determined they completed required activities. Compliance was high:
87.5% of new suspects named in the health worker outreach arms were visited by Operation ASHA staff (85% in the encouragement arms and 88.4% in the incentivized
arms).
This experimental variation in outreach strategy corresponds to the social and economic costs of a referral. As discussed in Section 2, peer referrals carry two types of
costs: the time cost of the interaction itself (cij ) and the stigma cost (sij ) of revealing
one’s own TB status to a peer (and hinting that the peer might have TB). Referreridentified outreach by health workers eliminates the time cost to the existing patient
(and shifts it to a health worker) but, because the health worker explicitly names the
peer who provided the referral, it maintains the stigma cost. Anonymous outreach by
health workers carries neither time nor stigma cost at the margin for the existing patient. In both conditions, however, the new suspect might incur a psychological cost
from inferring that someone in their social network (named or not) believes that they
might have an infectious disease.
Making referrals may also entail a social benefit (gij in the framework outlined in
Section 2). It is unclear how to rank the treatments in terms of their social benefits
to existing patients. Existing patients may experience a “warm glow” from helping
25

Of course, patients in the peer-outreach conditions were not limited to reaching out to the contacts
they named. As shown in Appendix Table A4, patients in the peer-outreach conditions initially listed
fewer names than those in the health worker outreach arms. However, they made more referrals than
the names they provided at baseline.

21

others even if their contribution is anonymous. Or, they may feel greater satisfaction—
or receive gratitude from their peers—for in-person or identified outreach strategies.
Since peer referrals may have higher costs and benefits than identified or anonymous
heath worker outreach, the question of which strategy will generate more referrals is an
empirical one.
In the public health context, the quality of information conveyed to new suspects
(qij ) is paramount. Health workers and peers may differ in the content of the information
they convey, and in the credibility with which the information is perceived. On one hand,
health workers may be better informed about symptoms and treatment of TB, and their
expertise may be respected by prospective patients. On the other hand, existing patients
are able to provide firsthand testimonials about the experience and benefits of treatment
from a patient’s perspective. Furthermore, because existing patients are asked to speak
to people they know personally and believe to have symptoms of TB in the peer outreach
condition, the personal connection may also build trust and enhance the value of the
information exchanged. In the health worker outreach conditions in which the identity
of the referring existing patient is revealed, some of that credibility may be recovered
through the endorsement.
The final design thus randomly assigned 122 clinics to a pure control condition or
one of nine treatment conditions. Figure 2 summarizes the research design and indicates
how many clinics and patients were assigned to the pure control condition and to each
of the nine treatment conditions.26
26

We had originally planned equal-sized arms both in terms of number of centers and average number
of original patients per center. Figure 2 shows that the number of centers ranged from 10 to 14 across
arms. The reason for this variation is that the randomization was done by wave, and the number
of centers available at the start of each wave varied. Centers also varied in size, and although we
stratified on city, we did not have sufficient centers in each wave to also be able to stratify on center
size. The average center had 26 original patients (standard deviation = 19.4). Treated centers had
about 7 more patients on average than control centers (p=0.13) but there were no economically or
statistically significant differences in the number of original patients across incentive conditions and
outreach conditions (see Appendix Table A2). There were no differences across experimental arms in
original patient attrition at baseline (see Appendix Table A1) and, as described in detail below, the
samples are balanced on observables. Moreover, as shown in the Appendix and discussed below, the
results are robust to weighing observations by the inverse of the number of original patients per center,
and center-level regressions find very similar effects as at the original patient level. This suggests that
there was no interaction between treatment and unobserved characteristics that are correlated with

22

3.5

Incentivized elicitation of outreach effort

After responding to the endline survey (see next section for details on data collection),
participants were offered the opportunity to return unused referral cards to the enumerators for a payment of Rs. 10 per card. This provided an incentive-compatible
measure of how many cards were not distributed, in contrast to simply asking respondents, who may exaggerate the number of cards distributed because of experimenter
demand effects. By combining this measure of the number of cards not distributed with
administrative data about the number of cards brought to Operation ASHA providers,
we were able to compute the number of cards distributed by existing patients but not
redeemed by suspects—information that helped us identify the nature of the barriers to
referrals and testing (see Section 4.4.6 below). Patients were not told about the card
buyback in advance in order to prevent strategic or risk-averse behavior with regard to
card distribution.

4
4.1

Data and Results
Data

Our analysis combines administrative data from Operation ASHA with two rounds of
surveys of existing patients and the new suspects they identified. The administrative
data include rosters of baseline patients and new suspects (collected as part of the normal
outreach and enrollment procedures), ID numbers for existing patients who referred each
new suspect, and information on treatment adherence for all patients. Baseline surveys
of existing patients measured their socioeconomic characteristics, physical and psychological health, risk- and information-sharing networks, and attitudes toward Operation
ASHA and TB treatment. After the intervention, endline surveys were conducted with
existing patients to capture information on health outcomes and satisfaction with Operation ASHA. Intake surveys were also administered to the new suspects identified
through the schemes: these measured their characteristics and history of care for TB.
center size.

23

4.2

Patient characteristics and balance tests

Tables 1 and 2 provide the means and standard errors of existing patients’ baseline
characteristics overall as well as by incentive condition and outreach type. As a result of
working with a large provider operating in multiple states, our sample is not only large
but also heterogeneous on many sociodemographic dimensions. The average existing
patient in the study was approximately 37 years old, and about 40% of baseline patients
were women (World Health Organization (2017) reports that 65% of new incident TB
cases are male). About 70% of the patients had some literacy, 30% had secondary
education, and 61% had a bank account. Eighty-three percent of the respondents had
never been treated for TB before receiving care at Operation ASHA.
Tables 1 and 2 show that the randomization resulted in patients having similar
characteristics across experimental conditions. To formally test for balance, we implemented omnibus balance tests that compared pairs of treatments using linear probability
models. Specifically, we compared the probability of assignment to each of the three
incentive treatments (separately) relative to the control group and to the other incentive treatments, and to each of the three outreach treatments (separately) relative to
the control group and to the other outreach treatments. These tests involve 12 separate
regressions: six comparing an incentive or outreach treatment to the pure control group,
three comparing pairs of incentive treatments, and three comparing pairs of outreach
treatments.
The p-values for the F-tests that the covariates included in Tables 1 and 2 jointly
predict assignment are reported in Appendix Table A3. Six specifications compare a
treatment arm to the pure control group. In all six, we fail to reject the null that the
covariates jointly predict assignment at the 95% confidence level (the p-value for the Ftest for the comparison between any treatment group (pooling across the nine treatment
arms) and the pure control group is 0.4497). Among the outreach treatments, covariates
are reasonably well-balanced between each of the three possible pairs of treatments, with
p-values of 0.18 or greater in two cases (peer outreach compared to anonymous outreach
by health workers, and identified compared to anonymous outreach by health workers),
and a p-value of 0.025 in one case (peer outreach compared to identified health worker
24

outreach). We also fail to reject the null that covariates are well-balanced between
the unconditional incentive and encouragement treatments and between the conditional
and unconditional incentive treatments. However, the p-value for the test that the
coefficients on covariates are jointly zero when comparing the conditional incentive to
the encouragement treatment is 0.001. Of 12 tests, two p-values are less than 0.05.
In economic magnitude, the control group has a higher value of the asset index (0.15
standard deviations) and reports between 0.43 and 0.84 more social contacts than each of
the treatment arms. While our preferred specifications mirror the experimental design
in including only city fixed effects, the magnitudes and statistical significance of our
estimates are virtually unchanged by the inclusion of the baseline covariates from Tables
1 and 2 or, alternatively, covariates selected using the double-lasso procedure described
in Belloni et al. (2014). Details on the double-lasso procedure are provided in section
4.4.5 and results from these alternative specifications are reported in the Appendix
(Tables A10 and A11).

4.3

Overview of aggregate outcomes

Although our experiment is designed to measure the effects of various referral schemes
on individual patients’ behaviors, we begin by presenting the aggregate outcomes of the
study. A total of 216 new suspects were screened by Operation ASHA health workers
as part of this study in the nine experimental conditions combined. (These individuals
constitute the “referrals” discussed in subsequent analysis.) Of these, 170 (78.7%) presented symptoms consistent with TB and were sent for testing at the government testing
centers; we follow Operation ASHA and call them “symptomatics.” Compared to other
case-finding efforts in India, this effort identified a large number of symptomatics, especially relative to the scale of outreach. As noted earlier, Charles et al. (2010) conducted
outreach to 18,417 individuals and found 640, or 3.5%, had symptoms consistent with
TB.
In our study, 123 of these symptomatic individuals subsequently presented themselves for testing at a government center. Thirty-five were found to have active TB,
of whom 34 began treatment immediately. All were previously unknown to the TB
25

treatment system. Because of the study’s stringent requirements, none were immediate family members of the existing patients who referred them, so they were not likely
to be located through health worker outreach by Operation ASHA or government labs
under existing protocols. Prospective patients screened in the health worker outreach
conditions were neighbors (47%), relatives (41%), and friends or coworkers (12%) of the
existing patients who referred them. The corresponding percentages in the peer-outreach
conditions were 48%, 35%, and 17%, respectively.27 The 28% infection rate of the new
symptomatics who were identified and tested through our referral schemes is more than
twice as large as the 12% average TB-positive rate reported in official RNTCP statistics
(the average rates in the states where we conducted our study were 14% in Delhi and
Madya Pradesh, and 17% in Rajasthan).28

4.4

Analysis

We study existing patients’ responses to incentives and their efficacy as outreach agents
by matching new suspects who were screened and tested to the existing patients who
referred them through the unique ID codes embedded in the referral cards. We report
four nested outcomes, each an integer value and measured at the level of the existing
patient.
First, we measure the total number of new suspects who were linked to an existing patient and who presented themselves for screening at the Operation ASHA centers. Second, we measure the number of these suspects who were subsequently sent
for testing (the number of “symptomatics”). This distinction is important because it
indicates whether the referral strategies in this experiment resulted in targeted testing
of symptomatic individuals, or whether existing patients were unable (or unwilling) to
distinguish between peers with symptoms of TB that warranted testing and those without. As part of its partnership with the RNTCP, Operation ASHA routinely screens
prospective patients and sends those with symptoms indicative of TB for testing at
27

The provision of incentives did not have any economic or statistically significant effects on the
relationship between referrer and referee.
28
In a study in Nepal that used peer volunteers to identify TB cases (Joshi et al., 2017), 6,046 suspects
were tested over a period of 16 months, resulting in 287 TB diagnoses, or 4.3%.

26

government-designated microscopy centers (DMCs). It played the same gatekeeping
role in screening prospective patients identified through our referral schemes. Third, we
measure the number of symptomatics who actually got tested, as testing is a necessary
condition to obtain treatment but requires effort by symptomatics (who have to report
to a DMC) and represents a critical juncture for loss to follow-up. Finally, we measure
and report the number of positive cases of TB attributed to the outreach of each existing
patient in the sample.
Note that we instituted procedures to capture any peer referrals made by existing
patients of pure control centers. Operation ASHA health workers at all centers kept a
record of the source of each new suspect screened during the intervention period. But in
practice, and in accordance with the extremely low rate of peer referrals that motivated
this study, all outcomes equal zero for existing patients in the pure control group.
Also note that our outcome variables are the union of behavior by existing patients—
who decide whom to approach or to have contacted by a health worker, how much effort
to exert, and what information to share—with the behavior of new suspects, who decide
whether to follow up to be screened and, when recommended, tested. Each of the
referral modalities we consider has advantages and disadvantages to existing patients
and new suspects. Our approach is to test the relative performance of each type of
referral using reduced-form specifications that capture the total effects of the ways these
strategies differ in costs, benefits, and information provided. Nonetheless, a comparison
of the effects of various incentive types and outreach modalities provides information
about the mechanisms through which referrals may (or may not) prove valuable in this
context.
4.4.1

Financial incentives

To measure the effect of incentives on referrals generated by existing patients, we use
OLS to estimate linear models of the form:
yijc = α + β1 Encouragementjc + β2 Conditionaljc + β3 Unconditionaljc + Γc + j

27

(2)

where i indexes existing patients, j are clinics (the level of treatment), and c are cities.
Γc are city fixed effects, which absorb state and wave fixed effects (randomization was
stratified by city). The omitted category in this specification is pure control clinics, so
β1 is the effect of encouraging existing patients to make referrals, relative to the status
quo; β2 is the effect of offering existing patients Rs. 100 for each new patient screened
at their recommendation, plus an Rs. 150 reward for any referrals who tested positive
for TB (corresponding to fi = 100 and pi = 150); and β3 is the effect of offering existing
patients Rs. 150 for any new patient screened at their recommendation, regardless of
test outcome (fi = 150 and pi = 0). We also report the estimated effect of financial
incentives relative to encouragement (and the p-value for the tests that β1 = β2 and
β1 = β3 ), and compare the conditional and unconditional incentive structures (reporting
the p-value for the test that β2 = β3 ). Recall that treatment is assigned at the clinic
level; standard errors are therefore clustered at the clinic level.29 Additionally, we report
p-values adjusted for testing 12 hypotheses (three coefficients and four outcomes), using
the false-discovery rate methodology of Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).30
While encouragement without financial reward does increase referrals relative to the
pure control condition, the results from the main OLS specifications reported in Table
3 clearly indicate that financial incentives matter. From column 1, patients at clinics
assigned to the encouragement arm referred, on average, 0.044 new suspects. Patients eligible for conditional incentives referred 0.102 new suspects and those eligible for unconditional incentives referred 0.096 new suspects. The p-value for the difference between
encouragement and the conditional incentive is 0.09, and the p-value for the difference
between encouragement and the unconditional incentive is 0.03. While money matters,
conditionality apparently does not: the p-value for the test that the conditional and unconditional incentives have equal effect is 0.84. The pattern persists in other measures
of referrals, including the number of new suspects recommended for testing (column 2),
29

Our primary results are from linear models. Below, we also report estimates from linear probability
specifications for binary analogs of the outcomes.
30
As we discuss in section 4.4.5, our results and conclusions are robust to a set of alternative specifications in which we include baseline covariates, or weigh observations based on the size of Operation
ASHA centers at baseline, or estimate our models using aggregate, center-level outcomes.

28

and the number of symptomatics actually tested for TB (column 3). In particular, note
that the vast majority of suspects identified through this scheme were sent for testing,
indicating that existing patients were able and willing to identify individuals with TB
symptoms warranting testing. We find similar patterns when we consider positive TB
tests (column 4), even though the results are less precise because this outcome variable
is defined more granularly and with correspondingly lower variation. As noted in section 4.3, more than one-quarter (28%) of the new suspects identified through any of the
treatment arms who got tested were ultimately diagnosed with TB, a higher rate than in
the public sector in India during the same time period. As shown in column 4 of Table 3,
existing patients in the unconditional incentive treatment group identified, on average,
0.013 new TB patients, whereas existing patients in the conditional incentive treatment
group identified 0.005 new TB patients (the p-value for the test that the effect of the two
incentive treatments is jointly zero is 0.04).31 The estimated effects of unconditional and
conditional incentives remain statistically significant even after adjustment for multiple
hypothesis testing for suspects screened, tests recommended, and symptomatics tested
(but not for positive tests).
These results indicate that existing patients respond to encouragement—and especially to financial incentives—to share information about screening for a communicable
disease. Screening, testing, and identification of TB patients are all measures of welfare
in a context with a high disease burden, where it is important to either diagnose TB
or rule it out as a cause of illness. Behavioral responses by existing patients, who can
identify more new suspects when offered a financial incentive to do so, translate into
small but economically meaningful and statistically significant increases in case finding.
4.4.2

Outreach strategies

The second set of existing patient-level analyses focuses on the effects of peer outreach
and two variants of health worker outreach, identified and anonymous, relative to a pure
31
In the encouragement group, existing patients were responsible for detecting an average of 0.003
cases of TB. The difference between the encouragement group and the unconditional group is significant
at the 90% confidence level (p=0.09), and the difference between the encouragement group and the
conditional incentive group is not significant at conventional levels (p=0.30).

29

control condition. While the analysis in section 4.4.1 is similar to the analysis of referrals
in labor market contexts, this section explores a margin of referrals not discussed in the
job referrals literature that is potentially especially important in a health context.
In all clinics, including the pure control group, health workers are tasked with routine
outreach to and screening of the immediate household members of newly diagnosed
patients. Our analysis focuses on suspects who are screened and tested because of
the recommendation of an existing patient, not through Operation ASHA’s standard
operating procedures. Outcomes for existing patients in the control group are equal to
zero in practice, though not by definition.
As in the previous section, we pool across treatment arms to estimate regressions of
the form:
yijc = α + γ1 Peerjc + γ2 Identifiedjc + β3 Anonymousjc + Λc + µj

(3)

Any peer-facilitated outreach is more effective than the status quo; 10 of the 12
coefficients reported in Table 4 are significantly different than zero even after adjustment
for multiple hypothesis testing, and we reject that the joint effect of the three treatment
arms is equal to zero for all four outcomes. Peers are more effective than trained and
paid health workers at inducing the new suspects to get screened and tested, even
though the suspects approached in both health worker outreach arms are identified by
existing patients. The interaction between an existing patient and a suspect increases
the probability of screening and testing. Existing patients who were asked to recruit
new suspects directly through peer outreach induced an average of 0.124 new suspects
to report for screening, compared to 0.054 for those approached by health workers
on behalf of a named peer (health worker outreach – identified) or 0.056 for those
approached by health workers on behalf of an unnamed peer (health worker outreach
– anonymous). The p-values for the differences between peer outreach and the two
health worker outreach arms are 0.01 and 0.03, respectively. There is no economic
or statistically significant difference between the anonymous and identified outreach
modalities. The three treatments are comparable in their efficacy in increasing the
number of symptomatics tested. Peer referrals have a statistically significant effect (at
30

the 95% level) on the number of TB cases found (0.010 per existing patient in the
peer-outreach arm), but differences with respect to the health worker outreach arms are
estimated imprecisely.
Peer outreach results in the screening of twice as many new suspects as outreach by
health workers, despite the additional transaction costs borne by existing patients in
the peer-outreach conditions. This suggests peers are more effective at conveying information about the benefits of treatment to convince suspects to seek health counseling,
an intuition that is confirmed by the analysis of complementarities between financial
incentives and peer outreach in Section 4.4.4 as well as by the analyses and discussion
in Section 4.4.6.
4.4.3

Extensive margin

The magnitude of the individual response to incentives documented above is substantial. Previous sections consider the number of new suspects detected, but for a more
complete understanding of the referral process, and for the purpose of comparing the
magnitudes of our results to the related literature on job referrals, we also estimate linear
probability models that correspond to equations (1) and (2) but have binary dependent
variables: any new suspects screened, any new symptomatics sent for testing, any new
symptomatics who get tested, and any new symptomatics whose sputum test results are
positive.
Some 3.8% of existing patients in the encouragement arm made at least one referral
that resulted in a screening, compared to 6.1% of patients who received the unconditional
incentive of Rs. 150 for each new suspect screened; the difference of 2.3 percentage points
is statistically significant at the 90% level (see Appendix Table A6). In the conditional
incentive arm, 4.9% of existing patients made at least one referral that resulted in the
screening of a new suspect, an effect that is significantly different from zero but not from
the point estimates for either encouragement only or the unconditional incentive.32 Since
32
In an experiment with a similar design but a different context for social costs and benefits, Beaman
and Magruder (2012) found that an unconditional incentive of Rs. 110 (in 2009, equivalent to Rs. 184
in 2017) increased the probability of referring a contact for a day of paid employment by 7.7 percentage
points, from a base probability of 69.5. In percentage terms, similar economic incentives had a bigger

31

the modal number of new suspects screened conditional on making any referrals is one,
it is not surprising that the extensive margin results are qualitatively very similar to the
results in the previous sections; both the financial incentives and outreach interventions
operate primarily at the extensive margin.
4.4.4

Complementarities between incentives and outreach modalities

Next, we investigate whether there are complementarities between incentives for referrals
and outreach modality. Peer outreach is more costly to existing patients than providing
names to health workers because of the time and effort required to perform outreach
activities as well as the social cost of interacting with others to discuss a potentially uncomfortable subject. Therefore, we hypothesize that incentives might be more effective
under the peer-outreach modality.
Because the results in sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 indicate no economically or statistically
meaningful differences of the conditionality of incentives or anonymity of health worker
outreach, we test for complementarities between financial incentives and peer outreach
by pooling the two incentive types and the two health worker outreach variants to
estimate the following regression:
yijc = α + ψ1 no$Peerjc + ψ2 no$Health workerjc + ψ3 $Peerjc + ψ4 $Health workerjc
+ Γc + j

(4)

where no$ denotes conditions with no incentives and $ indicates groups with incentives.
The results from this exercise, shown in Table 5, indicate strong complementarities between financial incentives and peer outreach. Each existing patient in the peeroutreach conditions produced, on average, 0.178 new suspects (significantly different
from zero in the control group at the 99% level) when incentives were provided, compared to 0.036 (not statistically significant) in the absence of incentives. The p-value for
effect on referrals in our public health context than in the employment context. This is striking since
the total social costs sij of referrals for TB testing and treatment may be higher due to stigma, and
because job referrals may generate income that a contact can share with a referrer, but health referrals
do not—at least in the short term.

32

the test that peer outreach is equally effective with and without incentives is 0.01. Similar patterns are observed for the other outcome variables, with incentives significantly
enhancing the effect of peer outreach on the number of new symptomatics recommended
for testing, the number of symptomatics actually tested, and the number of new TB
cases detected. In all cases, the estimated effects remain statistically significant at the
95% level even after adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing. Existing patients in
the incentivized peer-outreach conditions identified, on average, 0.017 new TB patients
(significantly different from zero in the control group at the 95% level), and the p-value
for the test that incentivized and nonincentivized peer outreach are equally effective at
identifying TB-positive cases is 0.05.
In contrast, the estimated effects of health worker outreach are similar with and
without financial incentives. For example, each patient in the health worker outreach
conditions resulted in 0.063 new suspects screened (significantly different from zero at
the 95% level) with incentives and 0.048 new suspects (significant at the 99% level)
screened without incentives. For all four outcomes, we cannot reject that outreach
by health workers is equally effective when implemented with and without financial
incentives. Moreover, the differential effectiveness of peer outreach relative to health
worker outreach is driven by the interaction with financial incentives.
4.4.5

Alternative specifications

All of the specifications described above are robust to including the patient-level covariates from the balance tests (Appendix Tables A8 and A9) as well as covariates selected
using the double-lasso procedure described by Belloni et al. (2014) (Appendix Tables
A10 and A11). This three-step procedure first uses lasso to select controls from among
all of the baseline variables in our sample (and, for continuous variables, their squares)
that are correlated with treatment assignment; second, it uses lasso to select additional
controls that predict the outcome variable; and third, it estimates our models via OLS,
including all of the selected controls. We implement this procedure using the Stata command “pdslasso,” selecting controls separately for each of the four outcomes of interest,
and including city fixed effects as unpenalized regressors. Point estimates for the effects
33

of the experimental treatments are very similar using this double-lasso procedure as in
our main specifications with no baseline covariates.
In the Appendix, we also report results from weighted regressions where each observation is weighted by the inverse of the number of original patients per center (Tables
A12-A14), and we compute p-values obtained by wild cluster bootstrap (Appendix Tables A15 and A16; these p-values were obtained using the Stata command “boottest”).
Further, we reestimated our models at the clinic level, where outcomes are clinic-level
averages and regressions account for different-sized clinics (Appendix Tables A17-A19).
The magnitude and statistical significance of the main estimated coefficients of interest
are largely unchanged in these alternative specifications.
4.4.6

Effort by existing patients

Existing patients could exert effort through screening potential referees (choosing those
with higher pj ), contacting them (the extensive margin), or by convincing them to
get tested (the intensive margin, qij ). While we cannot fully separate those channels,
data about the number of potential contacts named at the outset of the intervention,
the number of card distributed in the peer outreach arms, and the conversion rate
from screening to testing help us understand these mechanisms. At the onset of the
intervention, existing patients in all outreach arms – including peer outreach – were
asked to provide the names and contact information of people they would contact or who
should be contacted by health workers. In the health worker outreach arms, knowing
that health workers were responsible for outreach, 11.09 percent of existing patients
who were not offered financial incentives and 11.35 percent of existing patients who
were offered incentives provided at least one name (see Appendix Table A4). In the
peer outreach arms, 4.43 percent of existing patients who were not offered incentives
and 7.68 percent of those who were offered incentives provided at least one name. This
is consistent with both the previous result that financial incentives complemented peer
outreach by compensating existing patients for the required effort, and with the notion
that existing patients immediately recognized that peer outreach required greater effort.
In the health worker outreach arms, all of the potential symptomatics named at
34

baseline were contacted by Operation ASHA staff, with no additional effort required by
existing patients; the number of names listed corresponds to the number of potential
patients who received information about testing and treatment. In the peer outreach
arms, though, existing patients may have contacted all, some, or none of the people
who they identified at baseline; they also may have contacted people not on their initial
lists. While we do not have perfect data about outreach attempts by existing patients,
we did obtain an incentivized measure of effort in contacting suspect from existing
patients assigned to the peer-outreach arms. Recall that only existing patients in the
peer outreach arm were given referral cards to pass on to their contacts. After the
endline survey, we offered to buy back any remaining referral cards from these existing
patients. The difference between the ten cards initially distributed to existing patients
and the number of cards returned to the survey team provides a proxy for the extensive
margin of outreach in the peer outreach arm.
Some patients reported they had lost their cards; of 869 respondents assigned to
peer outreach and surveyed at endline, the 195 who returned zero cards represent those
who distributed 10 cards and those who lost or discarded the materials. The number
of cards returned is a lower bound on the number of cards not distributed to new
suspects. Nonetheless, a comparison of the number of cards returned by existing patients
eligible for different incentive schemes provides some information about the margin
of effort. In the encouragement arm, existing patients returned an average of 7.24
cards. Existing patients eligible for unconditional incentives returned 0.05 additional
cards and those eligible for conditional incentives returned 0.07 fewer cards; relative
to the encouragement arm, those differences are neither statistically nor economically
significant.33 Not only are the means similar, the distribution of the number of cards
returned by the two groups is almost identical.34
This is striking in light of the previous result that financial incentives strongly complemented peer outreach in increasing the number of new suspects screened and tested.
33

See Appendix Table A5, Panel A. The regression specification corresponds to equation (7) and the
sample includes all patients assigned to the peer-outreach arms.
34
See Appendix Table A5, Panel B. Kolmogorov-Smirnov equality-of-distributions tests give p-values
of 0.993 (no incentive vs. any incentive) and 0.795 (unconditional incentive vs. conditional incentive).

35

Now, we see that this complementarity was achieved without an increase in the number
of cards distributed. This pattern suggests that financial incentives increased existing
patients’ efforts to improve the quality of information they conveyed to new suspects
(qij ) or to identify suspects who had a greater likelihood of having TB (pj ). While we are
not fully able to separate these two components of existing patient effort, comparing the
conversation rates from screening to testing provides suggestive evidence that incentives
increased effort by both improving the quality of information shared with new suspects
and by targeting those most likely to have TB.
We know from the data about cards bought back that financial incentives did not
change the number of outreach attempts. However, as we saw in Table 5, incentives
did increase the number of new suspects who were screened, which is consistent with an
effect on qij . Though the small absolute number of new suspects who were screened and
tested limits subsequent analysis, we can compare the fraction positive for TB among
those who were referred by incentivized and non-incentivized existing patients. Of the
new suspects screened (sent for testing) as a result of referrals from existing patients
in the peer outreach, no incentives arm, 8.33 (16.67) percent tested positive. Of those
referred by existing patients in the peer outreach, financial incentives arm, 17.14 (30.09)
percent tested positive. Since test results are only available for those new suspects who
came to Operation ASHA for screening, their test results conditional on screening are
a measure of pj for those for whom the perceived benefits of screening were sufficiently
high to show up. In this group, those who were referred by incentivized existing patients
were twice as likely to have symptoms of TB and twice as likely to actually have TB
as other individuals who were convinced to show up by an existing patient who did not
receive incentives. Therefore, incentives appear to have improved screening as well as
increasing the quality of information conveyed by existing patients to their contacts.
4.4.7

Heterogeneity by existing patient characteristics

Just as network position matters in the diffusion of agricultural information (Beaman
et al., 2018a), it may also affect who is well-positioned to spread information about
public health. Banerjee et al. (2019) find that individuals nominated by their com36

munities are better at spreading information (in this case, about immunization camps)
that increases the take-up of vaccines than are randomly selected individuals. Several
papers emphasize the identification of individuals who are most efficient in gathering or
spreading information within their network based on their position within the network
structure or observable characteristics. These works consider information aggregation
(Alatas et al., 2016) and dissemination (Beaman et al., 2018b; Banerjee et al., 2019)
separately, while referrals in our context transmit information in both directions.
We do not capture full social networks, so our analysis of heterogeneous treatment
effects is based on subgroup analysis of how existing patients with different baseline
characteristics respond to the incentive and outreach treatments. We revert to to separate specifications for incentive type and outreach type, and focus on five characteristics
that potentially predict differential responses: asset ownership, social connection, delay
in seeking treatment for TB symptoms, phase of treatment, and gender. Having demonstrated equal effects of conditional and unconditional incentives, and health worker outreach on behalf of identified and anonymous peers, respectively, we pool across treatment
conditions.
Existing patients with higher asset levels are likely to enjoy higher levels of consumption and to have higher opportunity cost of time. Wealthier existing patients may be
less responsive to incentives because the payments represent a smaller fraction of consumption. Wealthier patients may also be less effective when tasked with peer referrals
because of their higher opportunity cost of time.
Existing patients who are more socially connected (measured by their number of
contacts in the previous 24 hours) may face lower costs (lower cij ) for each referral,
predicting both more referrals on average and possibly a stronger response to financial
incentives.35 The lower cij may also give these highly connected patients an advantage
over less connected patients in making peer referrals.
Existing patients who seek treatment quickly may receive a higher social benefit (sij )
35

Our measure of social connectedness should be interpreted as an indication of opportunities for
social interaction, not necessarily as a measure of the size of an individual’s network. In fact, lowincome individuals who live in highly crowded urban areas may have many interactions that do not
generate “social capital” that confers material benefits.

37

because of their own motivation or the perceived intrinsic value of making a referral.
These patients may also be more effective in convincing peers to seek testing and treatment; this information can improve qij only if it is conveyed directly in the peer-outreach
treatment but not indirectly in the health worker outreach arms. Therefore, we expect
more referrals from existing patients assigned to the encouragement group who quickly
seek treatment for their own symptoms, but we have no clear prediction for the response
to financial incentives. We also expect these early treatment seekers to be more effective
in referring new suspects than are existing patients who delay their own care. The early
treatment seekers may also make more referrals in health worker outreach arms, but only
through naming more contacts and not through communicating their own experiences.
Existing patients in the intensive phase (again, IP) of treatment have realized fewer
benefits of treatment than those in the continuation phase (again, CP). They are more
likely to experience side effects from the higher doses of medication they take and they
are required to take observed doses more frequently than those in the CP. Therefore,
they may bear higher costs of conducting outreach (higher cij ), leading to predictions
opposite those for patients with many social contacts: fewer referrals on average, a
weaker response to financial incentives, and less willingness to make peer referrals. The
patients in the intensive phase have also reaped fewer benefits from treatment, so they
may be less effective in communicating its benefits.
Finally, we consider heterogeneity by gender. This analysis is standard in public
health and in studies of India, a highly gendered society. It is particularly relevant in
the context of our study, because in at least some of the communities where we worked,
women’s movement outside the household is strictly limited and social relationships
are strictly gendered: men socialize with men, and women socialize with women. This
means that women may have lower ability to make peer referrals and that new suspects
they refer (who are disproportionately likely to be women themselves) may be less likely
to report for screening.
To test these predictions, we create indicators for above-median asset ownership,
connection, starting TB treatment without delay, and for being in the IP of treatment,

38

respectively,36 as well as for being female. We then estimate interacted versions of
equations (1) and (2), pooling conditional and unconditional incentives and identified
and anonymous health worker outreach treatments, respectively. The specification for
the tests of incentives is:
yijc = α + δ0 Above median + δ1 Encouragementjc + δ2 Financial incentivejc
+ δ3 Above median × Encouragementjc + δ4 Above median × Financial incentivejc
+ Γc + j

(5)

and the specification for the test of outreach strategies is:
yijc = α + θ0 Above median + θ1 Peerjc + θ2 Health workerjc
+ θ3 Above median × Peerjc + θ4 Above median × Health workerjc
+ Γc + j

(6)

Note that while we use the notation “above median” for convenience, the relevant
indicator is coded as 1 for female patients and for those in the IP, respectively, in the
specifications that consider those dimensions of heterogeneity. Because of statistical
power considerations and to reduce the number of reported outcomes, we estimate these
equations for only one outcome: the number of screened patients (corresponding to the
outcome in column 1 of Tables 3 and 4).
We begin with Table 6, which estimates equation (5). As predicted, and shown in
column 1, when assigned to the encouragement treatment, high-asset existing patients
made somewhat fewer referrals than existing patients with below-median assets. While
highly socially connected existing patients made more referrals on average, they did not
respond differentially to the financial incentives. In the encouragement arm, existing
patients who began their own TB treatment without delay made more referrals than
36

The IP lasts for the first two months of treatment and the CP for months three through six.
However, many patients require more than six months to complete treatment due to missed doses or
other considerations. We set the indicator for intensive treatment equal to 1 for patients in the first
two months of treatment and 0 for those in months 3–24. The indicator is coded as missing for the less
than 1% of patients who reported that they started treatment more than 24 months before the survey.

39

those who delayed seeking treatment, and they referred 0.037 more suspects than those
who delayed their own treatment. There is no clear pattern of differential response based
on treatment phase. Finally, women did not make fewer referrals on average or respond
differently to financial incentives than men.
Table 7 reports results for estimates of equation (6). While this specification confirms
that highly connected patients make marginally more referrals (column 2), there is
almost no evidence of differential effectiveness across the outreach modalities. In most
cases, the interaction effects are precisely estimated zeros. The statistical significance
of the outreach strategies, the magnitudes of the coefficients, and the pattern that peer
outreach generates approximately twice as many referrals as either of the health worker
outreach strategies are similar to those in Table 4.

4.5

Characteristics of referred patients across interventions

The previous sections focused on the number of suspects screened and tested, and they
relied on administrative outcomes. This section considers as outcomes the characteristics
of the suspects who were referred to Operation ASHA and screened by a counselor
(corresponding to outcomes in column 1 of Tables 3 and 4).37 The unit of analysis is
the new symptomatic. The objective is to learn whether financial incentives and peer
outreach, respectively, are effective tools to identify disadvantaged individuals in need
of TB care. We consider four outcomes, gender, and three measures of social status:
literacy, asset ownership, and social inclusion.
First, we compare new symptomatics to existing patients at baseline and present
group means in Table 8. Forty percent of existing patients and 37% of the new symptomatics were female. On other dimensions, the new symptomatics appear disadvantaged relative to the existing patients, despite being drawn from the same social networks
by design. Almost 70% of existing patients had at least some literacy, compared to 45%
of the new symptomatics (the p-value for the test that existing patients and new symp37

Of the 216 referrals screened, field teams were able to survey 172. Others had moved, refused to
participate in the survey, or could not be tracked. There was no economic or statistically significant
relationship between the probability that a suspect could be surveyed and whether the existing patient
who referred them was assigned to one of the treatment arms or the pure control condition.

40

tomatics have equal literacy rates is 0.00). Existing patients spoke to an average of
2.6 people outside their households in the 24 hours before the baseline survey, while
new symptomatics were less well-connected, with an average of 1.4 contacts (p=0.01).
Of course, this may reflect that the new symptomatics were in poor health, while the
existing patients were on the way to recovery. Finally, there is suggestive evidence to
indicate that the new symptomatics were poorer than the existing patients: while the
existing patients had a mean asset index value of 0.031, the new symptomatics averaged
-0.144. The difference is imprecisely estimated (p=0.43) but large in magnitude.
Next, we study whether outreach strategies differed in their ability to identify disadvantaged individuals. For this analysis, each new symptomatic was assigned the
treatment condition of the clinic where the referral originated. Since no suspects were
screened as a result of referrals in the control clinics, the specifications in this section
omit the control clinics. While the sample is both small and selected, Tables 9 and 10
provide descriptive evidence about the characteristics of prospective patients identified
under various schemes.
In the first set of results, we estimate:
yijc = α + δ1 Financial incentivejc + Γc + j

(7)

where we pooled the conditional and unconditional incentive arms, and the encouragement condition is the reference category.
There is no indication that financial incentives caused existing patients to identify
relatively better-off patients than when they were asked to participate for altruistic
reasons only. While the point estimates in Table 9 indicate little effect of incentives
on the gender or literacy level of new symptomatics, those identified by incentivized
existing patients had lower asset levels than those identified by existing patients in the
encouragement condition. The difference of -0.675 points on the asset index is large
relative to the mean asset score for symptomatics identified in the encouragement group
(0.21), and the effect is significant at the 95% level.
We estimate similar specifications to compare the characteristics of symptomatics
identified under the peer- and health worker outreach strategies. In these specifications,
41

the reference category is health worker outreach (again, pooling the anonymous and
identified arms):
yijc = α + θ1 Peer outreachjc + Γc + j

(8)

Suspects identified via peer referrals appear more disconnected than those identified
through the health worker outreach strategies. On average, new symptomatics identified
via health worker outreach had 2.12 social contacts in the 24 hours preceding the survey,
whereas we estimate that those identified through peer outreach had 1.77 fewer contacts
(an effect statistically significant at the 95% level). It is striking that peer referrals
resulted in the screening of suspects with statistically and meaningfully fewer social
contacts than did outreach via health workers. These results suggest peers can effectively
reach disconnected patients.

4.6

Clinic-level analysis of potential crowding-out

While both financial incentives and outreach strategies affect individual-level behavior
in meaningful ways, the total number of new suspects screened through the outreach
schemes tested here is small relative to the stock and flow of these clinics.38 We study
clinic-level outcomes to rule out crowd-out rather than to precisely estimate an aggregate
effect on the patient loads of these clinics. Crowd-out could occur through competition
for health workers’ time, especially if they allocate a fixed-time budget to outreach
activities and substitute time spent on outreach to or screening of new suspects identified
through the referral schemes for their status quo outreach efforts.
Appendix Table A20 presents results of clinic-level regressions where the dependent
variable is the total number of new TB patients enrolled at Operation ASHA clinics
during the study period, normalized by the clinic-level number of patients at baseline.
We estimate four specifications, aggregating the experimental conditions as in Section
38

On average, clinics in the control group added eight patients during the two months of the study,
whereas the treated clinics added 11. Normalizing by the size of the clinic-level patient population at
baseline, control clinics added 0.44 new patients and treated clinics added 0.52 new patients for each
existing baseline patient.

42

4.4.4. Eight of nine estimated coefficients are positive, including economically meaningful positive effects of peer outreach, although for the reasons explained above, the
study is not adequately powered to detect differences in the number of new patients at
the clinic level. Nevertheless, the point estimates do not suggest that the intervention
crowded out enrollment of new patients through other intake streams, or otherwise had
negative effects on new patient enrollment.

4.7

Cost analysis

The academic research questions posed by this experiment concern the behavior of existing patients. From a policy perspective, the key parameters of interest are the costs of
detecting individuals with TB symptoms (who require screening, even if negative tests
ultimately rule out TB and indicate the need for different treatment) and of identifying
those who have the disease. We consider four categories of recurring expenses: incentive
payments made for referrals, the production of referral cards, time costs of explaining the scheme to existing patients, and wages paid to health workers. We calculate
costs per treatment arm, aggregating as in the previous sections. We calculate average
costs per treatment arm by dividing the total number of symptomatics screened or new
cases detected, respectively, by the total across the four categories of costs within the
treatment arm.
Incentive payments are straightforward to calculate and reflect actual amounts paid
to existing patients, depending on the rules of the treatment arm to which they were
assigned. They are zero by definition in encouragement arms.
The referral cards printed for the project cost Rs. 8 ($US 0.12) per card. In peer
outreach arms, each existing patient was given 10 cards, and we include the cost of all
those cards even though not all were distributed to prospective patients. In the health
worker outreach arms, cards were distributed to health workers based on the number
of referral names provided during the baseline survey, so the per-current-patient cost of
cards was actually lower than in the peer outreach arms.
We use administrative data captured by our computer-assisted interview interface
to track the amount of time spent explaining the referral scheme to existing patients,
43

and arrive at an estimate of 10 minutes per patient to explain the scheme, in both peer
and health worker outreach arms. Computed at the daily wage for field staff, these
explanations cost Rs. 10.42 ($0.15) per existing patient.
Finally, while the health workers in this study were paid regular wages by Operation
ASHA, the outreach required by this project was outside their usual scope of work. Our
project offered a fixed stipend of Rs. 1,800 ($US 26.44) per month (increased to Rs.
2,000 ($US 29.38) per month in the second year of the project) to Operation ASHA
staff whose centers were assigned to the health worker outreach arms to cover time and
transportation costs for outreach. The stipend was worth about 22.5% of their average
monthly salaries and was the minimum compensation deemed acceptable by Operation
ASHA’s senior leadership.39 Operation ASHA estimates that its DOTS providers allocate one-third of their time to outreach activities, though the vast majority of these
efforts are devoted to tracing members of existing patients’ households (a population not
targeted by our intervention). This outreach is considered part of health workers’ core
job responsibilities and covered by the monthly salary, though they also receive small
financial incentives and penalties for a range of activities including treatment initiation
and completion.
Table 11 summarizes the results of this exercise by incentive type (Panel A) and
outreach type (Panel B). Based on costs incurred during the study, it was less expensive
to use financial incentives to identify a patient with TB than it was not to use them.
Each positive case of TB identified cost $US 253 in the conditional treatment arms
or $US 183 in the unconditional arms, relative to $US 410 in the encouragement arm.
This is because while the financial incentives themselves were small relative to other
costs—especially of outreach (balanced across the incentive types because of the crossrandomized design)—they were effective in increasing the number of cases detected.
Costs per suspect screened are, by definition, lower: $US 33 using conditional incentives,
$US 36 using unconditional incentives, and $US 70 without financial incentives.
The cost-effectiveness of peer outreach is even more pronounced. In peer arms, the
39

To implement health worker outreach for the first time also requires training the health workers.
We have omitted this fixed cost from our calculations; including it would make peer outreach relatively
more cost-effective.

44

average cost per detection was $US 114. Active case finding by health workers was
2.5 to 3.5 times as expensive: $US 402 per case detected when using the name of the
referring EP and $US 302 per case detected when the identity of the referring EP was
anonymous. Costs per suspect screened were $US 14 in the peer-outreach arms and $US
75 and $US 71 using health worker outreach on behalf of anonymous and identified peers,
respectively. The differences across treatment arms are driven by the greater number of
suspects screened and detected as a result of peer outreach, as indicated in Table 4, and
the higher costs of compensating health workers (via stipends) than existing patients.
We made every effort to minimize costs in all treatment arms during the study. Yet
having completed it, we recognize two areas in which future implementation of these
schemes could further reduce costs. The first is to distribute fewer cards to existing
patients for peer referrals. Ninety percent of existing patients in the peer outreach
arms distributed five or fewer cards, so we reestimate costs assuming that five cards
rather than 10 were printed and distributed to each existing patient in the peer referral
treatments. The second is to reduce the stipend to health workers. Our data do not offer
guidance about the optimal stipend level, but as a benchmark, we consider reducing the
stipend to health workers by half, to Rs. 900 ($US 13.22) per month. Table A21 presents
estimates for this alternate scenario, which has the biggest effect on the comparison
between peer outreach and health worker outreach. While the differences between peer
outreach and health worker outreach are smaller in this hypothetical than the realized
costs in our study, they still clearly indicate the cost advantage of using peers for active
case finding: costs would fall to $US 71 for each case detected through peer outreach,
compared to $US 210 for outreach by health workers who identified the referrers and
$US 158 for health worker outreach on behalf of anonymous peers. In fact, assuming the
same detection rates as in the current study and distributing the original 10 cards per
existing patient, peer outreach remains more cost-effective than case finding by health
workers for any stipend above Rs. 560 ($US 8.62) per month, 31% of the actual stipend
paid to health workers in the study.
Few estimates of the cost of outreach are available in the literature. A study from
South Africa estimates the cost of identifying a TB patient among a high-prevalence

45

sample (of HIV patients, where co-infection increases patients’ risk but decreases the
average cost of detection) to be $US 381 (Kranzer et al., 2012). Although incentivized
peer outreach should not replace other outreach strategies, it is clearly an effective
complement with the potential to reach marginalized patients.

5

Conclusion

Underdetection of tuberculosis has serious health consequences for infected individuals,
their families, and others exposed to the disease. Despite the availability of free treatment throughout India, an estimated one million people with TB have not been tested
and are not receiving the necessary treatment. The value of private information may
be especially high in this context: the public health system and not-for-profit providers
working under its auspices are often overwhelmed and unable to mount intensive contact
tracing efforts. Existing outreach strategies are insufficient to overcome informational
barriers that prevent some people with symptoms from seeking testing and treatment.
In contrast, people who are currently undergoing treatment for TB have relatively lower
time costs to identify and reach others with symptoms, and they may have particularly
relevant information about the benefits of treatment. Despite this, peer referrals are
virtually unheard of, partly due to the stigma associated with TB.
The results of our field experiment in India demonstrate that, just as referrals are
valuable for leveraging private information to identify well-qualified employees, they
are highly effective for outreach to TB symptomatics. Encouragement and, especially,
financial incentives induce existing patients to refer others in need of testing, which
results in the testing of new symptomatics and the detection of new TB cases. Moreover,
peers are particularly effective in outreach. Our experimental design allowed us to
discover that peer referrals are effective not only because existing patients have—and
can be induced to reveal—useful information about members of their social network
who need screening for TB, but also because of the direct role they can play in outreach
to these contacts. Among peer referrers, incentives increased the number of prospective
patients who were screened without affecting the number of cards distributed, suggesting

46

that financial incentives increased the quality of information conveyed or outreach target
selected.
Our study demonstrated that incentivized, community-based referral schemes can
serve as a useful complement to existing TB case-finding strategies. Both financial
incentives and peer outreach are highly cost-effective at $US 114 for each case of active
TB identified through peer outreach, compared to $US 300–$US 400 for outreach by
health workers. Because other diseases such as HIV/AIDS and STDs present challenges
similar to TB including under-diagnosis, a reluctance to get tested, and high costs of
identifying new cases, insights from this study may also prove useful in other contexts.

47

References
Ahrens, A., C. B. Hansen, and M. E. Schaffer (2018): “pdslasso and ivlasso:
Programs for Post-Selection and Post-Regularization OLS or IV Estimation and Inference.” http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s458459.html.
Alatas, V., A. Banerjee, A. Chandrasekhar, R. Hanna, and B. Olken
(2016): “Network Structure and the Aggregation of Information: Theory and Evidence from Indonesia.” American Economic Review, 106, 1663–1704.
André, E., O. Rusumba, C. Evans, P. Ngongo, P. Sanduku, M. Elvis, H. Celestin, I. Alain, E. Musafiri, J. Kabuayi, and O. de Waroux (2018):
“Patient-Led Active Tuberculosis Case-Finding in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 96.
Andreoni, J. (1990): “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of
Warm-Glow Giving.” Economic Journal, 100, 464–477.
Atre, S., A. Kudale, S. Morankar, D. Gosoniu, and M. Weiss (2011): “Gender and Community Views of Stigma and Tuberculosis in Rural Maharashtra, India.”
Global Public Health: An International Journal for Research, Policy, and Practice, 6.
Baird, S., R. Garden, C. McIntosh, and B. Ozler (2012): “Effect of a Cash
Transfer Programme for Schooling on Prevalence of HIV and Herpes Simplex Type 2
in Malawi: A Cluster Randomised Trial.” The Lancet.
Balat, J. F., N. W. Papageorge, and S. Qayyum (2018): “Positively Aware?
Conflicting Expert Reviews and Demand for Medical Treatment.” National Bureau
of Economic Research w24820.
Banerjee, A., A. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. Jackson (2019): “Using
Gossips to Spread Information: Theory and Evidence from Two Randomized Controlled Trials.” Review of Economic Studies, 0, 1–38.

48

Basing, P., P. Gertler, A. Binagwaho, A. Soucat, J. Sturdy, and C. Vermeersch (2011): “Effect on Maternal and Child Health Services in Rwanda of Payment to Primary Health-Care Providers for Performance: An Impact Evaluation.”
The Lancet, 377, 1421–1428.
Beaman, L., A. BenYishay, J. Magruder, and A. M. Mobarak (2018a): “Can
Network Theory-based Targeting Increase Technology Adoption?” Working Paper.
Beaman, L., N. Keleher, and J. Magruder (2018b): “Do Job Networks Disadvantage Women? Evidence from a Recruitment Experiment in Malawi.” Journal of
Labor Economics, 36, 121–157.
Beaman, L. and J. Magruder (2012): “Who Gets the Job Referral? Evidence from
a Social Networks Experiment.” American Economic Review, 102, 3574–3593.
Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, and C. Hansen (2014): “Inference on Treatment Effects after Selection among High-Dimensional Controls.” Review of Economic
Studies, 81, 608–650.
Benjamini, Y. and Y. Hochberg (1995): “Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A
Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing.” Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, Series B (Methodological), 57, 289–300.
Berg, E., M. Ghatak, R. Manjula, D. Rajasekhar, and S. Roy (2019): “Motivating knowledge agents: Can incentive pay overcome social distance?” Economic
Journal, 129, 110–142.
Bryan, G., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2010): “Making the Most of the Friends
You Have: Referrals and Enforcement in a Referrals Field Experiment.” Working
Paper, Department of Economics, Yale University.
Burks, S. V., B. Cowgill, M. Hoffman, and M. Housman (2015): “The Value of
Hiring through Employee Referrals.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 805–839.

49

Chaisson, R. E. (2018): “Advances in Tuberculosis.” Lecture delivered at the Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
Charles, N., B. Thomas, B. Watson, V. Chandrasekeran, and F. Wares
(2010): “Care Seeking Behavior of Chest Symptomatics: A Community Based Study
Done in South India after the Implementation of the RNTCP.” PLoS One, 5.9.
Christakis, N. A. and J. H. Fowler (2007): “The Spread of Obesity in a Large
Social Network over 32 Years.” New England Journal of Medicine, 357, 370–379.
——— (2008): “The Collective Dynamics of Smoking in a Large Social Network.” New
England Journal of Medicine, 358, 2249–2258.
Cowling, K., R. Dandona, and L. Dandona (2014): “Improving the Estimation
of the Tuberculosis Burden in India.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 92,
817–825.
Fafchamps, M., A. Islan, A. Malek, and D. Pakrashi (2018): “Can Referral
Improve Targeting? Evidence from an Agricultural Training Experiment.” Working
Paper.
Faye, F. (2012): “Responsabiliser les Relais Communautaires pour le Traitement
Préventif Intermittent Saisonnier du Paludisme (TPI) au Sénégal: Enjeux, Modalités,
Défis.” Autrepart, 1, 129–146.
Friebel, G., M. Heinz, M. Hoffman, and N. Zubanov (2018): “Why do Employees (Not) Make Referrals?” Working Paper.
Glasman, L. R., J. Dickson-Gomez, J. Lechuga, S. Tarima, G. Bodnar,
and L. R. de Mendoza (2016): “Using Peer-Referral Chains with Incentives to
Promote HIV Testing and Identify Undiagnosed HIV Infections among Crack Users
in San Salvador.” AIDS and Behavior, 20, 1236–1243.
Godes, D. and D. Mayzlin (2009): “Firm-Created Word-of-Mouth Communication:
Evidence from a Field Test.” Marketing Science, 28, 721–739.
50

Gwadz, M., C. M. Cleland, D. C. Perlman, H. Hagan, S. M. Jenness, N. R.
Leonard, A. S. Ritchie, and A. Kutnick (2017): “Public Health Benefit of
Peer-Referral Strategies for Detecting Undiagnosed HIV Infection among High-Risk
Heterosexuals in New York City.” Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes,
74, 499.
Haileyesus Getahun, J., L. Tomaskovic, and M. C. Raviglione (2012):
“Engage-TB: Integrating Community-Based Tuberculosis Activities into the Work
of Nongovernmental and Other Civil Society Organizations: Operational Guidance.”
Tech. rep., World Health Organization, Geneva.
Heath, R. (forthcoming): “Why Do Firms Hire Using Referrals? Evidence from
Bangladeshi Garment Factories.” Journal of Political Economy.
Hoffman, M. (2017): “The Value of Hiring through Employee Referrals in Developed
Countries.” IZA World of Labor.
Hussam, R., N. Rigol, and B. Roth (2017): “Targeting High Ability Entrepreneurs
Using Community Information: Mechanism Design in the Field.” Working Paper.
Jackson, M. O. (2011): “An Overview of Social Networks and Economic Applications.” Handbook of Social Economics. North-Holland, 1, 511–585.
Joshi, D., R. Sthapit, and M. Brouwer (2017): “Peer-Led Active Tuberculosis
Case-Finding among People Living with HIV: Lessons from Nepal.” Bulletin of the
World Health Organization, 95.
Kelly, P. (1999): “Isolation and Stigma: The Experience of Patients with Active
Tuberculosis.” Journal of Community Health Nursing, 16.
Kohler, H. P. and R. L. Thornton (2011): “Conditional Cash Transfers and
HIV/AIDS Prevention: Unconditionally Promising?” World Bank Economic Review,
26, 165–190.

51

Kranzer, K., S. Lawn, G. Meyer-Rath, A. Vassall, E. Raditlhalo,
D. Govindasamy, N. van Schaik, R. Wood, and L.-G. Bekker (2012): “Feasibility, Yield, and Cost of Active Tuberculosis Case Finding Linked to a Mobile HIV
Service in Cape Town, South Africa: A Cross-Sectional Study.” PLoS Medicine, 9.
Kremer, M., E. Miguel, and R. L. Thornton (2009): “Incentives to Learn.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 91, 437–456.
Kugler, A. (2003): “Employee Referrals and Efficiency Wages.” Labour Economics,
10, 531–556.
Kumar, V., J. A. Petersen, and R. P. Leone (2010): “Driving Profitability by
Encouraging Customer Referrals: Who, When, and How.” Journal of Marketing, 74,
1–17.
Laurence, Y. V., U. K. Griffiths, and A. Vassall (2015): “Costs to Health
Services and the Patient of Treating Tuberculosis: A Systematic Literature Review.”
Pharmacoeconomics, 33, 939–955.
Miller, G., R. Luo, L. Zhang, S. Sylvia, Y. Shi, P. Foo, Q. Zhao, R. Martorell, A. Medina, and S. Rozelle (2012): “Effectiveness of Provider Incentives
for Anaemia Reduction in Rural China: A Cluster Randomised Trial.” BMJ.
Munyanga Mukungo, S. and B. B. Kaboru (2014): “Intensive TB Case Finding
in Unsafe Settings: Testing an Outreach Peer Education Intervention for Increased
TB Case Detection among Displaced Populations and Host Communities in SouthKivu Province, Democratic Republic of Congo.” Journal of Tuberculosis Research, 2,
160–167.
Oster, E. and R. Thornton (2012): “Determinants of Technology Adoption: Peer
Effects in Menstrual Cup Take-Up.” Journal of the European Economic Association,
10, 1263–1293.
Pope, D. G. (2009): “Reacting to Rankings: Evidence from America’s Best Hospitals.”
Journal of Health Economics, 28, 1154–1165.
52

Shangani, S., D. Escudero, K. Kirwa, A. Harrison, B. Marshall, and
D. Operario (2017): “Effectiveness of Peer-Led Interventions to Increase HIV Testing among Men Who Have Sex with Men: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.”
AIDS Care, 29, 1003–1013.
Sorensen, A. T. (2006): “Social Learning and Health Plan Choice.” The Rand Journal
of Economics, 37, 929–945.
Thornton, R. L. (2008): “The Demand for, and Impact of, Learning HIV Status.”
American Economic Review, 98, 1829–1863.
Walque, D. D., W. H. Dow, R. Nathan, R. Abdul, F. Abilahi, E. Gong,
Z. Isdahl, J. Jamison, B. Jullu, S. Krishnan, and A. Majura (2012): “Incentivising Safe Sex: A Randomised Trial of Conditional Cash Transfers for HIV and
Sexually Transmitted Infection Prevention in Rural Tanzania.” BMJ Open, 2.
Wang, S. Y. (2013): “Marriage Networks, Nepotism, and Labor Market Outcomes in
China.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 91–112.
World Health Organization (2017): “Global Tuberculosis Report 2017.” Tech.
rep., Geneva.
——— (2019): “Global Tuberculosis Report 2019.” Tech. rep., Geneva.

53

Figures
Figure 1: Sample referral card (English translation)

Figure 2: Experimental design and sample sizes

Incentive type

Pure control
10 clinics
189 patients
Encouragement
Rs. 150 unconditional
Rs. 100 + Rs. 150
if TB positive

Outreach type
Health worker outreach Health worker outreach
(anonymous)
(identified)
11 clinics
331 patients
11 clinics
336 patients
10 clinics
259 patients

54

13 clinics
300 patients
13 clinics
436 patients
13 clinics
352 patients

Peer outreach
14 clinics
361 patients
14 clinics
252 patients
13 clinics
360 patients

Tables
Table 1: Summary statistics, by incentive type
(1)

Female respondent
Hindu respondent
Muslim respondent
Respondent has some literacy
Respondent has secondary education
Asset index
Respondent has bank account
Number of social contacts
Previously treated for TB
Tested within 1 month of symptoms
Observations

Control

(2)
Conditional incentive

(3)
Encouragement

(4)
Unconditional
incentive

(5)
Overall

0.413
(0.036)
0.831
(0.027)
0.153
(0.026)
0.688
(0.034)
0.307
(0.034)
0.289
(0.125)
0.640
(0.035)
3.087
(0.425)
0.159
(0.027)
0.878
(0.024)

0.390
(0.016)
0.826
(0.012)
0.128
(0.011)
0.668
(0.015)
0.294
(0.015)
0.000
(0.055)
0.588
(0.016)
2.650
(0.208)
0.173
(0.012)
0.852
(0.011)

0.403
(0.016)
0.812
(0.012)
0.153
(0.011)
0.703
(0.015)
0.288
(0.014)
0.055
(0.060)
0.633
(0.015)
2.249
(0.139)
0.185
(0.012)
0.794
(0.013)

0.406
(0.015)
0.823
(0.012)
0.150
(0.011)
0.700
(0.014)
0.311
(0.014)
-0.081
(0.053)
0.613
(0.015)
2.654
(0.204)
0.166
(0.012)
0.816
(0.012)

0.401
(0.009)
0.821
(0.007)
0.145
(0.006)
0.690
(0.008)
0.298
(0.008)
0.008
(0.031)
0.613
(0.009)
2.554
(0.105)
0.174
(0.007)
0.824
(0.007)

189

971

992

1024

3176

55

Table 2: Summary statistics, by outreach type

Female respondent
Hindu respondent
Muslim respondent
Respondent has some literacy
Respondent has secondary education
Asset index
Respondent has bank account
Number of social contacts
Previously treated for TB
Tested within 1 month of symptoms
Observations

(1)
Control

(2)
Peer outreach

(3)
Health worker
outreach,
anonymous

(4)
Health worker
outreach,
identified

(5)
Overall

0.413
(0.036)
0.831
(0.027)
0.153
(0.026)
0.688
(0.034)
0.307
(0.034)
0.289
(0.125)
0.640
(0.035)
3.087
(0.425)
0.159
(0.027)
0.878
(0.024)

0.414
(0.016)
0.830
(0.012)
0.142
(0.011)
0.674
(0.015)
0.284
(0.014)
-0.088
(0.056)
0.595
(0.016)
2.575
(0.191)
0.163
(0.012)
0.811
(0.013)

0.371
(0.016)
0.810
(0.013)
0.160
(0.012)
0.681
(0.015)
0.285
(0.015)
-0.034
(0.057)
0.630
(0.016)
2.432
(0.182)
0.170
(0.012)
0.825
(0.013)

0.412
(0.015)
0.821
(0.012)
0.132
(0.010)
0.713
(0.014)
0.321
(0.014)
0.080
(0.055)
0.611
(0.015)
2.545
(0.186)
0.189
(0.012)
0.825
(0.012)

0.401
(0.009)
0.821
(0.007)
0.145
(0.006)
0.690
(0.008)
0.298
(0.008)
0.008
(0.031)
0.613
(0.009)
2.554
(0.105)
0.174
(0.007)
0.824
(0.007)

189

973

926

1088

3176

56

Table 3: Effects of financial incentives on TB detection
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Encouragement

Unconditional incentive

Conditional incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

0.044
(0.018)
[0.090]
0.096
(0.025)
[0.002]
0.102
(0.031)
[0.013]

0.030
(0.015)
[0.194]
0.080
(0.020)
[0.001]
0.078
(0.028)
[0.044]

0.024
(0.014)
[0.247]
0.057
(0.015)
[0.002]
0.058
(0.021)
[0.053]

0.003
(0.003)
[0.410]
0.013
(0.006)
[0.107]
0.005
(0.006)
[0.410]

3176
0.01
0.00

3176
0.01
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00

0.07

0.032
(0.014)
0.034
(0.022)
0.001
(0.019)

0.011
(0.006)
0.003
(0.007)
-0.008
(0.008)

0.00
0.00
P-value: treatments jointly 0
Point estimate of differences between treatment arms:
Encouragement-Unconditional
0.052
0.050
(0.024)
(0.020)
Encouragement-Conditional
0.058
0.048
(0.035)
(0.031)
Conditional-Unconditional
0.007
-0.002
(0.033)
(0.028)

“Patients screened” (column 1) is the number of new suspects who meet with an Operation
ASHA counselor after receiving a referral card. “Tests recommended” (column 2) is the number
of new suspects who are observed by Operation ASHA counselors to have symptoms of active
TB and are therefore told to report to a government center for testing. “Patients tested” is the
number of new suspects who obtain a test at a government testing center. “Positive tests” is
the number of new suspects who have a positive sputum test result. The unit of observation
is the existing patient. Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the clinic level and reported in parentheses. The sample includes all current
patients. The omitted category is patients in pure control clinics. False discovery rate corrected
q-values (based on Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)) in square brackets in the top panel; standard
errors for point estimates of differences between treatment arms in parentheses in the bottom panel.

57

Table 4: Effects of outreach type on TB detection
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Peer outreach

0.124
(0.030)
[0.001]
Health worker outreach, identified
0.054
(0.016)
[0.004]
Health worker outreach, anonymous 0.056
(0.020)
[0.053]

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00
P-value: treatments jointly 0
Point estimate of differences between treatment
Peer-Identified
0.070
(0.027)
Peer-Anonymous
0.068
(0.031)
Anonymous-Identified
0.002
(0.018)

0.092
(0.025)
[0.011]
0.042
(0.014)
[0.021]
0.049
(0.019)
[0.053]

0.058
(0.018)
[0.003]
0.035
(0.013)
[0.011]
0.043
(0.018)
[0.061]

0.010
(0.004)
[0.061]
0.004
(0.004)
[0.302]
0.005
(0.005)
[0.302]

3176
0.01
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00
arms:
0.050
(0.023)
0.043
(0.027)
0.007
(0.017)

0.01

0.09

0.024
(0.014)
0.015
(0.019)
0.008
(0.014)

0.006
(0.006)
0.005
(0.006)
0.001
(0.007)

“Patients screened” (column 1) is the number of new suspects who meet with an Operation
ASHA counselor after receiving a referral card. “Tests recommended” (column 2) is the number
of new suspects who are observed by Operation ASHA counselors to have symptoms of active
TB and are therefore told to report to a government center for testing. “Patients tested” is the
number of new suspects who obtain a test at a government testing center. “Positive tests” is
the number of new suspects who have a positive sputum test result. The unit of observation
is the existing patient. Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the clinic level and reported in parentheses. The sample includes all current
patients. The omitted category is patients in pure control clinics.False discovery rate corrected
q-values (based on Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)) in square brackets in the top panel; standard
errors for point estimates of differences between treatment arms in parentheses in the bottom panel.

58

Table 5: Complementarities between peer outreach and financial incentives on TB detection
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Peer outreach, no financial incentive

0.036
(0.023)
[0.623]
0.048
(0.020)
[0.169]
0.178
(0.044)
[0.001]
0.063
(0.017)
[0.006]

0.023
(0.020)
[0.623]
0.034
(0.017)
[0.381]
0.135
(0.038)
[0.008]
0.054
(0.016)
[0.011]

0.017
(0.016)
[0.623]
0.028
(0.016)
[0.562]
0.084
(0.026)
[0.017]
0.046
(0.015)
[0.030]

-0.001
(0.003)
[0.846]
0.005
(0.004)
[0.623]
0.017
(0.007)
[0.170]
0.006
(0.004)
[0.623]

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.01
P-value:
Peer encouragement = Peer incentives
P-value:
0.40
Health worker outreach encouragement = Health worker outreach incentives
P-value:
0.64
Health worker outreach encouragement = Peer encouragement
P-value:
0.01
Health worker outreach incentives = Peer incentives

0.02

0.04

0.05

0.23

0.23

0.85

0.61

0.50

0.30

0.03

0.10

0.14

Health worker outreach, no financial incentive

Peer outreach, financial incentive

Health worker outreach, financial incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

“Patients screened” (column 1) is the number of new fsuspects who meet with an Operation ASHA counselor after receiving
a referral card. “Tests recommended”(column 2) is the number of new suspects who are observed by Operation ASHA counselors
to have symptoms of active TB and are therefore told to report to a government center for testing. “Patients tested” is the number
of new suspects who obtain a test at a government testing center. “Positive tests” is the number of new suspects who have a
positive sputum test result. Health worker outreach includes both identified and anonymous health worker outreach. Financial
incentives includes both conditional and unconditional incentives. The unit of observation is the existing patient. Linear models
estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the clinic level and reported in parentheses.
The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted category is patients in pure control clinics. False discovery rate corrected
q-values (based on Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)) in square brackets in the top panel;standard errors for point estimates
of differences between treatment arms in parentheses in the bottom panel.

59

Table 6: Heterogeneous effects of financial incentives on the number of referrals
(2)

(3)
(4)
Patients screened
Asset
Social
No treatment Intensive
ownership contacts delay
phase

(1)
Outcome:
Heterogeneity by:

Above median

-0.001
(0.006)
Encouragement
0.060
(0.021)
Financial incentive
0.102
(0.024)
Above median * Encouragement
-0.033
(0.020)
Above median * Financial incentive -0.012
(0.023)

Observations
R-squared

3174
0.01

(5)
Female

0.023
(0.012)
0.064
(0.023)
0.095
(0.022)
-0.034
(0.023)
0.005
(0.019)

-0.007
(0.013)
0.014
(0.024)
0.104
(0.030)
0.037
(0.017)
-0.006
(0.037)

0.004
(0.007)
0.046
(0.022)
0.097
(0.027)
-0.005
(0.019)
0.004
(0.028)

-0.001
(0.014)
0.040
(0.018)
0.102
(0.024)
0.012
(0.026)
-0.015
(0.035)

3046
0.01

3167
0.01

3176
0.01

3047
0.01

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the clinic level. The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted category is patients
in pure control clinics. “Above median” is an indicator set to 1 for patients with above-median
asset scores (column 1); above-median social contacts (column 2); who did not delay seeking
treatment for their own TB symptoms (column 3); in the first two months of treatment
(column 5); and who are female (column 6).

60

Table 7: Heterogeneous effects of outreach strategies on the number of referrals
(3)
(4)
(5)
Patients screened
Asset
Social
No treatment Intensive Female
ownership contacts delay
phase

(1)
Outcome:
Heterogeneity by:

Above median

-0.002
(0.005)
Peer outreach
0.125
(0.029)
Health worker outreach
0.062
(0.019)
Above median * Peer
-0.013
(0.042)
Above median * Health worker -0.015
(0.015)

Observations
R-squared

3174
0.02

(2)

0.021
(0.012)
0.117
(0.030)
0.064
(0.018)
0.012
(0.037)
-0.015
(0.016)

-0.007
(0.013)
0.078
(0.039)
0.060
(0.027)
0.057
(0.054)
-0.007
(0.023)

0.005
(0.006)
0.120
(0.038)
0.058
(0.017)
0.010
(0.049)
-0.008
(0.015)

0.001
(0.013)
0.126
(0.034)
0.055
(0.016)
-0.005
(0.066)
-0.012
(0.021)

3046
0.02

3167
0.02

3176
0.02

3047
0.01

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the clinic level. The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted category is patients
in pure control clinics. “Above median” is an indicator set to 1 for patients with above-median
asset scores (column 1); above-median social contacts (column 2); who did not delay seeking
treatment for their own TB symptoms (column 3); in the first two months of treatment
(column 5); and who are female (column 6).

61

Table 8: Comparison of existing patients and new symptomatics
(2)
(1)
Current New
patients symptomatics
Female respondent

0.401
(0.009)
Respondent has some literacy 0.690
(0.008)
Asset Index
0.031
(0.051)
Number of social contacts
2.554
(0.105)

Observations

3176

62

(3)
(4)
Difference P-value
(1) = (2)

0.366
(0.037)
0.448
(0.038)
-0.144
(0.124)
1.413
(0.266)

0.035
(0.038)
0.243
(0.036)
0.175
(0.220)
1.141
(0.445)

172

3348

0.368
0.000
0.425
0.010

Table 9: Effects of financial incentives on characteristics of referred patients
(1)

Financial incentive

Female

(2)
(3)
Some
Asset
literacy index

-0.007
(0.087)

0.022
(0.85)

-0.676 -0.208
(0.305) (0.553)

172
0.15
0.49

172
0.18
0.21

Observations
172
R-squared
0.12
Mean of dep. var. in encouragement group 0.37

(4)
Social
contacts

172
0.07
1.37

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the clinic level. The sample includes new patients who were screened because of a referral.
The omitted category is new patients referred under the encouragement condition.

Table 10: Effects of outreach type on characteristics of referred patients
(1)
Female

(2)
(3)
Some
Asset
literacy index

Peer outreach

0.096
(0.097)

-0.174
(0.102)

-0.269 -1.772
(0.370) (0.873)

Observations

172
0.13
0.34

172
0.17
0.55

172
0.16
0.04

R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in health worker outreach groups

(4)
Social
contacts

172
0.11
2.12

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the clinic level. The sample includes new patients who were screened because of a referral.
The omitted category is new patients referred via health worker outreach.

63

Table 11: Cost of detection
Panel A: Costs by Incentive Type
Conditional

Encouragement

Incentive payments
Referral card printing
Training for existing patients
Payments to health workers
Total cost
Cost
Cost
Cost
Cost

per
per
per
per

Unconditional

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

n/a
30
14
144

n/a
29880
13542
143200
186622

11
31
14
147

10500
29840
13542
143200
197082

12
21
13
140

12600
21496
13542
143200
190838

symptomatic screened
TB case detected
symptomatic screened ($US)
TB case detected ($US)

4552
26660
70
410

2119
16423
33
253

2327
11927
36
183

Panel B: Costs by Outreach Type
Health worker, identified

Health worker, anonymous

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

13
80
14
n/a

12400
77840
13542
n/a
103782

5
1
12
197

5300
1408
13542
214800
235050

6
2
15
232

5400
1968
13542
214800
235710

Peer

Incentive payments
Referral card printing
Training for existing patients
Payments to health workers
Total cost
Cost
Cost
Cost
Cost

per
per
per
per

symptomatic screened
TB case detected
symptomatic screened ($US)
TB case detected ($US)

887
7413
14
114

4897
26117
75
402

Panel A: Estimated number of detections correspond to outcome variables in Table 3, columns 1 and 7.
Panel B: Estimated number of detections correspond to outcome variables in Table 4, columns 1 and 7.
All costs in Indian rupees, except where indicated. Exchange rate is Rs. 65 to $US 1.

64

4622
19642
71
302

Appendix A (For online publication only)
Table A1: Testing whether attrition was associated with experimental condition

Y = 1 if the patient was surveyed, 0 otherwise
(1)
(2)
Encouragement
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

-0.023
(0.030)
-0.005
(0.029)
-0.025
(0.030)

Peer outreach

-0.016
(0.031)
-0.038
(0.029)
0.005
(0.028)

Health worker outreach, identified
Health worker outreach, anonymous

Observations
R-squared

4,203
0.029

4,203
0.030

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. The dependent
variable is equal to 1 if the existing patient was surveyed, and 0 otherwise.
Standard errors are clustered at the clinic level. The sample includes
all baseline patients. The omitted category is patients in pure control clinics.

65

Table A2: Testing whether the size of OpASHA centers was associated with experimental
condition

Y = Number of original patients in a center
(1)
(2)
Encouragement
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

6.467
(4.922)
7.219
(5.129)
7.078
(4.595)

Peer outreach

5.321
(4.842)
8.102
(4.982)
7.633
(4.803)

Health worker outreach, identified
Health worker outreach, anonymous

Observations
R-squared

122
0.520

122
0.523

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. The dependent
variable is the number of original patients in each center. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. The sample includes all 122 OpASHA centers
in the study.

66

Table A3: P-values for pairwise omnibus balance tests
Control
Encouragement
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

0.108
0.237
0.512
Control

Peer outreach
0.386
Health worker outreach, identified
0.167
Health worker outreach, anonymous 0.475

Unconditional
incentive
0.390

Conditional
incentive
0.001
0.120

Identified health Anonymous health
worker outreach worker outreach
0.025
0.613
0.183

Each cell reports the p-value of the F-test that the coefficients on the variables
listed in Table 1 are jointly zero, in an LPM specification where the sample
includes respondents in the respective pairs of treatment conditions, and the
outcome is a binary for assignment to one of the treatment conditions instead
of the other. Each specification includes city fixed effects.

67

Table A4: Number of referrals named by existing patients

Peer outreach
N. names given No incentive
None
345 (95.57%)
1 name
13 (3.6%)
2 names
3 (0.83%)
3 names
0 (0%)
4 names
0 (0%)
5 names
0 (0%)
6 names
0 (0%)
Total
Per patient

N. names
None
1 name
2 names
3 names
4 names
5 names
6 names

19
0.05

Incentive
565 (92.32%)
36 (5.88%)
7 (1.14%)
2 (0.33%)
0 (0%)
2 (0.33%)
0 (0%)
66
0.11

Health worker outreach
given No incentive Incentive
561 (88.91%)
1226 (88.65%)
41 (6.5%)
91 (6.58%)
20 (3.17%)
32 (2.31%)
6 (0.95%)
15 (1.08%)
2 (0.32%)
9 (0.65%)
0 (0%)
7 (0.51%)
1 (0.16%)
3 (0.22%)

Total
Per patient

113
0.18

289
0.21

Note: Distribution of existing patients according to
the number of names given to the enumerators,
by experimental condition.
68

Table A5: Number of returned cards, by experimental condition (peer outreach only)
Panel A
(1)
Dep. var. = number of cards returned
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean in no-incentive group

0.283
(0.305)
0.235
(0.315)
869
0.043
7.24

Linear model estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. The dependent
variable is the number of cards returned by the patient at endline. Standard
errors clustered by center are in parentheses. The sample includes patients
in the peer outreach arms only.

Panel B
(1)
No
incentive

(2)
(3)
Unconditional Conditional
incentive
incentive

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

73 (23.1%)
3 (0.95%)
4 (1.27%)
0 (0%)
1 (0.32%)
3 (0.95%)
2 (0.63%)
5 (1.58%)
7 (2.22%)
25 (7.91%)
193 (61.08%)

47 (20.43%)
2 (0.87%)
1 (0.43%)
2 (0.87%)
2 (0.87%)
3 (1.3%)
4 (1.74%)
10 (4.35%)
9 (3.91%)
24 (10.43%)
126 (54.78%)

75 (23.22%)
1 (0.31%)
4 (1.24%)
1 (0.31%)
5 (1.55%)
4 (1.24%)
2 (0.62%)
6 (1.86%)
10 (3.1%)
20 (6.19%)
195 (60.37%)

Per-patient average

7.24

7.29

7.17

Number of
cards returned
0

69

Table A6: Effects of financial incentives on the probability of TB screening, testing, and
detection
(1)

Indicator:

Encouragement
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

(2)
Any patients Any tests
screened
recommended

(3)
Any patients
tested

(4)
Any positive
tests

0.038
(0.010)
0.061
(0.013)
0.049
(0.013)

0.029
(0.008)
0.054
(0.012)
0.042
(0.012)

0.022
(0.009)
0.041
(0.010)
0.034
(0.012)

0.004
(0.003)
0.011
(0.005)
0.004
(0.004)

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.01
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00

0.05

0.019
(0.009)
0.012
(0.010)
-0.007
(0.011)

0.007
(0.005)
0.000
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.006)

P-value: treatments jointly 0
0.00
0.00
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Encouragement-Unconditional
0.023
0.025
(0.013)
(0.012)
Encouragement-Conditional
0.012
0.013
(0.013)
(0.012)
Conditional-Unconditional
-0.012
-0.012
(0.015)
(0.014)

Linear probability models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the clinic level. The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted category
is patients in pure control clinics.

70

Table A7: Effects of outreach strategies on the probability of TB screening, testing, and
detection
Indicator:

(1)
Any patients
screened

Peer outreach

0.065
(0.012)
Health worker outreach, identified
0.035
(0.010)
Health worker outreach, anonymous 0.046
(0.014)

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

3176
0.02
0.00

(2)
(3)
Any tests
Any patients
recommended tested

(4)
Any positive
tests

0.053
(0.011)
0.027
(0.008)
0.043
(0.013)

0.038
(0.009)
0.023
(0.009)
0.036
(0.013)

0.009
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.007
(0.005)

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00

0.03

0.015
(0.008)
0.002
(0.011)
0.013
(0.011)

0.006
(0.004)
0.003
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)

0.00
0.00
P-value: treatments jointly 0
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Peer-Identified
0.030
0.026
(0.013)
(0.012)
Peer-Anonymous
0.019
0.010
(0.015)
(0.014)
Anonymous-Identified
0.011
0.015
(0.013)
(0.012)

Linear probability models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the clinic level. The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted category
is patients in pure control clinics.

71

Table A8: Effects of financial incentives on TB screening, testing, and detection (including baseline covariates)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Encouragement
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

0.043
(0.017)
0.093
(0.025)
0.091
(0.029)

0.031
(0.014)
0.078
(0.020)
0.073
(0.024)

0.026
(0.014)
0.055
(0.014)
0.056
(0.020)

0.003
(0.003)
0.009
(0.004)
0.004
(0.004)

3031
0.02
0.00

3031
0.02
0.00

3031
0.02
0.00

3031
0.02
0.00

0.00

0.10

0.029
(0.013)
0.030
(0.019)
0.001
(0.016)

0.007
(0.005)
0.001
(0.005)
-0.005
(0.005)

0.00
0.00
P-value: treatments jointly 0
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Encouragement-Unconditional
0.049
0.046
(0.024)
(0.019)
Encouragement-Conditional
0.048
0.042
(0.030)
(0.026)
Conditional-Unconditional
-0.001
-0.005
(0.031)
(0.025)

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the clinic level. The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted
category is patients in pure control clinics. Includes all covariates from Table 1.

72

Table A9: Effects of outreach strategies on TB screening, testing, and detection (including baseline covariates)
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Peer outreach

0.115
(0.030)
Health worker outreach, identified
0.049
(0.016)
Health worker outreach, anonymous 0.059
(0.020)

0.090
(0.024)
0.037
(0.013)
0.052
(0.018)

0.058
(0.017)
0.031
(0.013)
0.046
(0.017)

0.008
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)

Observations

3031
0.02
0.00

3031
0.02
0.00

3031
0.02
0.00

0.00

0.04

0.027
(0.013)
0.012
(0.018)
0.016
(0.013)

0.007
(0.004)
0.002
(0.005)
0.005
(0.006)

R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

3031
0.02
0.00

P-value: treatments jointly 0
0.00
0.00
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Peer-Identified
0.067
0.053
(0.027)
(0.022)
Peer-Anonymous
0.057
0.038
(0.030)
(0.026)
Anonymous-Identified
0.010
0.014
(0.017)
(0.015)

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the clinic level. The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted
category is patients in pure control clinics. Includes all covariates from Table 1.

73

Table A10: Effects of financial incentives on TB screening, testing, and detection (covariates selected by double lasso)
(1)

Encouragement
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

Patients
screened

(2)
(3)
(4)
Tests
Patients Positive
recommended tested
tests

0.034
(0.018)
0.091
(0.023)
0.095
(0.027)

0.022
(0.016)
0.077
(0.018)
0.072
(0.023)

0.021
(0.014)
0.056
(0.014)
0.057
(0.018)

0.002
(0.004)
0.012
(0.005)
0.004
(0.005)

3171
0.04
0.00

3171
0.04
0.00

3171
0.04
0.00

3176
0.04
0.00

0.00

0.04

0.035
(0.014)
0.036
(0.021)
0.001
(0.017)

0.010
(0.006)
0.002
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.008)

P-value: treatments jointly 0
0.00
0.00
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Encouragement-Unconditional
0.058
0.055
(0.025)
(0.021)
Encouragement-Conditional
0.061
0.050
(0.032)
(0.029)
Conditional-Unconditional
0.004
-0.005
(0.031)
(0.026)

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the clinic level. The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted
category is patients in pure control clinics. Covariates selected by the double-lasso
procedure described by Belloni et al. (2014) and implemented in Stata 15 using the
command pdslasso, a user-written command provided by Ahrens et al. (2018).
Summary statistics for corresponding covariates provided in Appendix Table 5.

74

Table A11: Effects of outreach strategies on TB screening, testing, and detection (covariates selected by double lasso)
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Peer outreach

0.119
(0.028)
Health worker outreach, identified
0.050
(0.016)
Health worker outreach, anonymous 0.053
(0.021)

0.089
(0.023)
0.038
(0.014)
0.047
(0.019)

0.059
(0.016)
0.034
(0.013)
0.043
(0.018)

0.010
(0.004)
0.004
(0.004)
0.005
(0.005)

Observations

3171
0.03
0.00

3171
0.03
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00

0.08

0.025
(0.014)
0.016
(0.019)
0.009
(0.015)

0.006
(0.006)
0.005
(0.006)
0.001
(0.007)

R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

3171
0.03
0.00

P-value: treatments jointly 0
0.00
0.00
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Peer-Identified
0.070
0.050
(0.026)
(0.022)
Peer-Anonymous
0.067
0.042
(0.030)
(0.027)
Anonymous-Identified
0.003
0.008
(0.018)
(0.017)

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the clinic level. The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted
category is patients in pure control clinics. Covariates selected by the double-lasso
procedure described by Belloni et al. (2014) and implemented in Stata 15 using the
command pdslasso, a user-written command provided by Ahrens et al. (2018).
Summary statistics for corresponding covariates provided in Appendix Table 5.

75

Table A12: Effects of financial incentives on TB screening, testing, and detection
(weighted regressions)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Encouragement
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

0.046
(0.021)
0.090
(0.029)
0.100
(0.029)

0.034
(0.017)
0.075
(0.024)
0.075
(0.024)

0.029
(0.016)
0.053
(0.017)
0.054
(0.019)

0.005
(0.004)
0.011
(0.006)
0.005
(0.005)

3176
0.01
0.00

3176
0.01
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00

0.13

0.025
(0.015)
0.025
(0.019)
0.000
(0.016)

0.006
(0.006)
0.000
(0.007)
-0.006
(0.007)

0.00
0.00
P-value: treatments jointly 0
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Encouragement-Unconditional
0.044
0.041
(0.029)
(0.025)
Encouragement-Conditional
0.055
0.041
(0.032)
(0.028)
Conditional-Unconditional
0.011
0.000
(0.035)
(0.030)

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects and weighting each
observation by the the inverse of the number of original patients per center.
Standard errors are clustered at the clinic level. The sample includes all current
patients. The omitted category is patients in pure control clinics.

76

Table A13: Effects of outreach strategies on TB screening, testing, and detection
(weighted regressions)
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Peer outreach

0.134
(0.029)
Health worker outreach, identified
0.047
(0.020)
Health worker outreach, anonymous 0.057
(0.020)

0.103
(0.024)
0.034
(0.016)
0.050
(0.018)

0.062
(0.017)
0.032
(0.015)
0.044
(0.018)

0.010
(0.004)
0.003
(0.004)
0.008
(0.006)

Observations

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00

0.05

0.030
(0.012)
0.018
(0.015)
0.012
(0.011)

0.007
(0.005)
0.002
(0.006)
0.005
(0.007)

R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

3176
0.02
0.00

P-value: treatments jointly 0
0.00
0.00
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Peer-Identified
0.087
0.069
(0.026)
(0.023)
Peer-Anonymous
0.077
0.052
(0.027)
(0.024)
Anonymous-Identified
0.010
0.016
(0.015)
(0.014)

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects and weighting each
observation by the the inverse of the number of original patients per center.
Standard errors are clustered at the clinic level. The sample includes all current
patients. The omitted category is patients in pure control clinics.

77

Table A14: Complementarities between peer outreach and financial incentives on TB
detection (weighted regressions)
(1)
Patients
screened

(2)
(3)
(4)
Tests
Patients Positive
recommended tested
tests

0.030
(0.030)
0.054
(0.022)
0.194
(0.037)
0.062
(0.019)

0.022
(0.026)
0.040
(0.018)
0.149
(0.032)
0.051
(0.016)

0.018
(0.021)
0.034
(0.017)
0.087
(0.022)
0.043
(0.016)

-0.001
(0.005)
0.008
(0.005)
0.016
(0.006)
0.006
(0.005)

3176
0.03
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Peer encouragement = Peer incentives
0.00
Health worker outreach encouragement = Health worker outreach incentives 0.64
Health worker outreach encouragement = Peer encouragement
0.44
Health worker outreach incentives = Peer incentives
0.00

0.01
0.49
0.52
0.00

0.02
0.52
0.42
0.01

0.04
0.78
0.20
0.06

Peer outreach, no financial incentive
Health worker outreach, no financial incentive
Peer outreach, financial incentive
Health worker outreach, financial incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects and weighting each observation by the the inverse of the
number of original patients per center. Health worker outreach includes both identified and anonymous health worker
outreach. Financial incentives includes both conditional and unconditional incentives. Standard errors are clustered at
the clinic level. The sample includes all current patients. The omitted category is patients in pure control clinics.

78

Table A15: Effects of financial incentives on TB detection (p-values obtained by wild
bootstrap)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Encouragement
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

0.044
[0.019]
0.096
[0.001]
0.102
[0.002]

0.030
[0.046]
0.080
[0.002]
0.078
[0.008]

0.024
[0.077]
0.057
[0.002]
0.058
[0.010]

0.003
[0.365]
0.013
[0.024]
0.005
[0.405]

3176
0.01
0.00

3176
0.01
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00

0.07

0.032
[0.015]
0.034
[0.155]
0.001
[0.953]

0.011
[0.100]
0.003
[0.733]
-0.008
[0.419]

0.00
0.00
P-value: treatments jointly 0
Point estimate of differences between treatment arms:
Encouragement-Unconditional
0.052
0.050
[0.030]
[0.014]
Encouragement-Conditional
0.058
0.048
[0.103]
[0.130]
Conditional-Unconditional
0.007
-0.002
[0.863]
[0.952]

“Patients screened” (column 1) is the number of new suspects who meet with an Operation
ASHA counselor after receiving a referral card. “Tests recommended” (column 2) is the number
of new suspects who are observed by Operation ASHA counselors to have symptoms of active
TB and are therefore told to report to a government center for testing. “Patients tested” is the
number of new suspects who obtain a test at a government testing center. “Positive tests” is
the number of new suspects who have a positive sputum test result. The unit of observation
is the existing patient. Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. P-values
are obtained by Wild bootstrap clustering at the clinic level and reported in square brackets.
The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted category is patients in pure control clinics.

79

Table A16: Effects of outreach type on TB detection (p-values obtained by wild bootstrap)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Peer outreach

0.124
[0.001]
Health worker outreach, identified
0.054
[0.002]
Health worker outreach, anonymous 0.056
[0.005]

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00
P-value: treatments jointly 0
Point estimate of differences between treatment
Peer-Identified
0.070
[0.021]
Peer-Anonymous
0.068
[0.036]
Anonymous-Identified
0.002
[0.876]

0.092
[0.001]
0.042
[0.003]
0.049
[0.007]

0.058
[0.003]
0.035
[0.006]
0.043
[0.011]

0.010
[0.016]
0.004
[0.308]
0.005
[0.308]

3176
0.01
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

3176
0.02
0.00

0.00
arms:
0.050
[0.042]
0.043
[0.126]
0.007
[0.661]

0.01

0.09

0.024
[0.108]
0.015
[0.435]
0.008
[0.561]

0.006
[0.357]
0.005
[0.456]
0.001
[0.888]

“Patients screened” (column 1) is the number of new suspects who meet with an Operation
ASHA counselor after receiving a referral card. “Tests recommended” (column 2) is the number
of new suspects who are observed by Operation ASHA counselors to have symptoms of active
TB and are therefore told to report to a government center for testing. “Patients tested” is the
number of new suspects who obtain a test at a government testing center. “Positive tests” is
the number of new suspects who have a positive sputum test result. The unit of observation
is the existing patient. Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. p-values
are obtained by Wild bootstrap clustering at the clinic level and reported in square brackets.
The sample includes all existing patients. The omitted category is patients in pure control clinics.

80

Table A17: Effects of financial incentives on TB screening, testing, and detection (cliniclevel specification)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Encouragement
Unconditional incentive
Conditional incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

0.056
(0.072)
0.112
(0.072)
0.139
(0.073)

0.039
(0.062)
0.096
(0.063)
0.110
(0.063)

0.030
(0.044)
0.061
(0.044)
0.084
(0.045)

0.004
(0.008)
0.013
(0.008)
0.008
(0.008)

122
0.13
0.00

122
0.14
0.00

122
0.17
0.00

122
0.34
0.00

0.17

0.28

0.031
(0.028)
0.054
(0.029)
0.023
(0.029)

0.009
(0.005)
0.004
(0.005)
-0.005
(0.005)

0.17
0.21
P-value: treatments jointly 0
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Encouragement-Unconditional
0.056
0.056
(0.046)
(0.040)
Encouragement-Conditional
0.083
0.071
(0.047)
(0.040)
Conditional-Unconditional
0.026
0.015
(0.047)
(0.040)

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. The unit of analysis is the clinic.
Outcomes are averages of existing patient-level outcomes within clinic. The omitted category
is pure control clinics. Regressions include the clinic-level baseline number of patients as control.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

81

Table A18: Effects of outreach strategies on TB screening, testing, and detection (cliniclevel specification)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Patients Tests
Patients Positive
screened recommended tested
tests
Peer outreach

0.151
(0.071)
Health worker outreach, identified
0.063
(0.072)
Health worker outreach, anonymous 0.069
(0.073)

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

122
0.14
0.00

0.116
(0.062)
0.052
(0.063)
0.061
(0.064)

0.073
(0.044)
0.040
(0.045)
0.052
(0.046)

0.012
(0.008)
0.004
(0.008)
0.007
(0.008)

122
0.13
0.00

122
0.15
0.00

122
0.34
0.00

0.35

0.29

0.033
(0.028)
0.021
(0.030)
0.012
(0.030)

0.008
(0.005)
0.006
(0.005)
0.002
(0.005)

0.08
0.19
P-value: treatments jointly 0
Point estimates of differences between treatment arms:
Peer-Identified
0.088
0.063
(0.045)
(0.039)
Peer-Anonymous
0.082
0.055
(0.048)
(0.042)
Anonymous-Identified
0.006
0.008
(0.048)
(0.042)

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. The unit of analysis is the clinic.
Outcomes are averages of existing patient-level outcomes within clinic. The omitted category is
pure control clinics. Regressions include the clinic-level baseline number of patients as control.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

82

Table A19: Complementarities between peer outreach and financial incentives on TB
screening, testing, and detection (clinic-level specification)
(1)
Patients
screened

(2)
(3)
(4)
Tests
Patients Positive
recommended tested
tests

0.040
(0.081)
0.060
(0.074)
0.210
(0.072)
0.069
(0.069)

0.024
(0.071)
0.045
(0.065)
0.164
(0.063)
0.063
(0.061)

0.018
(0.051)
0.035
(0.047)
0.103
(0.046)
0.052
(0.044)

0.001
(0.009)
0.006
(0.008)
0.018
(0.008)
0.005
(0.008)

122
0.19
0.00

122
0.18
0.00

122
0.19
0.00

122
0.38
0.00

0.01
P-values: Peer encouragement = Peer incentives
Health worker outreach encouragement = Health worker outreach incentives 0.84
Health worker outreach encouragement = Peer encouragement
0.77
Health worker outreach incentives = Peer incentives
0.00

0.01
0.68
0.72
0.02

0.04
0.59
0.68
0.09

0.02
0.92
0.51
0.02

Peer outreach, no financial incentive
Health worker outreach, no financial incentive
Peer outreach, financial incentive
Health worker outreach, financial incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. The unit of analysis is the clinic. Outcomes are averages of existing
patient-level outcomes within clinic. The omitted category is pure control clinics. Regressions include the clinic-level baseline
number of patients as control. Standard errors are in parentheses.

83

Table A20: New patients enrolled at Operation ASHA clinics (clinic-level data)
(1)

Any treatment

(2)
(3)
(4)
new patients enrolled / baseline patients

0.124
(0.283)

Encouragement

0.139
(0.305)
0.116
(0.291)

Financial incentive
Peer outreach

0.303
(0.298)
0.006
(0.288)

Health worker outreach
Peer outreach, no financial incentive

0.296
(0.352)
0.035
(0.322)
0.307
(0.316)
-0.010
(0.300)

Health worker outreach, no financial incentive
Peer outreach, financial incentive
Health worker outreach, financial incentive

Observations
R-squared
Mean of dep. var. in control group

122
0.10
0.44

122
0.10
0.44

122
0.13
0.44

122
0.13
0.44

Linear models estimated by OLS, including city fixed effects. The unit of analysis is the clinic.
The outcome variable is the number of new patients enrolled at Operation ASHA clinics during
the study period divided by the baseline number of patients at the start of the study period.
The omitted category is pure control clinics. Regressions include the clinic-level baseline
number of patients as control. Standard errors are in parentheses.

84

Table A21: Cost of detection: reduced-cost scenario
Panel A: Costs by Incentive Type
Conditional

Encouragement

Incentive payments
Referral card printing
Training of existing patients
Payments to health workers
Total cost
Cost
Cost
Cost
Cost

per
per
per
per

Unconditional

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

n/a
16
14
69

n/a
15440
13542
68400
97382

11
16
14
70

10500
15440
13542
68400
107882

12
11
13
67

12600
11416
13542
68400
105958

symptomatic screened
TB case detected
symptomatic screened ($US)
TB case detected ($US)

2375
13912
37
214

1160
8990
18
138

1292
6622
20
102

Panel B: Costs by Outreach Type
Health worker, identified

Health worker, anonymous

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

Cost per current
patient

Total cost

13
40
14
n/a

12400
38920
13542
n/a
64862

5
1
12
94

5300
1408
13542
102600
122850

6
2
15
111

5400
1968
13542
102600
123510

Peer

Incentive payments
Referral card printing
Training of existing patients
Payments to health workers
Total cost
Cost
Cost
Cost
Cost

per
per
per
per

symptomatic screened
TB case detected
symptomatic screened ($US)
TB case detected ($US)

554
4633
9
71

2559
13650
39
210

2422
10292
37
158

This scenario assumes distribution of 5 cards instead of 10 and reduces health worker stipends by 50% to Rs. 900/month.
Panel A: Estimated number of detections correspond to outcome variables in Table 3, columns 1 and 7.
Panel B: Estimated number of detections correspond to outcome variables in Table 4, columns 1 and 7.
All costs in Indian rupees, except where indicated. Exchange rate is Rs. 65 to $US 1.

85

Appendix B (For online publication only)

86

Table B1:

Summary statistics: variables selected by double-lasso procedure for analysis of incentive conditions

Variable
Seek advice for a cough - no
Seek advice on children’s school - maybe
Seek advice on medical care for TB - maybe
Attended wedding with friend
Last amount borrowed from Self Help Group
Trust enough to borrow from - relative not in household
Cooking fuel - cow dung cake
No cooking fuel
Delay in starting treatment - family problems
Delay in starting treatment - treated for something else
Delay in starting treatment - not know treatment place
Delay in starting treatment - no time
Condition diagnosed - paralysis
Relative died of TB - aunt/uncle
Relative died of TB - cousin
Relative died of TB - son/daughter in law
Electricity at home
Household member condition diagnosed - BP
Household member condition diagnosed - paralysis
Household member condition diagnosed - pneumonia
Health advice from boss/employer
Health advice from relatives in household - aunt/uncle
Health advice from relatives in household - all family members
Health advice from relatives not in household - sister/brother in law
Health advice from doctor
Health complaints in past week - none
Discuss health problems with boss/employer
Discuss health problems with relatives not in household - grandparents
Discuss health problems with parents
Know baseline patient being treated for TB - customer
Know baseline patient being treated for TB - employee
Trust enough to lend to - boss/employer
Trust enough to lend to - co-worker
Trust enough to lend to - employee
Trust enough to lend to - parents
Trust enough to lend to - relatives not in household
Source of light - battery
Source of light - kerosene
Source of light - no electricity
Source of light - other oil
Source of light - solar energy
Last transaction - one year ago
Careful that customer does not find out about TB treatment
Careful that spouse does not find out about TB treatment
Own a radio/transistor
Recommended treatment location type - public hospital
Has bank account
Number of social contacts
Socialize with customer
Socialize with relatives not in household - children
Socialize with spouse
Symptom noticed first - don’t know
Symptom noticed first - swollen glands
Symptom noticed in - July
Symptom noticed in - June
Symptom noticed in - March
Symptom noticed in - May
Symptom noticed first - body pain
Symptom noticed first - chest pain
Symptom noticed first - stomach pain
Symptom noticed first - vomiting
Test type - fluid test
Test type - MRI
No test
Test revealed TB
Choice of test location - health card for facility
Choice of test location - recommended by friend
Choice of test location - trustworthy
Primary water source - well

Mean
0.250
0.025
0.026
0.617
23490.155
0.099
0.059
0.002
0.009
0.290
0.078
0.130
0.008
0.196
0.025
0.010
0.933
0.057
0.008
0.081
0.006
0.008
0.002
0.009
0.002
0.360
0.011
0.003
0.331
0.161
0.299
0.013
0.014
0.001
0.013
0.065
0.019
0.888
0.014
0.009
0.047
0.127
0.845
0.781
0.070
0.867
0.613
2.554
0.006
0.004
0.116
0.011
0.122
0.065
0.060
0.078
0.058
0.007
0.024
0.021
0.015
0.060
0.005
0.001
0.992
0.011
0.030
0.220
0.051

SD
0.433
0.156
0.158
0.487
40487.383
0.299
0.235
0.043
0.095
0.454
0.268
0.337
0.087
0.398
0.157
0.100
0.251
0.232
0.090
0.272
0.079
0.090
0.043
0.097
0.040
0.480
0.103
0.056
0.471
0.368
0.458
0.114
0.116
0.035
0.113
0.247
0.136
0.316
0.118
0.096
0.212
0.333
0.363
0.416
0.329
0.340
0.487
5.772
0.079
0.066
0.320
0.103
0.327
0.247
0.237
0.268
0.234
0.081
0.153
0.143
0.122
0.238
0.073
0.031
0.088
0.103
0.169
0.414
0.221

Minimum
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Maximum
1
1
1
1
400000
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8
1
1
99
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Observations
3176
3176
3176
533
161
3176
3176
3176
438
438
438
438
3176
397
397
397
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
323
421
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
214
214
214
214
214
1948
271
105
3174
218
3176
3042
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3041
3041
3041
3041
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176

Numbers in column 6 indicate the columns from Table A10 in which the relevant covariate was selected by the double-lasso procedure
and included in the corresponding regression.

Used in
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3, 4
2, 4
1, 2, 3, 4
2, 4
2, 4
2, 4
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3, 4

Table B2:

Summary statistics: variables selected by double-lasso procedure for analysis of outreach conditions

Variable

(1)
Mean

(2)
SD

(3)
(4)
Minimum Maximum

(5)
(6)
Observations Used in

Seek advice for a cough - no
Seek advice on children’s school - maybe
Seek advice on medical care for TB - maybe
Attended wedding with friend
Last amount borrowed from Self Help Group
Trust enough to borrow from - relative not in household
Cooking fuel - cow dung cake
No cooking fuel
Delay in starting treatment - family problems
Delay in starting treatment - treated for something else
Delay in starting treatment - not know treatment place
Delay in starting treatment - no time
Condition diagnosed - paralysis
Relative died of TB - aunt/uncle
Relative died of TB - cousin
Relative died of TB - son/daughter in law
Household member condition diagnosed - BP
Household member condition diagnosed - paralysis
Household member condition diagnosed - pneumonia
Health advice from boss/employer
Health advice from relatives in household - aunt/uncle
Health advice from relatives in household - all family members
Health advice from relatives not in household - sister/brother in law
Health advice from doctor
Health complaints in past week - none
Discuss health problems with boss/employer
Discuss health problems with all family members in household
Discuss health problems with relatives not in household - grandparents
Discuss health problems with parents
Know baseline patient being treated for TB - customer
Know baseline patient being treated for TB - employee
Trust enough to lend to - boss/employer
Trust enough to lend to - co-worker
Trust enough to lend to - employee
Trust enough to lend to - parents
Trust enough to lend to - relatives not in household
Last transaction - one year ago
Careful that customer does not find out about TB treatment
Careful that spouse does not find out about TB treatment
Own a radio/transistor
Recommended treatment location type - public hospital
Recommended specific place for treatment
Has bank account
Number of social contacts
Socialize with customer
Socialize with relatives not in household - children
Socialize with spouse
Symptom noticed first - don’t know
Symptom noticed first - swollen glands
Symptom noticed in - July
Symptom noticed in - March
Symptom noticed in - May
Symptom noticed first - body pain
Symptom noticed first - chest pain
Symptom noticed first - stomach pain
Test type - fluid test
Test type - MRI
No test
Test revealed TB
Choice of test location - health card for facility
Choice of test location - recommended by friend
Choice of test location - trustworthy
Primary water source - water truck

0.250
0.025
0.026
0.617
23490.155
0.099
0.059
0.002
0.009
0.290
0.078
0.130
0.008
0.196
0.025
0.010
0.057
0.008
0.081
0.006
0.008
0.002
0.009
0.002
0.360
0.011
0.010
0.003
0.331
0.161
0.299
0.013
0.014
0.001
0.013
0.065
0.127
0.845
0.781
0.070
0.867
0.592
0.613
2.554
0.006
0.004
0.116
0.011
0.122
0.065
0.078
0.058
0.007
0.024
0.021
0.060
0.005
0.001
0.992
0.011
0.030
0.220
0.013

0.433
0.156
0.158
0.487
40487.383
0.299
0.235
0.043
0.095
0.454
0.268
0.337
0.087
0.398
0.157
0.100
0.232
0.090
0.272
0.079
0.090
0.043
0.097
0.040
0.480
0.103
0.098
0.056
0.471
0.368
0.458
0.114
0.116
0.035
0.113
0.247
0.333
0.363
0.416
0.329
0.340
0.492
0.487
5.772
0.079
0.066
0.320
0.103
0.327
0.247
0.268
0.234
0.081
0.153
0.143
0.238
0.073
0.031
0.088
0.103
0.169
0.414
0.112

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

3176
3176
3176
533
161
3176
3176
3176
438
438
438
438
3176
397
397
397
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
323
421
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
1948
271
105
3174
218
368
3176
3042
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3041
3041
3041
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176
3176

1
1
1
1
400000
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8
1
1
1
99
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Numbers in column 6 indicate the columns from Table A11 in which the relevant covariate was selected by the double-lasso procedure
and included in the corresponding regression.

1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
3
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
1,
3

2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,

3
3
3
3
3
3,
3,
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3,
3
3
3
3
3,
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3,
3
3
3
3
3

2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,
2,

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3, 4
3
3
3
3

4
4

4

4

4

