NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX REFORM MADE ME DO IT!
Michelle Hanlon
Jeffrey L. Hoopes
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 25283
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25283

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

Prepared for presentation at the NBER Tax Policy and the Economy conference, September 27,
2018 in Washington, DC. We thank Todd Castagno and Morgan Stanley for providing the data on
firms’ forecasts of future tax rates, and for insights into how firms responded to tax reform, and
John Kartch for an explanation of how Americans for Tax Reform collected its Tax Reform Good
News list. We thank Robert Moffitt for comments on an earlier draft and Ben Yost for providing
computer code to calculate shareholder composition measures. We are grateful to Paul Organ and
Kendra Robbins for outstanding research assistance, and to participants at the University of
Michigan public finance seminar and at the Tax Policy and the Economy conference for
feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Michelle Hanlon, Jeffrey L. Hoopes, and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Tax Reform Made Me Do It!
Michelle Hanlon, Jeffrey L. Hoopes, and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 25283
November 2018
JEL No. H20,H24,H25
ABSTRACT
This paper examines corporations’ actions, and statements about actions, following the tax law
change known as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA). Specifically, we examine four different
outcomes—bonuses (or other actions that benefit workers), announcements of new investments,
share repurchases, and dividend announcements. We find that 4% of public firms in our sample
announced in Q1 2018 they would pay some portion of their tax savings toward workers. In terms
of investment, we find that 22% of the S&P 500 firms in our sample mentioned in
earnings conference calls that they would increase investment because of the TCJA. We find
a general increase in share repurchases following the passage of the TCJA, but the increase is
extremely concentrated in a small number of firms. We find only nine firms that announced a
new share repurchase plan explicitly attributed the new plan to the TCJA. In regression
analysis, we find that both political and economic variables explain TCJA-linked
announcements. The analysis suggests that firms with greater expected tax savings from the
TCJA are those most likely to announce payments to workers and plans to increase
investment. Firms with a Political Action Committee that donates more to Republican
candidates are also more likely to announce benefits to employees.
Michelle Hanlon
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
E62-668, 100 Main Street Cambridge,
MA 02142
mhanlon@mit.edu
Jeffrey L. Hoopes
Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of North Carolina
300 Kenan Center Drive
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
hoopes@unc.edu

Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan 701
Tappan Street
Room R5396
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

On December 20, 2017, Congress passed what is commonly known as the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act (henceforth TCJA); it was signed into law by President Trump on December 22. The
TCJA is the most comprehensive change in the U.S. income tax law since the Tax Reform Act of
1986. The centerpieces of the TCJA were major changes in the taxation of business income,
including a cut in the headline corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% and large changes in
the taxation of foreign profits.1 The consequences of the TCJA will depend in large part on the
impact of the business tax changes on the economy, which will in turn rest on how businesses
respond to the tax changes. The business provisions of the TCJA arguably made investment more
attractive by reducing the tax-adjusted cost of capital. In addition, the change to the international
tax provisions will reduce some tax frictions in a previously locked-up internal capital market
(although other incentives with respect to international activity may remain). Thus, the increased
cash flow from lower tax rates and investment incentives (and higher cash flow to the U.S. from
foreign operations) might lead to more investment as well as increased sharing of the “rents” from
the corporate income tax cuts with workers, shareholders, or consumers.
Notably, in the immediate aftermath of its passage—and in some cases even before it had
become law—hundreds of companies announced actions certain to be seen as evidence of the
TCJA’s positive economic effects—raising wages, providing bonuses, expanding facilities, and
hiring additional workers.2 Strikingly, many of the companies themselves asserted that the actions
were due to the passage of the TCJA.3

1

We outline more specifics of the TCJA in Section 2.
During the post-TCJA period, some companies, as is always the case, announced layoffs, factory closings, offshoring
of operations, and other corporate actions with negative impacts on workers, but we have found few such
announcements tied to the TCJA. One is H&R Block announcing plans to close 400 offices due to tax return
simplification, echoing President Trump’s statement on tax reform, “We're going to simplify very greatly the tax code.
It's too complicated. H&R Block probably won't be too happy. That's one business that might not be happy with what
we're doing (Isidore 2017).”
3
It is not unprecedented for companies to make announcements of actions linked to specific legislation. For example,
the advocacy group FreedomWorks compiled a list of companies that announced layoffs tied to the 2012 passage of
2

1

However, some have viewed these disclosures as partisan speech by corporations. While
corporations were quick to publicize bonuses and salary increases as a result of tax reform,
detractors pointed to the small size of these employee benefits. Larry Summers, former Treasury
Secretary under President Clinton, labeled employee bonuses as a “gimmick” (Cox 2018).
Goldman Sachs’ CEO, Lloyd Blankfein, said they were largely “symbolic” (Shiels et al. 2018).
Likewise, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi called the worker bonuses “crumbs” stating, “In
terms of the bonus that corporate America received versus the crumbs that they are giving workers
to kind of put the schmooze on is so pathetic (O’Keefe 2018).” Specifically, some claimed such
announcements were an attempt to curry favor with the Trump administration and the Republican
Party. Further, some of the announcements could be seen by some as corporations trying to boost
the public image of tax reform, increasing the likelihood that in the event Democrats regained
control of the House or Senate, they would not try to dismantle key pieces of the tax legislation
(as Republicans did with the Affordable Care Act).4
This paper examines corporations’ actions, and especially statements about actions,
following the passage of the TCJA, with an eye on whether the evidence supports the political or
economic explanation for the announcements (or both, or neither). Using a variety of data sources,
it provides initial descriptive evidence related to 1) which firms have announced TCJA-inspired
decisions, and 2) the extent and nature of these TCJA-inspired decisions. Specifically, we examine
four different outcomes—bonuses (or other actions that benefit workers), announcements of new

the Affordable Care Act. See http://www.freedomworks.org/content/mourning-america-heres-those-layoffs-wevoted-last-night. Some companies noted that they were shifting dividends or paying special dividends because of
dividend tax rate increases in prior years (Hanlon and Hoopes 2014).
4
One high-ranking employee at a firm that provided worker-related benefits that one author spoke to noted that the
firm was well aware of its predominantly Republican customers, and that some actions the firm took were made with
that knowledge in mind. However, we have seen no public evidence that companies responded to tax reform in ways
designed to appeal to their partisan customers.

2

investment, share repurchases, and dividend announcements.5 Although we primarily examine
disclosures and announcements of firms’ actions or plans for actions, we supplement the data on
disclosures with evidence about actual actions where possible.
This study lies in the under-studied intersection between three distinct literatures: 1) the
effects of taxes on business decisions, 2) corporate disclosure, and 3) business lobbying. While (1)
is about reality, (2) is about what firms say about the reality, and (3) are attempts to change the
reality. Although a vast literature in accounting examines corporate disclosure (e.g., see the review
by Healy and Palepu (2001)), few papers have examined corporate disclosures as a political tool.
Similarly, although researchers routinely study corporate lobbying and political speech, little
research has examined corporate public disclosures as a form of lobbying.
The extent to which TCJA would generate benefits to workers was one of the crucial
aspects of the debate leading up to its passage. Many supporters claimed that much of the benefit
would redound to the benefit of workers, with a Council of Economic Advisors (CEA) report
claiming that average wage and salary income could be $4,000-$9,000 higher as a result (Council
of Economic Advisers 2017). This is of course a classic, and controversial, tax incidence question.
We will not be able to answer this question because little time has elapsed; learning to what extent
workers benefit will require a long-run analysis of, among other aspects of the TCJA, how returns
to shareholders are subsequently invested. However, we do provide an initial analysis of the
announcements corporate America has made with regard to what they are doing with any tax
savings from the TCJA in Q1 2018.6

5

Data sources for specific tests are enumerated along with the test descriptions below. In addition, a summary table
of where our data come from appears in Appendix 1.
6
Journalists have offered conclusions about how corporations’ tax savings have been shared among constituents.
Writing for Bloomberg Gadfly, Stephen Gandel calculated, based on “a close look at the announcements companies
made after the passage of the tax law,” that across 51 S&P 500 companies, 39% of the gains went to shareholders via
buybacks and increased dividends, 23% went to business investment, 15% to employees bonuses, wages, and benefits,
and 3% to philanthropy (Gandel 2018). How these calculations differentiate tax-reform-motivated buybacks from

3

Using data gathered by Americans for Tax Reform, which we discuss more below, we
document that hundreds of firms announced worker-related benefits because of the TCJA. These
include increases in the minimum wage at the firm, increases in salary generally, one-time bonuses,
and increases in 401(k) matching. As an example, TJX Companies, parent company of TJ Maxx,
announced “a one-time, discretionary bonus to eligible, non-bonus-plan Associates, globally, an
incremental contribution to the Company’s defined contribution retirement plans for eligible
Associates in the U.S. and internationally, instituting paid parental leave for eligible Associates in
the U.S., and enhancing vacation benefits for certain U.S. Associates.”
We also examine which firms made statements that they would increase investment
because of tax reform. We examine all earnings conference calls from S&P 500 companies in the
first quarter of 2018. We find that 95 firms in our sample state that they plan to increase investment
as a result of the TCJA.7
We next look for evidence that, after tax reform, businesses altered their payout policy.
Payout policy may change as a result of the tax savings from TCJA, or from the newly freed-up
cash because of the changes to the international tax system (discussed more below). Some
companies have explicitly announced plans to increase returns to shareholders motivated by TCJA.
For example, in addition to other actions, TJX Companies said that, as a result of the TCJA, it is
“planning a significant increase in shareholder distributions in Fiscal 2019, through both the
Company’s dividend and share buyback programs.”
Using data from Capital IQ, we find that there is an increase in the number of firms
announcing new share repurchase plans. We also look at the value of shares actually repurchased

buybacks that would have occurred anyway, or how much business will save, long-term, from tax reform (something
many businesses still do not know) is unclear.
7
For our detailed analysis, 424 firms have sufficient data, of which 95 (22%) announce a TCJA-tied increase in
investment of any kind.

4

using data from firms’ quarterly filings we obtain from Compustat. We do see an increase in Q1
2018, although it appears to be the continuation of a trend. Moreover, the increase is incredibly
concentrated; in fact, after eliminating the shares repurchased by Apple Inc., the value of share
repurchases in Q1 2018 is no higher than the value of shares repurchased in Q1 2016.8 While there
may have been some increase in share repurchases, we also find that of the 179 newly announced
share repurchase plans on Capital IQ during Q1 2018, only 9 firms tied the decision to tax reform
in their share repurchase announcement.
We then turn our attention to dividend announcements. We find no evidence that the
number of firms announcing either regular or special dividends in Q1 2018, or the total amount of
regular or special dividends, increased significantly. Similarly, we do not observe an increase in
the percentage of firms initiating new dividends. We do detect elevated levels in the percentage of
firms increasing their dividends, but very few firms attributed this activity to tax reform. We find
that 2 of the 17 special dividends, 2 of the 18 dividend initiations, and 41 of the 344 dividend
increases were publicly attributed to tax reform.
Having provided descriptive evidence on these outcomes, we then turn to investigate what
characteristics of companies are associated with some of these announcements. First, we examine
the determinants of firms that announced worker benefits and increases in investment explicitly
tied to tax reform. We examine three sets of determinants: 1) Political determinants (e.g., whether
the headquarters state of the firm voted for Trump in 2016 or whether the Political Action
Committee of the firm donated more to Republicans than Democrats), 2) Economic determinants
(e.g., actual projected tax savings from tax reform), and 3) Controls (factors generally associated
with corporate actions, such as size, ROA, etc.). While pundits on both sides claimed that

We note that part of the reasoning for Apple’s repurchases is the “freeing-up” of foreign cash for repatriation to the
U.S. parent company. We discuss this issue more below.
8

5

(depending on the side) these announcements were purely political or purely economic, we find
evidence that both factors may have been at play. For example, the companies that had the highest
pre-TCJA tax rates, and that expected their tax rate to decrease the most, were more likely to
announce worker-related benefits due to the TCJA. Similarly, firms with the highest pre-reform
tax rates were more likely to assert they would invest more because of the TCJA. However, we
also find that corporations with PACs that donated more to Republican candidates than Democratic
candidates were more likely to announce TCJA-tied worker benefits (although we do not find this
same result for increased TCJA-motivated investment). We also find some evidence that firms in
highly unionized industries are less likely to announce actions related to the TCJA, as are
multinational firms.
We conclude that firms’ political motivations may have played a role in these
announcements, but that the firms with the most to gain from tax reform were also the most likely
to announce actions in response to the TCJA. We also test the same factors’ relation to an increase
in payout policy. We find that some factors seem to be related to post-TCJA changes in payout,
but there is not a consistent, economically significant factor in these decisions in our sample as of
the end of the first quarter of 2018.
2.

Business Tax Changes in the TCJA
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 is the largest U.S. tax law change in three decades,

with the changes to business taxation the centerpiece of the new law. First, the TCJA decreased
the headline top corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%. The rate cut by itself means that corporations
will pay less cash in taxes to the U.S. government. These reduced tax payments will result in firms
having more cash available to reinvest in the business, raise worker compensation, reduce prices
to consumers, or return value to shareholders. We note that not all, and possibly very little, of the

6

tax savings had actually been realized at the time the corporate disclosures that we analyze were
made in Q1 2018. The lower rate will, though, reduce the estimated tax payments immediately and
will affect managers’ expectations of future cash flows.
The second piece of the TCJA that may have a major impact on firms’ decisions is the
switch from a hybrid worldwide tax system to a modified territorial system. Prior to the TCJA, the
U.S. had a worldwide tax system with deferral. This system operated such that foreign earnings
were taxable in the U.S. and a foreign tax credit was allowed for foreign taxes paid, or deemed
paid, on the foreign earnings.9 However, if the foreign earnings were active operating earnings of
a foreign subsidiary, the foreign earnings were not taxable in the U.S. immediately, but rather the
U.S. tax due was instead deferred until those earnings were repatriated (brought back to the U.S.
as a dividend to the parent corporation).10 As a result, in order to avoid the relatively high (35%)
U.S. tax upon repatriation, many companies retained foreign earnings in the foreign subsidiaries
(in real capital or in cash or cash equivalents) (Foley et al. 2007; Hanlon, Lester, and Verdi 2015).
Thus, under the prior system, companies could achieve a sort-of do-it-yourself territorial tax
treatment (i.e., avoid U.S. tax on significant foreign earnings), but at the cost of immobility of
capital back to the U.S. parent company (Hanlon 2012), leading to higher borrowing in the U.S. to
fund U.S. operations and shareholder returns (Graham et al. 2010).
The TCJA moves the U.S. to a modified territorial tax system. At a high level, the TCJA
makes dividends from foreign subsidiaries exempt from U.S. taxation upon repatriation. However,
the TCJA also enacted anti-base erosion provisions to protect the tax base in the U.S. from outward

9

The foreign tax credit is subject to limitations, the discussion of which is beyond the scope of this paper. See Scholes
et al. (2014) for more detail.
10
This discussion necessarily skips myriad details; see Foley et al. (2007), Scholes et al. (2014), or Hanlon et al.
(2015) for more details.

7

income shifting.11 The TCJA also imposed a one-time mandatory tax on unrepatriated, previously
untaxed (in the U.S.), foreign earnings of foreign subsidiaries (controlled foreign corporations),
assessed regardless of whether repatriation actually occurs. As a result, much of the “trapped” cash
from the pre-TCJA foreign earnings is no longer trapped, and is now more readily available to pay
down debt (see Graham et al. (2010)), be paid as bonuses to employees, be reinvested domestically,
or be returned to shareholders via dividends or share repurchases.
There are other provisions of the TCJA that will possibly be important as well. For
example, bonus depreciation was expanded such that the full cost of investments in qualified
property through 2022 can be immediately expensed for tax purposes in the first year. Net
operating losses (NOL) can now be carried forward indefinitely, but cannot be carried back in
time, and can now be used to offset only 80% of taxable income. In addition, interest deductibility
is currently limited based upon measures of income.12
3. Descriptive Evidence of Corporate Announcements and Disclosures
We examine several different short-run responses by corporations to tax reform. We
investigate TCJA-linked announcements about worker benefits and investments, as well as
(whether linked to the TCJA or not) share repurchases, newly announced share repurchase plans,
regular dividends, and special dividends.
3.1

TCJA-Linked Announcements about Workers

11

The U.S. adopted two such provisions—the Global Intangibles Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) provision and the Base
Erosion Anti-Abuse Tax (BEAT). The details of these provisions are beyond the scope of this paper. Overall, these
provisions have led some to claim that the U.S. now has a global-minimum tax of sorts (i.e., a lower-rate worldwide
tax with no deferral) and/or a modified territorial system. Most countries’ tax systems are a hybrid of worldwide and
territorial systems. These provisions may actually cause some firms to have a higher tax burden under the new tax
system than under the old tax system.
12
Two studies that we are aware of examine stock price reactions to the election of President Trump and/or the TCJA.
Wagner et al. (2018a) and Wagner et al. (2018b). These papers find that expectations about tax rate reductions impact
firm value.

8

Proponents of tax reform have strong incentives to make tax reform appear as favorable as
possible. One of these groups, Americans for Tax Reform (ATR), a lobbying group headed by
Grover Norquist that “opposes all tax increases as a matter of principle,” has compiled a
continuously updated list of companies that have made TCJA-tied announcements of corporate
actions.13 We obtained the list in April, 2018, and focus our analysis on announcements made in
the first quarter of 2018.14 We conducted checks to verify that the list is representative of all
businesses that announced worker-related benefits, and found it to be representative, although not
completely comprehensive.15 We start with this list to obtain our sample of firms to examine
TCJA-linked worker-related benefits announced by firms. For our sample, we retain only public
corporations so as to be consistent with the rest of our paper where we gather publicly available
announcements and disclosures by public companies.
We verify that each firm we include in our sample did make a public announcement of a
worker-related benefit that was tied to tax reform. We categorize the announcements, and

13

Obviously, ATR is not a neutral observer of the TCJA. However, all of the episodes on their list have been
independently verified by us, and we read each corporate announcement on their list to verify the company did
announce a tax-reform-related worker benefit.
14
See the constantly updated list here: https://www.atr.org/list. We examine announcements that happened in the first
quarter of 2018. The list now contains many new examples that are not in our analysis, as it is constantly updated.
Further, many of the firms on the list are private firm or non-corporate entities, and so are not in our sample.
15
To the extent that firms that took TCJA-induced actions but are not on the ATR list are systematically different
from those on the list, this may bias our results. To the extent that the ATR does not cover a material percentage of
announcements, even if the omissions are non-systematic, it would make the phenomena of TCJA-linked benefits
appear less frequent than they actually are. To investigate these issues, we conduct two different checks. First, we read
the comprehensive set of Q1 2018 earnings conference calls from S&P 500 firms and identified any announcements
of employee-related TCJA benefits among these firms. In reconciling the S&P 500 announcers to the ATR list, we
found five instances where, in the earnings conference call, the firm announced a specific employee-related action to
be taken as a result of TCJA that was not covered in the ATR list that we judged the ATR should have included on its
list (it was publicized, concrete, etc.). Second, we select a random 100 firms from our sample that are not on the ATR
list and searched the internet for evidence that any of these 100 firms paid employee-related TCJA benefits; we failed
to find any examples of news coverage or press releases from the firm of such benefits. We conclude that the ATR
list, while not completely comprehensive, is representative. We note that the full ATR list at the time we constructed
our sample was 473 firms, many of which were private, and some very small relative to the public firms we examine
(e.g., The Flood Insurance Agency of Gainesville, Florida planned to give a $1,000 bonus to all of its 17 full-time
employees). Some announcements did not relate to employees (e.g., WeStar Energy in Topeka, Kansas planned to
pass tax savings along to customers). Of the firms that were public, the 163 firms with TCJA-linked worker benefit
announcements in our sample had sufficient data to calculate all the test and control variables.

9

summarize them in Table 1. Table 1 shows the breakdown of worker-related benefits announced
by firms on the ATR list that end up in our final sample (i.e., that contain necessary control
variables).16 We obtain a sample of 163 public firms that announce a TCJA-tied worker-related
response. Of these firms, 118 (72%) announced a one-time worker bonus, 11 (7%) announced that
they will do additional hiring, 63 (39%) stated that they will enact wage increases, and 50 (31%)
stated that they will otherwise enhance benefits.17
To put these announcements into a quantitative perspective, we can compare the dollar
amounts involved to an estimate of total wages. We obtain data from firms’ annual financial
statements in 2016 on total staff expense. We have 43 firms for which we have both the aggregate
value of TCJA-tied worker bonus announcements and the staff expense from the annual report.
We find that the total value of TCJA-tied worker bonuses sums to $441,458,000 for these 43 firms,
and the total 2016 staff expense equals $82,769,687,000, suggesting that for this (small) sample
of firms, the worker benefits sum to approximately 0.5% of annual staff expense.
Another way of assessing firms’ initial responses to tax reform in context involves
considering how much total tax savings occurred due to TCJA. While estimates of these
magnitudes will certainly change over time as firms respond to the law and regulations surrounding
the new laws are written, we can provide some initial estimates. Using our sample of 904 firms for
which Morgan Stanley collected estimated post-tax reform effective tax rates, we multiply pre-tax

16

In this table, we focus on announcements of non-shareholder related actions (we omit investment, dividends,
repurchases, charitable contributions, and price reductions to customers).
17
We categorize these benefits according to broad categories that many firms mentioned. However, some of these
announcements also contained firm-idiosyncratic benefits going to workers. For example, Hostess Brands, Inc.,
producer of the mouth-watering Twinkie, announced that, along with a cash bonus and a contribution to employees’
401(k) plans, they would provide their employees a year’s worth of free food in the form of a weekly multipack of a
Hostess product of their choice.

10

income in 2016 by the change in the effective tax rate from 2016 to a post-tax reform rate as
calculated by Morgan Stanley, which yields $72 billion in tax savings.18
Figure 1 graphs the timing of these TCJA-tied worker benefit announcements by public
firms that are in our sample. We can see from this graph that the majority of the announcements
occurred soon after the passage of the TCJA. Table 2 shows the announcements by industry.
Banks, retail establishments, and transportation firms were especially likely to announce
employee-related benefits associated with tax reform.
3.2 TCJA-Linked Announcements about Investment
We now turn to examining announcements about investment. We analyze firms
announcing tax-reform related investment by examining conference call transcripts for S&P 500
firms for the first quarter (Q1) of 2018.19 Frequently, managers explain on conference calls (often
as a result of analysts asking) what the firm was intending to do with the proceeds from tax reform.
Indeed, Morgan Stanley created a report entitled, “What Will Corporate America Do with Tax
Savings,” in which they analyzed these earnings conference calls available up through the report
date, and categorized firms according to what they said they would do with the proceeds from tax
reform (Morgan Stanley 2018). We follow this method and analyze the call transcripts and
categorize what was said about the savings from tax reform and whether it was used for investment.
We break investment down into different categories. First, some firms mentioned they would
invest generally. For example, Harley-Davidson noted that “The positive impact of tax reform on

18

This sample is only a subset of all firms, but it does generally represent the largest firms in the economy. There are
several caveats. The effective tax rates here are more closely aligned with GAAP effective tax rates, as opposed to
cash effective tax rates, so do not represent actual cash tax savings. Further, as we have explained previously, some
of the initial reaction to TCJA by firms may well reflect the use of "freed-up" cash in foreign subsidiaries rather than
actual tax savings projected to happen in the future.
19
More specifically, we examine any “CQ FD Disclosure” on Factiva from January 1 through March 31, 2018. In
most cases, these disclosures were made during the annual earnings conference call. For some non-calendar year end
firms, these were the quarterly conference call discussing quarterly earnings. For a small group of firms, this also
included other firm-initiated disclosures such as executives making speeches at industry conferences.

11

our cash flow will provide additional investment capital to drive our business.”20 Some firms more
specifically mentioned deploying the savings from tax reform to invest in technology. For
example, CarMax stated its “…strategy on the use of cash flows created by the reduction in our
effective tax rate” will be to “invest incrementally in our business, including our digital and
technology capabilities.”
Table 3 provides details of our sample. Of the S&P 500 firms, 424 make it into our final
sample. Of these 424 firms, 95 firms (22%) mentioned some form of investment associated with
tax reform. Not all companies provided detailed disclosure, but within the set of 95 firms that did
provide more specific disclosures, we find that 43 firms (10%) mentioned investment in new
capital expenditure and 59 firms (14%) mentioned investments that would be associated with
technology improvements at the firm (note that we count the firm separately in each category of
specific disclosure if the firm disclosed they were doing both capital expenditures and technology).
In Table 4 we show the firms broken down by industry and find that corporate statements
of intent to increase investment as a result of tax reform are concentrated in the banking, business
supplies, insurance, and retail industries. Both banking and retail firms appear in both our
investment and employee-related benefits announcements as industries that will benefit from tax
reform, and that have announced that their employees and investment will benefit from the TCJA.
3.3 TCJA-Linked Announcements about Returns to Shareholders
Finally, we examine the variety of ways in which firms can return cash to shareholders.
We use Capital IQ, a subscription service owned by S&P Global (prior to 2016, McGraw Hill
Financial) used by investment professionals and researchers, to identify firms announcing new
share repurchase plans. We also examine the actual number of shares repurchased using firms’ 10-

Harley-Davidson later demonstrated that it was also willing to announce a “negative” decision, moving some of its
production overseas, due to the tariffs imposed by the Trump administration.
20

12

Q disclosures, in which they are required to disclose the number of shares repurchased each
quarter; we get these data from Compustat. Finally, we use CRSP data on regular and special
dividends to investigate whether firms initiated new regular dividends, increased the value of their
regular dividends, paid special dividends, or increased the size of special dividends as a result of
the TCJA.
3.3.1 Share Repurchases
While some firms disclosed and discussed paying tax reform “bonuses” to their employees,
the media was quick to pick up on what appeared to be a rash of share repurchases in early 2018.
The Wall Street Journal ran an article entitled “Boom in Share Buybacks Renews Question of
Who Wins from Tax Cuts” (Otani et al. 2018), while CNN reported “Tax Cut Scoreboard: Workers
$6 Billion; Shareholders $171 Billion” (Egan 2018). These buybacks were held out by some as
prima facie proof that the bulk of the benefits of tax reform were going to shareholders. For
example, Senator Chuck Schumer (D-NY) said that the rash of share buybacks “prove that the
bulk of the savings from this bill aren’t trickling down into higher wages, but into bigger gains for
giant corporations and the wealthy” (Senate Democrats 2018). Partly in response to Schumer, John
Cochrane of the Hoover Institution penned an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal headlined “Stock
Buybacks Are Proof of Tax Reform’s Success,” explaining that buybacks do not automatically
make shareholders wealthier (Cochrane 2018).
Firms can respond to tax reform with share repurchases in two ways. First, firms may
announce new share repurchase plans. Firms announce a share repurchase plan which allows them
to purchase of a number of shares over a given time period, and management then uses its
discretion to determine when to purchase shares, and how many to purchase. A new repurchase
plan is not a commitment to repurchase shares, but rather authorization to repurchase up to a certain

13

number of shares; firms are under no obligation to actually purchase all of the shares they are
authorized to purchase. Figure 2 graphs the number of firms announcing new share repurchase
plans, using data from Capital IQ, ending in Q1 2018. While the Q1 2018 number firms
announcing new share repurchases do represent an all-time high, they also appear to be a
continuation of a trend upward, and a reflection of generally good economic times.
We also examine the disclosure language used in discussing the new share repurchase
plans. While each of the worker benefit announcements we examined above were publicly tied by
the companies to tax reform, such might not be the case with share repurchases. To get a sense of
whether firms tied these actions to the TCJA, we first carefully examine the companies’ disclosures
regarding new share repurchase plans in the Capital IQ database that occurred between December
22, 2017, and March 31, 2018. Of the 179 announcements on Capital IQ, we locate a firm
disclosure discussing the share repurchase for 173 instances, and in only 9 cases (5%) the company
explicitly tied the repurchase to the TCJA. These 9 firms, and their relevant disclosures, are listed
in Appendix 2.
Firms may also respond to tax reform through share repurchases in a second way by
actually repurchasing more shares through a new or existing plan. For example, a firm may have
an outstanding plan that allows the purchase of 50 million shares over the period 2018-2020, and
because of TCJA may decide to repurchase all 50 million shares in 2018, when in the absence of
TCJA it would not have. Figure 3, Panel A, depicts the number of firms that actually bought back
shares during each quarter from 2010 through Q1 2018, as reported on the quarterly financial
filings (the 10-Q), using data from Compustat. The graph shows that the number in Q1 2018 is not
high relative to the rest of the time period, although it is slightly higher in Q1 2018 relative to Q1
2017. Panel B of Figure 3 shows the value of the shares repurchased. Here we observe an increase

14

after the TCJA. Thus, it appears that the total value increased much more than the number of
firms, indicating that the effect is likely concentrated in a few firms. Indeed, in Panel C of Figure
3 we examine the value of buybacks after eliminating the firms that made the largest buybacks in
2018. First, we eliminate Apple Inc. After eliminating Apple, the value of buybacks in Q1 2018
is not larger than the value of buybacks in Q4 2016. If we eliminate the five firms with the largest
value of buybacks in 2018, then the value of Q1 2018 buybacks are roughly in line or smaller than
several other quarters in the time period since 2009.21
3.3.2 Dividends
While some media outlets and other pundits cited the number of share repurchases as
evidence that the benefits of tax reform were going to shareholders, they also cited the possibilities
that companies would give the savings from tax reform to their owners through increasing their
dividends (e.g., Borzykowski 2018). In this section, we examine the temporal trends in dividends
up through Q1 2018 using data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).
In Figure 4, Panel A, we graph the number of firms announcing dividends, graphed at the
quarterly level (ending with Q1 2018), and detect no obvious increase following TCJA. In Panel
B, we graph the total dollar value of dividends announced and we find a slight increase, but this
appears to be a continuation of a trend. In Panel C, where we graph the percentage of all dividendpaying public firms in CRSP increasing their regular dividend, we do document an increase in the
percentage of dividend-paying firms raising their dividends. For example, in Q1 2017, a very
positive economic quarter, about 23.6% of dividend-paying firms increased their dividends. In Q1
2018, that number rose to 29.8%. However, as with all of our graphical analyses, it is impossible
to definitively attribute the increase to TCJA (because, for example, some firms may have

21

Alternatively, if we simply remove the largest buyback each quarter, the takeaway is similar—the number of
repurchases in Q1 2018 is overshadowed by the number of repurchases in Q4 2016.

15

increased dividends in response to the TCJA but did not publicly announce this association). We
searched public announcements of the firms that increased dividends in Q1 2018 and find that 41
firms out of the 344 firms that increased their dividends publicly announced that the increase was
attributable to the TCJA.
Finally, while firms with existing dividends may increase their dividend, it is also possible
firms that had not previously paid a dividend may initiate dividends as a result of tax reform. We
examine this possibility in Panel D, and find no notable increase in the number of firms initiating
dividends (defined as having paid a regular dividend for the first time in at least three years) in Q1
2018, relative to previous quarters.22
Previous work on tax rates and payout decisions has noted that dividend decisions are very
sticky and firms may be hesitant to, for example, initiate a new dividend as a result of a tax policy
that may not be permanent (Hanlon and Hoopes 2014). If firms resist making permanent changes
to their payout policy, they may increase share repurchases (examined above), or use one-time
special dividends. These less permanent responses seem especially likely if firms are merely
responding to the change in the international tax system, which freed up trillions of dollars of cash
previously held by foreign subsidiaries. In Figure 5, Panel A, we examine the value of special
dividends. Notable is the large spike in 2004, which is entirely attributable to a large special
dividend paid by Microsoft. Also notable are the surges in special dividends in Q4 2010 and Q4
2012, which Hanlon and Hoopes (2014) attribute to a threatened increase in the individual-level
dividend tax rate. We observe somewhat of a spike in Q4 2017, but no spike in Q1 2018.23 Finally,

22

We searched the announcements of all firms that initiated dividends in Q1 of 2018 and find that 2 firms out of the
18 firms that initiated a dividend publicly announced that the initiation was at least in part a response to the TCJA.
23
We examine the data constituting the spike in late 2017. We find that the spike is largely due to one company, CME
Group Inc., issuing a large dividend as part of an annual variable dividend. Per the firm’s announcement this dividend
is $3.50 per share and was paid as part of a plan where the level of the dividend can “increase or decrease from year
to year based on operating results.” This plan was adopted in 2012 and the announcement of this particular dividend
was made on December 6. Thus, this large dividend in 2017 does not seem to be related to the TCJA.

16

in Panel B, we similarly observe no increase in the number of special dividends announced in Q1
2018, suggesting that there was no clear increase in special dividends along either the intensive or
extensive margins.24
4.

Determinants of Announcements
We now turn to explaining which types of companies made announcements about TCJA-

related employee benefits and investments, as well as which companies bought back shares or
increased dividend payments. The explanatory variables we consider in our models are of three
types, which we term: (1) control, (2) political, and (3) economic. The control variables are
included to control for characteristics of companies that might be associated with the decisions we
consider for reasons outside of our purview, such as general economic trends, etc. The political
variables aim to measure the political incentives such as currying favor with the administration or
bolstering the argument for retaining the TCJA or even expanding its aims.25 Finally, the economic
variables are designed to indicate the extent to which the TCJA affected corporate decisions, either
by changing the tax-adjusted cost of capital or providing additional cash flow. To be clear, these
categories are not mutually exclusive—for example, a high tax rate company may have motives to
make tax reform look as positive as possible (to retain its now-lower tax rate), but also has more
cash flow with which to invest or pay workers a bonus.
Before describing our analysis in detail, we briefly discuss what the research has to say
about how corporations may use the political system to try to increase firm value, and then turn
our attention to how tax changes affect the economic fundamentals of the firm.

24

We searched the public announcements for firms paying a special dividend and find that 2 firms out of the 17 firms
that paid a special dividend in Q1 of 2018 publicly announced that the payment was in response to the TCJA.
25
We recognize that we do not have the requisite data to be able to conclusively establish these explanations. For
example, it may not be “currying favor” but rather that the particular action is what the firm decision makers of that
political persuasion think is best to do.

17

4.1 Political Factors
Corporations may try to use their influence to change policy outcomes. Researchers have
studied corporate Political Action Committee (PAC) contributions and lobbying expenditures, and
the effects these contributions can have on policies. For example, de Figueiredo and Richter (2014,
p. 168) note that, although lobbying expenditures are substantial (indicating firms are serious in
their attempts to influence policy), the question of how effective lobbying is remains
“extraordinarily challenging” due to problematic econometric identification and difficult-to-isolate
causal mechanisms. While researchers are uncertain of the effects of lobbying on policy outcomes,
firms appear convinced it has an impact, as they engage heavily in lobbying. Most lobbying
expenditures come from corporations and trade associations, and larger corporations are more
likely to lobby than small firms (Barrick and Alexander 2014; de Figueiredo and Richter 2014).
Beyond campaign contributions and lobbying expenditures, others have studied a broader
set of actions under the umbrella of “corporate political activity” (CPA). Hadani and Schuler
(2013, p. 338) describe CPA as “tak[ing] place through lobbying, making contributions to political
campaigns, participating in trade associations, or engaging in grass-roots mobilization efforts.”
Hadani and Schuler also include an additional action under the definition of CPA: “other
interactions with policy makers.” In our paper, we focus on this branch of CPA, viewing firms’
public announcements as yet another way in which firms attempt to influence policy outcomes.
Researchers have also asked if CPA is effective at improving a firm’s financial
performance. Several studies have found a positive relationship between firms’ political activities
and financial performance,26 while other studies have found no significant relation, or even a
negative relation (Hersch, Netter, and Pope 2008). All of these studies estimate the effects of some

26

For example, Cooper et al. (2010) finds a positive relationship between the number of candidates a firm donates to
and that firm’s future abnormal returns.

18

quantifiable political activity, such as PAC donations or lobbying expenditures, on firm
performance. Thus, these studies do not address other political activities firms may engage in, such
as public announcements, the focus of this paper.
In addition, the literature has studied when and why firms engage in CPA. This strand of
the literature relates to our study of which firms make TCJA-tied announcements. Hillman, Keim,
and Schuler (2004) describe “four important categories of antecedents of CPA: firm, industry,
issue, and institutional factors”; within the firm category, they note several factors associated with
CPA, including firm size, foreign ownership, and managerial influence (i.e., political orientation
of firms' top managers) (pp. 839-841). Thus, we include these firm-level variables in our regression
analysis. Finally, we note that You (2017) examines a slightly overlapping issue, what he calls
“ex-post lobbying,” trying to explain the fact that fully 40% of lobby effort, for all bills and not
just tax bills, happens after the bill is passed. His explanation is that, for much legislation, the
original bill only provides a broad outline of the legislative intent, with the details to be decided
after passage.
4.2 Economic Factors
4.2.1 TCJA-tied Worker Benefits
Under a set of assumptions, because payments to labor are tax deductible, the statutory tax
rate does not affect the incentive to hire labor, just as it would not affect the incentive to buy capital
in the presence of expensing. With competitive labor markets without frictions, wage rates would
rise only when the productivity of labor increased, which would happen slowly to the extent that
TCJA increased capital accumulation, and certainly not in the time frame we are studying.
However, as Auerbach (forthcoming) argues, given the cost of training and other adjustment costs,
some firms might raise wages in anticipation of stronger future labor productivity.

19

A recent literature has revisited the question of who benefits in the short run from changes
in the corporate tax rate where wage setting institutions and labor market frictions matter. For
example, in models with wage bargaining, “fair-wage” setting (Akerlof and Yellen 1990),
efficiency wage considerations, or monopsony power (due to, for example, heterogeneous worker
preferences over work environments27), firm owners and workers share any rents generated by the
firm and, if corporate tax cuts increase that rent, the models predict that some of that increase will
be shared with employees through higher compensation. Some recent empirical analyses with this
kind of model in mind have found substantial short-run pass-through to workers, as much as onehalf in the Arulampalam, Devereux, and Maffini (2012) study of federal corporate taxation in nine
European countries and in the Fuest, Peichl, and Siegloch (2018) study of German municipal
business taxes. These effects are certainly context-dependent.28
Of interest for our empirical analysis is Fuest et al.’s emphasis on the role of collective
bargaining arrangements in the pass-through to wages of the effects of corporate tax cuts. In their
theoretical model, pass-through is more likely with collective wage bargaining at the firm level,
but not necessarily at the sector level. These rent-sharing effects are certainly context-dependent
and these theories address what form an increase in labor compensation would take (e.g., increased
salaries or one-time bonuses). Further, as unionization is concentrated in specific industries, other
industry trends may make observing the effect of unionization in the data difficult (especially as
unionization is measured at the industry level).
4.2.2 Investment
Holding constant the perceived rewards to publicly linking actions to the TCJA, how did
the TCJA change the incentives to take the actions we study in this paper? First, we consider

27
28

Card et al. (2018) stress this last interpretation.
See also Azemar and Hubbard (2015). In addition, see Gravelle (2017) for discussion.

20

business investment. There are two principal potential avenues of impact: (1) how it affects the
cost of capital, which affects the incentive to invest, and (2) how it affects cash flow.
First, according to the standard formula due originally to Hall and Jorgenson (1967), the
tax-adjusted user cost of capital depends on, inter alia, the statutory tax rate, the present value of
depreciation deductions per dollar of investment, the tax treatment of interest expenses (for debtfinanced investment), and the tax treatment of net operating losses.29
A few lessons emerge from this approach. One is that, as long as tax depreciation is not
immediate, a cut in the statutory tax rate reduces the cost of capital and thus makes investment
more attractive. However, when capital expenditures can be expensed for tax purposes (i.e., tax
depreciation is immediate), the tax rate has no effect on the user cost of capital of equity-financed
investments.30 Because of this, the effect of the TCJA on the incentive to invest depends crucially
on counterfactual perceptions of depreciation policy. TCJA enacted expensing of qualified
tangible capital expenditures (until the end of 2022, sunsetting through tax year 2026 at a reduced
rate of 20% per year) and the continued expensing of research and development through the end
of 2021, after which time a 5-year amortization period for research and development will apply.31
One attempt to quantify the total impact of the TCJA on the cost of capital, DeBacker and Kasher
(2018), concluded that it would reduce the cost of capital for equity-financed corporate (and

29

This expression ignores inflation and holds only under a set of assumptions including but not limited to that the tax
system parameters are assumed to be in place forever (an assumption which the phenomena we are studying, the
TCJA, makes clear is false), that capital goods prices do not change (in this period new tariffs were being proposed
which may have increased the cost of some capital goods), and that no tax changes or effects on future deficits affect
the required rate of return. It also ignores the imperfect refundability of losses. Auerbach (forthcoming) discusses
many of these issues.
30
With a tax rate of τ, expensing of all costs and full loss offsets, the present value of equity-financed investments is
Σ((1-τ)Rt – (1-τ)Ct)/(1+r)t = (1-τ)Σ(Rt – Ct)/(1+r)t, where R is gross revenue, C is costs, and r is the discount factor.
Those projects that have a positive present value, and thus are value-enhancing, still have a positive present value
regardless of the value of τ; those that do not, still do not regardless of τ.
31
In addition, for tangible personal property, under Section 179, up to $500,000 of qualified assets could be expensed
each year, limited by a dollar-for-dollar phase-out if such assets placed in service exceeded $2 million. The TCJA
increased this to $1 million, with the phase-out limit set at $2.5 million.

21

noncorporate) investment, increase it for debt-financed investment, and decrease it overall; the
estimated decrease was negligible for intellectual property.
The TCJA could also affect investment because in the case of firms with large stockpiles
of foreign trapped cash, a one-time cash flow increase may occur dramatically and nearly
instantaneously as a result of the deemed repatriation tax required in the TCJA. The effect of cash
flow on investment has been a controversial notion at least since Fazzari et al (1988) found
empirical evidence suggesting that the investment of financially-constrained firms appears to be
more sensitive to cash flow, which is consistent with the notion that more cash flow relaxes
financing constraints on investment. But investment-cash flow sensitivity is not consistent with
the Hall-Jorgenson models of investment, and has not been consistently replicated. For example,
Chen and Chen (2012, p. 394) conclude that “investment-cash flow sensitivity has completely
disappeared in recent years,” while other papers argue that cash flow is still a significant
determinant of investment even when there is an exogenous shock to cash flow without a
corresponding change in firm growth opportunities, as is arguably the case for the TCJA.
One aspect of a possible cash flow effect is how to consider the “unlocking” of the
unrepatriated past earnings of foreign subsidiaries that by 2017 had grown to an estimated $2.6
trillion. This unlocking will occur because the U.S. will now tax the unremitted post-1986 through
pre-2018 foreign earnings whether repatriation occurs or not.32 Some claimed that, by eliminating
a barrier to the repatriation of these funds, this would stimulate investment in the United States
funded by the parent companies’ newly “available” funds, and thus will have the same effect as
increased cash flow. Others have questioned this reasoning on the grounds that unless the firms
were financially constrained, they could have previously borrowed in the U.S. to fund U.S.

32

The new tax law imposes a one-time tax on untaxed overseas profits, with a different rate applying to cash and noncash assets. This one-time tax is payable, in installments, over a period of up to eight years.

22

investment, in which case the “unlocked” cash would now be used to pay down U.S. debt.
Ultimately, it is an empirical question.33
Motivated by prior literature on the factors that affect business investment, we include
several factors in our model that may influence future investment choices such as expected tax
saving, the importance of (expensed) intangible assets, size, and return on assets.
4.2.3 Buybacks and Dividends
Previous papers have examined the relation between dividend tax rate changes and regular
dividends (Chetty and Saez 2005; Blouin et al. 2011; Edgerton 2012; Hanlon and Hoopes 2014),
and share repurchases (Lie and Lie 1999; Rau and Vermaelen 2002). If shareholder-level tax rates
decrease, firms interested in maximizing shareholder after-tax returns may be sensitive to the
shareholder-level taxes their investors face and increase shareholder-level payout. Firms have
traditionally done this through dividend payments, but increasingly are also returning cash to
shareholders through share repurchases (Grullon and Ikenberry 2000). However, while several
papers examine the relation between shareholder-level taxes and corporate payout, few papers
examine the relationship between corporate tax rates and payout. As dividends or share
repurchases are not tax deductible to the corporation, the corporate-level tax has no direct effect
on the firm’s incentives to pay dividends or repurchase shares. However, the dividend literature
does suggest that the financial capacity to pay a dividend (e.g., generating sustainable earnings) is
a positive predictor of dividend payments. Indeed, in the very early literature on corporate payout,

33

For empirical evidence, we can look back to the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, which offered a temporary
tax holiday for repatriations in 2004 and 2005, allowing funds to be brought back subject to a 5.25% tax rate. There
is mixed evidence on how firms used the funds. For example, one study found that those companies that repatriated
were ones with limited investment opportunities, and that much of the money went to share repurchases (Blouin and
Krull 2009), while another study, which controls for the capacity to repatriate foreign earnings, finds capitalconstrained firms used the repatriated funds for domestic investment (Faulkender and Petersen 2012). Hanlon, Lester,
and Verdi (2015) also provide some evidence that, following the AJCA, the likelihood of a foreign acquisition by a
U.S. company declined but the likelihood of a domestic acquisition increased.

23

Lintner (1956, pp. 97–98) noted that “the primary effect of taxes on the volume of net corporate
savings results from their impact on the magnitude of net earnings which is a primary determinant
of the volume of dividends.”
Firms can distribute cash to shareholders in many ways: regular dividends, special
dividends, and share repurchases. All three forms of payout require that firms have cash available
to return to shareholders. TCJA will increase cash flows to many U.S. firms as a result of the
decreased corporate tax rate and through the one-time effect of making available previously
“locked-out” foreign cash. Depending on which source of cash flow is motivating the change in
payout, firms may make different payout decisions. If firms anticipate cash tax savings as a result
of lower tax rates (or other features of TCJA), and anticipate those cash tax savings to be
sustainable, they may increase their regular dividends.
However, as mentioned above, regular dividend decisions are very sticky, and there are on
average large capital market punishments for cutting regular dividends (Healy and Palepu 1988).
In addition, dividend increases are seen by some as signaling increases in permanent earnings
(John and Williams 1985; Miller and Rock 1985). As a result, if firms perceive the gains from tax
reform to be transitory and wish to distribute those gains from shareholders, they may do so using
special dividends or share repurchases. Special dividends differ from regular dividends only in that
they do not convey a future obligation to continue shareholder distributions. Share repurchases
also do not convey a future obligation to distribute cash to shareholders, but also have the benefit
of being more tax-efficient in that they only distribute cash to shareholders who opt to receive that
cash (instead of forcing all shareholders to recognize the taxable income associated with a
distribution (Skinner 2008)).
5. Research Design and Results

24

As the foundation for our empirical analysis, we assume that firms make real and disclosure
decisions with the objective of maximizing the present value of after-tax cash flow. Some
companies believe that certain actions will affect their discounted cash flows by affecting future
tax policy or non-tax policy actions that affect them.34 Thus, for example, they may be willing to
provide and announce worker bonuses when in the absence of the “political” motive they would
not pay these bonuses. How the TCJA affects both the real and announcement decisions depends
on the absent-political-factors bottom line, what we call the economic factors, as well as the
political factors. This is what guides our empirical modeling below.
Although both types of factors may affect both the real and announcement decisions, the
data we analyze in what follows are of two subtly distinct kinds. The worker benefits and
investment data single out firms who announced (and presumably actually carried out) the real
decisions and also publicly linked their actions to TCJA. In these cases we do not have information
on cases where, for example, a firm paid a worker bonus but made no announcement about it. In
the case of dividends and share buybacks, we know of all such real decisions, whether the decision
was publicly tied by the corporation to TCJA or not.
5.1 TCJA-tied Worker Benefits
In order to examine which firms announced TCJA-tied worker benefits, we estimate the
following linear probability model:
TCJA–tied Worker Benefit = + β1Red State + β2Politically Sensitive Industry + β3Percent
Unionized + β4GOP PAC Donator + β5Cash + β6Percent Expensed + β7High Cash ETR +
β8Tax Savings + β8Ln(Assets) + β9MNE + 10Ln(Employees) + β11R&D + β12Dividend +
13CAPEX + β14ROA + ϵ
(1)

34

We presume that the free-rider problem constraining political action has been solved by institutions such as the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce and Americans for Tax Reform.

25

The sample is all firms from Compustat for the fiscal year (fyear) 2016 with required data.
We only retain corporations (eliminating trusts and publicly traded partnerships), and only keep
U.S.-headquartered firms (FIC=USA). The dependent variable takes a value of one if the firm
announced a TCJA-tied Worker Benefit as described above and zero otherwise. We measure the
independent variables in 2016 so that we employ measures that are not affected by tax reform. All
independent variables are defined in the tables, but we reiterate the definitions of our main test
variables here. First, we include a series of political factors. Red State is an indicator variable
coded to equal one if the corporation’s headquarters are located in state that voted for Donald
Trump in 2016. Politically Sensitive Industry is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the
firm’s industry is politically sensitive, as defined by Julio and Yook (2012).35 Percent Unionized
is the percentage of the industry that is unionized in 2016, following Hirsch and Macpherson
(2003). Finally, GOP PAC Donator is an indicator variable coded to equal one for firms whose
political action committees donated more to Republican candidates than to Democratic candidates
during the 2015-2016 election cycle and zero otherwise (firms without a PAC are coded as a
zero).36

35

While we define industries that may be politically sensitive following Julio and Yook (2012), there is reason to
believe that other industries may be politically sensitive. For example, Dodd-Frank regulations were still being written
and implemented in this time period (and in Q1 2018, Congress rolled back pieces of Dodd-Frank), and it may be that
banks were eager to appease regulators by making tax reform look positive. In untabulated analysis, replacing the
Politically Sensitive indicator with an indictor which equals one for firms in the banking industry, we find that banks
are 11 percentage points more likely to announce an employee benefit, but not statistically more likely to announce
new tax reform-related investment.
36
In order to measure the political orientation of a firm, we use corporate PAC contributions. Specifically, we take
the list of all PACs, restrict to PACs sponsored by corporations, and match these manually to Compustat using PAC
name and location. All PAC data are available at https://www.fec.gov/data/advanced/?tab=bulk-data. For the set of
PACs, see the Committee master file (filter for Org_TP = “C” to restrict to corporations); for the set of candidates
(identifying party affiliations), see the Candidate master file; for contributions see the “Contributions to candidates”
tab, and select 2015-2016. We then summarize contributions made during the 2015-2016 election cycle by each
corporate PAC to candidates from each party (Democrat, Republican, or other). The result is, for each company with
a matched PAC, the percent of donations made to each party.

26

In terms of the economic factors (all measured in 2016): Cash is the percentage of a firm’s
total assets (Compustat mnemonic AT) that are cash or cash equivalents (CHE). Percent Expensed
is the fraction of two commonly expensed investments — advertising (XAD) and research and
development (XRD) — as a fraction of the sum of advertising (XAD), research and development
(XRD), and capital expenditures (CAPX). We replace missing values of advertising, capital
expenditures, and R&D with zero and set the ratio to zero if the denominator is zero. High Cash
ETR is equal to one if the ratio of cash taxes paid (TXPD) divided by pretax income (PRE) is above
the sample median, and set equal to zero if at or below the sample median or if Cash ETR is
undefined. Tax Savings is GAAP ETR from 2016 minus the ongoing forecast of the GAAP ETR
after tax reform, as collected from earnings conference calls by Morgan Stanley (Morgan Stanley
2018), where GAAP ETR is total tax expense (TXT) divided by pretax income (PRE), truncated at
0 and 1, and only defined over positive values of pretax income. 37 Because Tax Savings requires
a firm to have positive income and requires an estimate of future taxes as collected by Morgan
Stanley, we present our results without this variable over the full sample and separately with this
variable over the much smaller sample.
Table 5 presents descriptive statistics about our sample. About 4% of the sample had
TCJA-tied Worker Benefit Announcements, whereas 22% of the sample of S&P 500 firms
announced they would invest as a result of TCJA. On average, the Percent Unionized in our
sample is 5%. Among the subset of firms for which we are able to measure Tax Savings, firms

37

Prior literature on payout finds a strong relation between ownership by management and tax-related payout decisions
(Chetty and Saez 2005; Blouin et al. 2011; Edgerton 2012; Hanlon and Hoopes 2014). We examine whether insider
ownership (the percentage of the firm owned by the CEO, obtained from Thomson Financial dataset tfn.table1 on
WRDS), and find no relation between insider ownership and the decision to pay an employee benefit, increase
investment, make a new buyback announcement, or increase a dividend. Similarly, prior literature has found that
institutional ownership affects a number of corporate outcomes. We examine whether the percentage of the firm owned
by institutional investors (measures using Thomson Financial dataset tfn.s34 on WRDS), and find no relation between
institutional ownership and the decision to pay an employee benefit, increase investment, make a new buyback
announcement, or increase a dividend.

27

expected to experience an average decrease in GAAP ETR of 7 percentage points from 2016 to
2018. 41% of the sample are multinational enterprises (MNE).
Table 6 shows the results of estimating specification (1), which suggest that both political
and economic factors played a role in which firms made an announcement of TCJA-tied worker
benefits. In terms of political determinants, a firm was more likely to announce a TCJA-tied worker
benefit if the firm’s PAC donated more to Republican than Democratic candidates in 2015-2016.
The coefficient on GOP PAC Donator suggests a sizable impact.38 The unconditional mean of
TCJA-tied Worker Benefit is 4%. As we use a linear probability model, the coefficient on GOP
PAC Donator of 0.091 can be interpreted as a tripling of the unconditional mean of TCJA-tied
Worker Benefit. However, firms are less likely to announce a TCJA-tied worker benefit if the
company is in a relatively highly unionized industry. However, as we can measure unionization
only at the industry level, other industry-level determinants may be at play.39 We also find that a
corporation is marginally less likely to announce a TCJA-tied worker benefit if it is headquartered
in a Red State.
Turning to the economic factors, in Column 2, the firm’s estimated Tax Savings from the
TCJA are highly positively related to the firm announcing a worker benefit from the TCJA.

38

We use corporate PAC contributions to assign corporations a political identity. It is also possible to use direct
political contributions by the CEOs or other insiders at the firm. In robustness tests, we use the data used in Bonica
(2016) on corporate insiders’ political donations. These data end in 2014, and cover only S&P 500 firms. We replace
GOP Donator with an indicator variable coded to equal one if the CEO donated more money to Republicans than
Democrats, and in a separate regression, an indicator coded to equal one if all corporate insiders covered in the Bonica
(2016) database at a firm, when aggregated together, donated more to Republican than Democrats. Using the data on
CEOs and insiders (which is older data and available only for a limited sample), we fail to find any evidence that
political donations by individuals increase the chance of an employee benefit announcement, or the discussion of new
TCJA-linked investment.
39
In untabulated analysis, we control for industry fixed effects, using both Fama and French 48 industries, and
separately, 1 digit SIC codes. In both cases, we find no result in any specification for Percent Unionized. Absent firmlevel variation in unionization, we are unable to conclude whether the relation we document between unionization and
employee benefits is spurious (due to other industry trends) or valid. At the conference, participants raised the issue
that companies with a unionized workforce might be less likely to change wages or pay bonuses immediately because
they are bound by prior agreements and contracts with unions.

28

Similarly, when we estimate over the full sample (including loss firms and firms for which Morgan
Stanley did not obtain an estimated ongoing ETR), we find that High Cash ETR is positively
related to the announcement of a TCJA-tied worker benefit. Both results are consistent with the
idea that firms that benefit from tax reform are more likely to increase employee compensation.
Recall that skeptics viewed these employee-related announcements as entirely opportunistic. Our
analysis suggests that, controlling for a number of other factors (including measures such as GOP
PAC Donator, which may proxy for such opportunism), the firms that were helped most by tax
reform were indeed the most likely to announce an increase in employee benefits. Looking at our
controls, results that are consistent across the two columns are that larger firms are more likely to
announce a worker-related benefit and multinational firms are less likely to do so than domesticonly firms. We conjecture that a potential explanation for the lack of announcements by
multinational firms is that the complexity in the TCJA regarding U.S. taxation of foreign earnings
is delaying decision-making at these firms.
5.2 Investment
Table 7 shows the results of a similar regression analysis for investment. In this linear
probability model, the dependent variable is Announced Tax Reform Related Increase in
Investment, which we describe above. The independent variables are the same as in model (1)
above. The sample for this analysis consists of all S&P 500 firms in 2016 with the required data,
again eliminating non-corporations and non-U.S. incorporated firms. We find that, as with worker
benefits, corporations with above the median Cash ETRs before the TCJA are more likely to say
they plan on increasing investment because of TCJA. We find some evidence that if the firm is
headquartered in a Red State it was more likely to announce TCJA-related investment in our
smaller sample where we include the variable Tax Savings, but the estimated coefficient is

29

insignificant when we estimate the regression over the full sample. In addition, if the firm is in a
relatively highly unionized industry, is it less likely to announce increased investment in response
to the TCJA.
In terms of our control variables, ROA and (the log of) the number of employees are
positively associated with the likelihood of the firm announcing that the TCJA will lead to more
investment. However, being a multinational firm is negatively associated with announcing that the
firm will increase investment. Again, it is possible that multinational firms have said less about
their plans because of the complexity of the TCJA with respect to the taxation of foreign earnings.
We find no evidence that firms that are financially constrained (proxied in our test by not paying
dividends) are more likely to announce an increase in investment, although given the sample size,
this may be due to lack of statistical power. Further, financial constraint is notoriously difficult to
measure (Hadlock and Pierce 2010), and our inability to measure this construct precisely in our
small sample may contribute to our failure to find a relation. The notion that financially constrained
firms will increase investment when they experience a cash shock is consistent with corporate
finance theory (e.g., Faulkender and Petersen (2012)).
5.3 Share Buybacks and Dividends
In the previous sections, we examined what kind of firms announced TCJA-related worker
benefits, and which firms said that they would increase investment, both outcomes that firms likely
felt free (and perhaps motivated) to mention publicly. However, there was substantial criticism of
firms announcing buybacks or increasing dividends because of tax reform—certain politicians and
some media outlets pointed out that this behavior was evidence of tax reform only enriching
shareholders (e.g., Senate Democrats 2018; Otani et al. 2018; Gibson 2018; Mui 2018; Cox 2018).
As discussed above, we detect some graphical evidence of post-tax reform increases in dividend

30

increases, and new share repurchase announcements. In this section, we examine which firms
increased dividends and announced new repurchase plans. Because of the nature of these
outcomes, we examine these outcomes differently than the previous outcomes. Recall that all the
firms in our worker-benefit sample announced they were making a TCJA-tied worker benefit.
Actions with regard to worker benefits are not publicly available in machine-readable format and,
thus, our data only contain firms that made an announcement with respect to employee
compensation and benefits.40 However, firms regularly issue dividends and announce new share
repurchase plans, and so we have a more complete set of data for these actions, available in a time
series. In order to examine whether there was an abnormal number of these two outcomes after
tax reform (which we recognize is not compelling evidence that the increase is due to the tax
reform) and which firms were associated with this abnormal behavior, we estimate the following
regression:
New Share Repurchase Plan or Dividend Increase = + β1Post Tax Reform + β2-15Determinants
+ β16Trend + β17Trend Squared + ϵ
(2a)
New Share Repurchase Plan or Dividend Increase = + β1Post Tax Reform + β2-15Determinants
+ β16-29Tax Reform X Determinants + β30Trend + β31Trend Squared + ϵ
(2b)

40

In our analysis, we do not formally examine whether firms paid bonuses but did not attribute them to tax reform, or
how common bonus payments were in the past, primarily because no systematic data of which we are aware exists on
employee bonuses. However, to try to gauge, at least to some extent, whether the hundreds of bonuses we observe are
abnormal, we conduct two Factiva searches for evidence of bonuses in prior years, and find that one-time bonuses
were exceedingly rare during the five years prior to TCJA, at least in the retail and banking industries, two of the
industries most likely to have paid TCJA-tied bonuses. First, we search for the "Retail" industry in Factiva, using the
three terms "one-time bonus", "special bonus," and "non-performance bonus." Between 1/1/2012 and 11/30/2017, we
find one example of non-performance, company-wide bonuses (LL Bean in 2013). Second, we perform the same
search in the "Banking/Credit" industry in Factiva, and find only one example of a one-time bonus between 1/1/2012
and 11/30/2017: Morgan Stanley's payment of bonuses for several thousand brokerage-support personnel "to
compensate them for extra work on the tumultuous computer-system conversion." These same search terms return
vastly more results during the period 12/1/2017 to 3/31/2018, capturing many of the TCJA-tied bonuses we analyze
in this paper. While not systematic, this evidence is consistent with the frequency of bonus payment we observe in Q1
2018 being abnormally high.

31

We examine two separate dependent variables, New Share Repurchase Plan (an indicator
coded as one if the firm announced a new share repurchase plan, using data from Capital IQ), and
Dividend Increase (an indicator coded as one if the firm increased their regular dividend per share
over the prior quarter, using data from CRSP). We estimate this model using data from 2011 to
Q1, 2018, using observations at the firm-quarter level. We include a Trend variable and a Trend
Squared variable in order to account for any linear and non-linear trend in the two dependent
variables.41
In regression 2a, we estimate whether these two outcomes actually did increase after tax
reform, after controlling for a number of factors by including Post Tax Reform, an indicator coded
to equal one for observations falling in Q1 2018, and 0 otherwise. In regression 2b, we interact
the Post Tax Reform indicator with our vector of factors used previously in model 1. Specifically,
we interact Post Tax Reform with Red State, Politically Sensitive Industry, Percent Unionized,
GOP PAC Donator, Cash, Percent Expensed, High Cash ETR, Tax Savings, Ln(Assets), MNE,
Ln(Employees), R&D, Dividend, CAPEX and ROA. The coefficient on the interaction terms
represents the extent to which the determinants map into the outcome variables differently after
tax reform than prior to tax reform. For example, if the coefficient on Post Tax Reform X Red
State were positive and significant, that would suggest that firms headquartered in states that voted
for Donald Trump in 2016 (Red State) were more likely to increase dividends after tax reform
compared to before tax reform.42

41

In our main regression, we include a linear trend, and a trend squared, to control for the trend in the dependent
variable. In untabulated regressions, we include only a trend. In that specification, the analog to Columns 1, 2, and 3
in Table 8, we estimate that the effect of tax reform (Post Tax Reform) is positive and statistically significant.
42
Using a simple Post Tax Reform indicator to identify the effects of tax reform is obviously limited. Alternatives
would be to compare U.S. to non-U.S. firms, U.S. corporations to U.S. partnerships, utilize the variability of the effect
of tax reform on U.S. corporations, etc. However, these identification strategies all have their limitations, chief among
them that data for all of the outcome variables are not available to us.

32

Panel A of Table 8 provides the descriptive statistics for the data used to perform this
analysis. About 1% of firm-quarter observations announced new share repurchase plans
(Announced New Buyback). About 8% of firm-quarters experience a Dividend Increase. The
estimates of models 2a and 2b are in Table 8, Panel B. In Columns 1 and 2, we find that Announced
New Buyback did not increase after tax reform but that Dividend Increase did increase after tax
reform, even after controlling for our vector of determinants (consistent with the graphical
evidence in Figure C). In Columns 3 and 4 of Table 8, we show the results of estimating regression
2b, including all the interaction terms. We find that few of the interaction terms are significant.
However, there is some evidence that being in a Politically Sensitive Industry is associated with
being less likely to increase dividends. The evidence also suggests that being in a highly unionized
industry is associated with fewer announcements of new share repurchase plans. However, we do
not find that firms from Red States or that were GOP PAC Donators were any more likely to
increase their dividends or announce a new share repurchase announcement after tax reform. We
also find no evidence that the firms that had the highest cash ETRs were more likely to increase
dividends or announce new share repurchase plans after tax reform.
6. Conclusions
This paper examines corporations’ actions, and especially statements about actions,
following the tax law change known as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA). Our paper provides
initial descriptive evidence related to 1) which firms have announced TCJA-inspired decisions,
and 2) the extent and nature of these TCJA-inspired decisions. Specifically, we examine several
different outcomes—bonuses (or other actions that benefit workers), announcements of new
investment, share repurchases, and dividend announcements.

33

Our evidence suggests that announcements about TCJA-tied worker benefits are related to
both economic and political factors: firms with larger expected tax savings and firms that have
PACs that donate more to Republicans than Democrats have a greater likelihood of announcing
worker-related benefits. In terms of investment, we find that firms with high cash effective tax
rates are more likely to announce an increase in investment. We also find that firms in highly
unionized industries appear less likely to announce either worker benefits or more planned
investment. Finally, in terms of shareholder payout we find some evidence of announcements of
new share repurchase plans being motivated by the TCJA. We find that nine firms announce TCJArelated share repurchase plans. It is plausible that there are fewer incentives to publicize
shareholder payouts relative to payments to employees. When we look at the actual data, there is
no evidence of a broad change in actual shareholder payouts in the first quarter of 2018 that
deviates from the trend.
Overall, we find that multinational firms are less likely to announce any action. We
conjecture that this is potentially due to the complexity in the TCJA with respect to the taxation of
foreign earnings and the fundamental changes in the U.S. tax regime included in the TCJA. Thus,
multinational corporations may have been less likely to have determined what the best course of
action is at this time. In addition, we recognize that it is likely too early to examine overall payout
policy effects, and that our analysis considers data only from the first quarter following the TCJA.
We look forward to future research that expands on the evaluation of the effects of the TCJA.

34

References
Akerlof, G. A., and J. L. Yellen. 1990. The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and Unemployment. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 (2): 255–283.
Arulampalam, W., M. P. Devereux, and G. Maffini. 2012. The Direct Incidence of Corporate
Income Tax on Wages. European Economic Review 56 (6): 1038–1054.
Auerbach, A. J. forthcoming. Measuring the Impact of Corporate Tax Cuts. Journal of Economic
Perspectives.
Azémar, C., and R. G. Hubbard. 2015. Country Characteristics and the Incidence of Capital
Income Taxation on Wages: An Empirical Assessment. Canadian Journal of
Economics/Revue canadienne d’économique 48 (5): 1762–1802.
Barrick, J. A., and R. M. Alexander. 2014. Tax Lobbying and Corporate Political Activity: How
Do Firms Seek Tax Relief? Working Paper.
Blouin, J., and L. Krull. 2009. Bringing It Home: A Study of the Incentives Surrounding the
Repatriation of Foreign Earnings Under the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004. Journal
of Accounting Research 47 (4): 1027–1059.
Blouin, J. L., J. S. Raedy, and D. A. Shackelford. 2011. Dividends, Share Repurchases, and Tax
Clienteles: Evidence from the 2003 Reductions in Shareholder Taxes. The Accounting
Review 86 (3): 887–914.
Bonica, A. 2016. Avenues of Influence: on the Political Expenditures of Corporations and Their
Directors and Executives. Business and Politics 18 (4): 367–394.
Borzykowski, B. 2018. Tax Reform Fuels Rise of Company Dividend Payouts for Investors.
CNBC, June 5.
Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline. 2018. Firms and Labor Market Inequality:
Evidence and Some Theory. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1): S13–S70.
Chen, H. (Jason), and S. (Jenny) Chen. 2012. Investment-cash Flow Sensitivity Cannot be a Good
Measure of Financial Constraints: Evidence from the Time Series. Journal of Financial
Economics 103 (2): 393–410.
Chetty, R., and E. Saez. 2005. Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from the 2003
Dividend Tax Cut. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3): 791–833.
Cochrane, J. H. 2018. Stock Buybacks Are Proof of Tax Reform’s Success. Wall Street Journal,
March 5, sec. Opinion.
Cooper, M. J., H. Gulen, and A. V. Ovtchinnikov. 2010. Corporate Political Contributions and
Stock Returns. The Journal of Finance 65 (2): 687–724.
Council of Economic Advisers. 2017. Corporate Tax Reform and Wages: Theory and Evidence.
Cox, J. 2018. Employee Bonuses are a Tax Reform “Gimmick,” Larry Summers says. CNBC,
January 26.
DeBacker, J., and R. Kasher. 2018. Effective Tax Rates on Business Investment Under the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act. AEI Economic Perspectives.
Dharmapala, D., C. F. Foley, and K. J. Forbes. 2011. Watch What I Do, Not What I Say: The
Unintended Consequences of the Homeland Investment Act. The Journal of Finance 66
(3): 753–787.
Edgerton, J. 2012. Four Facts about Dividend Payouts and the 2003 Tax Cut. International Tax
and Public Finance: 1–16.
Egan, M. 2018. Tax cut scoreboard: Workers $6 billion; Shareholders: $171 billion. CNNMoney.
https://money.cnn.com/2018/02/16/investing/stock-buybacks-tax-lawbonuses/index.html.
35

Faulkender, M., and M. Petersen. 2012. Investment and Capital Constraints: Repatriations Under
the American Jobs Creation Act. Review of Financial Studies 25 (11): 3351–3388.
Fazzari, S. M., R. G. Hubbard, B. C. Petersen, A. S. Blinder, and J. M. Poterba. 1988. Financing
Constraints and Corporate Investment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1988 (1):
141–206.
de Figueiredo, J. M., and B. K. Richter. 2014. Advancing the Empirical Research on Lobbying.
Annual Review of Political Science 17 (1): 163–185.
Foley, F. C., J. C. Hartzell, S. Titman, and G. Twite. 2007. Why Do Firms Hold so Much Cash?
A Tax-Based Explanation. Journal of Financial Economics 86 (3): 579–607.
Fuest, C., A. Peichl, and S. Siegloch. 2018. Do Higher Corporate Taxes Reduce Wages? Micro
Evidence from Germany. American Economic Review 108 (2): 393–418.
Gandel, S. 2018. Share Buybacks Distort Profit Picture. Bloomberg.com, June 13.
Gibson, K. 2018. Guess where the Corporate Tax Cut Money is Flowing. CBS News, May 2.
Gravelle, J. G., 2017. Corporate Tax Reform: Issue for Congress. CRS Report, September 22.
Graham, J. R., M. Hanlon, and T. Shevlin. 2010. Barriers to Mobility: The Lockout Effect of US
Taxation of Worldwide Corporate Profits. National Tax Journal 63 (4 Part 2): 1111–1144.
Grullon, G., and D. L. Ikenberry. 2000. What Do We Know About Stock Repurchases? Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance 13 (1): 31–51.
Hadani, M., and D. A. Schuler. 2013. In Search of El Dorado: The Elusive Financial Returns on
Corporate Political investments. Strategic Management Journal 34 (2): 165–181.
Haight, D. B. 1973. Power of Evil. General Conference April.
Hall, R. E., and D. W. Jorgenson. 1967. Tax Policy and Investment Behavior. American Economic
Review 57 (3): 391–414.
Hanlon, M., and J. L. Hoopes. 2014. What Do Firms Do When Dividend Tax Rates Change? An
Examination of Alternative Payout Responses. Journal of Financial Economics 41(1):
105-124.
Hanlon, M. L. 2012. Testimony of Michelle Hanlon before the United States House Committee on
Ways and Means. Committee on Ways and Means.
Hanlon, M., R. Lester, and R. Verdi. 2015. The Effect of Repatriation Tax Costs on U.S.
Multinational Investment. Journal of Financial Economics 116 (1): 179–196.
Hanlon, M., E. L. Maydew, and J. R. Thornock. 2015. Taking the Long Way Home: U.S. Tax
Evasion and Offshore Investments in U.S. Equity and Debt Markets. The Journal of
Finance 70 (1): 257–287.
Healy, P. M., and K. G. Palepu. 1988. Earnings Information Conveyed by Dividend Initiations and
Omissions. Journal of Financial Economics 21 (2): 149–175.
Healy, P. M., and K. G. Palepu. 2001. Information Asymmetry, Corporate Disclosure, and the
Capital Markets: A Review of the Empirical Disclosure Literature. Journal of Accounting
and Economics 31 (1–3): 405–440.
Hersch, P., J. M. Netter, and C. Pope. 2008. Do Campaign Contributions and Lobbying
Expenditures by Firms Create “Political” Capital? Atlantic Economic Journal 36 (4): 395–
405.
Hillman, A. J., G. D. Keim, and D. Schuler. 2004. Corporate Political Activity: A Review and
Research Agenda, Corporate Political Activity: A Review and Research Agenda. Journal
of Management 30 (6): 837–857.
Hirsch, B. T., and D. A. Macpherson. 2003. Union Membership and Coverage Database from the
Current Population Survey: Note. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56 (2): 349–354.
36

Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy. 2017. Fortune 500 Companies Hold a Record $2.6
Trillion Offshore.
Isidore, C. 2017. Donald Trump says H&R Block will be Unhappy with his Tax Plan. CNN,
February 15.
John, K., and J. Williams. 1985. Dividends, Dilution, and Taxes: A Signalling Equilibrium. The
Journal of Finance 40 (4): 1053–1070.
Julio, B., and Y. Yook. 2012. Political Uncertainty and Corporate Investment Cycles. The Journal
of Finance 67 (1): 45–83.
Lie, E., and H. J. Lie. 1999. The Role of Personal Taxes in Corporate Decisions: An Empirical
Analysis of Share Repurchases and Dividends. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 34 (4): 533–552.
Lintner, J. 1956. Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends, Retained Earnings,
and Taxes. The American Economic Review 46 (2): 97–113.
Miller, M. H., and K. Rock. 1985. Dividend Policy under Asymmetric Information. The Journal
of Finance 40 (4): 1031–1051.
Morgan Stanley. 2018. What Will Corporate America Do with Tax Savings? US Public Policy.
Mui, Y. 2018. Democrats: GOP Tax Cut Spurs $85 Billion wave in Corporate Buybacks. CNBC,
February 7.
O’Keefe, E. 2018. Nearly Half of Americans Agree with Nancy Pelosi’s ‘Crumbs’ Comment,
According to a Poll by a Pro-Trump Group - Washington Post, March 1.
Otani, A., R. Rubin, and T. Francis. 2018. Boom in Share Buybacks Renews Question of Who
Wins From Tax Cuts. Wall Street Journal, March 2, sec. Markets.
Rau, P. R., and T. Vermaelen. 2002. Regulation, Taxes, and Share Repurchases in the United
Kingdom. The Journal of Business 75 (2): 245–282.
Rosenbaum, D. E. 1986. Some Opening Gambits on Tax Revision. The New York Times.
Scholes, M. S., M. A. Wolfson, M. M. Erickson, M. Hanlon, E. L. Maydew, and T. J. Shevlin.
2014. Taxes & Business Strategy. 5 edition. Boston: Prentice Hall.
Senate Democrats. 2018. SPECIAL REPORT: The #GOPTaxScam Is Setting All The Wrong
Records: In Two Months, $200 Billion In Corporate Share Buybacks Have Been
Announced, Overwhelmingly Funneling Huge Amounts Of Money To Corporate
Executives And Wealthy Shareholders While The Middle Class Gets Left Behind, Senate
Democratic Leadership.
Shiels, M., K. Trfecante, and J. Malter. 2018. Blankfein: Tax Bonuses are “Symbolic” - but
Symbolism Matters. CNNMoney, February 14.
Skinner, D. J. 2008. The Evolving Relation between Earnings, Dividends, and Stock Repurchases.
Journal of Financial Economics 87 (3): 582–609.
Wagner, A. F., R. J. Zeckhauser, and A. Ziegler. 2018. Company Stock Price Reactions to the
2016 Election Shock: Trump, Taxes and Trade. Journal of Financial Economics 130(2):
428-451.
Wagner, A. F., R. J. Zeckhauser, and A. Ziegler. 2018. Unequal Rewards to Firms: Stock Market
Responses to the Trump Election and the 2017 Corporate Tax Reform. American Economic
Association Papers and Proceedings, May: 590-596.
You, H. Y. 2017. Ex Post Lobbying. The Journal of Politics 79 (4): 1162–1176.

37

Appendix 1. Data Sources
Data Item
Worker Related Benefits
Dividends
New Share Repurchase Annoucements
Actual Shares Repurchased
Investment
Financial Statement Items
PAC Contributions
Unionization

Data Source
Americans for Tax Reform website, https://www.atr.org/list
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), obtained via WRDS, wrds.wharton.upenn.edu
Capital IQ, capitaliq.com
Compustat, obtained via WRDS, wrds.wharton.upenn.edu
Hand collected from Q1 2018 Earnings Conference Calls via Factiva
Compustat, obtained via WRDS, wrds.wharton.upenn.edu
Federal Election Commision website, https://www.fec.gov/data/advanced/?tab=bulk-data
Union Membership and Coverage Database, Unionstats.com

38

Appendix 2. Firms Specifically Connecting Share Repurchases with Tax Reform
BankUnited
Given the increase in capital generated by the income tax benefit discussed above, the Board of Directors of the Company
has authorized a share repurchase program under which the Company may repurchase up to $150 million in shares of its outstanding common
stock.
Benchmark Electronics
"Benchmark's management team and board of directors firmly believe in the long-term growth prospects of the
company and remain committed to a balanced approach to capital allocation," said Paul Tufano, CEO and President. "Given our strong cash
position and recent tax reform, we believe we have the financial strength and liquidity to invest in future organic and inorganic growth, while
returning value to shareholders through a combination of share repurchases and the return of cash through quarterly dividends."
Big Lots The Company also expects to realize a cash benefit from a lower tax rate in fiscal 2018 and is planning to reinvest into the business
approximately 70% of the expected benefit while returning approximately 30% of the expected benefit to shareholders... On March 7, 2018, our
Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program (""2018 Share Repurchase Program"") providing for the repurchase of up to $100 million
of our common shares.
Cortland Bancorp In addition to raising its quarterly dividend, the Board authorized the repurchase of up to 100,000 shares of the Company’s
common stock for the twelve-month period ending December 31, 2018. The share repurchase authorization replaces the share repurchase
authorization which expired on December 31, 2017. Repurchases may be made at the discretion of the Company’s senior management based on
market conditions and other relevant factors. “Anticipated earnings increase, due to the passage of the Tax and Jobs Act, prompted an evaluation
of our Capital Plan Policy and dividend payment practices,” said James Gasior, President and Chief Executive Officer. “The increase in our cash
dividend reflects our continued commitment to providing strong shareholder returns while supporting strategic growth initiatives. Our opportunistic
share repurchase initiative also aids in supporting the share price and returns additional capital to shareholders.” At the stock price of $21.00 per
share at the close of the market on January 25, 2018, the increased dividend equates to a yield of 2.1% on an annualized basis.
Five Below
We are announcing our first ever share repurchase authorization for $100 million dollars... We are excited to begin 2018
with momentum and are in a position of strength to execute against our key strategic priorities. With a portion of the recent tax reform benefits, we
are accelerating important investments focused on our associates, systems and infrastructure, further solidifying the foundation to support our future
growth. The majority of the benefit from tax reform will flow through to our shareholders.
Plexus Corp.
Plexus Corp. today announced that recent U.S. tax reform will enable it to tax-efficiently repatriate approximately $500
million of offshore cash into the United States. As a result, Plexus has established a revised capital allocation plan that is intended to fund growth
investments, reduce debt, reward our employees and enhance shareholder value. A summary of the capital allocation plan is summarized below...In
June 2016, Plexus announced a three year, $150 million share repurchase authorization (referred to as the “2016 Share Repurchase Plan”). Under
this authorization, Plexus has purchased approximately $44 million of shares through its fiscal first quarter 2018. Under Plexus’ revised capital
allocation plan, Plexus intends to accelerate the repurchases under the 2016 Share Repurchase Plan and complete the remaining $106 million of
authorized purchases in fiscal 2018 through open market purchases. Plexus’ Board of Directors has approved a new share repurchase authorization,
commencing upon completion of the 2016 Share Repurchase Plan, in the amount of $200 million. Shares would be purchased through the open
market, on a relatively consistent basis, with the intent to complete the repurchases in fiscal 2019. Todd Kelsey, President and CEO, commented,
“We view the recent U.S. tax reform as immensely beneficial for Plexus. Through the reform, Plexus now has the ability to repatriate our current
and future offshore cash in a significantly more tax-efficient manner. Access to this cash will enable us to support our growth prospects, improve
our capital structure and reward our shareholders. Further, I am pleased to share this benefit with our employees. It is their commitment to
Customer Service Excellence that has enabled Plexus to be an industry leader.”
Teradyne On the capital allocation front, the combination of a strong business outlook and U.S. tax reform support our plan to raise our quarterly
dividend by 29% to $0.09 cents per share and initiate a $1.5 billion share repurchase program with expected repurchases of $750 million in 2018.
The TJX Companies The 2017 Tax Act benefited the Company in the fourth quarter and full year Fiscal 2018. The Company expects to continue
to benefit from the 2017 Tax Act going forward, primarily due to the lower U.S. corporate income tax rate. As a result of the estimated cash benefit
related to the 2017 Tax Act, the Company is taking the following actions...The Company also announced today its plan to repurchase approximately
$2.5 to $3.0 billion of TJX stock during the fiscal year ending February 2, 2019. With $1.1 billion remaining at Fiscal 2018 year end under the
Company’s stock repurchase programs, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program that authorizes the repurchase
of up to an additional $3.0 billion of TJX common stock from time to time. The new authorization represents approximately 6% of the Company’s
outstanding shares at current prices. The new stock repurchase program marks the 19th program approved by the Board since 1997.
TransAct Technologies
We will also benefit from a significant decline in our corporate tax rate beginning in 2018 as a result of the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. Our strong financial position enables us to simultaneously invest in growth opportunities for our restaurant solutions
business while returning capital to shareholders through both share repurchases and our quarterly dividend, which is reflected in the $2.9 million
in total capital we returned to shareholders during 2017. As such, we are pleased to announce our new share repurchase program, which
demonstrates the Company’s ongoing commitment to allocating capital towards shareholder value building initiatives. In fact, we have repurchased
over $30 million of our common stock since our first program was implemented in 2005. As we look to 2018, TransAct remains very favorably
positioned to deliver growth and further value creation for our shareholders.

39

Figure 1. Tax Reform Employee-Related Benefits Announced

Notes. This graph depicts the timing of corporate announcements of employee related benefits
attributed to tax reform. We obtain the data from the Americans for Tax Reform (ATR) website.

40

Figure 2. Tax Reform and New Share Repurchase Agreements

Notes. Figure 2 depicts the number of new share repurchase plans announced on a quarterly basis
from 2008 to Q1, 2018. All data are from Capital IQ.

41

Figure 3. Actual Share Repurchases and Tax Reform
Panel A. Number of Firms Repurchasing Shares, 2010-2018

Panel B. Value of Share Repurchases, 2010-2018

42

Figure 3 (continued). Actual Share Repurchases and Tax Reform
Panel C. Concentration of Buybacks, 2010-2018

Notes. Panel A depicts the number of firms disclosing share repurchases in their 10-Q filing, as
obtained from Compustat. Panel B depicts the dollar magnitude of share repurchases disclosed in
the 10-Q. Panel C replicates Panel B, taking out shares repurchased by the five firms that
repurchased the largest dollar value of shares in Q1 2018. All data are shown on a quarterly
frequency.

43

Figure 4. Regular Dividends and Tax Reform
Panel A. Number of Regular Dividends Announced, 1980-2018

Panel B. Value of Regular Dividends Announced, 1980-2018

44

Figure 4 (continued). Regular Dividends and Tax Reform
Panel C. Percentage of Firms Increasing Dividends, 1980-2018

Panel D. Percentage of Firms Initiating New Dividends, 1980-2018

Notes. Panel A depicts the number of firms announcing regular dividends, from 1980-2018. Panel B depicts
the dollar value of regular dividends announced from 1980-2018. Panel C depicts the percentage of firms
increasing their dividend from the amount they paid in the previous quarter. Panel D depicts the percentage
of firms initiating a normal dividend for the first time in at least three years. All data is obtained from CRSP.
Regular dividends are dividends with distribution codes (CRSP mnemonic DISTCD) 1232, 1212, 1222,
and 1242. Only share codes (CRSP mnemonic SHRCD) 10 and 11 are used. Dates are determined from the
date the dividend is announced (CRSP mnemonic DCLRDT).

45

Figure 5. Special Dividends
Panel A. Value of Special Dividends Announced, 1980-2018

Panel B. Number of Special Dividends, 1980-2018

Notes. Panel A depicts the dollar value of special dividends announced, from 1980-2018. Panel
B depicts the number of firms that announced a special dividend from 1980-2018. All data is
obtained from CRSP. Special dividends are dividends with distribution codes (CRSP mnemonic
DISTCD) 1262 or 1272. Only share codes (CRSP mnemonic SHRCD) 10 and 11 are used. Dates
are determined from the date the dividend is announced (CRSP mnemonic DCLRDT).

46

Table 1. Worker-Related Announcement Attributed to Tax Reform
Firms announcing:
Public Firms from ATR List in Final Sample
163
One-time bonuses
118
72%
Additional hiring
11
7%
Wage increases
63
39%
Enhanced benefits
51
31%
Notes. This table depicts the breakdown of types of worker-related benefits attributed to tax reform
from firms captured by Americans for Tax Reform and announced in the first quarter of 2018 that
enter into our final sample.

47

Table 2. Worker-Related Benefits by Industry

Industry Name
Agriculture
Aircraft
Alcoholic Beverages
Apparel
Automobiles and Trucks
Banking
Business Services
Business Supplies
Candy and Soda
Chemicals
Coal
Computers
Construction
Construction Materials
Consumer Goods
Defense
Electrical Equipment
Electronic Equipment
Entertainment
Fabricated Products
Food Products
Healthcare
Insurance
Machinery
Measuring and Control Equip
Medical Equipment
Miscellaneous
Nonmetallic Mines
Personal Services
Petroleum and Natural Gas
Pharmaceutical Products
Precious Metals
Printing and Publishing
Real Estate
Recreational Products
Restaurants, Hotel, Motel
Retail
Rubber and Plastic Products
Shipbuilding, Railroad Eq
Shipping Containers
Steel Works, Etc.
Telecommunications
Textiles
Tobacco Products
Trading
Transportation
Utilities
Wholesale

Composition of
Composition of Announcing
Announcing Sample by Sample by Industry as a
Industry
Percentage
(1)
(2) = (Column 1)/163
0
0.00%
1
0.61%
1
0.61%
2
1.23%
1
0.61%
76
46.63%
9
5.52%
1
0.61%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
2
1.23%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
2
1.23%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
5
3.07%
3
1.84%
6
3.68%
1
0.61%
1
0.61%
0
0.00%
1
0.61%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
1
0.61%
7
4.29%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
3
1.84%
16
9.82%
0
0.00%
1
0.61%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
8
4.91%
0
0.00%
2
1.23%
2
1.23%
8
4.91%
1
0.61%
2
1.23%
163
100%

Total Sample
(Announcers and non- Percent of Total Sample That
Announcers)
Announced By Industry
(3)
(4) = (Column 1)/(Column 3)
10
0.00%
20
5.00%
13
7.69%
34
5.88%
57
1.75%
492
15.45%
499
1.80%
29
3.45%
18
0.00%
85
0.00%
7
0.00%
86
2.33%
54
0.00%
66
0.00%
44
0.00%
8
0.00%
41
0.00%
182
1.10%
47
0.00%
8
0.00%
58
8.62%
68
4.41%
98
6.12%
109
0.92%
67
1.49%
158
0.00%
56
1.79%
19
0.00%
33
0.00%
162
0.62%
503
1.39%
20
0.00%
20
0.00%
40
0.00%
21
0.00%
72
4.17%
150
10.67%
19
0.00%
11
9.09%
10
0.00%
31
0.00%
85
9.41%
8
0.00%
4
50.00%
122
1.64%
70
11.43%
104
0.96%
116
1.72%
4,034

Notes. This table depicts the breakdown by industry of worker-related benefits attributed to tax
reform from firms captured by Americans for Tax Reform and announced in the first quarter of
2018 that enter into our final sample by industry.

48

Table 3. Firms’ Investment Announcements Attributed to Tax Reform
Firms announcing:
S&P 500 firms in Final Sample
424
Any form of Investment
95
22%
Capital Expenditure
43
10%
Investment in Technology
59
14%
Notes. This table depicts the number of firms mentioning the different types of investment they
will undertake as a result of tax reform, collected from transcripts for earnings conference calls
held in Q1 of 2018. Note that 95 is the total set of firms that mentioned any type of investment.
Some firms did not provide specific disclosures about what the investment would be. For those
that did provide specific disclosure, some said capital expenditure, some said technology, and
some mentioned both types. We count the firm separately in each category of specific disclosure
if the firm disclosed they were doing both capital expenditures and technology (in other words, the
same firm could be included in both groupings of specific disclosures).

49

Table 4. Investment Announcements by Industry
Industry Name
Agriculture
Aircraft
Alcoholic Beverages
Apparel
Automobiles and Trucks
Banking
Business Services
Business Supplies
Candy and Soda
Chemicals
Computers
Construction
Construction Materials
Consumer Goods
Defense
Electrical Equipment
Electronic Equipment
Entertainment
Food Products
Healthcare
Insurance
Machinery
Measuring and Control Equip
Medical Equipment
Miscellaneous
Nonmetallic Mines
Personal Services
Petroleum and Natural Gas
Pharmaceutical Products
Precious Metals
Printing and Publishing
Real Estate
Recreational Products
Restaurants, Hotel, Motel
Retail
Shipbuilding, Railroad Eq
Shipping Containers
Steel Works, Etc.
Telecommunications
Textiles
Tobacco Products
Trading
Transportation
Utilities
Wholesale

Composition of
Composition of Announcing
Announcing Sample by Sample by Industry as a
Industry
Percentage
(1)
(2) = (Column 1)/95
0
0.00%
1
1.05%
2
2.11%
1
1.05%
0
0.00%
9
9.47%
4
4.21%
2
2.11%
0
0.00%
1
1.05%
2
2.11%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
2
2.11%
1
1.05%
1
1.05%
1
1.05%
0
0.00%
7
7.37%
2
2.11%
9
9.47%
1
1.05%
1
1.05%
3
3.16%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
1
1.05%
8
8.42%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
1
1.05%
0
0.00%
3
3.16%
19
20.00%
1
1.05%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
3
3.16%
0
0.00%
2
2.11%
1
1.05%
1
1.05%
3
3.16%
2
2.11%
95
100%

Total Sample
(Announcers and non- Percent of Total Sample That
Announcers)
Announced By Industry
(3)
(4) = (Column 1)/(Column 3)
1
0.00%
7
14.29%
5
40.00%
7
14.29%
6
0.00%
25
36.00%
41
9.76%
4
50.00%
3
0.00%
11
9.09%
9
22.22%
6
0.00%
5
0.00%
10
20.00%
1
100.00%
3
33.33%
20
5.00%
3
0.00%
13
53.85%
5
40.00%
23
39.13%
11
9.09%
11
9.09%
11
27.27%
3
0.00%
3
0.00%
1
0.00%
24
4.17%
18
44.44%
1
0.00%
1
0.00%
1
100.00%
2
0.00%
7
42.86%
28
67.86%
1
100.00%
3
0.00%
1
0.00%
11
27.27%
1
0.00%
2
100.00%
16
6.25%
15
6.67%
34
8.82%
10
20.00%
424

Notes. This table depicts the S&P 500 firms in our sample, by industry, and the percentage in each
industry announcing tax-reform related investment.

50

Table 5. TCJA-tied Worker Benefits Announcements, Investment, and Tax Reform

Variable
TCJA-tied Worker Benefit Announcement
S&P 500 Investment Announcements
Red State
Politically Sensitive Industry
Percent Unionized
GOP PAC Donator
Cash
Percent Expensed
High Cash ETR
Tax Savings
Ln(Assets)
MNE
Ln(Employees)
R&D
Dividend
CAPEX
ROA

Obs
4034
424
4034
4034
4034
4034
4034
4034
4034
904
4034
4034
4034
4034
4034
4034
4034

Mean
0.04
0.22
0.41
0.22
0.05
0.13
0.23
0.4
0.26
0.07
6
0.41
6.47
0.46
0.41
0.03
-0.33

S.D.
0.2
0.42
0.49
0.42
0.06
0.33
0.26
0.4
0.44
0.08
2.79
0.49
2.59
0.5
0.49
0.04
1.16

Min
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
-0.14
-1.26
0
0.69
0
0
0
-6.86

0.25
0
0
0
0
0.02
0
0.04
0
0
0.03
4.21
0
4.65
0
0
0
-0.15

Mdn
0
0
0
0
0.03
0
0.11
0.28
0
0.08
6.38
0
6.53
0
0
0.02
0.01

0.75
0
0
1
0
0.07
0
0.31
0.84
1
0.11
7.92
1
8.48
1
1
0.04
0.07

Max
1
1
1
1
0.56
1
0.96
1
1
0.29
11.21
1
11.39
1
1
0.19
0.29

Notes. The sample for this table is U.S. incorporated corporations on Compustat in 2016, and the unit of analysis is the firm. TCJA-Worker Tied Benefit is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the
firm was included on the Americans for Tax Reform website as having made a public announcement stating that as a result of tax reform, they were paying a worker benefit (salary increase, one-time
bonus, increased 401(k) match, etc.). Red State is an indicator variable coded to equal one for firms with headquarters in states that voted for Donald Trump in 2016. Politically Sensitive Industry is an
indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm’s industry is politically sensitive, following Julio and Yook (2012). Percent Unionized is the percentage of the industry that is unionized in 2016, following
Hirsch and Macpherson (2003). GOP PAC Donator is an indicator variable coded to equal one for firms whose political action committees donated more to Republican candidates than Democratic
candidates in 2015-2016. Cash is the percentage of a firm’s total assets (AT) that are cash (CHE). Percent Expensed is advertising expenses and R&D expenses divided by capital expenditures plus
advertising expenses and R&D expenses. Cash ETR is the cash taxes paid (TXPD) divided by pretax income (PRE), truncated at 0 and 1, and only defined over positive values of pretax income. GAAP
ETR is total tax expense (TXT) divided by pretax income (PRE), truncated at 0 and 1, and only defined over positive values of pretax income. Tax Savings is GAAP ETR from 2016 minus the ongoing
forecast of the GAAP ETR after tax reform as collected from earnings conference calls by Morgan Stanley. Ln(Assets) is the natural log of total assets (AT). MNE is an indicator variable coded to equal
one if the firm is a multinational enterprise, as determined by the firm having non-zero foreign pretax income (PIFO). Ln(Employees) is the natural log of the number of employees at the firm (EMP),
after multiplying EMP by 1,000. R&D is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm discloses a non-zero amount of research and development (XRD). CAPEX is the percentage of a firm’s total
assets (AT) that are capital expenditures (CAPX). ROA is the return on assets, obtained from dividing the pretax income (PRE) by the total assets of the firm (AT). All variables are obtained for the firm
fiscal year (fyear) 2016, and prior to being used in the regression analysis are winsorized at the 2% and 98% level.

51

Table 6. Regression Analysis of TCJA-Tied Worker Benefit Announcements
(1)

(2)

TCJA-tied Worker Benefit
Announcement

VARIABLES
Political:
Red State
Politically Sensitive Industry
Percent Unionized
GOP PAC Donator

Economic:
Cash
Percent Expensed
High Cash ETR
Tax Savings
Other Controls:
Ln(Assets)

-0.012*
(0.01)
0.013
(0.01)
-0.205***
(0.07)
0.091***
(0.02)

-0.031
(0.02)
0.054
(0.04)
-0.321*
(0.18)
0.102***
(0.03)

-0.010
(0.01)
-0.003
(0.01)
0.029***
(0.01)

0.030
(0.08)
-0.011
(0.04)
0.026
(0.02)
0.362***
(0.12)

0.012***
0.045***
(0.00)
(0.01)
MNE
-0.044***
-0.090***
(0.01)
(0.03)
Ln(Employees)
0.003
0.010
(0.00)
(0.01)
R&D
-0.010
-0.029
(0.01)
(0.03)
Dividend
0.015**
0.030
(0.01)
(0.02)
CAPEX
-0.242***
-0.274
(0.07)
(0.32)
ROA
-0.012***
0.005
(0.00)
(0.17)
Constant
-0.037***
-0.324***
(0.01)
(0.07)
Observations
4,034
904
R-squared
0.10
0.18
Notes. The sample for this analysis is U.S. incorporated corporations on Compustat in 2016, and the unit of analysis is the firm. TCJA-Worker Tied
Benefit is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm was included on the Americans for Tax Reform website as having made a public
announcement stating that as a result of tax reform, they were paying a worker benefit (salary increase, one-time bonus, increased 401(k) match,
etc.). Red State is an indicator variable coded to equal one for firms with headquarters in states that voted for Donald Trump in 2016. Politically
Sensitive Industry is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm’s industry is politically sensitive, following Julio and Yook (2012). Percent
Unionized is the percentage of the industry that is unionized in 2016, following Hirsch and Macpherson (2003). GOP PAC Donator is an indicator
variable coded to equal one for firms whose political action committees donated more to Republican candidates than Democratic candidates in
2015-2016. Cash is the percentage of a firm’s total assets (AT) that are cash (CHE). Percent Expensed is advertising expenses and R&D expenses
divided by capital expenditures plus advertising expenses and R&D expenses. Cash ETR is the cash taxes paid (TXPD) divided by pretax income
(PRE), truncated at 0 and 1, and only defined over positive values of pretax income. GAAP ETR is total tax expense (TXT) divided by pretax
income (PRE), truncated at 0 and 1, and only defined over positive values of pretax income. Tax Savings is GAAP ETR from 2016 minus the
ongoing forecast of the GAAP ETR after tax reform as collected from earnings conference calls by Morgan Stanley. Ln(Assets) is the natural log
of total assets (AT). MNE is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm is a multinational enterprise, as determined by the firm having
non-zero foreign pretax income (PIFO). Ln(Employees) is the natural log of the number of employees at the firm (EMP), after multiplying EMP
by 1,000. R&D is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm discloses a non-zero amount of research and development (XRD). CAPEX
is the percentage of a firm’s total assets (AT) that are capital expenditures (CAPX). ROA is the return on assets, obtained from dividing the pretax
income (PRE) by the total assets of the firm (AT). All variables are obtained for the firm fiscal year (fyear) 2016, and prior to be used in the
regression analysis are winsorized at the 2% and 98% level. Standard errors are in the parentheses.

52

Table 7. Regression Analysis of Announced Tax Reform Related Increase In Investment
(1)

VARIABLES

(2)

Announced Tax Reform
Related Increase In Investment

Political:
Red State
Politically Sensitive Industry
Percent Unionized
GOP PAC Donator

Economic:
Cash
Percent Expensed
High Cash ETR

0.040
(0.04)
0.069
(0.06)
-1.011***
(0.21)
0.049
(0.04)

0.122**
(0.06)
0.120
(0.10)
-1.130***
(0.35)
0.056
(0.06)

-0.252
(0.15)
0.133
(0.08)
0.136***
(0.05)

-0.222
(0.21)
0.222*
(0.13)
0.152***
(0.06)
0.447
(0.31)

0.052*
(0.03)
-0.211***
(0.05)
0.060***
(0.02)
-0.029
(0.05)
-0.071
(0.05)
0.506
(0.55)
1.010***
(0.25)
-0.805***
(0.24)

0.062*
(0.04)
-0.200***
(0.08)
0.056*
(0.03)
-0.037
(0.08)
-0.055
(0.07)
1.725
(1.12)
0.986*
(0.50)
-1.002***
(0.33)

Tax Savings

Other Controls:
Ln(Assets)
MNE
Ln(Employees)
R&D
Dividend
CAPEX
ROA
Constant

Observations
424
261
R-squared
0.21
0.22
Notes. The sample of firms for this test is the S&P 500 firms with available data on Compustat, and the unit of analysis is the firm. Announced Tax
Reform Related Increase In Investment is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm stated in an earnings conference call following tax
reform that, because of tax reform, it would increase investment. Red State is an indicator variable coded to equal one for firms with headquarters
in states that voted for Donald Trump in 2016. Politically Sensitive Industry is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm’s industry is
politically sensitive, following Julio and Yook (2012). Percent Unionized is the percentage of the industry that is unionized in 2016, following
Hirsch and Macpherson (2003). GOP PAC Donator is an indicator variable coded to equal one for firms whose political action committees donated
more to Republican candidates than Democratic candidates in 2015-2016. Cash is the percentage of a firm’s total assets (AT) that are cash (CHE).
Percent Expensed is advertising expenses and R&D expenses divided by capital expenditures plus advertising expenses and R&D expenses. Cash
ETR is the cash taxes paid (TXPD) divided by pretax income (PRE), truncated at 0 and 1, and only defined over positive values of pretax income.
GAAP ETR is total tax expense (TXT) divided by pretax income (PRE), truncated at 0 and 1, and only defined over positive values of pretax income.
Tax Savings is GAAP ETR from 2016 minus the ongoing forecast of the GAAP ETR after tax reform as collected from earnings conference calls
by Morgan Stanley. Ln(Assets) is the natural log of total assets (AT). MNE is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm is a multinational
enterprise, as determined by the firm having non-zero foreign pretax income (PIFO). Ln(Employees) is the natural log of the number of employees
at the firm (EMP), after multiplying EMP by 1,000. R&D is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm discloses a non-zero amount of
research and development (XRD). CAPEX is the percentage of a firm’s total assets (AT) that are capital expenditures (CAPX). ROA is the return
on assets, obtained from dividing the pretax income (PRE) by the total assets of the firm (AT). All variables are obtained for the firm fiscal year
(fyear) 2016, and prior to being used in the regression analysis are winsorized at the 2% and 98% level. Standard errors are in the parentheses.

53

Table 8. Dividend Increases, New Share Repurchase Announcements, and Tax Reform
Panel A. Descriptive Statistics
Variable
Announced New Buyback
Dividend Increase
Post Tax Reform
Red State
Politically Sensitive Industry
Percent Unionized
GOP PAC Donator
Cash
Percent Expensed
High Cash ETR
Ln(Assets)
MNE
Ln(Employees)
R&D
Dividend
CAPEX
ROA
Post Tax Reform X Red State
Post Tax Reform X Politically Sensitive Industry
Post Tax Reform X Percent Unionized
Post Tax Reform X GOP PAC Donator
Post Tax Reform X Cash
Post Tax Reform X Percent Expensed
Post Tax Reform X High Cash ETR
Post Tax Reform X Ln(Assets)
Post Tax Reform X MNE
Post Tax Reform X Ln(Employees)
Post Tax Reform X R&D
Post Tax Reform X Dividend
Post Tax Reform X CAPEX
Post Tax Reform X ROA

Obs
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752
123752

Mean
0.01
0.08
0.03
0.42
0.21
0.06
0.12
0.22
0.4
0.26
5.83
0.38
6.37
0.43
0.4
0.04
-0.33
0.01
0.01
0
0
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.19
0.01
0.2
0.01
0.01
0
-0.01

54

S.D.
0.11
0.27
0.17
0.49
0.4
0.06
0.33
0.25
0.38
0.44
2.78
0.48
2.57
0.49
0.49
0.05
1.31
0.11
0.08
0.01
0.06
0.06
0.1
0.09
1.18
0.11
1.22
0.12
0.11
0.01
0.2

Min
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
-1.47
0
0.69
0
0
0
-7.98
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
-1.47
0
0
0
0
0
-7.98

0.25
0
0
0
0
0
0.02
0
0.04
0
0
4.11
0
4.62
0
0
0
-0.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Mdn
0
0
0
0
0
0.03
0
0.11
0.34
0
6.19
0
6.44
0
0
0.02
0.01
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.75
0
0
0
1
0
0.07
0
0.3
0.79
1
7.76
1
8.33
1
1
0.05
0.08
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Max
1
1
1
1
1
0.56
1
0.95
1
1
11.02
1
11.27
1
1
0.26
0.31
1
1
0.56
1
0.95
1
1
11.02
1
11.27
1
1
0.26
0.31

Table 8 (continued). Dividend Increases, New Share Repurchase Announcements, and Tax
Reform
Panel B. Regression Results
(1)
(2)
(3)
(2)
Announced
Announced
Dividend
Dividend
New
New
Increase
Increase
VARIABLES
Buyback
Buyback
Post Tax Reform
0.0045
0.0272*** -0.0365***
0.0120
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.02)
Red State
0.0005
0.0043
0.0005
0.0047
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
Politically Sensitive Industry
-0.0022*** -0.0248*** -0.0019*** -0.0240***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
Percent Unionized
-0.0143*** 0.1162*** -0.0102** 0.1150***
(0.00)
(0.03)
(0.00)
(0.03)
GOP PAC Donator
0.0036*** 0.0321*** 0.0031*** 0.0316***
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
Cash
-0.0000
-0.0096*
-0.0003
-0.0092*
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
Percent Expensed
0.0010
-0.0064
0.0009
-0.0060
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
High Cash ETR
0.0036*** 0.0481*** 0.0037*** 0.0478***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
Ln(Assets)
0.0006*** 0.0188*** 0.0005*** 0.0184***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
MNE
0.0028*** -0.0087** 0.0027*** -0.0084**
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
Ln(Employees)
0.0015***
-0.0007
0.0015***
-0.0004
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
R&D
-0.0014*
-0.0044
-0.0010
-0.0040
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
Dividend
0.0016**
0.0014**
(0.00)
(0.00)
CAPEX
-0.0037
-0.1273*** -0.0078* -0.1269***
(0.00)
(0.03)
(0.00)
(0.03)
ROA
-0.0003** -0.0088*** -0.0003* -0.0087***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
Post Tax Reform X Red State
0.0037
-0.0142
(0.01)
(0.01)
Post Tax Reform X Politically Sensitive Industry
-0.0089
-0.0224**
(0.01)
(0.01)
Post Tax Reform X Percent Unionized
-0.1374***
0.0424
(0.05)
(0.10)
Post Tax Reform X GOP PAC Donator
0.0150
0.0143
(0.01)
(0.02)
Post Tax Reform X Cash
0.0189
0.0038
(0.01)
(0.02)
Post Tax Reform X Percent Expensed
0.0048
-0.0177
(0.01)
(0.02)
Post Tax Reform X High Cash ETR
-0.0026
0.0083
(0.01)
(0.01)
Post Tax Reform X Ln(Assets)
0.0037
0.0159***
(0.00)
(0.00)
Post Tax Reform X MNE
0.0056
-0.0067
(0.01)
(0.01)
Post Tax Reform X Ln(Employees)
0.0020
-0.0099**
(0.00)
(0.00)
Post Tax Reform X R&D
-0.0152
-0.0132
(0.01)
(0.01)
Post Tax Reform X Dividend
0.0059
(0.01)
Post Tax Reform X CAPEX
0.1836**
-0.0296
(0.09)
(0.10)
Post Tax Reform X ROA
-0.0019
-0.0055**
(0.00)
(0.00)
Trend
-0.0013** -0.0108*** -0.0012** -0.0108***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
Trend Squared
0.0008*** 0.0011*** 0.0008*** 0.0011***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
Constant
-0.0111*** -0.0190*** -0.0103*** -0.0190***
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
Observations
R-squared

123,752
0.01

55

123,752
0.06

123,752
0.01

123,752
0.06

Table 8 (continued). Dividend Increases, New Share Repurchase Announcements, and Tax
Reform
Notes. The sample consists of U.S. incorporated corporations from 2010-2018 available on Compustat, and the unit
of analysis is the firm-quarter. Announced New Buyback is an indicator coded to equal one for firm/quarter
observations which Capital IQ records as having announced a new share repurchase plan. Dividend Increase is an
indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm increased its dividend. Red State is an indicator variable coded to
equal one for firms with headquarters in states that voted for Donald Trump in 2016. Politically Sensitive Industry is
an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm’s industry is politically sensitive, following Julio and Yook (2012).
Percent Unionized is the percentage of the industry that is unionized in 2016, following Hirsch and Macpherson
(2003). GOP PAC Donator is an indicator variable coded to equal one for firms whose political action committees
donated more to Republican candidates than Democratic candidates in 2015-2016. Cash is the percentage of a firm’s
total assets (AT) that are cash (CHE). Percent Expensed is advertising expenses and R&D expenses divided by capital
expenditures plus advertising expenses and R&D expenses. Cash ETR is the cash taxes paid (TXPD) divided by
pretax income (PRE), truncated at 0 and 1, and only defined over positive values of pretax income. GAAP ETR is
total tax expense (TXT) divided by pretax income (PRE), truncated at 0 and 1, and only defined over positive values
of pretax income. Tax Savings is GAAP ETR from 2016 minus the ongoing forecast of the GAAP ETR after tax reform
as collected from earnings conference calls by Morgan Stanley. Ln(Assets) is the natural log of total assets (AT). MNE
is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm is a multinational enterprise, as determined by the firm having
non-zero foreign pretax income (PIFO). Ln(Employees) is the natural log of the number of employees at the firm
(EMP), after multiplying EMP by 1,000. R&D is an indicator variable coded to equal one if the firm discloses a nonzero amount of research and development (XRD). CAPEX is the percentage of a firm’s total assets (AT) that are
capital expenditures (CAPX). ROA is the return on assets, obtained from dividing the pretax income (PRE) by the
total assets of the firm (AT). The analysis is done at the firm-quarter level, and prior to being used in the regression
analysis, all variables are winsorized at the 2% and 98% level. Standard errors are in the parentheses.

56

