                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DRIVERS OF THE GREAT HOUSING BOOM-BUST:
                       CREDIT CONDITIONS, BELIEFS, OR BOTH?

                                             Josue Cox
                                        Sydney C. Ludvigson

                                        Working Paper 25285
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25285


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2018




Ludvigson acknowledges financial support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Econonomics at
NYU. We are grateful to participants at the "Housing, Credit, and Heterogeneity" conference, Stockholm
September 13-14, 2018 for helpful comments, and to Cindy Soo for providing us the data on her national
housing media index. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Josue Cox and Sydney C. Ludvigson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Drivers of the Great Housing Boom-Bust: Credit Conditions, Beliefs, or Both?
Josue Cox and Sydney C. Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 25285
November 2018, Revised January 15, 2019
JEL No. E7,R0,R21,R3

                                            ABSTRACT

Two potential driving forces of house price fluctuations are commonly cited: credit conditions and
beliefs. We posit some simple empirical calculations using direct measures of credit conditions and
beliefs to consider their potentially distinct roles in house price fluctuations at the aggregate level.
Changes in credit conditions are positively related to the fraction of riskier non-conforming debt in
total mortgage lending, while measures of beliefs are unrelated to this ratio. Credit conditions explain
quantitatively large magnitudes of the variation in quarterly house price growth and also predict future
house price growth. Beliefs bear some relation to contemporaneous house price growth but have little
predictive power. A structural VAR analysis implies that shocks to credit conditions have quantitatively
important dynamic causal effects on house price changes.


Josue Cox
Department of Economics
New York University
josue.cox@nyu.edu

Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
1        Introduction

The dawn of the 21st century was marked by a dramatic boom-bust cycle in residential real
estate prices, a phenomenon of unprecedented magnitude and breadth that a¤ected many coun-
tries and most regions within the United States. This cycle, which roughly spanned the years
2000-2010, has generated keen interest in the origins of house price movements. For brevity,
we shall refer hereafter to this entire episode as the Great Housing Cycle (GHC), to the period
of rapid home price appreciation from 2000 to 2006 as the boom, and to the period 2007 to the
end of 2010 as the bust.
        Two potential driving forces of house price ‡uctuations are commonly cited: credit condi-
tions and beliefs. Perhaps the boom was driven by cheaper and easier access to credit and the
bust by a subsequent constriction in credit availability. Alternatively, the boom might have
been propelled by an exuberance about housing unexplained by economic fundamentals, while
the bust came after a negative shift in beliefs. Theoretical studies have yet to reach consensus
on the relative or even absolute importance of these two mechanisms, pointing to the need for
empirical evidence.1 Yet even empirical researchers looking at similar data sets have arrived
at divergent conclusions. One set of results suggests that the boom was driven by a nascent
extension of credit to low-income and subprime borrowers, while the bust was caused by a sub-
sequent reversal of credit. Evidence commensurate with this idea (e.g., Mian and Su… (2009);
Mian and Su… (2016)) is often interpreted as consistent with the credit conditions view. Other
evidence suggests that the boom was characterized by an increase in mortgage originations to
households at all income levels, including higher-income and prime borrowers often thought
to be less constrained by credit conditions than subprime borrowers, while the bust was char-
acterized by a rising share of defaults by many of these same higher-income borrowers (e.g.,
Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2016)). This evidence is often interpreted as consistent with
the beliefs view, since it comports with the idea that the boom was caused by a broadly-shared
optimism about housing by prime and subprime borrowers alike, while the bust was caused by
a wide-spread shift toward pessimism.
        Often, the credit conditions view and beliefs view are discussed as if they were mutually
exclusive possibilities. In reality, both forces could be playing a role at the same time in the
data. Greenwald (2017) provides evidence that the vast majority of prime borrowers take
out the largest mortgage possible given their loan-to-value (LTV) limit and their monthly
debt payment-to-income (PTI) limit2 among other eligibility requirements, implying that any
    1
     A growing body of theoretical work has addressed these questions in general equilbrium. See e.g., Davis and
Heathcote (2005); Campbell and Hercowitz (2006), Kahn (2008), Kiyotaki, Michaelides, and Nikolov (2011),
Piazzesi and Schneider (2008), Iacoviello and Pavan (2013), Sommer, Sullivan, and Verbrugge (2013), Landvoigt,
Piazzesi, and Schneider (2015), Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2017), Garriga and Hedlund
(2017); Greenwald (2017), and Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2017).
   2
     This limit is referred to as the “debt-to-income”limit in the mortgage industry even though the numerator


                                                       1
homebuyer who isn’t purchasing with cash is likely to be credit constrained or nearly so. Higher
income and prime borrowers with more borrowing capacity take out larger mortgages, but are
not necessarily less constrained than lower income and subprime households. This suggests
that the relationship between mortgage growth and income growth at the individual level may
be no more (or no less) informative about credit conditions than it is about beliefs. What is
missing from this analysis are direct measures of credit conditions and beliefs.
    In this paper we posit some simple empirical calculations using direct measures of credit
conditions and beliefs to consider their potentially distinct roles as drivers of house price ‡uctu-
ations at the aggregate level. To measure credit conditions, we study a little-utilized indicator
of mortgage lending standards from a survey of banks: the Senior Loan O¢ cer Opinion Survey
(SLOOS) conducted by the Federal Reserve. The quarterly survey asks senior loan o¢ cers at
banks to state whether their lending standards for purchase mortgages have eased or tightened
relative to the previous quarter. We use the net percentage of banks that have eased their
lending standards on mortgage loans as a measure of credit supply, a variable we denote CSt .
To our knowledge, the only paper that has previously used this measure in the study of house
price ‡uctuations is Favilukis, Kohn, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2013) (FKLV). We
extend this prior analysis by considering an updated sample and a more extensive empirical
study using data on beliefs.
    To measure beliefs, we study four indicators. The …rst three are each distinct household-
level survey indicators from the University of Michigan’s Survey of Consumers (SOC) that
ask speci…cally about the respondent’s view on home prices. These include an overall buying
conditions index (whether now is a good or bad time to invest in a home), a measure created
from the fraction of SOC respondents who say that conditions are good because house prices
are expected to rise or stay high, and a survey point forecast for house price changes over the
next year (available since 2007). As a fourth measure of beliefs, we make use of the index
constructed by Soo (2018) that measures sentiment about housing based on a textual analysis
of major news publications’coverage of the housing market. We then combine these data with
data on national home prices in order to compile a set of statistical facts on the empirical
relationships among these variables at the aggregate level.
    We investigate several hypotheses. One concerns the relationship between credit conditions
and the type of mortgages that are underwritten. If a reported net easing of bank lending
standards means a relaxation of loan-to-value or payment-to-income limits, or more generally a
greater expansion of credit to borrowers previously deemed unquali…ed according to a stricter
set of lending standards, we would expect such easings to be associated with a shift in the com-
position of mortgages, away from less risky conforming loans and toward riskier non-conforming
is the monthly debt payment rather than the debt itself. We therefore follow other academic literature and refer
to it as the payment-to-income ratio, or PTI.


                                                       2
loans. The converse would be true of a reported net tightening of bank lending standards. By
contrast, there is no reason to expect a belief-driven change in household demand for mortgages
to a¤ect the composition of loans, since presumably the demand for all types of credit would
change in rough proportion. So we look at how the SLOOS survey measure of credit supply
relates to mortgage growth and its composition over time.
    A second and related hypothesis is that lenders’ beliefs about future home prices altered
their willingness to bear mortgage credit risk, with this willingness increasing when they were
optimistic and decreasing when they turned pessimistic. Under this hypothesis, a shift in the
composition of credit toward riskier non-conforming mortgages should occur when beliefs are
bullish. So we investigate whether our measures of house price beliefs are related to the shifts
in the composition of mortgages.
   A third question is whether either credit conditions or beliefs contain explanatory power
for national home price growth that is independent of the explanatory power contained in
the other variable, and in economic fundamentals. If the two are correlated, but the true
explanatory power for house prices lies more with one than the other, this should be revealed
by a multivariate regression where both variables are included. So we ask whether bank credit
supply contains information about current house price growth that is not contained in beliefs
(and vice versa). We further investigate which forces are more quantitatively important for
explaining the variation in house price changes.
   It is important to consider whether beliefs have explanatory power for house prices beyond
that contained in economic fundamentals. After all, beliefs about house prices evolve endoge-
nously even in models where beliefs have no independent role to play in economic ‡uctuations,
including models in which subjective expectations perfectly align with objective probability laws
governing the behavior of economic fundamentals. An important question for the literature on
behavioral biases is whether beliefs pushed house prices beyond what would be justi…ed by
fundamentals alone, in which case beliefs should contain information about house price growth
that is independent of credit conditions and other economic fundamentals. This is straightfor-
ward to address with a multivariate analysis that employs data on beliefs, credit conditions,
and economic fundamentals.
   The idea that beliefs may be an important independent driver of house price ‡uctuations
often rests on the premise that it is beliefs about future house prices, or expectations, that
are the key source of variation in home values (e.g., Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2017)). If
true, we would expect a shift toward more optimistic beliefs to predict an increase in future
house price growth and to drive out credit conditions as a competing predictor variable. We
therefore ask whether beliefs predict future house price changes, once other fundamentals and
lagged house prices are controlled for.
   The empirical analyses just described are silent on causality. Thus a …nal hypothesis we

                                               3
investigate is that there is no genuine causality running from credit conditions to house price
changes, even if there is a positive correlation between the two. Causality might run entirely in
the other direction, i.e., from rising home prices to greater credit extension in the boom, and
from falling house prices to a constriction of credit during the bust. We address this question by
estimating a bivariate structural vector autoregression (VAR) in our measure of credit supply
and house price growth using the shock-restricted identi…cation approach of Ludvigson, Ma,
and Ng (2015) and Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2016). The approach permits set identi…cation
of exogenous variation in the VAR variables under assumptions that are typically weaker than
those required for point identi…cation. If credit conditions have no genuine causal e¤ect, then
shocks to credit conditions that are mutually uncorrelated with house price shocks should not
have an impact on house prices. We use the shock-restricted structural VAR to address this
question.
   Our main …ndings may be summarized as follows. First, changes in credit supply, as mea-
sured by CSt ; are positively related to the fraction of riskier non-conforming debt in total
mortgage lending. The measures of beliefs we study, however, are unrelated to this ratio. This
underscores the role of easier credit in the proliferation of non-conforming debt during the
housing boom and its subsequent reversal during the bust.
   Second, CSt explains quantitatively large magnitudes of the variation in quarterly house
price growth and is strongly statistically signi…cant. For example, it explains 31% of the
variation in quarterly house price growth in the full sample from 1991:Q4-2017:Q4, and 54% in
the GHC subsample. Several measures of beliefs also have statistically signi…cant explanatory
power for changes in home values, though they explain lower fractions of the variation in house
price growth compared to changes in credit conditions. Once key macroeconomic fundamentals
such as interest rates and expected economic growth are controlled for,    CSt retains its strong
statistically signi…cant explanatory power but only two measures of beliefs do so. These are the
Soo (2018) national housing media sentiment index, and the growth in the share of households
in the SOC who reported being optimistic about the housing market because they said house
prices would further appreciate. Both of these measures add modestly to the fraction of variation
explained in contemporaneous house price growth.
   Third, in terms of predicting future house price changes,       CSt is found to be a strong
marginal predictor of house price growth, both in terms of statistical signi…cance and in terms
of economic magnitudes, over horizons ranging from one- to four-quarters-ahead, controlling for
economic fundamentals, lagged house price growth, and beliefs. We …nd little evidence that be-
liefs have predictive power for future house price changes, once credit conditions, fundamentals,
and lagged house price growth are controlled for.
   Fourth, the structural VAR analysis implies that shocks to credit conditions have quantita-
tively important dynamic causal e¤ects on house price changes, with positive shocks (an easing

                                                4
of credit) increasing home values and negative shocks (a tightening of credit) decreasing them.
Although the set identi…ed procedure produces a range of estimates, the bounds of the set are
nevertheless informative. They imply that a one-standard deviation shock to        CS increases
real quarterly house price growth by up to 1.4% on impact, or roughly 5.7% at an annual rate.
At the lowest end of the range in the set, a one-standard deviation shock to CS is found to
increase real quarterly house price growth by roughly 0.8% on impact, or roughly 3.2% at an
annual rate.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the data. Section
3 reports the empirical …ndings. This section includes subsections on the relation between
mortgages, credit conditions and beliefs (Section 3.1), on explaining contemporaneous house
price changes (Section 3.2), on predicting future house price changes (Section 3.3), and on the
structural VAR analysis of credit conditions shocks on house prices (Section 3.4). Section 4
concludes.


2     Data

This section describes the data. Details and sources for all data may be found in the Internet
Appendix.

2.1    Data on Credit Conditions
Our measure of credit conditions is based on the Federal Reserve’s SLOOS survey. The survey
asks banks to explicitly distinguish between changes in the supply of credit (whether it has
eased or tightened) as distinct from the demand for credit, on bank loans to businesses and
households over the past three months. We focus on questions related to mortgage credit supply
to households. The detailed information is considered highly reliable because the surveys are
carried out by central banks which also function as bank regulators with access to a large
amount of information about a bank’s operations, including those re‡ected in loan applications
and balance sheet data.
    For the SLOOS survey, banks indicate easing, tightening, or no change in lending standards
on purchase mortgages compared to the previous three months. Thus, this variable indicates
whether there has been any change in lending standards from the previous quarter. We use the
net percentage of banks that have eased their lending standards on mortgage loans as a measure
of credit supply, and denote this variable   CSt . The net percentage is the di¤erence between
the percentage of banks reporting easing and the percentage of banks reporting tightening, thus
a positive …gure indicates a net easing of lending standards, considering all bank respondents.
To facilitate the interpretation of results below, we standardize this variable. These data begin
in 1990:Q2.

                                               5
   Figure 1 displays the credit supply variable CSt over time. This variable is persistent,
with an autoregressive coe¢ cient of 0.9, but statistical tests indicate it is stationary. According
to this measure, there was a notable easing of standards from 2002-2006, and a very sharp
tightening afterwards. This measure does not weight banks by their relative importance in the
mortgage market, nor does it weight the responses by the degree of tightening. Thus, it is not
an indicator of the strength of credit easing or tightening, only of its breadth. Moreover, until
2007, the survey did not distinguish between prime and subprime mortgages. Subsequent to
this time, the SLOOS survey asks banks about lending on di¤erent categories of mortgages.
The Online Appendix explains how we weight these to arrive at the overall index. The …gure
shows a marked broad tightening of credit standards beginning at the end of 2006. A cursory
examination of the …gure suggests that the easing of standards in the boom was more modest.
One must be careful in interpreting this series however. A string of observations starting in 2002
and continuing through 2006 show that standards were eased in every quarter. Recall that the
survey asks banks about how their standards have changed relative to the pervious three months.
Thus a series of observations indicating easier credit conditions relative to previous quarters
by a few important banks in the mortgage space, once cumulated, could indicate a signi…cant
relaxation of underwriting standards. As a crude measure of the magnitude of credit standard
easing or tightening, the bottom panel of Figure 1 reports the …tted value of CSt over time
that would be predicted by the actual changes in GSE-backed conforming loans outstanding
and non-conforming “asset backed securities”(ABS) outstanding, categories de…ned explicitly
below. This estimate points to a quantitatively large easing of standards from 2002-2006, and
a sharp tightening afterwards.
   An important aspect of SLOOS survey is that it asks loan o¢ cers to explicitly distinguish
between changes in mortgage credit supply as distinct from credit demand ( CD), on bank
loans over the past three months. Thus in principle, answers to the appropriate questions are
able to identify a movement in supply separately from a movement in demand. There could of
course be some residual correlation between the two. As it turns out, there is very little such
correlation. The results presented in the next sections are not sensitive to replacing    CSt with
the residual from a regression of CSt on CDt .
   It’s worth noting that other indicators of credit conditions, even for conforming mortgages,
also imply that credit standards were signi…cantly relaxed during the boom and then sub-
sequently tightened in the bust. For example, Figure 2 exhibits the fraction, over time, of
mortgage originations purchased by the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae)
with PTI ratios greater than either 35, 45, or 50 percent, weighted by loan balance. The …g-
ure shows that PTI ratios increased dramatically from 2000 to the end of 2006. The largest
increase was for the fraction that exceeded 50 percent, which rose by 85% over this period, fol-
lowed by the fraction that exceeded 45 percent, which rose 66%, and the fraction that exceeded

                                                 6
36 percent, which rose 28%. All three were sharply reduced in the bust, with the fraction
exceeding 50% driven to zero shortly after 2010, in part because of the Dodd-Frank act, which
explicitly limits PTI ratios on conforming loans. Because these data are available only annually
since 2000, we don’t use them in our empirical analysis below, instead focusing on the SLOOS
measure, which is available quarterly and over a longer time frame. But theoretical evidence
in Greenwald (2017) suggests that time-variation in these PTI constraints have an important
in‡uence on home prices in general equilibrium.3

2.2       Data on Beliefs
We use four measures of beliefs about home values. The …rst three of these are available from
the University of Michigan’s SOC. The …rst is an index of perceived buying conditions that
goes back to 1978. The SOC asks, “Generally speaking, do you think now is a good time or
a bad time to buy a house?” We construct a net buying conditions index (BCI) by taking
the number of “good” answers, subtracting the number of “bad” answers and adding 100.
This index is plotted over time in the upper panel of Figure 3. A slightly di¤erent measure,
the fraction of respondents who answer that now is a “good time to buy” is shown in the
lower panel and behaves similarly over time. Below we investigate the relation between the log
di¤erence in house prices and possible covariates such as beliefs and credit conditions. Thus
our empirical analysis uses the quarterly log di¤erence in all belief indicators, including BCI.
The log di¤erence in BCI is denoted bci.
       Our second measure of beliefs is taken from a follow up question of the SOC on buying
conditions. There may be many reasons respondents answer that it is a good time to buy a
house. The SOC asks households to give up to two reasons. This is an open-ended question, but
the SOC groups the answers into six categories. Figure 4 plots the fraction of respondents who
have a positive view about buying conditions along with the three most important reasons given
for that view, again in terms of the fraction of respondents who hold that view for that reason.
As pointed out previously by Piazzesi and Schneider (2009), the most commonly given reason
that households have a positive view of buying conditions is that credit conditions are good.
Good credit conditions are expressed by referring to low interest rates, lower down payment
requirements, or more general ease in obtaining credit.4 The next two most important reasons
given in the case of good time to buy are current prices are low, and future prices will be higher.
Note that relatively few individuals cite an expectation of future price growth as a reason to
   3
     Greenwald (2017) uses the Fannie Mae data to calibrate a general equilibrium model with prepayable debt
and a limit on the ratio of mortgage payments to income. He …nds that a relaxation of payment-to-income
standards has large e¤ects on home prices and price-rent ratios in the model.
   4
     The SOC refers to this category as “interest rates low.” We refer to it as “good credit” because the re-
spondents include all those giving any of the four following reasons for their favorable outlook: 1. Lower down
payment 2. Interest rates are low 3. Credit easy to get, easy money 4. Variable mortgage rate.


                                                      7
buy. Nevertheless, this latter series–the fraction of respondents who say that buying conditions
are good because future house prices will be high–hones in on the expectations component of
beliefs that is central, in some theories, to driving house price variation. In some models, it
is crucial that all agents in the economy share the same beliefs (e.g., Kaplan, Mitman, and
Violante (2017)). But in other models this is not the case. Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) point
out that in a search market with high transaction costs, even a small number of optimistic
(pessimistic) buyers can drive up (down) the average transaction price without a large increase
in trading volume. This insight motivates us to use the fraction of respondents who say that
buying conditions are good because future house prices will be high as a third measure of house
price beliefs. Our empirical analysis uses the log di¤erence in this fraction, denoted bcihighF
                                                                                          t
                                                                                                P
                                                                                                  .
This measure is available over the same time period as the overall buying conditions index.
    The third measure available from the SOC asks households for a point forecast on house
price changes over the next 12 months. This measures is available from 2007:Q1 onward. This
question asks respondents By about what percent do you expect prices of homes like yours in
your community to go (up/down), on average, over the next 12 months? The SOC asks the
analogous question for expected in‡ation over the next 12 months. We use either the median
or mean responses to both questions to construct a measure of real house price expectations
( pet ). For example, the median response is calculated as

                               pe;med
                                t     = Etmed   log Pt+4      Etmed   t+4 ;


where “Etmed ”denotes the median value of the survey expectation for house prices and in‡ation.
The mean response for house price growth is constructed in an analogous fashion and denoted
  pe;avg
   t     .
   Our fourth measure of beliefs is the national version of Soo’s (Soo (2018)) housing media
sentiment index. Soo measures housing sentiment through a textual analysis of content in
newspaper articles from major publications in 34 cities of the U.S. spanning the period January
2000 to December 2013. Soo calculates sentiment by subtracting the number of negative words
about housing from the number of positive words and dividing by the total number of words,
where “negative”and “positive”refer to sentiment about current and future home values. Thus
this index rises when media housing sentiment is more “bullish”and falls when media sentiment
turns more “bearish.” Soo further shows that log changes in her index at the city level have
important predictive power for house price changes in the corresponding city. Here we employ
log changes in the national version of her housing media index in our empirical analysis of
national home prices. This variable is denoted       hmit .
    Each of these four measures of beliefs are constructed so that an increase in the measure
quanti…es a general shift toward optimism about the housing market, while a decrease quan-
ti…es a corresponding shift toward pessimism. Models in which beliefs matter for home prices

                                                 8
(e.g., Piazzesi and Schneider (2009), Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2017)) predict that these
measures should be positively related to home price growth.

2.3    Data on House Prices
Two repeat-sales national home price indexes are commonly examined in the study of house
price ‡uctuations at the aggregate level. The …rst is the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home
Price Index (CSUS) and the second is the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) home price
index. These series are divided by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and plotted over time in
Figure 5. The lower panel plots the same series relative to an aggregate measure of rents, a
common speci…cation of the fundamental dividend stream provided by the housing stock. The
dramatic boom/bust cycle is clear in the …gure for both series, but is much more pronounced
in the CSUS than in the FHFA. The most signi…cant di¤erence between the two indexes is
that FHFA collects data from mortgages that have been purchased or securitized by Fannie
Mae or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. (Freddie Mac) only. (It also equal-weights
house prices and includes re…nances, while the CSUS does not.) The CSUS index includes
all available transactions on single-family homes, including sales …nanced with non-conforming
mortgages, such as jumbo, Alt-A and subprime. As a result, this index is broader than FHFA.
Transactions are also value-weighted in the CSUS. Because of its breadth, and because non-
conforming mortgage lending appears to have played an outsized role in the GHC, we use the
CSUS index as our main measure of national home prices in the empirical work below. We
employ log changes in the CPI de‡ated value of this index in our empirical analysis. This
variable is denoted   pt .


3     Empirical Findings

This section reports the empirical …ndings. Output for all regressions include the coe¢ cient
estimates, adjusted R2 statistic, and heteroskedasticity and serial correlation robust (HAC) t-
statistics (Newey and West (1987)). To assess potential …nite sample biases, for each regression
we also undertake bootstrap procedures under the null that the explanatory variables have
no marginal explanatory power. Following the prescription of Horowitz (2003), we use the
bootstrap to estimate the probability distribution of the t-statistic for each coe¢ cient under
this null, since such a statistic is asymptotically pivotal and can deliver bias reduction in …nite
samples. To account for the serial dependence of the data, we use two approaches. The …rst
employs a parametric model of the serial dependence, while the second is a non-parametric
model based on block bootstraps. We refer to these as the parametric and nonparametric
bootstrap, respectively. Each regression table reports statistical signi…cance on the basis of the
two bootstrap distributions of the t-statistic, as well as the Newey-West HAC approximation

                                                9
to the asymptotic distribution of the t-statistic.
    The samples used in each empirical analysis depend on data availability. Di¤erent measures
of beliefs are available over di¤erent time periods. In addition, although the SLOOS survey
begins in 1990:Q2, our measure of the real 10-year Treasury bond, used in several regressions,
uses the Survey of Professional Forecasters median 10-year in‡ation forecast to construct a
real rate. This latter variable is available starting in 1991:Q4. Thus our longest “full sample”
spans the period 1991:Q4-2017:Q4. We begin by investigating mortgage credit extension and
its relation to credit conditions and beliefs over time.

3.1      Mortgages, Credit Conditions, and Beliefs
Mortgages vary in terms of the attributes that are considered to be closely related to the ex-ante
riskiness of the loan. For the purposes of this paper, we shall de…ne a conforming loan to be
one that is eligible for purchase by the Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac. Conforming loans are considered less risky than non-conforming loans for
two reasons. First, they must adhere to strict eligibility requirements that ostensibly limit the
riskiness of the loan ex-ante. These include limits on the size of the loan, on the borrower’s
LTV ratio, on the borrower’s PTI ratio, on the borrower’s credit score, and the documentation
requirements of the loan.5 Second, the GSEs purchase these safer mortgages on the secondary
market and guarantee them against default. Non-conforming loans, such as jumbo, subprime,
and Alt-A mortgages, are considered riskier than conforming loans, since they need not adhere
to these standards and they are ineligible for purchase and guarantee by the GSEs.
      Time variation in the composition of loans over time is of interest because of how it relates to
lending standards, holding …xed aggregate credit demand. When loan o¢ cers at banks answer
questions on whether their lending standards have eased or tightened, their answers presumably
relate to the price terms of the mortgage contracts, such as interest rates, but also non-price
terms such as the maximum loan-to-value ratio, the maximum payment-to-income ratio, any
requirements on private mortgage insurance, and the minimum credit score. If so, it is natural
to expect a reported easing of bank lending standards to be associated with an increase in
the share of credit extended to borrowers who do not meet the eligibility requirements of a
conforming loan, and conversely for a reported tightening of standards. By contrast, there is
no reason to expect an economy-wide change in demand for mortgages to be related to the
composition of loans, since presumably the demand for all types of credit would change in
rough proportion.
      The upper panel of Figure 6 shows the share of mortgages outstanding by mortgage type,
over time, updating the same …gure in FKLV. The line labeled “GSE portfolio and pools”
  5
    The    eligibility  matrix     guidelines      for    conforming       loans   are   given    here
https://www.fanniemae.com/content/eligibility_information/eligibility-matrix.pdf


                                                    10
are Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pools, comprised only of conforming mortgage loans.
The line labeled “ABS” refers to issuers of asset backed securities, comprised entirely of non-
conforming loans. The ABS mortgages are the sum of jumbo, subprime, and Alt-A mortgages
discussed above. The …gure shows a signi…cant change in the composition of loans from 2002-
2007: a sharp rise in the share of ABS during the housing boom, which mirrors a sharp fall in the
share of GSE loans. From 2000 to 2006, the share of ABS in total mortgages outstanding almost
tripled, increasing 178%. This indicates a shift in the composition of mortgage lending, away
from conforming debt and toward non-conforming debt, a trend that was subsequently reversed
after 2007 during the housing bust. The lower panel of Figure 6 shows a similar pattern in the
share of mortgage originations over time, which comes from a di¤erent data source comprised of
annual rather than quarterly observations. The analogy to the ABS category in the originations
data is the “private label”PL+Portfolio category. Private label includes mortgages securitized
by private institutions. Portfolio includes mortgages held in the asset portfolios of life insurance
companies, credit unions, mortgage banks and a¢ liate institutions. The sum of these two
categories is comprised entirely of non-conforming debt, since the conforming loans are all sold
o¤ to the GSEs and counted as part of the GSE category. Again we see a signi…cant change in
the composition of originations over the boom period, with a sharp rise in the non-conforming
PL loans relative to total originations, and a sharp reversal of this trend over the housing
bust. Over the boom period 2000-2006, the share of PL+Portfolios loans in total originations
increased by roughly 40%, but because the share falls in the intermediate aftermath of the
2000-2001 recession, it increased 63% from 2001-2006.
   The …rst column of Table 1 shows that the short-term trends in         CS are related to these
changes in the composition of lending. For the quarterly data on mortgages outstanding, we
investigate the relation between the year-over-year growth in credit standards, measured as the
four-quarter sum of the SLOOS net percentage easing indicator CS shown in Figure 1, and
year-over-year growth in mortgage credit outstanding, by mortgage type. The table reports
results from a regression of the latter on the former. Changes in credit standards          CS are
positively related to growth in ABS and negatively related to growth in mortgages held in GSE
pools. The last column shows the results from a regression on the growth in the ratio of ABS
to GSE pools. CS is positively related to log changes in this ratio. The percentage of banks
reporting an easing of credit standards is associated with a shift in the composition of loans,
toward non-conforming loans and away from conforming loans. This result is more pronounced
when looking only at the entire GHC period 2000-2010 (Panel B), underscoring the role of
easier credit standards in the proliferation of non-conforming debt during the housing boom.
      2
The R in this subsample is 47%, almost 5 times larger than that found in the the full sample,
while the estimated regression coe¢ cient is almost twice as large.
   In contrast to changes in credit supply, there is little reason to expect a belief-driven change

                                                11
in demand for mortgages to be associated with a change in the composition of loans, since
presumably demand for all types of loans would change in rough proportion. Columns two
through six in Table 1 show the relationship between the four beliefs measures and the com-
position of mortgage credit outstanding. We regress the year-over-year growth in mortgage
credit outstanding, by mortgage type, on the year-over-year log change in beliefs. Using these
measures, there is little evidence that shifts in the composition of mortgages toward riskier
non-conforming debt during the housing boom were associated with optimism about the hous-
ing market. The only measure of beliefs that shows a statistically signi…cant relationship to
changes in ABS/GSE in a sample that includes the housing boom is the SOC measure bcit
in the GHC subsample, but this relationship has the wrong (negative) sign. This correlation
should be positive if optimistic beliefs were a source of growth in the ratio of non-conforming to
conforming debt during the boom, or pessimistic beliefs a source of decline in this ratio during
the bust. The two other beliefs measures that are available in a sample that contains the GHC,
  hmit and bcihighF
                t
                     P
                       , bear no relationship to this fraction. The one measure of beliefs that
is statically signi…cantly related to growth in the ratio ABS/GSE with the right (positive) sign
is the survey average (but not the median) point forecast for housing growth       pe;avg
                                                                                    t     , but this
occurs in a sample that excludes the boom (2007:Q1-2017:Q4).
    It’s possible that a change in the beliefs of lenders about house prices over the housing cycle
altered their willingness of to bear mortgage credit risk, which resulted in the observed shift in
the composition of credit. Lenders beliefs would need to di¤er from those captured by the four
house price beliefs measures considered here, however, otherwise the evidence in Panels A and
B is not supportive of this hypothesis. It is worth pointing out, however, that while shifts in the
composition of mortgage credit are not associated with these measures of beliefs about house
prices, beliefs, they are associated with measures of beliefs about economic fundamentals. To
illustrate, Table 1 also reports the results of regressing changes in the composition of mortgages
on the expected real gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate for the year ahead, as measured
by the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) median forecast of one-year-ahead GDP growth,
denoted Etmed GDPt!t+4 : Unlike survey expectations of positive house price growth, survey
expectations of positive economic growth are associated with a shift in the composition of loans,
toward non-conforming loans and away from conforming loans. Survey expectations of positive
economic growth are also positively related to CSt , our measure of growth in credit supply.
   Table 2 presents results for originations that are analogous to those just presented for debt
outstanding. Because originations are only available annually, we relate the annual log di¤erence
in originations to the annual average of CSt over the four quarters of the year, and to the
Q4-over-Q4 log di¤erence in the three belief measures bcit , hmit and bcihighF
                                                                          t
                                                                               P
                                                                                 : Given the
small number of observations, we do not use data on expected house price growth,         pet ; which
is only available since 2007. Even for the other measures the samples are quite small, so these

                                                12
results can only be considered suggestive, but they are broadly similar to those reported in
Table 1. While CSt is positively related to changes in the ratio of PL/GSE; the three beliefs
measures are statistically insigni…cant.

3.2     Explaining Contemporaneous House Price Changes
We begin our investigation of which variables, if any, are contemporaneously correlated with
house price growth by analyzing univariate regressions of pt on contemporaneous CSt and
of pt on contemporaneous beliefs. Throughout this section we use the terminology “explain”
when referring to the estimated empirical relations, with the proviso that we do not make
claims about causality. The question of causality and the identi…cation of exogenous variation
in credit standards is addressed in the penultimate section of the paper using a structural
vector-autoregression.
     Table 3 presents the results of the univariate regressions, where Panel A gives results over
the full sample that is available given the data series being used, and Panel B presents results
for the GHC subsample. Panel A shows that, in the sample from 1991:Q4-2017:Q4, changes in
credit standards as measured by CSt explain 31% of the variation in pt , with the coe¢ cient
on    CSt signi…cant at the 1% or better level. To interpret the magnitudes of the coe¢ cient on
 CSt , recall that this variable is standardized, so a one-unit increase in this measure implies
a one standard deviation increase around its mean. Thus a coe¢ cient of 0.01 implies that a
one-standard deviation increase in CSt leads to a 100 basis point rise in quarterly real house
price growth, or roughly a 4% rise at an annual rate. This increase represents about one-half
of a one-standard deviation change in quarterly U.S. real house price growth (1.9%).
   Of the two measures of beliefs that are available over the same sample period, the overall
buying conditions variable bcit bears a negative empirical relation to contemporaneous house
price growth, but the index created from the fraction of respondents who say buying conditions
are good because future prices will be high,   bcihighF
                                                  t
                                                        P
                                                          , is positively correlated with house price
growth. This variable explains about 9% of current house price growth. Similarly, growth in
Soo’s housing media index hmit explains 8% of pt and is strongly signi…cant in a sample
from 2000:Q1-2013:Q4, whereas in this sample      CSt explains 37%. And in the sample 2007:Q1-
2017:Q4 for which the SOC point forecasts for housing growth are available, the median forecast
  pe;med
   t     and the average forecast pe;avg
                                      t    are both positively related to house price growth and
strongly statistically signi…cant, explaining 11% and 20%, respectively, of house price growth.
By comparison      CSt explains 38% in this subsample. Since the average is more in‡uenced by
outliers than the median, the …nding that the average point forecast explains a larger fraction of
house price growth than the median forecast lends empirical support for the model in Piazzesi
and Schneider (2009), which implies that a small number of optimists (or pessimists) can have


                                                13
an important e¤ect on the relatively few repeat sales transactions observed in the data.
   In the GHC subsample (Panel B), CSt explains a much larger fraction (54%) of the
variation in   pt than in the full sample, reinforcing the notion that credit conditions played an
out-sized role in the housing boom and bust. Of the three beliefs measures that are available over
this subsample, only the housing media index hmit is statistically related to pt , explaining
6% of the variation compared to 8% when the sample is extended to 2013:Q4. By contrast,
and unlike the full sample, growth in the share of optimistic households who said housing was
a good investment because house prices would further appreciate,      bcihighF
                                                                         t
                                                                               P
                                                                                 , bears no relation
to house price growth in the GHC subsample. Thus, while the univariate regressions suggest
that both credit conditions and beliefs are contemporaneously related to current house price
growth, the credit conditions measure is found to explain much larger fractions than the beliefs
measures of the variation in home values.
    In most economic theories, both credit standards and beliefs evolve endogenously with the
state of the economy and with expectations about future economic conditions. This is so even
in fully rational models where beliefs have no independent role to play. Thus an important
question for the literature on behavioral biases is whether beliefs pushed house prices beyond
what would be justi…ed by economic fundamentals alone, in which case beliefs should contain
information about house price growth that is independent of that in measures of economic
fundamentals. Moreover, if beliefs but not credit standards are the driving force behind house
price changes, the former should drive the latter out of the regression.
   To address these questions, Table 4 presents results from multivariate regressions of pt
on contemporaneous CSt and contemporaneous beliefs (one at a time), controlling for two
economic fundamentals other than credit conditions: the SPF median forecast of one-year-ahead
GDP growth, Etmed GDPt!t+4 , and the real 10-year Treasury-bond rate, as measured by the
nominal 10-year Treasury bond rate minus the SPF median 10-year in‡ation in‡ation forecast,
denoted rt10 . We refer to the sequence of observations on both Etmed GDPt!t+4 ; and rt10 simply
as fundamentals hereafter.
   As a benchmark, the …rst column of Table 4 reports the explanatory power of            CSt and
fundamentals alone. Taken together, these variables explain 34% of the variation in pt in
the sample from 1991:Q4 to 2017:Q4 and 58% in the GHC sample 2000:Q1-2006:Q4. In the
…rst sample, fundamentals alone account for a little less than half of the total. In the GHC
subsample, fundamentals alone account for 49% while          CSt alone accounts for 54%. It is
notable that CSt and      Etmed
                              GDPt!t+4 are substantially collinear in the GHC period, so
that they contain much overlapping information. But credit standards remain statistically
signi…cant in the multivariate regression where both are included, whereas each fundamental
variable, including Etmed GDPt!t+4 is no longer individually statistically signi…cant. (These
latter results are not shown in the Table.) This suggests that the information in   CSt subsumes

                                                14
the information in fundamentals for house price growth.
   For the regressions in Table 4, there are twelve di¤erent speci…cations covering four di¤erent
sample periods. Of these,       CSt remains strongly statistically related to contemporaneous house
price growth in all speci…cations that control for beliefs and fundamentals except one, namely
the shorter sample from 2007:Q1-2017:Q4 where neither CSt nor the belief measure pe;avg      t
have any marginal predictive power. In this sample, the regressors are su¢ ciently collinear that
the regression cannot distinguish their independent e¤ects, as suggested by the …nding that
no regressor (including the fundamentals) is individually signi…cant even though the adjusted
R2 is roughly the same as in column 1. In the GHC subsample, which also consists of fewer
observations, regressions with CSt always explain large fractions of variation in house price
growth, but the bootstrap distributions of the t-statistic indicates signi…cance for the coe¢ cient
on    CSt only at the 10% level. For beliefs, once fundamentals are controlled for, the only
measures that have incremental explanatory power according to the asymptotic HAC t-statistics
are the housing media index hmit and the growth in the share of optimistic households who
said housing was a good investment because house prices would further appreciate,         bcihighF
                                                                                             t
                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                     ,
though as above the latter is not related to     pt in the GHC subsample (Panel B). None of these
measures are statistically signi…cant according to either boostrapped distribution. Moreover,
the incremental explanatory power of these beliefs measures is modest. In the sample from
1991:Q4-2017:Q4, including         bcihighF
                                      t
                                            P
                                              as an additional regressor allows the speci…cation to
                                                                       2
explain an additional 4% of the variation in       pt , increasing the R from 0.34 to 0.38, while in
the sample from 2000:Q1-2013:Q4, the inclusion of          hmit also explains an additional 4% of
                                          2
the variation in    pt , increasing the R from 0.40 to 0.44.

3.3     Predicting House Price Changes
The idea that beliefs may be an important independent driver of house price ‡uctuations often
rests on the premise that it is beliefs about future house prices, or expectations, that are the
key source of variation in home values. If true, we would expect a shift toward more optimistic
beliefs to predict an increase in future house price growth. We now ask which measures, if any,
help predict future house price growth, controlling for credit conditions and fundamentals. It is
also of interest to ask whether credit conditions themselves predict home prices. In the model
of Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2017), credit conditions are predicted to have no forecasting
power for house price growth once beliefs are controlled for, so the former should be driven out
of the regression by beliefs.
     Tables 5, 6 and 7 display results of forecasting regressions of house price growth from the end
of period t to the end of period t + h, denoted pt+h;t : Future house price growth is regressed
on variables known at time t, including time t fundamentals, time t credit conditions, CSt ,


                                                  15
and time t beliefs (one at a time). Case and Shiller (1989) have pointed out that house price
growth is correlated with its own lags, thus we also include time t house price growth pt as
an additional control variable. The tables show results for horizons h = 1; 2; 3; and 4 quarters
ahead. Several aspects of these results bear emphasis.
   First, in the full sample, CSt is a strong marginal predictor of house price growth at all
horizons except h = 4 (where it is signi…cant according to the HAC t-statistic but not the
bootstrapped statistics), controlling for fundamentals, lagged house price growth, and beliefs.
As a benchmark, the top panel of each table shows the results when no beliefs measures are
included. In the sample 1991:Q4-2017:Q4 (Table 5), a speci…cation using only CSt and
fundamentals explains 26% of one-quarter-ahead house price growth, while adding lagged prices
increases this value to 32%. In the sample for which the housing sentiment index is available
(2000:Q1-2013:Q4, Panel B of Table 5), a speci…cation using only          CSt and fundamentals
explains 31% of one-quarter-ahead house price growth, while adding lagged prices increases
this to 34%. In the GHC sample (Table 6), a speci…cation using only CSt and fundamentals
explains 43% of one-quarter-ahead house price growth, while adding lagged prices increases this
to 49%. In a sample covering the period when survey point forecasts are available (2007:Q1-
2017:Q4, Table 7), a speci…cation using only CSt and fundamentals explains 32% of one-
quarter-ahead house price growth, while adding lagged prices decreases this to 29%. These
results underscore the strong predictive power of credit conditions for aggregate home price
‡uctuations, especially in the GHC subsample. A caveat with the shorter GHC subsample
results is that the coe¢ cient on CSt , while signi…cantly di¤erent from zero according to the
HAC distribution of the t-statistic, is not signi…cant according to the bootrapped distributions.
   It is worth noting that in each of the preceding results, the one-quarter-ahead forecasting
                                                                                        2
regression using   CSt as the sole predictor variable produces e¤ectively the same R (if slightly
greater) as does a regression using both    CSt and fundamentals as predictor variables. The
reason is the same as that given above for the contemporaneous regressions: credit standards
contain information that subsumes the information in the real ten-year bond yield and expected
economic growth, so that eliminating either or both of the latter has little e¤ect on the fraction
of variation explained in future house price growth.
   A second take-away from Tables 5, 6 and 7 is that there is no evidence that beliefs have
important predictive power for future house prices, once credit conditions, fundamentals and
lagged house price growth are controlled for. The single speci…cation for which a belief measure
is marginally signi…cant is exhibited in Table 5 for the sample 1991:Q4-2017:Q4 where the
buying conditions index bcit is signi…cant at the 5% level for predicting h = 1 quarter ahead
house price growth using the HAC t-statistic (but not the bootstrapped statistics). But a
comparison with the top panel of the same table shows that this measure adds little to the
                                                                                    2
magnitude of predictability: the same speci…cation without       bcit exhibits an R that is just

                                               16
2% lower than that including bcit . The bcit measure also has no predictive power for longer
horizon house price changes, or for house price changes over any horizon in the GHC subsample
(Table 6). We also …nd that eliminating lagged house price growth as an additional predictor
has little in‡uence on the predictability results using beliefs.

3.4     Do Credit Standards Cause Changes in House Prices?
In this section we consider a …nal hypothesis, namely that there was no genuine causality
running from credit conditions to house price changes, despite the positive correlation between
the two. Instead, the causality ran entirely in the other direction, i.e., from rising home prices to
greater credit extension in the boom, and conversely from falling house prices to a constriction of
credit during the bust. This reverse causality story is often associated with models where beliefs
play an important role. For example, exuberant expectations about future house prices might
have been the singular driving force behind rising house prices and relaxed credit conditions. If
so, shocks to credit conditions that are mutually uncorrelated with house price shocks should
not have an impact on house prices.
   To address this question we identify exogenous variation in our measure of credit conditions,
  CSt , and relate it to home price growth            pt using a structural VAR (SVAR). To identify
exogenous variation, we employ the shock-restricted SVAR approach of Ludvigson, Ma, and
Ng (2015) and Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2016) that permits set identi…cation of the structural
shocks under assumptions that are typically weaker than those required for point identi…cation.
Here we provide only a brief description of the identi…cation strategy and refer the reader to
those papers for details.
    The structural shocks of interest are the mutually uncorrelated innovations in the SVAR
variables CSt and pt . In this paper we focus on identifying a shock to credit standards
  CSt and tracing out its a¤ects on house price growth               pt .6 The single identifying assump-
tion we make is that changes in the composition of mortgages, i.e., toward non-conforming
loans and away from conforming loans, should be informative about credit standard shocks.
This is implemented by requiring that a positive credit standard structural shock (i.e., an eas-
ing of standards) must exhibit a minimum (lower bound) correlation with the quarterly log
di¤erence in the ratio ABS=GSE; a variable that is external to the SVAR. We refer to this as
a shock-based external variable constraint, where the parameter sets the lower bound of the
correlation. Although this approach has the ‡avor of an external instrumental variable (IV) or
   6
    We do not focus on identifying exogenous variation in house price growth to ask if a¤ects CSt . Most
paradigms, even those for which belief shocks play no role but exogenous movements in credit conditions have
quantitatively important causal consquences for house prices (e.g., Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2017)), would imply this reverse causality. This is because credit conditions themeselves also have an endoge-
nous component that moves with the economic state and home values. These values in turn shift collateralized
borrowing capacity and alter …nancing constraints and credit conditions.


                                                      17
proxy SVAR identi…cation strategy (e.g., Stock and Watson (2008); Mertens and Ravn (2014)),
unlike the external IV approach, the external variable in this methodology is not assumed to be
exogenous (uncorrelated with house price shocks) as would be required of a valid IV. Instead,
we only require the weaker assumption that the composition of mortgages is relevant for credit
standards. It is because these restrictions are weaker that we do not achieve point identi…ca-
tion. The bounds of the identi…ed set may still be informative, however, a possibility we now
investigate.
    We use impulse response functions to understand the dynamic causal e¤ects and propagating
mechanisms of a credit standards shock. Figure 7 shows, in shaded areas, the identi…ed set of
dynamic responses of quarterly real house price growth (in percent) to a one standard deviation
increase in the credit standards shock, which constitutes an easing of lending standards. The
Figure shows the results for two values of the lower bound on the correlation constraint between
  CS shocks an ln (ABSt =GSEt ): = 0:07 and = 0:05. That is, in the top panel the credit
standards shocks are required to have a correlation with ln(ABSt =GSEt ) of at least 7%, while
in the bottom panel this requirement is slackened to 5%.
    Given that we have a set of solutions, the impulse responses present a range of estimated
magnitudes of the e¤ect of credit standard shocks on house price growth. But the bounds of
the set are su¢ ciently tight that they are still informative about the dynamic relationship of
interest. At the highest end of the range, the results for   = 0:07 indicate that a one-standard
deviation shock to    CS increases real quarterly house price growth by 1.4% on impact, or
roughly 5.7% at an annual rate. At the lowest end of the range, a one-standard deviation shock
to CS increases real quarterly house price growth by roughly 0.8% on impact, or roughly
3.2% at an annual rate. These results are not highly sensitive to the value of , though the sets
are invariably wider when the identifying restriction is slackened. In the bottom panel, which
shows the results for = 0:05, the high end of the range is roughly the same as in the top
panel, but the low end is lower than in the top panel. In this case, the low end shows that a
one-standard deviation shock to     CS increases real quarterly house price growth by roughly
0.6% on impact, or roughly 2.4% at an annual rate. Though these magnitudes are substantial
and well determined, the estimated persistence of the e¤ects is less well determined. At least
some solutions in the identi…ed set imply that the e¤ects die out after 3 quarters, while others
suggest much more persistent e¤ects.


4    Conclusion

We consider two potential driving forces of house price ‡uctuations, credit conditions and
beliefs, using direct measures of these variables. To measure credit conditions, we use the
Senior Loan O¢ cer Opinion Survey conducted by the Federal Reserve, which asks senior loan


                                               18
o¢ cers at banks to state whether their lending standards for purchase mortgages have eased
or tightened relative to the previous quarter. To measure beliefs, we study three separate
household-level survey measures from the University of Michigan’s Survey of Consumers that
ask speci…cally about the respondent’s view on home prices and a fourth measure based on
the index constructed by Soo (2018) that measures sentiment about housing using a textual
analysis of major news publications. We combine these data with data on national house prices
in order to compile a set of statistical facts on the empirical relationships among these variables
at the aggregate level.
   We …nd that a relaxation of credit standards is positively related to the fraction of riskier
non-conforming debt in total mortgage lending, while beliefs bear little empirical relation to
this fraction. Credit conditions have statistically signi…cant and economically important ex-
planatory power for contemporaneous house price changes as well as predictive power for future
house price changes, even after lagged house price changes and economic fundamentals such
as interest rates and expected economic growth are controlled for. Two measures of beliefs
have statistically signi…cant explanatory power for contemporaneous house price changes once
fundamentals are controlled for, though these measures explain substantially smaller fractions
of the variation in house price growth than do credit standards. These are the Soo national
housing media sentiment index, and the growth in the share of households in the SOC who
reported being optimistic about the housing market because they said house prices would fur-
ther appreciate. We …nd little evidence that beliefs have important predictive power for future
house price changes, once credit conditions, fundamentals and lagged house price growth are
controlled for. A structural VAR analysis implies that shocks to credit conditions have quan-
titatively large dynamic causal e¤ects on house price changes, especially in the short-run, with
positive shocks (an easing of credit) driving up home values and negative shocks driving them
down.




                                                19
References

Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2016): “Loan originations and defaults in
 the mortgage crisis: The role of the middle class,” The Review of Financial Studies, 29(7),
  1635–1670.

Campbell, S. D., and Z. Hercowitz (2006): “The Role of Households’Collateralized Debt
  in Macroeconomic Stabilization,”Unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Board.

Case, K. E., and R. J. Shiller (1989): “The E¢ ciency of the Market for Single-Family
 Homes,”American Economic Review, 79(1), 125–137.

Davis, M. A., and J. Heathcote (2005): “Housing and the Business Cycle,” International
  Economic Review, 46(3), 751–784.

Favilukis, J., D. Kohn, S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2013): “Interna-
  tional Capital Flows and House Prices: Theory and Evidence,”in Housing and the Financial
  Crisis, ed. by E. L. Glaeser, and T. Sinai, pp. 235–299. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
  IL.

Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2017): “The Macroeco-
  nomic E¤ects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance and Limited Risk Sharing in General
  Equilibrium,”Journal of Political Economy, 125(1), 140–223.

Garriga, C., and A. Hedlund (2017): “Mortgage debt, consumption, and illiquid housing
  markets in the great recession,”Unpublished Paper, University of Missouri.

Greenwald, D. (2017): “The mortgage credit channel of macroeconomic transmission,”Un-
 published manuscript, MIT.

Hall, P., J. L. Horowitz, and B. Y. Jing (1995): “On Blocking Rules for the Bootstrap
 with Dependent Data,”Biometrika, 82, 561–574.

Horowitz, J. L. (2003): “The Bootstrap,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. J. Heck-
  man, and E. Leamer, vol. 5. Elsevier Science B.V., North Holland.

Iacoviello, M., and M. Pavan (2013): “Housing and Debt Over the Life Cycle and Over
  the Business Cycle,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(2), 221–238.

Kahn, J. A. (2008): “What Drives Housing Prices?,”Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤
  Reports, pp. 1–42.



                                              20
Kaplan, G., K. Mitman, and G. L. Violante (2017): “The housing boom and bust:
 Model meets evidence,”Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kiyotaki, N., A. Michaelides, and K. Nikolov (2011): “Winners and Losers in Housing
  Markets,”Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 43(2-3), 255–296.

Landvoigt, T., M. Piazzesi, and M. Schneider (2015): “The housing market (s) of San
  Diego,”American Economic Review, 105(4), 1371–1407.

Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ma, and S. Ng (2015): “Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous
  Impulse or Endogenous Response?,”http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/ludvigsons/ucc.pdf.

        (2016): “Shock Restricted Structural Vector-Autoregressions,”Manuscript, New York
  University.

Mertens, K., and M. O. Ravn (2014): “A reconciliation of svar and narrative estimates of
  tax multipliers,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 68, S1–S19.

Mian, A., and A. Sufi (2009): “The Consequences of Mortgage Expansion: Evidence from
 the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1449–1496.

         (2016): “Household debt and defaults from 2000 to 2010: The credit supply view,”
  evidence and innovation in housing law and policy, p. 257.

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West (1987): “A Simple, Positive Semide…nite, Heteroskedasticity
  and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,”Econometrica, 55, 703–708.

Piazzesi, M., and M. Schneider (2008): “In‡ation And The Price Of Real Assets,”Unpub-
  lished paper, Standford Univeristy.

         (2009): “Momentum traders in the housing market: survey evidence and a search
  model,”American Economic Review, 99(2), 406–11.

Sommer, K., P. Sullivan, and R. Verbrugge (2013): “The Equilibrium E¤ect of Funda-
  mentals on House Prices and Rents,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 60, 854–870.

Soo, C. K. (2018): “Quantifying Sentiment with News Media across Local Housing Markets,”
  The Review of Financial Studies.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2008): “NBER Summer Institute Minicourse 2008:
  What’s New in Econometrics: Time Series, Lecture 7: Structural VARs,”Cambridge, Mass.:
  National Institute for Economic Research. www. nber. org/minicourse_2008. html.



                                             21
Figures and Tables

                                              Figure 1: Credit Supply Measures

                    Panel A: Net Percentage of U.S. Banks Reporting Easier Credit Standards
             0.2

             0.1

             0.0

             -0.1

             -0.2

             -0.3

             -0.4

             -0.5

             -0.6

             -0.7

             -0.8
                1990Q1       1993Q1         1996Q1    1999Q1      2002Q1         2005Q1     2008Q1      2011Q1        2014Q1     2017Q1


                         Panel B: Fitted Values                   dt = ^ 0 + ^ 1
                                                                  CS                          log GSEt + ^ 2            log ABSt
             2.0



             1.5



             1.0



             0.5



             0.0



             -0.5



             -1.0



             -1.5



             -2.0
                1991Q4    1993Q4   1995Q4    1997Q4   1999Q4   2001Q4   2003Q4    2005Q4   2007Q4   2009Q4   2011Q4    2013Q4   2015Q4   2017Q4

Notes: Panel A presents the net percentage of banks that reported easier credit standards on mortgages. A positive number
indicates that more banks report easing than tightening. A negative number indicates the opposite (more banks tightening than
easing). Panel B presents the quarterly growth of normalized credit supply (blue line) and the …tted values of a regression on
the quarterly growth of mortgages held by GSE and ABS for the full sample (1991Q4 - 2017Q4) and the GHC sample (2000Q1 -
2010Q4). Source: Federal Reserve - Senior Loan O¢ cer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices.




                                                                            22
Figure 2: Share of Originations with Minimum Payment to Income Ratio (PTI)
                                           0.6




                                           0.5
    Share of total mortgage originations




                                           0.4




                                           0.3




                                           0.2




                                           0.1




                                            0
                                            2000        2002         2004         2006         2008         2010         2012         2014            2016
                             PTI ratios strictly above 36%                    PTI ratios strictly above 45%        PTI ratios strictly above 50%
                                           Notes: The …gure displays the fraction, over time, of mortgage originations purchased by Fannie Mae with
                                           PTI ratios greater than 36, 45, and 50%, weighted by loan balance. The sample spans the period 2000:Q1 -
                                           2016:Q1. Source: Fannie Mae Single Family Dataset.




                                                                                             23
                                Figure 3: Buying Condition for Houses

                                        Panel A: Buying Condition Index
             200

             180

             160

             140

             120

             100

              80

              60

              40

              20

               0
               1980Q1 1983Q1 1986Q1 1989Q1 1992Q1 1995Q1 1998Q1 2001Q1 2004Q1 2007Q1 2010Q1 2013Q1 2016Q1




                         Panel B: Share of Respondents who “Answer Good Time”
             1.0

             0.9

             0.8

             0.7

             0.6

             0.5

             0.4

             0.3

             0.2

             0.1

             0.0
               1980Q1 1983Q1 1986Q1 1989Q1 1992Q1 1995Q1 1998Q1 2001Q1 2004Q1 2007Q1 2010Q1 2013Q1 2016Q1
Notes: Panel A: Buying condition index constructed by taking the number of “good”answers, subtracting the number of “bad”
answers and adding 100. Panel B: Fraction of respodents who answer that now is a “good time ”to buy a house. Source: Survey
of Consumers, University of Michigan.




                                                           24
              Figure 4: Reasons for Which it is a Good Time to Buy a House

              0.9


              0.8


              0.7


              0.6


              0.5


              0.4


              0.3


              0.2


              0.1


              0.0
                1980Q1   1983Q1   1986Q1       1989Q1   1992Q1    1995Q1     1998Q1   2001Q1    2004Q1    2007Q1     2010Q1    2013Q1     2016Q1
                     Overall Share, Now Good       Good B/C: Good Credit Conditions    Good B/C: Low Current Price     Good B/C: High Future Prices


Notes: The black line presents the share of all respodents who answer that now is a “good time”to buy a house. We present the
three most important reasons that respondents give when surveyed. The blue line presents the share of respondents who answer
that it is a good time to buy a house because credit conditions are favorable, the SOC classi…es it as low interest rates. The green
line presents the share of respondents who answer that it is a good time to buy a house because current prices are low. The red
line presents the share of respondents who answer that it is a good time to buy a house because potential higher future prices.
Note that each respondent may give up to two reasons; hence, these shares do not necessarily sum up to 100%. Source: Survey of
Consumers, University of Michigan.




                                                                                 25
                                               Figure 5: House Prices

                                                   Panel A: Price Levels
              200


              180
                             S&P/Case-Shiller
                             FHFA
              160


              140


              120


              100


               80


               60


               40
                1980Q1 1983Q1 1986Q1 1989Q1 1992Q1 1995Q1 1998Q1 2001Q1 2004Q1 2007Q1 2010Q1 2013Q1 2016Q1




                                               Panel B: Price Rent Ratios
              150


              140
                            S&P/Case-Shiller
                            FHFA
              130


              120


              110


              100


               90


               80
                1980Q1 1983Q1 1986Q1 1989Q1 1992Q1 1995Q1 1998Q1 2001Q1 2004Q1 2007Q1 2010Q1 2013Q1 2016Q1

Notes: Panel A: The blue line refers to the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index (CSUS). The red line is the Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) home price index. Both indices are divided by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and rebased to
100 in the fourth quarter of 2000. Panel B: Price-rent ratios are constructed by dividing the real price index by the shelter CPI for
all urban consumers. The blue line is the price-ratio using the CSUS index and the red line the price-ratio using the FHFA index.
For both indices, the base is the fourth quarter of 2000. Source: Federal House Finance Agency, S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, and
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                26
                               Figure 6: Share of Mortgages by Mortgage Type

                        Panel A: Share of Mortgage Outstanding by Mortgage Type
           0.8
                          GSE portfolio and pools
                          ABS = jumbo + subprime + Alt-A
           0.7
                          Depositary Institutions

           0.6


           0.5


           0.4


           0.3


           0.2


           0.1


           0.0
             1990Q1      1993Q1    1996Q1     1999Q1     2002Q1        2005Q1   2008Q1    2011Q1     2014Q1    2017Q1




                        Panel B: Share of Mortgage Originations by Mortgage Type
         0.8
                               GSE
                               Private Label (PL) + Portfolio
         0.7
                               Depositary Institutions

         0.6


         0.5


         0.4


         0.3


         0.2


         0.1


         0.0
                 1990   1992    1994   1996   1998     2000     2002    2004    2006   2008   2010    2012    2014   2016

Notes: Panel A: The blue line reports the sum of GSE mortgage portfolio and Agency and GSE-backed mortgage pools. The
red line shows mortgages of issuers of asset backed securities (ABS), calculated based on the sum of jumbo, subprime, and Alt-A
mortgages. The black line reports the home mortgages held by U.S.-chartered depository institutions. Panel B: Private label (PL)
and portfolio is the sum of private securitization, a¢ liate institutions, life insurance companies, credit unions, mortgage banks, and
insurance …rms. Source: Flow of Funds and Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council.




                                                                        27
     Figure 7: Impulse Response of                      pt to a One Standard Deviation CS Shock

                  Panel A: Impulse Response of              pt with correlation constraint             = 7%


                              1.4
                                                                                       6 = 0.07

                              1.2



                                1



                              0.8
                        "pt




                              0.6



                              0.4



                              0.2



                                0



                              -0.2



                              -0.4
                                     0              5                     10                      15

                                                           Quarters

                  Panel B: Impulse Response of              pt with correlation constraint             = 5%


                              1.4
                                                                                       6 = 0.05

                              1.2



                                1



                              0.8
                        "pt




                              0.6



                              0.4



                              0.2



                                0



                              -0.2



                              -0.4
                                     0              5                     10                      15

                                                           Quarters

Notes: Dynamic Responses of pt to a positive one standard deviation CSt shock. Panel A reports the identi…ed set of responses
of pt to a one standard deviation shock in CS with a correlation constraint that sets the minimum correlation between CS
        ABS
and ln( GSE  ) at = 7%. Panel B reports the set of responses when = 5%. The sample spans the period 1991:Q4-2017:Q4.




                                                             28
        Table 1: Regressions of Mortgage Growth Outstanding by Holder Type

                                                                Left-hand-side Variable
                                                                                                              ABS
                   Regressor                    4   log All      4   log ABS      4   log GSE       4   log   GSE

                                                              Sample: 1991:Q4 - 2017:Q4
                    4 CS                         0.003           0.013      -0.005      0.018
                     t-stat                     (1.517)            (2.270)    (-3.362)     (3.587)
                     R2                         [0.024]            [0.044]     [0.157]     [0.101]
                    4 bci                        -0.133             -0.037    0.131         -0.168
                     t-stat                    (-1.613)           (-0.072)    (2.363)     (-0.337)
                     R2                         [0.043]           [-0.009]     [0.071]    [-0.004]
                         highF P
                    4 bci                        -0.013             -0.054 -0.030 yy        -0.025
                     t-stat                    (-0.994)           (-0.957)    (-3.942)    (-0.435)
                     R2                         [0.013]            [0.013]     [0.165]    [-0.004]
                    med
                   Et      GDPt!t+4           0.047             0.177           0.000    0.177
                     t-stat                     (3.974)            (3.681)    (0.039)      (3.527)
                     R2                         [0.217]            [0.185]    [-0.010]     [0.213]
                                                              Sample: 2000:Q1 - 2013:Q4
                     4 hmi                      -1.446              -6.313     -0.493       -5.819
                     t-stat                    (-1.167)           (-1.437)    (-0.460)    (-1.304)
                     R2                         [0.029]            [0.059]    [-0.008]     [0.049]
                                                              Sample: 2007:Q1 - 2017:Q4
                     pe;med
                      t                          0.006              -0.002     -0.018       0.016
                     t-stat                    (0.582)            (-0.202)    (-1.232)     (1.597)
                     R2                        [-0.004]           [-0.023]     [0.091]     [0.001]
                     pe;avg
                      t                          0.007              0.009      -0.009    0.018
                     t-stat                    (1.431)             (1.201)    (-1.209)     (2.539)
                     R2                         [0.094]            [0.003]     [0.100]     [0.113]
                                                              Sample: 2000:Q1 - 2010:Q4
                     4 CS                    0.007              0.028        -0.003     0.032
                     t-stat                     (4.713)            (4.568)    (-2.215)     (4.700)
                     R2                         [0.389]            [0.427]     [0.150]     [0.472]
                     4 bci                     -0.239             -0.986     0.177        -1.162
                     t-stat                    (-2.285)           (-2.169)    (2.803)     (-2.508)
                     R2                         [0.149]            [0.189]     [0.186]     [0.239]
                          highF P
                     4 bci                       0.001              0.034   -0.030 yy        0.064
                     t-stat                     (0.039)            (0.418)    (-3.372)     (0.742)
                     R2                        [-0.024]           [-0.013]     [0.250]     [0.012]
                   Etmed GDPt!t+4           0.059 yy            0.205          -0.012   0.216
                     t-stat                     (7.298)            (4.974)    (-1.128)     (4.476)
                     R2                         [0.462]            [0.402]     [0.019]     [0.399]
                     4 hmi                       -0.545             -3.939      0.495       -4.434
                     t-stat                    (-0.397)           (-0.815)    (0.553)     (-0.881)
                     R2                        [-0.017]            [0.009]    [-0.009]     [0.013]
Notes: Regressions of the log change of each mortgage type on the four quarter sum of credit supply ( 4 CS), the annual log change
of the buying condition index, i.e. ln bcit ln bcit 4 ( 4 bci), and the annual log change in the share of respondents that answer that
is “good time ”to buy a house because prices will increase ( 4 bcihighF P ), the median SPF forecast of real GDP growth between t
and t + 4 (Etmed GDPt!t+4 ), the annual log change in the House Media Index ( 4 hmit ), the expected median real house price
change over the next 12 months ( pe;medt    ), and the expected average real house price change over the next 12 months ( pe;avgt    ).
See Figure 6 for the de…nition of each mortgage type. For both panels, Newey-West corrected t statistics in parentheses (lags =
4). Newey-West HAC: *sig. at 10%. **sig. at 5%. ***sig. at 1%. Parametric Bootstrap: y sig. at 10%. yy sig. at 5%. yyy sig. at
1%. Non-Parametric Bootstrap: sig. at 10%.          sig. at 5%.      sig. at 1%. Full sample spans all the available data in each case.
The GHC sample spans the period 2000:Q1 - 2010:Q4.




                                                                  29
        Table 2: Regressions of Mortgage Origination Growth by Holder Type

                                                             Left-hand-side Variable
                                                                                                          PL + Potfolio
          Regressor                  4   log All   4   log PL + Potfolio       4   log GSE     4   log        GSE

            4 CS                     0.014               0.041                 -0.014                0.056 yy
            t-stat                  (1.274)               (3.464)             (-1.374)                (7.879)
            R2                      [-0.020]              [0.135]             [-0.024]                 [0.409]

            4 bci                  2.059                  1.600               2.565                       -0.965
            t-stat                  (3.003)               (2.016)              (3.917)                   (-1.567)
            R2                      [0.274]               [0.139]              [0.352]                    [0.051]

                 highF P
            4 bci                   -0.117                 -0.108              -0.171                     0.063
            t-stat                 (-0.871)               (-1.064)            (-1.106)                   (0.617)
            R2                      [0.011]                [0.001]             [0.048]                   [-0.021]

          Etmed GDPt!t+4             0.019                 0.197               -0.148                    0.345
            t-stat                  (0.132)               (1.096)             (-1.273)                    (3.789)
            R2                      [-0.041]              [0.052]              [0.003]                    [0.363]

            4 hmi                 17.986                 14.054               17.066                      -3.012
            t-stat                 (6.592)                (2.188)              (5.830)                   (-0.407)
            R2                     [0.295]                [0.074]              [0.169]                   [-0.083]

Notes: regressions of the log change of each mortgage type on the annual sum of credit supply ( CS), the annual log change of the
buying condition index ( 4 bci), the annual log change in the share of respondents that answer that is “good time ”to buy a house
because prices will increase ( 4 bcihighF P ), the median SPF forecast of real GDP growth between t and t + 4 (Etmed GDPt!t+4 ),
and the annual log change in the House Media Index ( 4 hmit ). See Figure 6 for the de…nition of each mortgage type. Newey-West
corrected t statistics in parentheses (lags = 4). Newey-West HAC: *sig. at 10%. **sig. at 5%. ***sig. at 1%. Parametric
Bootstrap: y sig. at 10%. yy sig. at 5%. yyy sig. at 1%. Non-Parametric Bootstrap: sig. at 10%.     sig. at 5%.    sig. at 1%. The
sample spans 1991 - 2016 for the …rst four row blocks and the period 2000 - 2013 in the last row block.




                                                               30
   Table 3: Univariate Regressions of                       pt on Contemporaneous                    CSt and Beliefs

                                                           Panel A
  Regressor             1991:Q4 - 2017:Q4                2000:Q1 - 2013:Q4                      2007:Q1 - 2017:Q4
                      (1)         (2)     (3)               (4)         (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)

    CSt          0.011 yyy                             0.012 yyy                  0.011 yyy
    t stat          (11.575)                              (8.286)                    (8.176)
    bcit                         -0.043yy
    t stat                       (-1.362)
    bcihighF
       t
             P
                                            0.017**
    t stat                                  (2.551)
    hmit                                                                1.212**
    t stat                                                              (2.666)
    pe;med
     t                                                                                             0.012 yy
    t stat                                                                                           (3.935)
    pe;avg
     t                                                                                                            0.007 yyy
                                                                                                                     (5.541)

  R2                [0.307]       [0.000]    [0.087]     [0.370]   [0.079]            [0.380]         [0.107]        [0.201]
                                                   Panel B - GHC Sample
  Regressor           (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)                (6)             (7)            (8)

    CSt          0.013 yyy                                                 –             –               –              –
    t stat          (9.704)                                                –             –               –              –
    bcit                          -0.075
    t stat                       (-1.562)
    bcihighF
       t
             P
                                             -0.004
    t stat                                  (-0.638)
    hmit                                                  1.021**
    t stat                                                (2.310)
    pe;med
     t                                                                                                   –
    t stat                                                                                               –
    pe;avg
     t                                                                                                                  –
    t stat                                                                                                              –

  R2                [0.535]      [-0.001]   [-0.014]       [0.061]         –             –               –              –
Notes: regressions of pt on CSt and beliefs. Newey-West corrected t statistics in parentheses (lags = 4). Newey-West HAC:
*sig. at 10%. **sig. at 5%. ***sig. at 1%. Parametric Bootstrap: y sig. at 10%. yy sig. at 5%. yyy sig. at 1%. Non-Parametric
Bootstrap: sig. at 10%.   sig. at 5%.   sig. at 1%. Panel A: Full sample spans all the available data in each case. Panel B: The
GHC sample spans the period 2000:Q1 - 2010:Q4.




                                                              31
 Table 4: Multivariate Regressions of                            pt on Contemporaneous                 CSt and Beliefs

                                                                 Panel A
  Regressor                      1991:Q4 - 2017:Q4                         2000:Q1 - 2013:Q4               2007:Q1 - 2017:Q4
                         (1)            (2)                (3)              (4)          (5)             (6)        (7)      (8)

    CSt             0.009 yyy       0.009 yyy        0.009 yyy        0.009 yy       0.009 yy       0.009 yy       0.008      0.006
    t stat             (6.820)         (6.690)          (7.977)         (4.604)        (4.656)        (4.772)      (2.230)   (1.599)
    bcit                                0.002
    t stat                             (0.078)
    bcihighF
       t
             P
                                                        0.012**
    t stat                                              (2.026)
    hmit                                                                               0.930**
    t stat                                                                             (2.383)
    pe;med
     t                                                                                                              0.002
    t stat                                                                                                         (0.360)
    pe;avg
     t                                                                                                                        0.003
                                                                                                                             (1.247)
  Fundamentals            X                X              X           X                    X              X           X         X
  R2                   [0.341]          [0.334]        [0.384]     [0.395]              [0.443]        [0.360]     [0.345]   [0.372]
                                                     Panel B - GHC Sample
  Regressor              (1)              (2)            (3)         (4)                  (5)            (6)         (7)        (8)

   CSt                0.008            0.008           0.008           0.008               –              –           –             –
    t stat             (3.292)          (3.401)         (3.611)         (3.542)            –              –           –             –
   bcit                                 0.029
    t stat                              (0.750)
   bcihighF
       t
            P
                                                         0.007
    t stat                                              (1.166)
   hmit                                                                 0.659*
    t stat                                                              (1.914)
   pe;med
     t                                                                                                                –
    t stat                                                                                                            –
   pe;avg
     t                                                                                                                              –
    t stat                                                                                                                          –
  Fundamentals            X                X                X                 X            –              –           –             –
  R2                   [0.581]          [0.573]          [0.585]           [0.607]         –              –           –             –
Notes: regressions of pt on CS, beliefs. All regressions control for fundamentals, de…ned as the 10-year bond yield minus median
SPF 10-year in‡ation forecast, and the median SPF forecast of real GDP growth between t and t + 4. Newey-West corrected
t statistics in parentheses (lags = 4). Newey-West HAC: *sig. at 10%. **sig. at 5%. ***sig. at 1%. Parametric Bootstrap: y sig.
at 10%. yy sig. at 5%. yyy sig. at 1%. Non-Parametric Bootstrap: sig. at 10%.     sig. at 5%.    sig. at 1%. Panel A: Full sample
spans all the available data in each case. Panel B: The GHC sample spans the period 2000:Q1 - 2010:Q4.




                                                                 32
          Table 5: Predicting House Price Growth                              pt+h;t : Full Sample Period
                                                      Panel A: 1991:Q4 - 2017:Q4
            Regressor                                       Forecast horizon
                                     h=1               h=1          h=2      h=3                         h=4

             CSt                 0.009 yyy           0.006 yy          0.016           0.021           0.021
                t-stat              (5.025)            (3.539)          (3.989)         (3.421)         (2.688)
             pt                                      0.320 yyy          0.205yyy       0.539 yyy      1.386 yyy
                t-stat                                 (4.352)          (1.091)         (2.000)         (4.234)
            Fundamentals                X                  X                X               X              X
            R2                       [0.262]            [0.323]          [0.308]         [0.380]        [0.505]

             CSt                 0.009 yyy          0.007 yy           0.017           0.021           0.021
                t-stat              (5.025)            (3.934)          (4.131)         (3.461)         (2.750)
             bcit                                      0.073**            0.085           0.052          0.068
                t-stat                                 (2.067)          (1.398)         (0.774)         (0.800)
             pt                                      0.319 yy           0.203yyy       0.537 yyy      1.381 yyy
                t-stat                                 (4.063)          (1.052)         (1.968)         (4.177)
            Fundamentals                X                 X                 X               X              X
            R2                       [0.262]           [0.344]           [0.314]         [0.377]        [0.503]

             CSt                 0.009 yyy           0.006 yy       0.016       0.021                  0.021
                t-stat              (5.025)            (3.525)        (3.881)     (3.308)               (2.627)
             bcihighF
                t
                      P
                                                         0.003         0.000       -0.004                -0.001
                t-stat                                 (0.559)        (0.016)    (-0.427)              (-0.086)
             pt                                       0.301 yy       0.204yyy    0.560 yyy            1.391 yyy
                t-stat                                 (3.507)        (1.007)     (1.947)               (4.000)
            Fundamentals                X                  X             X           X                     X
            R2                       [0.262]            [0.320]       [0.301]     [0.375]               [0.500]
                                                      Panel B: 2000:Q1 - 2013:Q4
            Regressor                                          Forecast horizon
                                     h=1                 h=1           h=2         h=3                   h=4

              CSt              0.010 yy      0.008 yy       0.020                       0.022            0.019
                 t-stat          (4.742)       (3.472)        (3.750)                   (2.742)         (1.955)
              hmit                               0.109         0.076                     -0.112           0.253
                 t-stat                        (0.451)        (0.134)                   (-0.148)        (0.319)
              pt                              0.282 yy       0.171yyy                   0.542yyy       1.320 yy
                 t-stat                        (2.983)        (0.762)                   (1.570)         (3.033)
            Fundamentals             X             X             X                          X               X
            R2                    [0.309]       [0.337]       [0.340]                    [0.400]         [0.506]
            t-statistics in parentheses (Newey-West, 4 lags).
            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Regressions of the log change of CSUS real house price index for di¤erent forecast horizons in quarters (h) on CS, the
buying condition index, the share of respondents that answer that is “good time ”to buy a house because prices will increase, and
the House Media Index. Regressions include fundamentals: the 10-year bond yield minus median SPF 10-year in‡ation forecast,
and the median SPF forecast of real GDP growth between t and t + 4. Newey-West corrected t statistics in parentheses (lags =
4). Newey-West HAC: *sig. at 10%. **sig. at 5%. ***sig. at 1%. Parametric Bootstrap: y sig. at 10%. yy sig. at 5%. yyy sig. at
1%. Non-Parametric Bootstrap: sig. at 10%.        sig. at 5%.    sig. at 1%. The sample spans the period 1991:Q4 - 2017:Q4 for
the …rst three blocks and the period 2000:Q1 - 2013:Q4 for the last block.


                                                              33
               Table 6: Predicting House Price Growth                              pt+h;t : GHC Period

                Regressor                                       Forecast horizon
                                       h=1            h=1           h=2          h=3                 h=4

                 CSt                 0.010***       0.006**         0.015**         0.016*            0.009
                    t-stat            (2.865)       (2.090)          (2.661)       (1.975)          (1.101)
                 pt                                0.435 yy         0.554 yyy     1.072 yyy        2.198 yy
                    t-stat                          (2.795)          (1.880)       (2.421)          (4.264)
                Fundamentals             X              X               X              X                X
                R2                    [0.430]        [0.493]         [0.472]        [0.490]          [0.572]

                 CSt                 0.010***        0.006**        0.016***        0.016*            0.010
                    t-stat            (2.865)        (2.121)         (2.713)       (2.003)          (1.181)
                 bcit                                 0.056           0.079          0.078            0.115
                    t-stat                           (1.222)         (0.947)       (0.600)          (0.617)
                 pt                                 0.420 yy        0.532 yyy     1.051 yyy        2.167 yy
                    t-stat                           (2.543)         (1.750)       (2.352)          (4.076)
                Fundamentals             X              X               X              X                X
                R2                    [0.430]        [0.493]         [0.466]        [0.480]          [0.565]

                 CSt                 0.010***       0.006**         0.015**         0.015*            0.009
                    t-stat            (2.865)       (2.063)          (2.625)       (1.928)          (1.043)
                 bcihighF
                    t
                          P
                                                     -0.002           -0.003        -0.003           -0.004
                    t-stat                          (-0.283)        (-0.390)       (-0.397)         (-0.376)
                 pt                                0.445 yy         0.568 yyy     1.089 yyy        2.219 yy
                    t-stat                          (2.824)          (1.915)       (2.371)          (4.167)
                Fundamentals             X              X               X              X                X
                R2                    [0.430]        [0.481]         [0.459]        [0.477]          [0.561]

                  CSt             0.010***     0.006*    0.015**                    0.014*           0.008
                     t-stat        (2.865)    (1.925)    (2.613)                    (1.839)         (0.958)
                  hmit                         -0.123     -0.025                     -0.378          -0.307
                     t-stat                   (-0.540)   (-0.039)                  (-0.431)        (-0.313)
                  pt                         0.461 yy 0.571 yyy                   1.145 yyy       2.267 yy
                     t-stat                   (2.993)    (2.253)                    (2.975)         (4.662)
                Fundamentals          X           X          X                         X               X
                R2                 [0.430]     [0.473]    [0.452]                   [0.476]         [0.561]
                t-statistics in parentheses (Newey-West, 4 lags).
                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: Regressions of the log change of CSUS real house price index for di¤erent forecast horizons in quarters (h) on CS, the
buying condition index, the share of respondents that answer that is “good time ”to buy a house because prices will increase, and
the House Media Index. Regressions include fundamentals: the 10-year bond yield minus median SPF 10-year in‡ation forecast,
and the median SPF forecast of real GDP growth between t and t + 4. Newey-West corrected t statistics in parentheses (lags =
4). Newey-West HAC: *sig. at 10%. **sig. at 5%. ***sig. at 1%. Parametric Bootstrap: y sig. at 10%. yy sig. at 5%. yyy sig. at
1%. Non-Parametric Bootstrap: sig. at 10%. sig. at 5%.         sig. at 1%. The sample spans the GHC period, 2000:Q1 - 2010:Q4.




                                                               34
           Table 7: Predicting House Price Growth                              pt+h;t : 2007:Q1 - 2017:Q4
           Regressor                                      Forecast horizon
                                     h=1              h=1      h=2                       h=3              h=4

            CSt                  0.010 yy            0.009           0.022             0.023           0.024
                t-stat              (4.699)          (2.508)           (4.972)          (3.590)          (4.197)
              e;med
            pt                                         0.001             0.002            0.001         -0.014
                t-stat                               (0.226)           (0.319)          (0.093)         (-1.488)
            pt                                         0.111         -0.400            -0.359           0.410 yy
                t-stat                               (1.203)           (-2.656)         (-2.289)         (2.478)
           Fundamentals                X                 X                 X                X               X
           R2                       [0.319]           [0.293]           [0.542]          [0.750]         [0.835]

             CSt             0.010 yy      0.008       0.020 yy                       0.018             0.017
                 t-stat         (4.699)     (2.848)       (6.176)                       (3.451)          (2.654)
             pe;avg
               t                              0.001         0.005                         0.006           0.000
                 t-stat                     (0.759)       (1.262)                       (1.248)          (0.089)
             pt                               0.095     -0.463                        -0.442            0.411 yy
                 t-stat                     (1.126)       (-3.237)                      (-2.940)         (2.312)
           Fundamentals            X            X             X                             X               X
           R2                   [0.319]      [0.297]       [0.561]                       [0.769]         [0.823]
           t-statistics in parentheses (Newey-West, 4 lags).
           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: Regressions of the log change of CSUS real house price index for di¤erent forecast horizons in quarters (h) on CS, expected
real median house price change over the next 12 month, and expected real average house price growth. Regressions include
fundamentals: the 10-year bond yield minus median SPF 10-year in‡ation forecast, and the median SPF forecast of real GDP
growth between t and t + 4. Newey-West corrected t statistics in parentheses (lags = 4). Newey-West HAC: *sig. at 10%. **sig.
at 5%. ***sig. at 1%. Parametric Bootstrap: y sig. at 10%. yy sig. at 5%. yyy sig. at 1%. Non-Parametric Bootstrap: sig. at 10%.
  sig. at 5%.    sig. at 1%.




                                                                35
Online Appendix

Data Appendix
This appendix discusses the data.

Credit Standards

The Senior Loan O¢ cer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) provides qual-
itative and limited quantitative information on bank credit availability and loan demand, as
well as on evolving developments and lending practices in the U.S. loan markets. The FED
requires one or more senior loan o¢ cers at each respondent bank to complete the survey, up to
six times a year; however, the survey has typically been conducted only four times a year since
1992. The current reporting panel consists of up to 80 large domestically chartered commercial
banks and up to 24 large U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. The minimum asset size
for panel institutions is $2 billions (this amount was reduced in 2012 from $3 billion). As of
March 31, 2017, the panel of domestic respondents contained 80 banks, 47 of which had assets
of $20 billion or more. The assets of the panel banks totaled $11.8 trillion and accounted for
about 69 percent of the $17.0 trillion in total assets of all domestically chartered institutions.
   The FED seeks to limit the di¢ culty and quantitative content of survey questions. When
quantitative information is requested, respondents generally are asked to provide approximate
or rough estimates, usually in terms of percentages rather than dollar amounts. A respondent
may decline to answer a particular question when answering would entail excessive burden. The
FED distributes two versions of the survey, one to domestically chartered institutions and one
to U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks.
   Since 2012, the FED maintains a panel of 80 banks (from 1981 to 2012, the FED maintained
a panel of 60 insured, domestically chartered commercial banks, before 1981 they were 120).
To ensure adequate geographic coverage, the survey panel of domestic banks spans all Federal
Reserve Districts, while balancing the need to keep it heavily weighted toward the largest banks.
However, the panel also includes a fair number of large and medium-size regional banks, which
allows for a greater diversity of responses and provides a broader view of the banking system.
    In selecting the panel, the Fed generally imposes three constraints: (i) size: banks that
have less than $2 billion of total assets or for which commercial and industrial (C&I) loans
are less than 5 % of total assets are eliminated from consideration, with a few exceptions,
(ii) geographic diversity: between two and ten banks are included from each district, (iii)
mutual independence: with some exceptions, a bank is eliminated from consideration if it
is a subsidiary of a bank holding company that is already represented in the panel, because
its responses would likely not be independent of those of the related bank already providing
responses.

                                                1
  The Fed tries to maintain a panel of U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. As of
March 2017, the panel included 23 institutions, 21 of which are located in the New York District.
In March 2017, the share of C&I loans held by respondent U.S. branches and agencies of foreign
banks ($187.7 billion) relative to that held by the universe of such institutions ($274.8 billion)
was 68%.
   As of April 2007, the SLOOS asked one question about supply of residential mortgages and
one about demand. From April 2007 until January 2015, it divided the supply and demand
questions in three categories of residential mortgage loans: (i) prime residential mortgages, (ii)
nontraditional residential mortgages, and (iii) subprime residential mortgages. As stated by
SLOOS:

     The prime category of residential mortgages includes loans made to borrowers that typi-
     cally had relatively strong, well-documented credit histories, relatively high credit scores,
     and relatively low debt-to-income ratios at the time of origination.

     The nontraditional category of residential mortgages includes, but is not limited to,
     adjustable-rate mortgages with multiple payment options, interest-only mortgages, and
     Alt-A.

     The subprime category of residential mortgages typically includes loans made to borrow-
     ers that displayed weakened credit histories that include payment delinquencies, charge-
     o¤s, judgments, and/or bankruptcies; reduced repayment capacity as measured by credit
     scores or debt-to-income ratios; or incomplete credit histories.

   From January 2015, it divided this question further into seven categories:

     The GSE-eligible category of residential mortgages includes loans that meet the under-
     writing guidelines, including loan limit amounts of the GSEs - Fannie Mae and Freddie
     Mac.

     The government category of residential mortgages includes loans that are insured by
     the Federal Housing Administration, guaranteed by the Department of Veterans A¤airs,
     or originated under government programs, including the U.S. Department of Agriculture
     home loan programs.

     The QM non-jumbo, non-GSE-eligible category of residential mortgages includes
     loans that satisfy the standards for a quali…ed mortgage and have loan balances that
     are below the loan limit amounts set by the GSEs but otherwise do not meet the GSE
     underwriting guidelines.


                                                2
                 Table 8: Results for the prime category: January 2010

                              All Respondents Large Banks  Other Banks
                              Banks Percent Banks Percent Banks Percent
 Tightened considerably         1       1.9    0       0    1      4.2
 Tightened somewhat              8      15.1   3     10.3   5     20.8
 Remained basically unchanged   42      79.2  24     82.8  18      75
 Eased somewhat                  2       3.8   2      6.9   0       0
 Eased considerably             0         0    0       0    0       0
 Total                         53       100   29     100   24     100
Source: The Fed - Senior Loan O¢ cer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices.


      The QM jumbo category of residential mortgages includes loans that satisfy the stan-
      dards for a quali…ed mortgage but have loan balances that are above the loan limit amount
      set by the GSEs.

      The non-QM jumbo category of residential mortgages includes loans that do not satisfy
      the standards for a quali…ed mortgage and have loan balances that are above the loan
      limit amount set by the GSEs.

      The non-QM non-jumbo category of residential mortgages includes loans that do not
      satisfy the standards for a quali…ed mortgage and have loan balances that are below the
      loan limit amount set by the GSEs.

      The subprime category of residential mortgages typically includes loans made to bor-
      rowers with weakened credit histories that include payment delinquencies, charge-o¤s,
      judgements, and/or bankruptcies; reduced repayment capacity as measured by credit
      scores or debt-to-income ratios; or incomplete credit histories.

   For instance, in January 2010, the SLOOS asks about three categories of residential mort-
gage loans: (i) prime residential mortgages, (ii) nontraditional residential mortgages, and (iii)
subprime residential mortgages. presents the results for the prime category in January 2010.
The total of banks in the survey that answer this question during the particular time period
was 53.
   We use the net percentage of domestic respondents easing standards for mortgage loans.
To construct this measure from the respondents’information, …rst sum all the banks that have
eased (somewhat or considerably) their credit standards and subtract this from the number
of banks that have tightened (considerably or somewhat) their credit standards. Using Table
8, the total number of banks easing their credit standards is 2 and the total number of banks
tightening is 9. Therefore, the net percentage of domestic respondents easing standards for
mortgage loans is 2 53
                     1 8
                         = 13:2%.

                                                   3
                       Table 9: Number of Banks Reporting in 2015:Q1

                                             Number Percentage Weights
              GSE-eligible                     64     0.928     0.164
              Government                       60     0.870     0.154
              QM non-jumbo, non-GSE-eligible   58     0.841     0.149
              QM jumbo                         65     0.942     0.167
              Non-QM jumbo                     57     0.826     0.146
              Non-QM non-jumbo                 57     0.826     0.146
              Subprime                          7     0.072     0.072
              Total                            69              1.000
          Source: The Fed - Senior Loan O¢ cer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices.


   Before 2007, the SLOOS reported one aggregated mesure of the net percentage of domestic
respondents easing standards for mortgage loans. After 2007, and before 2015, it reported
three di¤erent categories for the net percentage of domestic respondents easing standards for
mortgage loans. Since 2015, it reports this variable for seven categories.
  To aggregate these categories into one measure of credit supply, we create weights for each
category. We take the total share of banks that report they have tightened/remained un-
changed/eased subprime mortgage loans in each quarter. Then, we calculate the total share of
banks that report they have tightened/remained unchanged/eased in the other categories (two
before 2015 and six since 2015). For instance, in the …rst quarter of 2015, we have the following
results: The share of banks answering for each category is in column Percentage. We …x the
percentage of banks that answer for the subprime category and rebase the other percentages to
make the weights sum up to 100%.

Beliefs measures

University of Michigan’s Survey of Consumers - Price Expectations. The survey is
conducted each month to a minimum of 500 households. It contains approximately 50 core
questions, each of which tracks a di¤erent aspect of consumer attitudes and expectations. The
samples for the Surveys of Consumers are statistically designed to be representative of all
American households. We are interested in the Index of Consumer Expectations which focuses
on: consumers’view of their own …nancial situation and their view of the general economy in
the short and the long term
    The method used to select monthly nationally representative samples of persons is generally
referred to as random digit dialing (RDD) of cellular telephone numbers. However, any single
monthly sample consists of two parts, an RDD sample of cell telephone subscribers selected in
that month and a sample of RDD sample cell telephone subscribers who completed interviews
six months previously. The latter is referred to as the re-contact sample, and the former the


                                                  4
RDD sample7 . The questions we focus on are the following:

   Question A24a: What do you think will happen to the prices of homes like yours in your
community over the next 12 months? Will they

  1. increase at a rapid rate?

  2. increase at a moderate rate?

  3. remain about the same?

  4. decrease at a moderate rate? or

  5. decrease at a rapid rate?


   Question A24b: By about what percent do you expect prices of homes like yours in your
community to go (up/down), on average, over the next 12 months?
                            Percent

      All responses are coded in an open-ended format, with any answers outside of the range
-95% to +95% truncated to 95%.
   Some types of adjustments are made to the response distributions:

  1. Imputations for missing information: There are three missing data codes that are
     used to document the type and extent of the missing information to the questions on
        price expectations. First, NA indicates that no information is available. In most cases,
        it re‡ects a respondent’s refusal to answer the question. This type of missing data is
        relatively uncommon. Second, DK IF signi…es that in response to the …rst question on
        the expected direction of change in prices, the respondent replied that they did not know
        whether prices would increase or decrease. This response re‡ects the respondent’s lack
        of knowledge or understanding, and hence lacks any information content. This type of
        missing data has also been relatively uncommon. Third, DK UP - DK DW signify
        that only partial information was obtained. The respondents indicated the direction they
        expected prices to change but replied that they didn’t know how much prices would
        increase/decline.
        Respondents coded as NA or DK IF were eliminated from the calculated estimates. By
        excluding these cases, the implicit assumption is that the overall sample mean or median
        is the best estimate of the missing information.
  7
      See https://data.sca.isr.umich.edu/fetchdoc.php?docid=57449.


                                                 5
        The partial information codes DK UP and DK DW provide important information
        about the direction of expected change in prices (but not the extent of expected change).
        The usual procedure is to impute the mean/median increase or decrease calculated among
        the complete data cases. Rather than imputing a point estimate of the mean or median, a
        distribution of responses is imputed whose mean/median is identical to the point estimate.
        This is done by distributing the DK UP and DK DW cases across all response codes in
        the same proportions as cases with complete information.

  2. Truncation of outliers: At each step in the data collection process, all extreme values
        are veri…ed: interviewers are instructed to probe all unusually large responses, asking
        respondents to con…rm their answers; at each subsequent step in data processing all large
        values are subjected to special checking and editing procedures to verify that all responses
        were accurately transcribed. The remaining extreme values are assumed to accurately
        re‡ect the respondent’answers. The methodology favors the truncation rather than the
        elimination of extreme values.

University of Michigan’s Survey of Consumers - Buying Condition Index. Because
of the availability problem with the price expectations data, we use another measure provided
by the SoC. This variables presents the share of households in the survey that reponds that it
is a good time to buy a house. There are many reasons for which it is a good time to buy a
house. The survey asks households to give up to two reasons. This is an open-ended question.
SoC then groups the answers in six categories8 . The questions we focus on are:

      Question A16: Generally speaking, do you think now is a good time or a bad time to buy
a house?

  1. Good

  2. Uncertain

  3. Bad

      Question A16a: Why do you say so? (Are there any other reasons?)

      In their responses, households point to issues as either good or bad for buying a home. For
instance, a response could be credit is cheap or interest rate is going to increase. Panel B of
Figure 3 presents the share of respondents answering that it is a good time to buy a house.
Panel A presents the buying condition index (BCI). We construct this index by summing the
share of good time answers minus the share of bad time answers plus one hundred.
  8
      See https://data.sca.isr.umich.edu/data-archive/mine.php


                                                  6
                   Table 10: Classi…cation of answers to Question A16a

                  Good/Bad               Reason
                  Good time to buy       Prices are low; good buys available
                  Good time to buy       Prices won’t come down; are going higher
                  Good time to buy       Interest rates low
                  Good time to buy       Borrow in advance of rising interest rates
                  Good time to buy       Good investment
                  Good time to buy       Times are good; prosperity
                  Bad time to buy        Prices low
                  Bad time to buy        Interest rates high; credit is tight
                  Bad time to buy        Times are bad; Can’t a¤ord
                  Bad time to buy        Bad times ahead; Uncertain future
                  Bad time to buy        Bad investment

                   Source: University of Michigan - Survey of Consumers.



      The SoC classi…es the answers to Question A16a in six groups in the case of a (1) good
answer and in …ve groups if the answer is (3) bad.
   Question A16a is open-ended. SOC classi…es these answers into the categories in Table
10. For instance, category Interest rates low includes answers such as: lower down payment,
Interest rates are low, credit easy to get, easy money, variable mortgage rate.
    Figure 4 presents the most important three reasons that households give. These are Good
credit, current prices low, and future prices high. In our regressions we use the log-growth of
the BCI ( bcit ). This variable goes back to 1978.

House Prices

We use the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index from S&P Dow Jones Indices
LLC9 . These data are on monthly basis, so we take last moth of each quarter. They are not
seasonally adjusted. We rebase the index to 2005 = 100. We refer to this variable as Pt . We
divide the house price index by the Consumer Price Index (All items in U.S. city average, all
urban consumers, SA) rebased to 2005 = 100, from the Bureau of Labor and Statistics10 to
express it in real terms.
      We use the log-growth of the real price in the contemporaneous regressions, that is           pt =
log Pt =CP It      log Pt 1 =CP It   1   and in the forecasting regressions we use the quarterly
(denoted with h) forecasting price growth,       pt+h;t = log Pt+h =CP It+h       log Pt =CP It .
  9
      S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index (CSUSHPINSA), retrieved
from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CSUSHPINSA.
   10
      All items in U.S. city average, all urban consumers, seasonally adjusted (CUSR0000SA0).        See
https://www.bls.gov/cpi/data.htm


                                                   7
    To construct the price-rent ratio, we use the quarterly average of the Consumer Price Index
for All Urban Consumers: Shelter from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics11 ; that is, prt =
Pt =Rentt . Then we set the value of 2000:Q4 = 100 and apply the growth of prt to get the
price-rent Panel B of Figure 5.

Fundamentals: 10-year real interest rates and GDP forecast

To construct the 10-year real interest rate (rt10 ), we use the 10-Year Treasury Constant Ma-
turity Rate from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System12 . We take the last
month of the each quarter (Rt10 ). This variables is not seasonally adjusted. Then we use the
mean response of the 10-Year CPI In‡ation Rate (CPI10) from the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia - Survey of Professional Forecasters13 to express the interest rate in real terms;
that is, rt10 = Rt10   CP I10t
                                                         e
   We create a measure of expected real GDP growth ( GDPt;t+4 ) using the annualized percent
change of median responses of the real GDP from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia -
Survey of Professional Forecasters14 . The survey provides the annualized expected real GDP
                                       f
growth in the next four quarters ( GDPt+i;t ) for i = 1;              4 which we use to construct our
measure of real GDP growth:
                                                                        1
                                                Y
                                                4               f
                                                           GDPt+i;t     4
                                     e
                                 GDPt;t+4   =         1+                     1
                                                i=1
                                                            100

Mortgage Data

Mortgage outstanding Data for mortgage outstanding come from the Federal Reserve, Flow
of Funds, Table L.21815 . We use the All sectors; home mortgages; asset as total mortgage out-
standing, the U.S.-chartered depository institutions; home mortgages, including farm houses;
asset as mortgages held by depositary institutions. These are composed by U.S.-chartered com-
mercial banks and savings institutions such as savings banks, federal savings banks, cooperative
banks, and savings and loan associations.
   The sum of Government-sponsored enterprises; home mortgages; asset and Agency-and
GSE-backed mortgage pools; home mortgages; asset is denoted with GSE. GSE portfolio includes
  11
     U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Shelter (CUSR0000SAH1),
retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CUSR0000SAH1.
  12
     Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), 10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate (GS10),
retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/GS10.
  13
     The CPI10 is the annual average in‡ation over the current and next nine years.                       See
https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/data-
…les
  14
     Constructed from the RGDP in Billions of real dollars. Seasonally adjusted. Annual rate. Real GNP
prior to 1992. Real GDP 1992-present. See https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-
center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/data-…les
  15
     See https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/current/default.htm


                                                      8
home mortgages held by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Federal Home Loan Banks, Farm Credit
System (FCS) and farm mortgages held by the FCS excluding farm mortgages from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture. Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pools include home mortgages
held in Ginnie Mae, Freddie Mac, Federal Farmers Home Administration, and Fannie Mae pools
excluding the Federal Financing Bank pools. All these mortgages are known as conforming
mortgage loans16 .

          GSEportfolioandpools = FannieMae + FreddieMac + FederalHomeLoanBanks
                                           + FarmCreditSystem + GinnieMae
                                           + FederalFarmersHomeAdministration

    We use the Issuers of asset-backed securities; home mortgages; asset as mortgages held
by ABS. ABS is made up of home mortgages subtracting securitized home mortgages by real
estate investment trusts (REITs). ABS is calculated based on the sum of jumbo17 , subprime,
and Alt-A mortgages18 .

                            ABS = Jumbo + subprime + Alt              Amortgages

Panel A of Figure 6 presents these variables. For the regressions we use the annual log-growth
of each series. For instance, in the case of ABS we have:

                                    4   log ABSt = log ABSt      log ABSt   4



Mortgage originations Panel B of Figure 6 presents the growth in mortgage origination by
type of purchaser. In this case, GSE includes mortgages in Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Farmer
Mac, and Ginnie Mae. Private label (PL) securitization includes private securitization and
a¢ liate institutions. Portfolio includes depositary institutions, life insurance companies, credit
unions, mortgage banks, and …nance companies, and other type of purchasers. We get these
data from the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council.
    Figure 2 presents the share of originations with minimum PTI.The population includes a
subset of Fannie Mae’s 30-year, fully amortizing, full documentation, single-family, conven-
tional …xed-rate mortgages. This dataset does not include data on adjustable-rate mortgage
   16
      A conforming loan is a mortgage that is eligible for purchase by the Federal National Mortgage Association
and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. These agencies created standardized rules and guidelines that
mortgages must conform to in order to be a conforming loan. Among these rules, one has the size of the loan
(conforming limit), borrower’s loan-to-value ratio (i.e. the size of down payment), debt-to-income ratio, credit
score and history, documentation requirements, etc.
   17
      A mortgage loan that is in an amount above conventional conforming loan limits. For 2018, the limit
is $453,100. See https://www.fhfa.gov/Media/PublicA¤airs/Pages/FHFA-Announces-Maximum-Conforming-
Loan-Limits-for-2018.aspx
   18
      An    Alt-A    mortgage     is   riskier     than     a   prime     but   less    risky  than    a    sub-
prime      mortgage.          Alt-A     loans      are    not    eligible   for    purchase   by    GSE.     See
https://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/fof/SeriesAnalyzer.aspx?s=FL673065105&t=L.218&suf=Q.

                                                       9
loans, balloon mortgage loans, interest-only mortgage loans, mortgage loans with prepayment
penalties, government-insured mortgage loans, Home A¤ordable Re…nance Program (HARP)
mortgage loans, Re… Plus mortgage loans, and non-standard mortgage loans. Certain types of
mortgage loans (e.g., mortgage loans with LTVs greater than 97 percent, Alt-A, other mortgage
loans with reduced documentation and/or streamlined processing, and programs or variances
that are ineligible today) have been excluded in order to make the dataset more re‡ective of
current underwriting guidelines. Also excluded are mortgage loans originated prior to 1999,
sold with lender recourse or subject to other third-party risk-sharing arrangements, or were
acquired by Fannie Mae on a negotiated bulk basis. For manually underwritten loans, Fannie
Mae’s maximum total PTI ratio is 36% of the borrower’s stable monthly income. The maximum
can be exceeded up to 45% if the borrower meets the credit score and reserve requirements re-
‡ected in the Eligibility Matrix. For loan case…les underwritten through Desktop Underwriter
(DU), the maximum allowable PTI ratio is 50%. If the DTI on a loan case…le exceeds 50%,
the loan case…le will receive an ineligible recommendation. We get these PTI ratios from the
Fannie Mae Single Family Dataset.




                                             10
Bootstrap Procedure
This appendix describes our bootstrap procedure. We employ two approaches that we refer to as
the parametric and non-parametric bootstrap. The distinction refers to how serial dependence
is modeled. In the …rst approach, serial dependence is speci…ed using a parametric model. In
the second approach, it is speci…ed using a block bootstrap procedure. For both approaches,
the general linear model we consider is the following:

                                                             0
                                         yt =      0   +     xt +             yt                                        (A1)

where x t is a vector of regressors. In some speci…cations x t will be a scalar; in other cases, it will
be multidimensional. We are interested in the distribution of the t-statistic for each element
of , under the null that        = 0. We use “*” to denote statistics and data generated from the
bootstrap procedure, while “hats”denote statistics estimated from historical data.

Algorithm 1: Parametric Bootstrap
This algorithm consists of the following steps:

   1. Generate data under the null that = 0. Estimate the time series regression in (A2) and
      obtain the sample estimate b0 of the parameter in

                                                   yt =          0   +    yt                                            (A2)

   2. Estimate the time series equations in (A3) separately and obtain the sample estimate of
      b0, b


                            2    3 2 3 2                                              32               3   2        3
                                         0                                                                     1
                             x1t         1        1          0                     0      x1;t     1           xt
                            6x2t 7 6 0 7 6 0                                          7 6
                                                                                   0 7 6x2;t           7 6     2 7
                            6 7 6 7 6    2                       2                                 17      6   xt 7
                      x t = 6 .. 7 = 6 .. 7 + 6 ..           ..          ..        .. 7 6 ..           7 + 6 .. 7       (A3)
                            4 . 5 4.5 4.                      .               .     . 54 .             5 4 . 5
                                         0                                                                     k
                             xkt         k      0            0                      k       xk;t   1           xt
                                     | {z } |                        {z                 }                  | {z }
                                         0                                                                     xt



   3. Given these estimates, obtain the …tted residuals

                                             byt = yt        b0                                                         (A4)
                                             bxt = x t       b0           b xt          1                               (A5)

      This leaves T    1 observations from (A5). We …ll the …rst observation using the …rst
      observation in the sample, so that x 0 = x 1 ; hence, bx1 = 1 b x 1 b 0 .

                                                        11
4. Estimate an AR(1) process for the …tted residuals:

                                                  byt =       yby;t 1    + eyt                                                 (A6)
                                                  bxt =       xbx;t 1     + e xt                                               (A7)
                                                                                                                  T
  From the above estimation, we obtain the …tted residuals:                                         ebyt ; b
                                                                                                           e xt   t=2
                                                                                                                      .   Draw rows
  randomly with replacement from
                                                  2                                           3
                                                 eby2         ebx1 2                   ebxk 2
                                               6 eby3         ebx1 3                   ebxk 3 7
                                               6                                              7
                                           b
                                           e = 6 ..              ..      ..               .. 7                                 (A8)
                                               4 .                .           .            . 5
                                                   ebyT ebx1 T                         ebxk T

  to obtain M bootstrap samples of these residuals:
                                                  2 (i)     (i)                             (i) 3
                                                   ey2 ex1 2                             exk 2
                                                  6e (i) e (i)                           exk 3 7
                                                                                            (i)
                                           (i)    6 y3    x1 3                                  7
                                       e         =6 .      ..                 ..           .. 7                                (A9)
                                                  4 ..      .                      .        . 5
                                                     (i)    (i)                             (i)
                                                   eyT ex1 T                             exk T

  for i = 1;        ; M.

5. Using the samples in (A9) and the estimated parameters in equations (A6)-(A7), we create
   M samples of the residuals by iterating on
                                                   (i)           (i)         (i)
                                                  yt     = by   yt 1 + et                                                     (A10)
                                                   (i)
                                                  xt     =   bx x;t(i) 1 + e xt(i)                                            (A11)

  for i = 1;         ; M , using the …rst observation in the sample to start the recursion (i.e.
    (i)                 (i)
   y1     = by1   and x1 = bx1 ):
                                                  2    (i)         (i)                    (i) 3
                                                      y1          x1 1                   xk 1
                                              6        (i)         (i)                    (i) 7
                                              6       y2          x1 2                   xk 2 7
                                             =6 .                  ..    ...              .. 7                                (A12)
                                              4 ..                  .                      . 5
                                                       (i)         (i)                    (i)
                                                      yT          x1 T                   xk T

  for i = 1;        ; M.

6. Using the appropriate columns in (A12), b 0 , and, b , use (A3) to create M samples of x :
                                             (i)         (i)                               (i)
                                           xt = b0 + b xt 1 +                             xt

                                (i)
  for i = 1;        ; M with x 1      = x1.

                                                             12
7. Using the appropriate columns in (A12) and b0 , we construct M samples of yt :

                                                            = b0 +
                                                      (i)                 (i)
                                                 yt                      yt


   for i = 1;    ; M.
            (i)
                        xt (i) gTt=1 for i = 1;
8. Given fyt gTt=1 and fx                                        ; M , we run regressions using bootstrapped
   data:
                                         (i)           (i)
                                    yt         =      0      +       xt (i) +
                                                                  (i)0
                                                                                yt

                                                       (i)       (i) M
   to obtain M samples of parameters f                0 ;           gi=1    and M samples of Newey-West HAC
                         n              oM
   estimators t-statistic t (i) ; t (i)    .
                             0             i=1

9. We compute the 99%, 95%, and 90% bootstrap con…dence intervals for t (i) . The coe¢ -
                                                                                0
         ^
   cients are reported as statistically signi…cant at the 1% (y y y), 5% (yy), or 10% (y) level
   if their t-statistics from historical data fall outside of the bootstrap con…dence intervals.




                                                            13
Algorithm 2: Non-Parametric Bootstrap
This procedure uses block bootstrap sampling to capture serial dependence in the data. We
choose the block length following the recommendation of Hall, Horowitz, and Jing (1995) who
show that the asymptotically optimal block length for estimating a one-sided distribution func-
tion is l _ T 1=4 ; also see Horowitz (2003). For the results reported in the text, we use a block
length exactly equal to T 1=4 = 3, but we check the robustness of our results to lengths of 2 and
5 and …nd little di¤erence in the resulting distributions and con…dence sets. This algorithm
consists of the following steps:

  1. Generate data under the null that           = 0. Estimate the time series regression in (A13)
      and obtain the sample estimate of b0 .

                                                 yt =      0       +   yt                   (A13)

  2. Estimate the time series equations in (A14) separately and obtain the sample estimate of
     b0, b.             2 3 2 3 2                             32         3 2 3
                                     0                                        1
                          x1t        1        1 0         0       x1;t 1      xt
                        6x2t 7 6 0 7 6 0                  0   7 6 x      7 6  2 7
                        6 7 6 27 6                 2          7 6 2;t 1 7 6 xt 7
                   xt = 6 .. 7 = 6 .. 7 + 6 ..   .. . .    . 76 . 7 + 6 . 7            (A14)
                        4 . 5 4.5 4.              .     . .. 5 4 .. 5 4 .. 5
                                     0                                        k
                          xkt        k      0 0             k    xk;t 1       xt
                                  | {z } |           {z       }            | {z }
                                       0                                          xt


  3. Given these estimates, obtain the …tted residuals

                                           byt = yt        b                                (A15)
                                                               0

                                           bxt = x t       b0          b xt   1             (A16)

      This leaves T    1 observations from (A16). We …ll the …rst observation using the …rst
      observation in the sample, so that x 0 = x 1 ; hence, bx1 = 1 b x 1 b 0 .
                                            2                    3
                                              by1 bx1 1 bx2 1
                                            6by2 bx 2 bx 2 7
                                            6            1     2 7
                                       b = 6 ..        ..    .. 7                     (A17)
                                            4 .         .     . 5
                                              byT bx1 T bx2 T

  4. We create M bootstrap samples by sampling blocks from the data in (A17) randomly
      with replacement and laying them end-to-end in the order sampled until a new sample
      of observations of length equal to the data (T ) is obtained. We consider a block length




                                                      14
   equal to L = [jT 1=4 j]
                                                               2      (i)       (i)           (i) 3
                                                                     y1        x1 1          x2 1
                                                          6           (i)       (i)           (i) 7
                                                   (i)    6          y2        x1 2          x2 2 7
                                                         =6 .                   ..            .. 7                  (A18)
                                                          4 ..                   .             . 5
                                                                      (i)      (i)            (i)
                                                                     yT       x1 T           x2 T

   for i = 1;         ; M.

5. Using the appropriate columns in (A18), b 0 , and, b , use (A14) to create M samples of x :
                                                (i)         (i)                                  (i)
                                              xt = b0 + b xt 1 +                                xt                  (A19)
                                     (i)
   for i = 1;         ; M with x 1         = x1.

6. Using the appropriate columns in (A18) and b0 , we construct M samples of yt :

                                                                     = b0 +
                                                               (i)                     (i)
                                                          yt                          yt                            (A20)

   for i = 1;         ; M.
                (i)              (i)
                        xt gTt=1 for i = 1;
7. Given fyt gTt=1 and fx                                                   ; M , we run regressions using bootstrap data:
                                                  (i)              (i)         (i)0    (i)
                                             yt         =      0         +           xt +           yt

                                                                (i)          (i) M
   to obtain M samples of parameters f                         0 ;              gi=1     and M samples of Newey-West HAC
                         n              oM
   estimators t-statistic t (i) ; t (i)    .
                                 0                  i=1

8. We compute the 99%, 95%, and 90% bootstrap con…dence intervals for t (i) . The coe¢ -
                                                                             0

   cients ^ are reported as statistically signi…cant at the 1% ( ), 5% ( ), or 10% ( ) level
   if their t-statistics from historical data fall outside of the bootstrap con…dence intervals.




                                                                     15
