                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 GEOGRAPHICAL ROOTS OF THE COEVOLUTION OF CULTURAL AND LINGUISTIC
                              TRAITS

                                           Oded Galor
                                           Ömer Özak
                                           Assaf Sarid

                                      Working Paper 25289
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25289


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




The authors are grateful to Alberto Alesina, Joan Bybee, Justin Cook, Lewis Davis, Klaus
Desmet, Delia Furtado, Paola Giuliano, Luigi Guiso, Stelios Michalopoulos, David Weil and
Søren Wichmann, as well as conference participants at the NBER Culture and Institutions
Meeting; “Annual Meetings of the American Economic Association”; “Annual Meetings of the
Southern Economic Association”; “Language Skills for Economic and Social Inclusion
Colloquium”, Humboldt-University Berlin; “Deep Rooted Factors in Comparative
Development”; “The Long Shadow of History: The Role of Geographical, Institutional, Cultural,
and Human Factors in Comparative Economic Development”, The Pinhas Sapir Economic Policy
Forum; Zeuthen Lectures, Copenhagen; and seminar participants at Ben-Gurion, Brown, Clark,
Haifa, Southern Methodist, Tel-Aviv, and UC-Merced, for useful comments and discussions.
Sarid gratefully acknowledges support for the Israel Science Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Oded Galor, Ömer Özak, and Assaf Sarid. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Geographical Roots of the Coevolution of Cultural and Linguistic Traits
Oded Galor, Ömer Özak, and Assaf Sarid
NBER Working Paper No. 25289
November 2018
JEL No. O10,Z10,Z13

                                          ABSTRACT

This research explores the geographical origins of the coevolution of cultural and linguistic traits
in the course of human history, relating the geographical roots of long-term orientation to the
structure of the future tense, the agricultural determinants of gender bias to the presence of sex-
based grammatical gender, and the ecological origins of hierarchical orientation to the existence
of politeness distinctions. The study advances the hypothesis and establishes empirically that: (i)
geographical characteristics that were conducive to higher natural return to agricultural
investment contributed to the existing cross-language variations in the structure of the future
tense, (ii) the agricultural determinants of gender gap in agricultural productivity fostered the
existence of sex-based grammatical gender, and (iii) the ecological origins of hierarchical
societies triggered the emergence of politeness distinctions.

Oded Galor                                       Assaf Sarid
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Brown University                                 University of Haifa
Box B                                            Mount Carmel, Haifa, 3498838
Providence, RI 02912                             Israel
and CEPR                                         asarid@econ.haifa.ac.il
and also NBER
oded_galor@brown.edu

Ömer Özak
Department of Economics
Southern Methodist University
3300 Dyer Street
Suite 301, Umphrey Lee Center
Box 0496
Dallas, TX 75275-0496
omer@omerozak.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25289
1     Introduction
The origins of the vast inequality in the wealth of nations have been largely attributed to the persis-
tent effect of an uneven distribution of pre-industrial geographical, cultural, institutional and human
characteristics across the globe.1 In particular, evidence suggests that regional variations in the ge-
ographical environment in the distant past have contributed to the differential formation of cultural
traits and their lasting effect on comparative economic development across countries, regions and
ethnic groups.2 In light of the apparent coevolution of cultural and linguistic characteristics in the
course of human history, emerging linguistic traits have conceivably reinforced the persistent effect of
cultural factors on the process of development.3 Nevertheless, the significance of these joint evolution-
ary processes, and their potential common geographical roots, for the understanding of the process of
development and the uneven distribution of wealth of nations, has remained obscured.
    This research explores the geographical origins of the coevolution of cultural and linguistic traits.
It advances the hypothesis and establishes empirically that geographical characteristics that were con-
ducive to the emergence and the persistence of fundamental cultural traits triggered the evolution of
complementary linguistic traits that have fostered and reinforced the diffusion and the intergenera-
tional transmission of these cultural traits in the course of human history.4
    The research identifies the common geographical roots of cultural and linguistic traits, associating
long-term orientation to the structure of the future tense, gender bias to the presence of sex-based
grammatical gender, and hierarchical orientation to the existence of politeness distinctions. The study
establishes that geographical characteristics that were conducive to higher natural return to agricul-
tural investment, and thus to the emergence of long-term orientation, contributed to the emergence
of a structure of the future tense that complements long-term oriented behavior. Furthermore, the
analysis suggests that suitability of land for the adoption of agricultural technologies that contributed
to a gender gap in productivity has been conducive to the emergence of sex-based grammatical gen-
der. Moreover, the findings indicate that ecological diversity, which had been pivotal to specialization,
trade, and thus to the emergence of hierarchical societies, fostered the presence of politeness distinc-
tions.
    The proposed hypothesis rests upon several fundamental building blocks. First, in light of the
pivotal role of languages in the diffusion of knowledge and the transmission of values, emerging lin-
guistic characteristics in the course of human history have conceivably affected the diffusion of cultural
values, reinforcing existing cultural traits and their intergenerational transmission.5 Second, the forces
of natural selection across language structures have plausibly generated an evolutionary advantage to
linguistic traits that reflected and reinforced the dominating cultural traits. Third, regional differences
    1
      Gallup et al. (1999), Guiso et al. (2004, 2006), Tabellini (2010), Acemoglu et al. (2001), Glaeser et al. (2004), and
Ashraf and Galor (2013b).
    2
      Alesina et al. (2013) and Galor and Özak (2016).
    3
      Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994), Cavalli-Sforza (2000), and Richerson et al. (2010).
    4
      This hypothesis is in line with the Linguistic Niche Hypothesis (LNH), which “proposes that, just as the structure
of biological organisms are affected by their ecological niche, the structure of society affects the evolutionary pressures
on language structures” (Roberts and Winters, 2012).
    5
      In particular, socio- and anthropological linguistics, have argued that language usage is central for social expression
(Brown and Levinson, 1987).



                                                             1
in geographical characteristics that have contributed to the emergence of variations in cultural traits
have conceivably contributed to the evolution of cross-language variations in complementary linguistic
traits. Fourth, cultural traits that have been reflected in language structures have been more persistent
across time and space, reflecting the view that deviations from existing language structures, rather
than from the prevailing cultural traits, are less likely to occur in light of their adverse effect on the
feasibility of communication across individuals.
    The common geographical origins of cultural and linguistic traits are explored in three distinct
settings. Consider historical societies characterized by hierarchical orientation (e.g., obedience, con-
formity, and power distance). Linguistic traits that had reinforced existing hierarchical structures
and cultural norms had conceivably emerged and persisted in these stratified societies in the course
of human history. In particular, politeness distinctions in pronouns (e.g., the differential use of “tu”
and “usted” in the Spanish language, “Du” and “Sie” in German, and “tu” and “vous” in French)
had conceivably appeared and endured in hierarchical societies.6 Thus, geographical characteristics,
such as ecological diversity that had been conducive to the emergence of hierarchical societies (Fenske,
2014), may have contributed to the emergence of politeness distinctions.
    Further, consider ancient civilizations that had been characterized by a sexual division of labor and
consequently by the existence of gender bias. Linguistic traits that had fortified the existing gender
biases have plausibly emerged and persisted in these societies over time.7 In particular, geographical
characteristics that had been associated with the adoption of agricultural technology that had con-
tributed to a gender gap in productivity, and thus to the emergence of distinct gender roles in society
(e.g., the suitability of land for the usage of the plow (Pryor, 1985; Alesina et al., 2013)), may have
fostered the emergence and the prevalence of sex-based grammatical gender in the course of human
history.8
    Finally, in societies characterized by long-term orientation in the distant past, a structure of the
future tense that has reinforced long-term oriented behavior may have emerged and persisted over
time. In particular, pre-industrial agro-climatic characteristics that were conducive to higher return
to agricultural investment and therefore to the prevalence of long-term orientation (Galor and Özak,
2016), may have triggered the emergence and the prevalence of a long-term oriented structure of the
future tense.
    The empirical analysis explores the proposed hypothesis and examines the geographical origins of
three language structures: the structure of the future tense, the presence of sex-based grammatical
gender systems, and the existence of politeness distinctions in pronouns. Moreover, it further examines
the proposed mediating channels that may have governed the associations between these geographic
and linguistic traits. The analysis advances several strategies to mitigate potential concerns regard-
ing the role of reverse causality, omitted variables, and sorting in the observed associations. First,
overcoming potential concerns about reverse causality (i.e., the effect of periphrastic future tense and
   6
      Politeness distinctions may have emerged in order to mitigate the coordination cost in the interaction between
individuals from various social strata (Brown and Levinson, 1987; Brown and Gilman, 1989; Helmbrecht, 2003, 2005).
    7
      Indeed, socio-linguists as well as other scholars have argued that gender bias can be reinforced by a sex-based
grammatical gender system (Lakoff, 1973; Eckert and McConnell-Ginet, 2003; Stahlberg et al., 2007).
    8
      As discussed in section 5, the timing of the emergence of the plow is consistent with the subsequent emergence of
sex-based grammatical gender in a significant number of languages.


                                                          2
the associated long-term orientation on cultivation methods, the choice of technologies, and thus the
actual crop returns, or the effect of sex-based grammatical gender, and the associated gender roles,
on the adoption of crops that are conducive for the use the plow), the analysis exploits potential crop
return and potential yield of crops suitable for the adoption of the plow (associated with agro-climatic
conditions that are orthogonal to human intervention), rather than the actual ones. Second, the em-
pirical analysis exploits the well-established observation that daughter languages within a language
family originated from a common proto-language (Bouckaert et al., 2012; Pagel et al., 2013; Wich-
mann, 2017), in order to establish the historical depth of the association between these geographical
characteristics and language structures as well as to mitigate potential concerns about the effect of
sorting on the observed relationships.9 Third, mitigating the potential role of omitted institutional,
cultural, geographical and human characteristics in the observed relationship, the analysis mirrors
the epidemiological approach to cultural diffusion and identifies the geographical origins of each lan-
guage structure based on variation across languages located outside the ancestral homeland of their
proto-language (i.e., their Urheimat), accounting for the host region fixed-effects, and thus capturing
unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity at the regional level. Furthermore, the analysis accounts for
confounding geographical characteristics in the homelands of the proto-language and of the daugh-
ter languages, as well as for spatial auto-correlation, while alleviating concerns about selection on
unobservables.
    The first part of the empirical analysis examines whether agro-climatic characteristics that have
governed the return to agricultural investment, and have been associated with the emergence of long-
term orientation (Galor and Özak, 2016), have contributed to the structure of the future tense. Con-
sistent with the view that periphrastic future tense reflects an intentional, future-orientated behavior,
the analysis establishes that periphrastic future tense is more prevalent in languages that originated
in geographical regions that have been characterized by higher potential crop returns and thus higher
long-term orientation. The findings suggest that higher potential crop return in the ancestral home-
land of the proto-language (i.e. the Urheimat of the language), rather than the potential return in
the current geographical location of each daughter language, has been the trigger for the presence of
periphrastic future tense in daughter languages, mitigating potential concerns about the effect of the
potential sorting of individuals who use periphrastic future tense into regions with high crop return.
Furthermore, the analysis suggests that long-term orientation is indeed more prevalent in communi-
ties whose languages are characterized by periphrastic future tense. Moreover, the findings indicate
that the intensity of agriculture of ethnic groups in the contemporary geographical homeland of each
language (i.e., the indigenous regions that spoke the language in the pre-colonial as well as in the post-
colonial era) appears to be the mediating channel through which the return to agricultural investment
has affected the presence of periphrastic future tense.
    The second part of the empirical analysis examines whether geographical characteristics that had
been associated with the the adoption of an agricultural technology that contributed to a gender
gap in productivity, and thus to the emergence of distinct gender roles in society, have increased the
   9
     A proto-language is the ancestral language that gave rise to all daughter languages that belong to the same language
family.



                                                           3
prevalence of sex-based grammatical gender in the language spoken in society. Consistent with the
view that the emergence of the plow was associated with an increase in a gender gap in productivity
(Pryor, 1985; Alesina et al., 2013), the analysis establishes that sex-based grammatical gender is more
prevalent in languages that originated in geographical regions that have been characterized by greater
suitability of land for the usage of the plow. Mitigating potential concerns about the effect of the
potential sorting of individuals who use sex-based grammatical gender into regions suitable for the
usage of the plow, while establishing the historical depth of this association, the findings further suggest
that higher suitability of land for the usage of the plow in the Urheimat (i.e., the ancestral homeland
of the proto-language), rather than in the current geographical location of each daughter language,
has been the dominating force in the presence of sex-based grammatical gender in each of the daughter
languages. Furthermore, the findings suggest that indeed gender bias is more prevalent in communities
whose languages are characterized by sex-based grammatical gender. Moreover, the findings indicate
that the actual usage of the plow within ethnic groups in the contemporary geographical homeland of
each language appears to be the mediating channel through which suitability of land for the usage of
the plow have affected the presence of sex-based grammatical gender.
    The third part of the empirical analysis examines whether geographical characteristics, such as
ecological diversity, that had been conducive to the emergence of hierarchical societies (Fenske, 2014),
have contributed to the emergence of politeness distinctions. Consistent with the view that the pres-
ence of politeness distinctions has reinforced existing hierarchical structures and cultural norms (e.g.,
obedience, conformity, and power distance), the findings suggest that the presence of politeness dis-
tinctions in pronouns is more prevalent in languages that originated in geographical regions that have
been characterized by greater ecological diversity. Furthermore, the findings suggest that hierarchical
orientation is indeed more prevalent in communities whose languages are characterized by politeness
distinctions. Moreover, the findings indicate that jurisdictional hierarchy of ethnic groups in the
contemporary geographical homeland of each language appears to be the mediating channel through
which ecological diversity has affected the presence of politeness distinctions.
    Consistent with evidence about the greater adaptability of politeness distinctions (in comparison
to the structure of the future tense and sex-based grammatical gender) to environmental and political
changes, the findings suggest that while geographical characteristics in the Urheimat (i.e., the ancestral
homeland of the proto-language) are associated with the existence of the periphrastic future tense and
sex-based grammatical gender, the geographical characteristics in the contemporary homeland of the
daughter languages are associated with the existence of politeness distinctions.
    This research is the first to explore the geographical determinants of the coevolution of cultural
and linguistic traits in the course of human history.10 It contributes to the growing literature on the
evolution of language (Pinker and Bloom, 1990; Christiansen and Kirby, 2003a,b; Bickerton, 2007),
   10
      Existing economic research predominantly views languages as an identifier of cultural and ethnic groups. Linguistic
fractionalization as well as linguistic distance have been extensively used as a proxy for cultural fractionalization and
cultural distance in the exploration of the effect of ethnic diversity on economic growth and the impact of cultural distance
on the diffusion of development (Easterly and Levine, 1997; Fearon, 2003; Alesina et al., 2003; Alesina and Ferrara, 2005;
Desmet et al., 2012; Harutyunyan and Özak, 2016). In particular, Michalopoulos (2012) and Ashraf and Galor (2013a)
explore the geographical origins (i.e., diversity of soil quality and migratory distance from Africa) of existing variation
in linguistic fractionalization within a geographical region.



                                                             4
providing evidence for the origins of language structures.11 Moreover, it sheds a new light on the
stability of some language structures (Wichmann and Holman, 2009; Greenhill et al., 2010; Dediu
and Levinson, 2012; Dediu and Cysouw, 2013; Greenhill et al., 2017), underlying the dominance
of geographical conditions in the Urheimat (i.e., the homeland of the proto-language) in observed
contemporary structures. Furthermore, it proposes geographical foundations for the link between
linguistic traits and socio-economic behavior as explored by Brown and Gilman (1960), Brown and
Levinson (1987), Hellinger and Bufimann (2001), Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (2003), Roberts and
Winters (2012), Chen (2013) and Davis and Abdurazokzoda (2016).12
     The analysis sheds additional light on the geographical roots of comparative development (Dia-
mond, 1997; Ashraf and Galor, 2013b), the interaction between the evolution of human traits and the
process of development (Galor and Moav, 2002; Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013), and the geographical
origins of cultural traits as well as the determinants of their persistence in the course of human history
(Bisin and Verdier, 2000; Nunn and Wantchekon, 2011; Fernández, 2012; Alesina et al., 2013; Galor
and Özak, 2016).


2        Data
This section presents the data that is used in the empirical analysis of the geographical origins of
language structures and the methodology that guided its construction. In particular, it introduces
the data on cross-language variations in the structure of the future tense, the presence of sex-based
grammatical gender, and the existence of politeness distinctions in pronouns, as well as the data on
cross-regional variations in the hypothesized geographical determinants of these language structures.
     The linguistic characteristics of each language are linked to: (i) the geographical characteristics of
the contemporary homeland (i.e., the characteristics of the indigenous regions that spoke the language
in the pre-colonial as well as in the post-colonial era),13 , (ii) the geographical characteristics of the
ancestral homeland of the proto-language (i.e., the Urheimat), and (iii) the ethnographic characteristics
of the groups that speak the language in the contemporary linguistic homeland. In particular, the
linguistic data is mapped to the Ethnologue (Lewis et al., 2009) in order to identify the geographical
characteristics of the contemporary linguistic homeland, and is linked to the Ethnographic Atlas
(Murdock, 1967) and the Standard Cross Cultural Sample (Murdock and White, 1969) in order to
identify the ethnographic characteristics of the aboriginal speakers of each language. The mapping of
these datasets is based on the ISO code of each language, which is available in all three datasets.
     Furthermore, in order to explore the deep historical roots of language structures, each language is
mapped to the ancestral homeland of its proto-language (Urheimat). In particular, for each language
family, the paper identifies the location of the Urheimat based on the frontier methodology used by
    11
      Earlier literature explored the spatial origins of languages, rather than the geographical determinants of language
structures.
   12
      See Ginsburgh and Weber (2018a,b) for surveys on the economics of language.
   13
      This focus on the contemporary linguistic homeland is designed to capture the geographical roots of each daughter
language (rather than the proto-language). For instance, Spain, rather than regions in Latin America and elsewhere that
had adopted the Spanish language in the post-colonial era, is considered the contemporary linguistic homeland of the
Spanish language.



                                                           5
linguists (Wichmann et al., 2010). This method, as explained further in Appendix E follows a similar
strategy employed by geneticists to determine the location of the origin of domestication of crops.14

2.1     Dependent Variables: Language Structures
This subsection introduces the three language structures whose geographical origins will be explored:
(i) periphrastic future tense, (ii) sex-based grammatical gender systems, and (iii) politeness distinctions
in pronouns. In particular, based on The World Atlas of Language Structures (WALS) (Dryer, 2013),
it presents the data about the existence of each of these structures across languages.
    The existence of a structure S in language `, S` , is encoded such that:
                                 
                                 1 if the structure exists in language `
                            S` =
                                 0 if the structure does not exist in language `.


2.1.1    Periphrastic Future Tense

Languages differ in the structure of their future tense. In particular, linguists distinguish between
languages that are characterized by an inflectional versus periphrastic future tense (Dahl, 1985, 2000;
Dahl and Velupillai, 2013). Inflectional future tense is associated with verbs that display morphological
variation (i.e., a change in the verb form that is associated with the future tense). In contrast,
periphrastic future tense is characterized by roundabout or discursive phrases, such as ‘will’, ‘shall’,
‘want to’, ‘going to’ in the English language (Bybee and Pagliuca, 1987; Bybee and Dahl, 1989; Bybee
et al., 1994).
    Bybee and Dahl (1989) argue that, unlike the inflectional future tense, the periphrastic future
tense is formed by terms that express a desire, an intention, an obligation, a commitment as well
as a movement towards a goal. In particular, in the English language, “ shall has developed from a
main verb meaning ‘to owe’, will from a main verb meaning ‘to want’, and the source of be going
to is still transparent”(Bybee and Dahl, 1989, p.90). Moreover, “intention and prediction are most
commonly expressed by the periphrastic future, while the synthetic one is more common in generic
statements, concessives, and suppositions” (Bybee et al., 1994, p.235). Inflectional futures “also appear
systematically (often obligatorily) in sentences which express clear predictions about the future (which
are independent of human intentions and planning), whereas less grammaticalized constructions [i.e.,
periphrastic] often tend to be predominantly used in talk of plans and intentions – a fact which is
explainable from the diachronic sources of future tenses”(Dahl and Velupillai, 2013, p.270). Thus,
these views suggest that the use of periphrastic future tense conceivably reflects long-term oriented
behavior.
    The dataset on the existence of periphrastic future tense includes 275 contemporary languages,
originated from 76 language families.15 The classification of 222 of the languages in the sample is
based on Dahl and Velupillai (2013), as reported in WALS, and the remaining 53 languages are
   14
      The analysis excludes language families for which there is no data on the location of the Urheimat, or if the language
family is unclassified, or the language is a Creole or language isolate (i.e., which has no identified sister languages).
   15
      Importantly, 90% of the languages in the Ethnologue belong to these 76 language families.



                                                             6
classified based on Dahl (1985, 2000).16 Figure 1 and Table D1 describe the prevalence and the spatial
distribution of the structure of future tense in the dataset, portraying wide variations within regions
in the existence of periphrastic future tense. In particular, in most regions about 50% of the languages
in the sample are characterized by periphrastic future tense.




                      Figure 1: The Global Distribution of Periphrastic Future Tense


2.1.2    Sex-Based Grammatical Gender Systems

Languages differ in the existence and the form of grammatical gender. In particular, languages that
are characterized by sex-based grammatical gender classify nouns according to biological gender. The
presence of sex-based grammatical gender induces speakers to highlight gender distinctions even in
situations in which gender may not play an intrinsic role. Moreover, linguists have argued that the
presence of “masculine generics” in some languages (e.g., the use of the noun “adam” to describe “man”
as well as “human being” in the Hebrew and Turkish languages) has reinforced gender biases in the
course of human history, equating “maleness and humanness” (Stahlberg et al., 2007, p.169). Thus,
perhaps not surprisingly, linguists as well as other scholars have persistently argued that gender biases
have been reinforced by languages characterized by sex-based grammatical gender systems (Lakoff,
1973; Eckert and McConnell-Ginet, 2003; Stahlberg et al., 2007).
    The study explores the geographical origins of sex-based grammatical gender based upon the exis-
tence of this language structure in 217 contemporary languages, originated from 74 language families
(Corbett, 2013b).17 Figure 2 and Table D2 describe the prevalence and the spatial distribution of
sex-based grammatical gender systems in the dataset, demonstrating wide regional and cross-regional
variations in the existence of these language structures. In particular, 37% of the languages in the
sample are characterized by the presence of a sex-based grammatical gender system.
  16
      These classifications identify languages that are characterized by an inflectional future tense. Languages that are
not characterized by an inflectional future tense are considered to be characterized by a periphrastic future tense.
   17
      While the WALS classifies the existence of grammatical gender for 245 contemporary languages, the classification
of sex-based grammatical gender that is relevant for the main analysis restricts the sample to only 217 of them. In
particular, the main analysis distinguishes between languages that have sex-based grammatical gender and those that
do not have gender. Appendix B extends the analysis to the full sample by distinguishing between languages that have
sex-based grammatical gender and those that do not have sex-based grammatical gender irrespective of whether they
have grammatical gender.


                                                           7
    To further explore the proposed hypothesis, the analysis examines two alternative aspects of gram-
matical gender: (i) the existence of gender distinctions in independent personal pronouns (Siewierska,
2013), and (ii) the intensity of the grammatical gender system (combining information on the num-
ber of genders, the existence of sex-based grammatical gender, the system of gender assignment, and
the existence of gender distinctions in independent personal pronouns) based on Corbett (2013a,b,c)
and Siewierska (2013). As established in Appendix B, the qualitative findings are independent of the
measure used.




              Figure 2: The Global Distribution of Sex-Based Grammatical Gender System



2.1.3     Politeness Distinctions in Pronouns

Languages differ in the existence and the form of politeness distinctions. In particular, politeness
distinctions in pronouns are present in some languages (e.g., the differential use of “tu” and “usted”
in the Spanish language, “Du” and “Sie” in German, and “tu” and “vous” in French) while being
absent from others. Moreover, linguists have underlined that the differential use of these pronouns is
associated with the speaker’s social class and is closely associated with power distance (Brown and
Gilman, 1960).18
    The study explores the geographical origins of politeness distinctions in pronouns based on the
existence of second-person politeness distinctions in 207 contemporary languages, originated from 69
language families (Helmbrecht, 2013).19 Figure 3 and Table D3 describe the prevalence and the spatial
distribution of politeness distinctions in the dataset, demonstrating wide regional and cross-regional
variations in the existence of these language structures. In particular, 34% of the languages in the
sample are characterized by the presence of politeness distinctions. Moreover, to further explore the
proposed hypothesis, the analysis considers two alternative specifications of politeness distinctions: (i)
   18
       In some languages, earlier linguistic forms predated politeness distinctions. In particular, in the Spanish language
“usted” evolved from “vuestra merced” – your grace (Solé, 1970; del Castillo Mathieu, 1982; Bentivoglio, 2003).
    19
       Helmbrecht (2013) classifies politeness distinctions, as reflected in second person pronouns, into four categories:
(i) no politeness distinction, (ii) binary politeness distinction, (iii) multiple politeness distinctions, and (iv) dominantly
avoided for politeness reasons. Hence, politeness distinctions are present if either one of the categories (ii)-(iv) are
present.


                                                              8
the degree (rather than the existence) of politeness distinctions, and (ii) the existence of a high degree
of politeness distinctions.20 As established in Appendix C, the qualitative findings are independent of
the classification used.




                        Figure 3: The Global Distribution of Politeness Distinctions



2.2     Main Independent Variables
In view of the hypothesized geographical origins of the explored language structures (i.e., the structure
of the future tense, the presence of sex-based grammatical gender, and the existence of politeness
distinctions), this subsection introduces the data on cross-regional variations in the hypothesized
geographical determinants of these structures: (i) the historical levels of potential crop return, (ii) the
historical levels of potential land suitability for the use of the plow, and (iii) the extent of ecological
diversity.

2.2.1    Crop Return in the Linguistic Homeland and the Urheimat

The potential historical crop return in the contemporary homeland of each language, as well as in its
Urheimat (i.e., the homeland of the proto-language from which the language descended), is used in
order to establish the geographical determinants of the structure of the future tense.
    The potential historical crop return in the homeland and the Urheimat of a language (i.e., the
potential return to crops that were native to these locations in the pre-1500 period, prior to the
Columbian exchange) is measured, following the methodology advanced by Galor and Özak (2016),
by the potential daily calories that could be generated by cultivating the crops that would maximize
potential caloric yield in each cell of the homeland or the Urheimat, in the pre-1500CE era, given the
crop growth cycle. The estimates of potential crop yield (measured in tons, per hectare, per year)
and the corresponding crop growth cycle (measured as the number of days elapsed from planting to
   20
      Using the classification of Helmbrecht (2013), the degree of politeness distinctions are captured by its assigned
category, ranging from the lowest category – (i) to the highest by category – (iv). Similarly, high degree of politeness
distinctions are defined as being associated with categories (iii) or (iv).



                                                           9
harvesting), for each 50 × 50 cell in a global grid (i.e., approximately 100 square kilometers), are pro-
vided by the Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) project of the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO). These measures are based on agro-climatic estimates, under low level of inputs and rain-fed
agriculture, capturing conditions that prevailed in early stages of development.21 The conversion of
these crop yields into caloric yield (measured in millions of kilo calories, per hectare, per year), pro-
duces comparable estimates of crop yields, permitting the identification of the caloric maximizing crop
in each cell, and given the crop growth cycle, the caloric daily return in the cell.22
    These estimates have several virtues in identifying the effect of crop return in the contemporary
homeland of a language or its Urheimat on the structure of the future tense. First, the focus on
the potential crop return, rather than the actual one, assures that the effect of the structure of the
future tense (and the associated time preference) on the choice of technology has no impact of the
estimated crop return. Second, the use of the agro-climatic estimates, which are arguably orthogonal
to human intervention, mitigates potential concerns about the exogeneity of these estimates. Third,
the use of estimates based on low level of inputs and rain-fed agriculture assures that the level of
agricultural inputs, the irrigation method, and soil quality, do not reflect endogenous choices that
could be potentially correlated with the structure of the future tense.
    Hence, the average pre-1500CE potential daily caloric return (per hectare), R` , in the homeland
or in the Urheimat of a language, `, is
                                                              
                                                        1 X yc
                                                R` =             ,                                                     (1)
                                                       |C` |  gc
                                                            c∈C`


where yc is the cell specific pre-1500CE potential caloric yield of the crop that maximizes caloric output
in cell c, gc is this crop’s growth cycle, C` is the set of cells in the language’s homeland or Urheimat,
and |C` | is the cardinality of this set. Figure 4 depicts the global distribution of the pre-1500CE
potentialcrop return at the cell level.

2.2.2     Geographical Determinants of Plow Usage in the Linguistic Homeland and Urheimat

The potential historical suitability of the land for the usage of the plow in the homeland of each
language, as well as in its Urheimat (i.e., the homeland of the proto-language from which the language
descended), is used in order to establish the geographical determinants of sex-based grammatical
gender.
    The potential historical suitability of the land for the usage of the plow can be captured by either
   21
      For each crop, GAEZ provides estimates for crop yield based on three alternative levels of inputs – high, medium, and
low - and two possible sources of water supply – rain-fed and irrigation. Moreover, for each input-water source category,
it provides two separate estimates for crop yield, based on agro-climatic conditions, that are arguably unaffected by
human intervention, and agro-ecological constraints, that could potentially reflect human intervention. The FAO dataset
provides for each cell in the agro-climatic grid the potential yield for each crop. These estimates account for the effect
of temperature and moisture on the growth of the crop, the impact of pests, diseases and weeds on the yield, as well as
climatic related “workability constraints”. In addition, each cell provides estimates of the growth cycle for each crop,
capturing the days elapsed from the planting to harvesting.
   22
      The caloric content of each crop is based on estimates of the United States Department of Agriculture Nutrient
Database for Standard Reference.



                                                            10
                Figure 4: The Global Distribution of Potential Crop Return (Pre-1500CE)


the average potential caloric yield attainable by crops that are suitable for the use of the plow in the
pre-1500CE period (i.e., plow positive crops), or those that are unsuitable for the use of the plow in
the pre-1500CE period (i.e., plow negative crops), as classified by Pryor (1985).23 Since plow positive
crops are characterized by limited regional variation (e.g., they are entirely absent from the Americas
in the pre-1500 period), the analysis will focus on the adverse effect of the average suitability of plow
negative crops on the adoption of the plow, as well as the positive effect of the average suitability of
all crops on the desirability of the adoption of agricultural technology such as the plow.24




Figure 5: The Global Distribution of Potential pre-1500CE Caloric Yield (per Hectare) Across Plow
                                         Negative Crops

    The average potential pre-1500CE caloric yield (per hectare) across plow negative crops in the
homeland or in the Urheimat of a language, `, P` , is

                                                           1 X
                                                   P` =         yc ,                                                   (2)
                                                          |C` |
                                                                 c∈C`

   23
      Plow positive crops include wheat, barley, rye, buckwheat, teff, and wet rice, while plow negative crops include
grains (such as millet, sorghum, dry rice, and maize), as well as all root and tree crops. Measures of the (non-caloric)
suitability of the land for the use of the plow were first introduced by Alesina et al. (2013). The conversion of the crop
yields of plow negative and plow positive crops into caloric yield (measured in millions of kilo calories, per hectare, per
year), produces comparable estimates of crop yields and permits the construction of an index of soil suitability for the
usage of the plow.
   24
      In particular, since plow positive crops are absent from the Americas this measure cannot capture any of the existing
variation in sex-based grammatical gender in these continents.



                                                            11
where yc is the average potential pre-1500CE caloric yield of plow negative crops in cell c, C` is the
set of cells in the language’s homeland or Urheimat, and |C` | is the cardinality of this set. Figure 5
depicts the global distribution of of the potential pre-1500CE average caloric yield (per hectare) across
plow negative crops.




 Figure 6: The Global Distribution of Potential pre-1500CE Caloric Yield (per Hectare) Across All
                                              Crops

    Similarly, the average potential pre-1500CE caloric yield (per hectare) across all crops in the
homeland or in the Urheimat of a language, `, A` , is

                                                       1 X
                                               A` =         yc ,                                               (3)
                                                      |C` |
                                                             c∈C`


where yc is the average potential pre-1500CE caloric yield of all crops in cell c, C` is the set of cells
in the language’s homeland or Urheimat, and |C` | is the cardinality of this set. Figure 6 depicts the
global distribution of the average potential pre-1500CE caloric yield (per hectare) across all crops.

2.2.3     Ecological Diversity in the Linguistic Homeland and Urheimat

The extent of ecological diversity in the homeland of each language, as well as in its Urheimat (i.e.,
the homeland of the proto-language from which the language descended), is used in order to establish
the geographical determinants of politeness distinctions.
    The extent of ecological diversity, following Fenske (2014), is measured as a Herfindahl index of the
share of each territory that is occupied by different ecological zones. In particular, ecological diversity,
E` , in the homeland or in the Urheimat of a language, `, is

                                                         16
                                                         X            2
                                              E` = 1 −          θ`j                                            (4)
                                                         j=1

where θ`j is the share of the homeland or the Urheimat of language ` that is located in ecological zone
j, j = 1, . . . , 16.25
  25
     Olson et al. (2001) provide a global dataset of biomes with 16 ecological zones: Boreal Forests/Taiga; Deserts
and Xeric Shrublands; Flooded Grasslands and Savannas; Inland Water; Mangroves; Mediterranean Forests, Woodlands
and Scrub; Montane Grasslands and Shrublands; Rock and Ice; Temperate Broadleaf and Mixed Forests; Temperate



                                                        12
2.3    Potentially Confounding Factors
The exploration of the geographical determinants of language structures accounts for the potentially
confounding effects of a wide range of geographical factors, in the homeland of each language as well as
in its Urheimat (i.e., the homeland of the proto-language from which the language descended). These
factors may have affected the evolution of the structure of the future tense, sex-based grammatical
gender, and politeness distinctions. In particular, it accounts for absolute latitude, average elevation,
terrain ruggedness, coast length, as well as climatic conditions captured by the average, standard
deviation, volatility, and spatial correlation of temperature and precipitation.26
    The analysis further accounts for the length of the period in which no yield could be expected from
the feasible set of crops (i.e., the expected number of days elapsed between the last potential harvest
and the subsequent one). This unproductive period may have been central in the formation of cultural
and linguistic characteristics since it had conceivably affected: (i) planning, intertemporal decisions,
and therefore long-term orientation, (ii) the intensity of the use of the plow during the year as a whole
and its implications for the emergence of gender roles, and (iii) cooperation in the development of
storage technologies and its impact on the emergence of social hierarchy.


3     The Structure of the Empirical Analysis
This section presents the empirical strategy for the exploration of the relation between language struc-
tures and their hypothesized geographical determinants: (i) the historical levels of potential crop
return to agricultural investment, in the language’s homeland and its Urheimat, and the existence
of periphrastic future tense, (ii) the historical levels of potential land suitability for plow-based agri-
culture, in the language’s homeland and its Urheimat, and the existence of sex-based grammatical
gender, and (iii) the extent of ecological diversity, in the language’s homeland and its Urheimat, and
the existence of politeness distinctions.

3.1    The Empirical Model
The empirical analysis estimates the association between the hypothesized geographical determinants
and linguistic traits using a linear probability model, given the binary nature of the dependent vari-
ables. In particular, it estimates the following empirical model using ordinary least squares (OLS):

                                                      X                 X
                               S` = β0 + β1 D`S +           γ0j X`j +       γc δ`c + ε` ,                        (5)
                                                       j                c

where S` indicates whether structure S =(periphrastic future tense, sex-based grammatical gender,
politeness distinctions) exists in language `, D`S is the hypothesized geographical determinant of
structure S in the homeland of language ` and in its Urheimat (i.e., pre-1500CE potential crop return,
Conifer Forests; Temperate Grasslands, Savannas and Shrublands; Tropical and Subtropical Coniferous Forests; Tropical
and Subtropical Dry Broadleaf Forests; Tropical and Subtropical Grasslands, Savannas and Shrublands; Tropical and
Subtropical Moist Broadleaf Forests; Tundra.
  26
     Table D4 provides description of the variables used in the analysis and their summary statistics.



                                                           13
R` , the average potential pre-1500CE caloric yield of plow negative crops, P` , and all crops, A` , and the
extent of ecological diversity, E` ), {X`j } is a set of potentially confounding geographical characteristics
in the homeland of language ` and in its Urheimat, {δ`c } is a complete set of regional fixed-effects in
the homeland of language ` and in its Urheimat, and ε` is a language-specific error term.
   Moreover, given the binary coding of each language structure, an alternative specification is con-
sidered and estimated using a Probit model. As reported in the Appendix, this alternative estimation
model generates qualitatively similar results.

3.2   The Empirical Strategy
The empirical analysis of the geographical determinants of language structures advances several strate-
gies to mitigate potential concerns regarding the role of reverse causality, omitted variables, and sorting
in the observed association between: (i) variations in geographical characteristics that were conducive
to higher natural return to agricultural investment and the existing cross-language variations in the
structure of the future tense, (ii) agricultural determinants of gender gap in agricultural productiv-
ity and the existence of sex-based grammatical gender, and (iii) the ecological origins of hierarchical
societies and the emergence of politeness distinctions.
   First, the observed associations between the hypothesized geographical determinants of linguistic
traits and observed language structures may reflect reverse causality from language structures, and
their associated cultural traits, to these geographical attributes. In particular, the conceivable effect
of periphrastic future tense, and the associated long-term orientation, on the choice of agricultural
technologies, may affect crop returns. Moreover, sex-based grammatical gender, and the associated
gender bias, may have conceivably affected the adoption of the plow. Hence, in order to overcome these
potential concerns about reverse causality, the empirical analysis exploits variations in potential crop
return (associated with agro-climatic conditions that are orthogonal to human intervention), rather
than the, potentially endogenous, actual crop return. Furthermore, the analysis is based upon the
potential use of the plow (as captured by potential agro-climatic yield of crops suitable for the usage
of the plow), rather than the actual usage.
   Second, the associations between geographical and linguistic traits may be governed by omitted
institutional, cultural, geographical and human characteristics. Thus, in order to mitigate these con-
cerns, the empirical analysis mirrors the epidemiological approach to cultural diffusion and identifies
the geographical origins of linguistic traits based on variation across languages located outside their
Urheimat (i.e, outside the ancestral homeland of their proto-language), accounting for the host re-
gion fixed-effects and thus capturing unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity at the regional level.
Moreover, the analysis accounts for the potentially confounding effects of a wide range of geographical
factors, in the homeland of each language, as well as in its Urheimat, factors which may have affected
the evolution of the structure of the future tense, sex-based grammatical gender, and politeness dis-
tinctions (e.g., absolute latitude, average elevation, terrain ruggedness, coast length, as well as climatic
conditions captured by the average, standard deviation, volatility, and spatial correlation of tempera-
ture and precipitation). Furthermore, the empirical analysis accounts for spatial auto-correlation and



                                                     14
explores whether selection on unobservables is significant.27
    Third, the observed associations between geographical and linguistic traits may reflect the sorting of
individuals into geographical niches that complement their linguistic and cultural traits. While sorting
would not affect the nature of the association between these geographical and linguistic characteristics
(i.e., variations in geographical characteristics across the globe would still be the origin of cross-
language variation in linguistic traits), it would weaken the cultural interpretation of the underlying
mechanism. Hence, to alleviate concerns about the potential sorting of individuals who use periphrastic
future tense into regions with high crop return, the analysis explores whether potential crop return in
the Urheimat of a language, rather than its contemporary homeland, is associated with the presence
periphrastic future tense. Similarly, to mitigate concerns about the potential sorting of individuals
who use sex-based grammatical gender into regions suitable for the usage of the plow, the analysis
explores whether the suitability of land for the usage of the plow in the Urheimat, rather than in the
contemporary homeland of daughter languages, is associated with sex-based grammatical gender.28
    Fourth, the hypothesized associations between geographical and linguistic traits may reflect a
broader association between each of these geographical factors and a wide range of linguistic traits,
rather than a unique association between each of these geographical characteristics and its hypothesized
corresponding linguistic trait, weakening the proposed hypothesis. Hence, in order to overcome this
potential concern, the empirical analysis explores whether alternative language structures (as reported
by WALS), such as the existence of other temporal structures (e.g., the past tense and the perfect
tense), as well as non-temporal structures (e.g., possessive, evidentiality, and the number of consonants
and colors), are associated with each of the proposed geographical roots.
    Fifth, the proposed hypothesis suggests that the evolution of linguistic traits is a by-product of
the coevolution of cultural and linguistic traits in the course of human history, as governed by deeply
rooted, culturally-embodied, common geographical roots. Hence, the proposed hypothesis rests upon
the importance of the culturally-embodied effect of geographical characteristics. In order to explore the
culturally-embodied effect, the empirical analysis examines whether the geographical characteristics in
the Urheimat, rather than the homeland of daughter languages, are the significant factors that govern
the evolution of language structures. Thus, it explores whether the culturally-embodied geographical
determinants in the Urheimat, rather than the direct effect of geography (as would have been reflected
by the significance of the geographical characteristics in the contemporary homeland of daughter
languages), governed the evolution of linguistic traits.
  27
      It should be noted that since the available data for a large fraction of language families consists of only a few
languages, a meaningful analysis based on variations in language structures within a linguistic family is precluded.
Nevertheless, given the common ancestry of daughter languages, the analysis is based on standard errors estimates
clustered at the language, language genus or language family levels. Specifically, the analysis based on the geographical
characteristics of the Urheimat employs standard errors estimates clustered at the language family level.
   28
      In light of the evidence about the greater adaptability of politeness distinctions to environmental and political
changes (Wichmann and Holman, 2009; Greenhill et al., 2010; Dediu and Levinson, 2012; Dediu and Cysouw, 2013;
Greenhill et al., 2017), this strategy does not fully mitigate concerns on the role of sorting in the observed association
between ecological diversity and politeness distinctions.




                                                           15
4        Geographical Origins of Periphrastic Future Tense
The hypothesized coevolution of long-term orientation and the structure of the future tense suggests
that in societies characterized by higher long-term orientation in the distant past, periphrastic future
tense, and its associated future orientation, have emerged and persisted over time, reinforcing existing
long-term oriented behavior. Thus, in view of the established positive effect of the natural return to
agricultural investment, as captured by caloric crop return, on long-term orientation (Galor and Özak,
2016),29 crop return is hypothesized to be associated with the prevalence of periphrastic future tense.
     This section analyzes the relation between the existence of periphrastic future tense across contem-
porary languages and the historical levels of potential crop return in their contemporary geographical
homelands (i.e., the indigenous regions that spoke the language in the pre-colonial as well as in the
post-colonial era), as well as in their ancestral homeland (i.e., their Urheimat). In particular, Table
1 explores the association between pre-1500CE crop return and the existence of periphrastic future
tense.30 As established in column (1), the unconditional correlation between pre-1500CE crop return
in the language’s contemporary homeland and the existence of periphrastic future tense is positive
and statistically significant at the 5% level, suggesting that a one standard deviation increase in crop
return in the language’s contemporary homeland is associated with a 6 percentage points increase
in the probability that the language is characterized by a periphrastic future tense. Furthermore, as
established in column (2) the estimated relationship remains stable once the potentially confounding
effects of the geographical characteristics (i.e., absolute latitude, mean elevation, terrain ruggedness,
and the length of its sea coast) in the contemporary homeland of each language, are accounted for.
     Moreover, since crop return is estimated based on agro-climatic conditions, its association with the
structure of the future tense might be capturing the potentially direct impact of climatic conditions
on the existence of periphrastic future. In particular, variability of climatic conditions may affect
the riskiness of agricultural investment, and therefore the effective crop return, while their spatial
correlation may affect the potential for spatial diversification of risk. Nevertheless, as established in
columns (3) and (4), accounting for the potentially confounding effects of average temperature and
precipitation, as well as their standard deviations, volatility, and spatial correlation, does not alter the
qualitative results.
     Furthermore, the length of the period within each year in which the land is not suitable for
agriculture – the unproductive period – may have conceivably triggered planning (e.g., storage and
intertemporal trade) and may have therefore reinforced long-term orientation and the existence of
periphrastic future tense. Nevertheless, as indicated by the estimates in column (5), accounting
for the length of the unproductive period, reinforces the findings and the coefficient on crop return
increases and becomes highly statistically significant.31 Finally, as reported in column (6), accounting
for regional fixed-effects, and therefore for unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity at the regional
    29
      See also, Figlio et al. (2016) and Falk et al. (2018).
    30
      Table A1 reports the estimated coefficients on the control variables in Table 1 .
   31
      Interestingly, as shown in the Appendix, the length of the unproductive period, as well, is significantly associated
with the probability of existence of the periphrastic future tense. However, unlike the crop return, the relation between
the unproductive period and the existence of periphrastic future tense is not robust to the other specifications and its
semi-partial R2 is smaller than the one of crop return.



                                                           16
                             Table 1: Geographical Origins of the Future Tense (OLS)

                                                                         Existence of Future Tense
                                               (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
        Crop Return (pre-1500CE)              0.06**        0.06**         0.07**        0.07**        0.09***         0.11***
                                              (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)
        Geographical Controls                 No            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
        Precipitation Controls                No            No             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
        Temperature Controls                  No            No             No            Yes           Yes             Yes
        Unproductive Period                   No            No             No            No            Yes             Yes
        Regional FE                           No            No             No            No            No              Yes
        Adjusted-R2                           0.01          0.02           0.02          0.06          0.07            0.11
        Observations                          275           275            275           275           275             275
        Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant association between a region
        pre-1500CE potential crop return and the existence of periphrastic future tense in the language spoken in this
        region, accounting for regional fixed-effects and other geographical characteristics. Geographical controls include
        absolute latitude, mean elevation, terrain ruggedness, and coast length. All independent variables have been
        normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be
        compared and show the impact of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on the probability
        of having a future tense in the language. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in
        parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level,
        all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



level, reinforces the magnitude and the statistical significance of the association between pre-1500CE
crop return and the existence of periphrastic future tense. In particular, a one standard deviation
increase in pre-1500CE crop return in the language’s contemporary homeland is associated with an
11 percentage points increase in the probability that the language is characterized by a periphrastic
future tense.

4.1     Robustness
The findings in Table 1 lend credence to the hypothesis that the natural return to agricultural in-
vestment in the language’s contemporary homeland, and its effect on time preference and long-term
oriented behavior, contributed to the emergence of periphrastic future tense. Nevertheless, the results
conceivably might be biased due to omitted institutional, cultural, and human characteristics, pre-
cluding a causal interpretation of the estimated coefficients. While concerns about omitted variables
will be directly addressed and mitigated in the next subsection, the remaining analysis in this section
establishes the robustness of the results to: (i) an alternative estimation method, (ii) spatial autocor-
relation, and (iii) clustering of standard errors, while demonstrating that the findings are unlikely to
be driven by selection on unobservables.

4.1.1     Estimation Method, Spatial-Autocorrelation and Selection on Unobservables

Table A2 (Panel A) establishes that the estimated average marginal effects of the Probit model are
nearly identical to the estimated associations using OLS. Furthermore, Table A2 (Panel B) establishes
the robustness of the results to the clustering of the standard errors at the level of the language
genus (i.e., a group of phylogenetically related languages inside a linguistic family), as well as spatial



                                                                    17
auto-correlation. In particular, the statistical significance is unaffected by the various methods used
to mitigate the potential violation of the independence assumption.
    Table A2 (Panel B) further explores the potential bias that could be generated by omitted variables.
In particular, using statistics on selection on observables and unobservables (Altonji et al., 2005; Oster,
2014), it establishes that the degree of omitted variable bias is low and is unlikely to explain the
magnitude of the estimated association between crop return and the existence of periphrastic future
tense. In particular, omitted factors would need to be 2-3 times stronger and negatively correlated with
crop return, in order to account for the estimated association between crop return and the emergence
of periphrastic future tense. Thus, the estimated coefficients could be considered as the lower bound
of the true association. The bias-adjusted estimated coefficient on pre-1500CE crop return is strictly
positive and larger than the OLS estimate. In particular, as reported in column (6), following Oster
(2014), the bias-corrected coefficient of crop return, assuming that the unobservables are as strongly
correlated with pre-1500CE crop return as the set of observables that are accounted for, implies that a
one standard deviation increase in crop return in the language’s contemporary homeland is associated
with a 13 percentage points increase in the probability of the existence of periphrastic future tense in
the language.32

4.1.2     Crop Return and Other Language Structures

The associations between the return to agricultural investment in the language’s contemporary home-
land, as captured by pre-1500CE crop return, and the existence of periphrastic future tense may
reflect a broader association between crop return and a wide range of linguistic traits, rather than a
unique association with periphrastic future tense, weakening the proposed hypothesis. Moreover, the
association between crop return in the language’s homeland and the existence of periphrastic future
tense in the language may reflect a broader association between a whole range of linguistic traits and
long-term orientation.
    Table A3 establishes, however, that alternative language structures (as reported by WALS), such
as the existence of other temporal and non-temporal structures, are largely uncorrelated with the
natural return to agricultural investment, suggesting that it is indeed uniquely associated with the
structure of the future tense.33 In particular pre-1500 crop return is not significantly associated with
the existence of either the past or the perfect tense, and it is orthogonal to non-temporal linguistic
characteristics such as: (i) the existence of possessive classifications, (ii) the existence of coding for
evidentiality, (iii) the number of consonants, and (iv) the number of colors.34 Furthermore, using all
available data on language structures as reported in WALS, Figure A1 establishes the orthogonality
   32
      If the unobservables were assumed to explain all the remaining variation in the probability of existence of periphrastic
future tense, then the estimated bias-adjusted impact of crop return would be even larger, implying that a one standard
deviation increase in crop return in the language’s contemporary homeland would be associated with 40 percentage points
increase in the probability of existence of periphrastic future tense in the language.
   33
      This result reinforces earlier findings by Galor and Özak (2016) that pre-1500CE crop return only affects time
preference and does not have a significant association with the other cultural traits.
   34
      While the association between crop return and the existence of possessive classification is marginally significant in
the OLS regressions, it is insignificant if Probit is used.




                                                             18
of crop return for nearly all language structures except for the structure of the future tense.35 These
results lend further support to the importance of the association between pre-1500 crop return and
the emergence of the periphrastic future tense.

4.2      Geographical Origins: Contemporary Homeland vs. Urheimat
This subsection exploits the descent of contemporary (daughter) languages from proto-languages to
explore the relative contribution of the return to agricultural investment in (i) the contemporary
homeland of the language and (ii) the ancestral homeland of the language (i.e., its Urheimat) to the
existence of a periphrastic future tense in daughter languages. Specifically, the proposed hypothesis
suggests that the evolution of linguistic traits is a by-product of the coevolution of cultural and
linguistic traits in the course of human history, as governed by deeply rooted, culturally-embodied,
common geographical roots. In order to examine this hypothesis, the empirical analysis explores
whether potential crop return in the Urheimat, rather than the homeland of daughter languages, is
associated with the presence of periphrastic future tense. This setting permits the exploration of the
role of culturally-embodied geographical determinants in the Urheimat, rather than the direct effect
of geography in the evolution of linguistic traits.
    Furthermore, this analysis mitigates concerns about the role of omitted variables in the established
associations between the return to agricultural investment and the existence of periphrastic future
tense, while overcoming concerns about the potential sorting of individuals into geographical niches
that complement their linguistic and cultural traits. Moreover, the analysis sheds light on the historical
depth of the observed relationship between the return to agricultural investment and the existence of
periphrastic future tense, as well as on the role of the culturally-embodied geographical characteristics
in the Urheimat, rather than the direct effect of geography, in the evolution of periphrastic future
tense.
    In particular, in order to further mitigate concerns about the importance of omitted institutional,
cultural, geographical and human characteristics in the established associations between the return
to agricultural investment and the existence of periphrastic future tense, the analysis mirrors the
epidemiological approach to cultural diffusion, and explores the geographical origins of the existence
of periphrastic future tense based on variation across languages located outside the Urheimat (i.e., the
ancestral homeland of their proto-language). This approach permits the analysis to account for the
host region fixed-effects and thus to capture unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity at the regional
level.
    Moreover, alleviating concerns about the potential sorting of individuals who use periphrastic
future tense into regions with high crop return, the analysis explores whether potential crop return in
    35
       Specifically, the only other structures that are statistically associated with crop return are: existence of politeness
distinctions (variables 45A in WALS), existence of cases (49A), number of cases (50A), existence of inflectional tenses
(69A), and existence of purpose clauses (125A). The association with politeness distinctions reflects the positive impact
of agricultural productivity, and the associated surplus, with the emergence of hierarchical societies. Furthermore, the
association with inflectional tenses reflects by construction the negative association between the existence of a periphrastic
future tense and the existence of an inflectional tense. Finally, the association with the remaining language structures
reflects the common elements among certain aspects of language structures. For example, the existence of temporal case
structures may be associated with the existence of tenses, and the future in particular (Lestrade and de Hoop, 2016).



                                                             19
the Urheimat, rather than in the contemporary homeland of daughter languages, is associated with the
presence periphrastic future tense. While sorting would not affect the nature of the association between
these geographical and linguistic characteristics (i.e., variations in geographical characteristics across
the globe would still be the origin of cross-language variation in linguistic traits), it would weaken the
cultural interpretation of the underlying mechanism. Finally, the distinction between the impact of the
geographical characteristics in the Urheimat and the contemporary homeland, permit the analysis to
explore the historical depth of the observed relationship between the return to agricultural investment
and the existence of periphrastic future tense.

Table 2: The Persistent Impact of Geographical Characteristics in the Urheimat, rather than in the
        Contemporary Linguistic Homeland, on the Existence of Periphrastic Future Tense:
                           Daugther Languages Outside the Urheimat

                                                                    The Existence of Periphrastic Future Tense
                                                                      Migratory Distance to the Urheimat
                                                                  Any Distance                  At Least 1 Week
                                                       Homeland        Urheimat     Both      Homeland      Urheimat       Both
                                                           (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
       Homeland’s Crop Return (pre-1500CE)             0.12**                       -0.01     0.12**                      -0.01
                                                       (0.05)                       (0.06)    (0.06)                      (0.06)
       Urheimat’s Crop Return (pre-1500CE)                             0.21**       0.25**                  0.23***       0.24**
                                                                       (0.10)       (0.10)                  (0.08)        (0.09)
       Regional FE                                     Yes             Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes           Yes
       Homeland’s Geographical Characteristics         Yes             No           Yes       Yes           No            Yes
       Urheimat’s Geographical Characteristics         No              Yes          Yes       No            Yes           Yes
       Adjusted-R2                                     0.09            0.12         0.16      0.07          0.12          0.15
       Observations                                    214             214          214       195           195           195
       Language Families                               38              38           38        32            32            32
       Notes: This table establishes the importance of pre-1500CE crop return in the Urheimat, rather than the contempo-
       rary homeland, to the presence of periphrastic future tense in daughter languages located outside of the Urheimat,
       accounting for regional fixed-effects and other geographical characteristics. Geographical controls include absolute
       latitude, mean elevation, terrain ruggedness, and coast length. Columns (1)-(3) consider daughter languages who are
       located anywhere outside of the Urhemat, while column (4)-(6) those who are at least a week of migratory distance
       from the Urheimat. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their
       standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the impact of a one standard deviation in the
       independent variable on the probability of having a future tense in the language. Heteroskedasticity robust standard
       error estimates clustered at the language family level are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance
       at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.


    Table 2 explores the relative contributions of pre-1500CE crop return in the contemporary home-
land of a language, in comparison to its ancestral homeland (i.e., its Urheimat), to the presence of
periphrastic future tense in daughter languages. It establishes that the existence of periphrastic future
tense among daughter languages located outside their Urheimat is governed predominantly by crop re-
turn in the Urheimat.36 Considering daughter languages anywhere outside of the Urheimat, Columns
(1) - (3) establish that while crop return in the contemporary homeland is significantly associated
with the existence of periphrastic future tense among migrant languages (column (1)), the association
  36
      Given the potential dependence of languages within the same language family, standard errors are clustered at this
level.



                                                                  20
between the Urheimat’s crop return and the existence of periphrastic future tense of daughter lan-
guages located outside of the Urheimat is much larger (column (2)). Moreover, considering jointly the
contribution of crop return in the contemporary homeland and the Urheimat, the impact of the crop
return in the Urheimat remains significant, while the impact of crop return in the contemporary home-
land dissipates entirely, suggesting that that crop return in the Urheimat predominately influenced
the existence of the future tense.37 Furthermore, considering daughter languages at a migratory dis-
tance of one week from the Urheimat (i.e, approximately 1300km away from the Urheimat), and thus
diminishing the association between the geographical characteristics in the contemporary homeland
and the Urheimat, columns (3)-(6) reinforce the findings about the domination of the corp return in
the Urheimat rather than in the contemporary homeland. In particular, accounting for regional fixed-
effects and other geographical characteristics of the Urheimat, a one standard deviation increase in the
crop return in the Urheimat is associated with a 21-25 percentage points increase in the probability
that a migrant daughter language would have a periphrastic future tense.
    The analysis suggests that periphrastic future tense began its formation in the distant past when
the speakers of the proto-language still inhabited the Urheimat of the language, reflecting the portable
culturally-embodied effect of crop return rather than the direct effect of these geographical character-
istics. The findings further suggest that the established association is not driven by either omitted
factors or geographical sorting, and they reflect the deep-historical culturally-embodied origins of the
structure of the future tense.

4.3    Mechanism
This section presents additional supportive evidence for the hypothesized geographical origins of the
structure of the future tense. In view of the evidence about the association between crop return and
long-term orientation (Galor and Özak, 2016), a positive effect of crop return on the emergence of
periphrastic future tense would necessitate the use of agriculture as the main source of subsistence. In
particular, as illustrated in Figure 7, the proposed hypothesis would imply that: (i) higher crop return
ought to be associated with a greater intensity of agriculture, and (ii) greater intensity of agriculture
ought to be associated with the existence of periphrastic future tense.
    Table 3 presents supporting evidence for the proposed mechanism. In particular, it establishes the
robust positive association between crop return and the level of agricultural intensity in a pre-colonial
society, which in turn is positively associated with the emergence of the periphrastic future tense.
Using data from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock and White, 1969) on the importance of patterns
of subsistence – hunting, gathering, fishing, animal husbandry and crop cultivation – the analysis
explores the association between crop return and agricultural intensity (i.e., the level of dependence
on agriculture) across ethnic groups, reflecting the effective crop return in the ethnic homeland. As
established in Columns (1) and (2) in Table 3 societies inhabiting regions with higher crop return have
higher levels of agricultural intensity. In particular, a one-standard deviation increase in crop return
  37
     Given the greater uncertainty about the geographical extent of the Urheimat, as opposed to the contemporary
linguistic homeland, measurement errors in the estimates of crop return in the Urheimat are likely to be larger than
those from crop return in the contemporary homeland and a-priori the horse race between the two variables should have
resulted in fact in the decline in the significance of crop return in the Urheimat.


                                                         21
                                          Future
                                          Tense




                                           Crop                              Agricultural
                                          Return                              Intensity


                           Figure 7: Crop Return, Agricultural Intensity & Future Tense

         Table 3: Geographic Origins of Agricultural Intensity and Periphrastic Future Tense

                                                                               Mechanism

                                                     Agricultural Intensity                 Periphrastic Future Tense

                                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)

          Crop Return (pre-1500CE)                 0.21***            0.24***
                                                   (0.03)             (0.03)
          Agricultural Intensity                                                            0.07**           0.08*
                                                                                            (0.03)           (0.04)

          All Geographic Controls                  No                 Yes                   No               Yes
          Regional FE                              No                 Yes                   No               Yes
                       2
          Adjusted-R                               0.04               0.64                  0.02             0.17
          Observations                             1303               1303                  263              263
          Notes: This table establishes, based on OLS regression, the positive statistically and economically sig-
          nificant association between pre-1500 crop return and the existence of a periphrastic future tense in a
          language. The first two columns provide the results of the association between crop return and the in-
          tensity of agricultural, and columns (3) and (4) provide evidence on the association between agricultural
          intensity and the emergence of periphrastic future tense. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error esti-
          mates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%
          level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



is associated with a 0.24 standard deviations increase in agricultural intensity.38 Moreover, columns
(3) and (4) establish the positive association between the level of agricultural intensity in an ethnic
group and the probability of existence of periphrastic future tense in the language it speaks. The
results suggest that a one standard deviation increase in agricultural intensity is associated with an 8
percentage points increase in the probability of the existence of periphrastic future tense.

4.4    Time Preference and Periphrastic Future Tense
This section explores the association between the level of long-term orientation of the community that
speaks a certain language and the existence of periphrastic future tense in the language. In light of
the proposed hypothesis that the periphrastic future tense is complementary to long-term oriented
behavior, the prevalence of long-term orientation within a given society ought to be associated with
   38
      Table A4 establishes the robustness of this result, by constraining the analysis to the set of societies that speak
languages for which data on the existence of periphrastic future tense is available.



                                                               22
the presence of periphrastic future tense in the language used among members of this society. Indeed,
the common geographical origins (i.e., the natural return to agricultural investment) of long-term
orientation as well as periphrastic future tense suggest that this positive association is likely to be
observed across speech communities.

                      Table 4: Long-Term Orientation and Periphrastic Future Tense

                                                                            Long-Term Orientation

                                                                      All                        Old World

                                                          (1)                 (2)          (3)               (4)

                 Periphrastic Future Tense              0.12**              0.15***      0.15***         0.17***
                                                        (0.05)              (0.04)       (0.04)          (0.05)
                 Crop Return (pre-1500CE)                                   0.29*                        0.26
                                                                            (0.16)                       (0.18)

                 Regional FE                            Yes                 Yes          Yes             Yes
                 Main Geographical Controls             No                  Yes          No              Yes
                 Adjusted-R2                            0.16                0.24         0.18            0.26
                 Observations                           106                 106          100             100
                 Notes: This table establishes the statistically and economically significant positive associa-
                 tion between periphrastic future tense and long-term orientation . The results account for
                 the geographical origin of the periphrastic future tense and other geographical characteristics
                 of the contemporary homeland of the language. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error
                 estimates clustered at the language family level are reported in parentheses; *** denotes
                 statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
                 two-sided hypothesis tests.


    Table 4 explores the association between the prevalence of long-term orientation within a given
society and the presence of periphrastic future tense in the language used among members of this
society.39 It establishes the positive significant association between the existence of the periphrastic
future tense and long-term orientation. This positive association is present among speakers of lan-
guages in the world as a whole (Columns (1) and (2)), as well as among speakers who reside in the
Old World and speak languages originated in the Old World (Columns (3) and (4)). Moreover, as
established in Columns (2) and (4), this association is highly significant and stable in magnitude if
one accounts for the geographical origins (i.e., the natural return to agricultural investment) of these
two traits. These findings lend credence to the proposed hypothesis that the prevalence of the trait
of long-term orientation and the presence of periphrastic future tense have coevolved in the course of
human history.
  39
      The measure of Long-Term Orientation is based on the following question in the World Values Survey (WVS): “Here
is a list of qualities that children can be encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to be especially
important?” Individuals are considered to have Long-Term Orientation if they answered “Thrift, saving money and
things”.




                                                                 23
5         The Origins of Sex-Based Grammatical Gender Systems
The hypothesized coevolution of gender biases and sex-based grammatical gender suggests that in
societies characterized by distinct gender roles and consequently by the existence of gender biases
in the distant past, sex-based grammatical gender has emerged and persisted over time, reinforcing
existing gender biases in society. Thus, in view of the established positive association between the
suitability of land for the usage of the plow and the emergence of distinct gender roles in society
(Pryor, 1985; Alesina et al., 2013), the suitability of the land for the usage of the plow is hypothesized
to affect the emergence and the prevalence of sex-based grammatical gender in the course of human
history.
     This section analyzes the relation between the existence of sex-based grammatical gender across
contemporary languages and the potential historical suitability of the land for the usage of the plow
in their contemporary geographical homelands (i.e., the indigenous regions that spoke the language
in the pre-colonial as well as in the post-colonial era), as well as in their ancestral homeland (i.e.,
their Urheimat). As explained in section 2.2.2, since plow positive crops are characterized by limited
regional variation (e.g., they are entirely absent from the Americas in the pre-1500 period), the analysis
will focus on the adverse effect of the average suitability of plow negative crops on the adoption of
the plow, as well as the positive effect of the average suitability of all crops on the desirability of the
adoption of agricultural technology such as the plow.
     Table 5 explores the association between the potential historical suitability of the land for the
usage of the plow and the existence of sex-based grammatical gender.40 As established in column (1),
the association between the potential caloric yield of plow negative crops in the pre-1500CE period in
the language’s contemporary homeland and the existence of sex-based grammatical gender is negative
and statistically significant at the 5% level, suggesting that a one standard deviation increase in the
potential caloric yield of plow negative crops in the language’s contemporary homeland is associated
with a 13 percentage points decrease in the probability that the language is characterized by a sex-based
grammatical gender. Moreover, the average caloric suitability of all crops in the pre-1500CE period
in the language’s contemporary homeland is indeed positively and statistically significantly associated
with the existence of sex-based grammatical gender, suggesting that a one standard deviation increase
in the potential caloric yield of all crops in the language’s contemporary homeland is associated with a
17 percentage points increase in the probability that the language has sex-based grammatical gender.
Furthermore, as established in column (2), the estimated relationship becomes more significant once
the potentially confounding effects of the geographical characteristics (i.e., absolute latitude, mean
elevation, terrain ruggedness, and the length of its sea coast) in the contemporary homeland of each
language, are accounted for.
     Since the potential historical agricultural determinants of plow usage are estimated based on agro-
climatic conditions, they might be capturing the potentially direct impact of climatic conditions on the
existence of sex-based grammatical gender. In particular, variability of climatic conditions may affect
the riskiness of agricultural investment, and therefore the effective caloric yield of plow negative crops,
    40
         Table B1 reports the estimated coefficients on the control variables in Table 5.



                                                               24
                   Table 5: Geographic Origins of Sex-Based Grammatical Gender (OLS)

                                                                           Existence of Sex-Based Grammatical Gender
                                                                     (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
 Plow Negative Crops (Average Caloric Yield, pre-1500) -0.13**               -0.19***   -0.25***   -0.26***   -0.29***   -0.23***
                                                       (0.06)                (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.08)
 All Crops (Average Caloric Yield, pre-1500)           0.17***               0.21***    0.28***    0.29***    0.32***    0.25***
                                                       (0.06)                (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.08)
 Geographical Controls                                          No           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Precipitation Controls                                         No           No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Temperature Controls                                           No           No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes
 Unproductive Period                                            No           No         No         No         Yes        Yes
 Regional FE                                                    No           No         No         No         No         Yes
 Adjusted-R2                                                    0.03         0.06       0.14       0.15       0.15       0.21
 Observations                                                   217          217        217        217        217        217
 Notes: This table establishes the statistically and economically significant association between the historical agricultural
 determinants of plow usage and the existence of sex-based grammatical gender in a language, accounting for regional fixed-
 effects and other geographical characteristics. All columns have the same specification and controls as Table 1. Geographical
 controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation, terrain ruggedness, and coast length, as well as other agriculture-related
 controls as precipitation and temperature means and standard deviations. All independent variables have been normalized
 by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the
 impact of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on the probability of having a sex-based grammatical gender
 in the language. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical
 significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



while their spatial correlation may affect the potential for spatial diversification of risk. Nevertheless,
as established in columns (3) and (4), accounting for the potentially confounding effects of average
temperature and precipitation, as well as their standard deviations, volatility, and spatial correlation,
does not alter the qualitative results.
    Furthermore, the length of the period within each year in which the land is not suitable for
agriculture – the unproductive period – may have conceivably affected the desirability of the usage
of the plow. Nevertheless, as indicated by column (5), accounting for the length of the unproductive
period, reinforces the findings. Finally, as reported in column (6), accounting for regional fixed-
effects, and therefore for unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity at the regional level does not alter
the qualitative results. In particular, a one standard deviation increase in the pre-1500CE potential
caloric yield of plow negative crops in the language’s contemporary homeland is associated with a
23 percentage points decrease in the probability that the language is characterized by a sex-based
grammatical gender. Similarly, a one standard deviation increase in the pre-1500CE potential caloric
yield of all crops in the language’s contemporary homeland is associated with a 25 percentage points
increase in the probability that the language is characterized by a sex-based grammatical gender.

5.1    Robustness
The findings in Table 5 lend credence to the hypothesis that the potential historical agricultural
determinants of plow usage in the language’s contemporary homeland, and their effect on gender biases,
contributed to the emergence of sex-based grammatical gender. Nevertheless, the results conceivably
might be biased due to omitted institutional, cultural, and human characteristics, precluding a causal


                                                                25
interpretation of the estimated coefficients. While concerns about omitted variables will be directly
addressed and mitigated in the next subsection, the remaining analysis in this section establishes the
robustness of the results to: (i) an alternative estimation method, (ii) spatial autocorrelation, and
(iii) clustering of standard errors, while demonstrating that the findings are unlikely to be driven by
selection on unobservables. Moreover, the robustness to alternative aspects of grammatical gender are
also considered.

5.1.1   Estimation Method, Spatial-Autocorrelation and Selection on Unobservables

Table B2 (Panel A) establishes that the estimated average marginal effects of the Probit model are
nearly identical to the estimated coefficients using OLS. Furthermore, Table B2 (Panel B) establishes
the robustness of the results to the clustering of the standard errors at the level of the language
genus (i.e., a group of phylogenetically related languages inside a linguistic family), as well as spatial
auto-correlation. In particular, the statistical significance is unaffected by the various methods used.
   Table B2 (Panel B) further explores the potential bias that could be generated by omitted variables.
In particular, using statistics on selection on observables and unobservables (Altonji et al., 2005; Oster,
2014), it establishes that the degree of omitted variable bias is low and is unlikely to explain the
magnitude of the estimated association between the potential historical agricultural determinants of
plow usage and the existence of sex-based grammatical gender. In particular, omitted factors would
need to be 1.3-2.3 times more strongly and negatively correlated with the caloric yield of plow negative
crops, in order to account for the estimated association between caloric yield of plow negative crops
and the emergence of sex-based grammatical gender. Similarly, omitted factors would need to be 1.6-3
times more strongly and negatively correlated with the caloric yield of all crops, in order to account for
the estimated association between caloric yield of all crops and the emergence of sex-based grammatical
gender. Thus, the estimated coefficients could be considered as the lower bounds in absolute value of
the true association. The bias-adjusted estimated associations between potential historical agricultural
determinants of plow usage and the existence of sex-based grammatical gender are larger in absolute
value than the OLS estimate. In particular, as reported in column (6), following Oster (2014), the
bias-corrected association between caloric yield of plow negative crops and the existence of sex-based
grammatical gender, assuming that the unobservables are as strongly correlated with pre-1500CE
caloric yield of plow negative crops as the set of observables that are accounted for, implies that a
one standard deviation increase in caloric yield of plow negative crops in the language’s contemporary
homeland is associated with a 27 percentage points decrease in the probability of the existence of
sex-based grammatical gender in the language.

5.1.2   Alternative Aspects of Grammatical Gender

Tables B4, B8 and B13 establish qualitatively similar associations between the geographical deter-
minants of plow-based agriculture and (i) an alternative measure of sex-based grammatical gender,
(ii) the intensity of grammatical gender in a language, and (iii) the existence of gender distinctions
in personal pronouns, respectively. These results suggest that various aspects of grammatical gender
that have reinforced gender biases, were associated with the geographical determinants of plow-based

                                                    26
agriculture. Moreover, Tables B2, B5, B9 and B14 establish the robustness of these alternative as-
sociations to: (i) an alternative estimation method, (ii) spatial autocorrelation, and (iii) clustering
of standard errors, while demonstrating that the findings are unlikely to be driven by selection on
unobservables.

5.1.3    Agricultural Determinants of Plow Usage and Other Language Structures

The associations between the potential historical agricultural determinants of plow usage and the
existence of sex-based grammatical gender may reflect a broader association between plow-based
agriculture and a wide range of linguistic traits, rather than its unique association with sex-based
grammatical gender, weakening the proposed hypothesis. Moreover, the association between the suit-
ability of land for the usage of the plow in the language’s contemporary homeland and the existence
of sex-based grammatical gender in the language may reflect a broader association between a whole
range of linguistic traits and gender biases.
    Table B3 establishes, however, that alternative language structures (as reported by WALS), such
as the existence of other temporal and non-temporal structures, are largely uncorrelated with the
geographical determinants of plow-based agriculture. In particular the potential historical agricultural
determinants of plow usage is not significantly associated with the existence of the perfect tense, and
it is orthogonal to non-temporal linguistic characteristics such as: (i) the existence of possessive
classifications, (ii) the existence of coding for evidentiality, (iii) the number of consonants, and (iv) the
number of colors. Furthermore, using all available data on language structures as reported in WALS,
Figure B1 establishes the orthogonality of the potential historical agricultural determinants of plow
usage for nearly all language structures except for sex-based grammatical gender.41 These results lend
further support to the hypothesis that the potential historical suitability of the land for the usage of
the plow is associated with the emergence of the sex-based grammatical gender system.

5.2     Geographical Origins: Contemporary Homeland vs. Urheimat
This subsection exploits the descent of contemporary languages from proto-languages to explore the
relative contributions of the potential suitability of land for the usage of the plow in (i) the contem-
porary homeland of the language and (ii) the ancestral homeland of the language (i.e., its Urheimat)
to the existence of a sex-based grammatical gender in daughter languages.
    This analysis mitigates concerns about the role of omitted variables in the established associa-
tions between the potential historical suitability of land for the usage of the plow and the existence
of sex-based grammatical gender, and the sorting of individuals into geographical niches that com-
plement their linguistic and cultural traits. Moreover, it sheds light on the historical depth of the
observed relationship between the potential suitability of land for the usage of the plow and the exis-
tence of sex-based grammatical gender, and the role of the culturally-embodied effects of geographical
characteristics, rather than the geography per se, in the evolution of sex-based grammatical gender.
  41
     Specifically, the only other structures that are statistically associated with the potential historical agricultural
determinants of plow usage are: perfective and imperfective aspect (variable 65A in WALS) and existence of past tense
(66A).


                                                           27
    The analysis mirrors the epidemiological approach to cultural diffusion, and establishes the geo-
graphical origins of the existence of sex-based grammatical gender based on variation across languages
located outside the Urheimat (i.e., ancestral homeland of their proto-language), permiting the analysis
to account for host region fixed-effects and thus to capture unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity
at the regional level, thus mitigating concerns about omitted variables.

Table 6: The Persistent Impact of Geographical Characteristics in the Urheimat, rather than in the
    Contemporary Linguistic Homeland, on the Existence of Sex-Based Grammatical Gender:
                           Daughter Languages Outside the Urheimat

                                                                                 The Existence of Sex-Based Gender System
                                                                                      Migratory Distance to the Urheimat
                                                                                    Any Distance             At Least 1 Week
                                                                          Homeland Urheimat Both Homeland Urheimat Both
                                                                              (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
Homeland’s Plow Negative Crops (Avg. Caloric Yield, pre-1500) -0.17**                           -0.10 -0.12                     -0.13**
                                                              (0.07)                            (0.07) (0.09)                   (0.05)
Homeland’s Crops (Average Caloric Yield, pre-1500)            0.14**                            0.12** 0.11                     0.09*
                                                              (0.07)                            (0.05) (0.09)                   (0.05)
Urheimat’s Plow Negative Crops (Avg. Caloric Yield, pre-1500)                          -0.50*** -0.44**                -0.51*** -0.47**
                                                                                       (0.15)   (0.17)                 (0.18)   (0.21)
Urheimat’s Crops (Average Caloric Yield, pre-1500)                                     0.60*** 0.54***                 0.64*** 0.60**
                                                                                       (0.17)   (0.19)                 (0.20)   (0.23)
Regional FE                                                               Yes          Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes
Homeland’s Geographical Characteristics                                   Yes          No         Yes      Yes         No         Yes
Urheimat’s Geographical Characteristics                                   No           Yes        Yes      No          Yes        Yes
Adjusted-R2                                                               0.30         0.45       0.44     0.30        0.53       0.50
Observations                                                              159          159        159      131         131        131
Language Families                                                         38           38         38       29          29         29
Notes: This table establishes the importance of agricultural productivity and the suitability of the land for the usage of the plow in
the Urheimat, rather than the contemporary homeland, to the existence of sex-based grammatical gender in daughter languages
located outside of the Urheimat, accounting for regional fixed-effects and other geographical characteristics. Geographical
controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation, terrain ruggedness, and coast length. Columns (1)-(3) consider daughter
languages anywhere outside of the Urhemat while column (4)-(6) those who are at least a week of migratory distance from the
Urheimat. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation.
Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the impact of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on the
probability of having a future tense in the language. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates clustered at the language
family level are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the
10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.


    Table 6 explores the relative contributions of the pre-1500CE potential suitability of land for the
usage of the plow in the contemporary language’s homeland vs. the Urheimat to the presence of
sex-based grammatical gender in daughter languages. In particular, it establishes that the existence of
sex-based grammatical gender among daughter languages located outside their Urheimat is associated
predominantly with the potential suitability of land for the usage of the plow in the Urheimat.42
    The analysis is conducted in two layers, distinguished by the geographical proximity of the daughter
languages to their Urheimat. Columns (1)-(3) consider daughter languages anywhere outside of the
Urheimat, while columns (4)-(6) consider languages at a migratory distance of one week from the
   42
      Given the potential dependence of languages within the same language family, standard errors are clustered at this
level.


                                                                  28
Urheimat (i.e, approximately 1300km away from the Urheimat). The analysis establishes that while
the association between potential suitability of land for the usage of the plow in the contemporary
homeland of a language and the existence of sex-based grammatical gender among migrant languages
is fragile (columns (1) and (4)), the association between the Urheimat’s crop return and the existence
of sex-based grammatical gender among daughter languages located outside of the Urheimat is larger
and highly significant (column (2) and (5)). Moreover, the impact of the potential suitability of land
for the usage of the plow in the Urheimat remains significant, while the impact of crop return in
the contemporary homeland remains fragile if the geographical characteristics of the contemporary
homeland of the language and its Urheimat are considered jointly.43
    The analysis suggests that the existence of sex-based grammatical gender began its formation in
the distant past when the speakers of the proto-language still inhabited the Urheimat of the language,
reflecting the portable culturally-embodied effect of the suitability of the land for the usage of the
plow rather than the direct effect of geography.44 As discussed in Appendix F, the timing of the
emergence of the plow is consistent with the subsequent emergence of sex-based grammatical gender
in a significant number of languages. The findings suggest that the results are driven by neither
omitted factors nor geographical sorting, and it provides support for the deep-historical origins of the
structure of sex-based grammatical gender.

5.3    Mechanism
This section presents additional supportive evidence for the hypothesized geographical origins of the
sex-based grammatical gender. In view of the evidence about the effect of plow usage on gender
biases (Pryor, 1985; Alesina et al., 2013), the effect of the geographical determinants of plow-based
agriculture on the emergence of sex-based grammatical gender would necessitate the adoption and use
of the plow. In particular, as illustrated in Figure 8, the proposed hypothesis would imply that: (i)
the geographical determinants of plow-based agriculture ought to be associated with the adoption and
use of the plow, and (ii) the use of the plow ought to be associated with the existence of sex-based
grammatical gender.
    Table 7 presents supporting evidence for the proposed mechanism. In particular, it establishes a
significant association between the geographical determinants of plow-based agriculture and the usage
of the plow in pre-colonial societies, which in turn is positively associated with the emergence of sex-
based grammatical gender. Using data from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock and White, 1969) on
the presence and use of aboriginal plows, the analysis explores the association between the geographical
determinants of plow-based agriculture and a pre-colonial society’s plow usage. In particular, columns
(1) and (2) establish that societies that resided in regions that were more suitable for the use of the plow
are more likely to use an aboriginal plow. A one-standard deviation increase in pre-1500CE caloric
suitability of plow negative crops is associated with a 6 percentage points decrease in the probability
  43
      Given the greater uncertainty about the geographical extent of the Urheimat, as opposed to the contemporary
linguistic homeland, measurement errors in the estimates of crop return in the Urheimat are likely to be larger than
those from crop return in the contemporary homeland and a-priori the horse race between the two variables should have
resulted in fact in the decline in the significance of crop return in the Urheimat.
   44
      Tables B7, B11 and B16 examine the robustness of this analysis to alternative aspects of grammatical gender.



                                                         29
                                       Grammatical
                                         Gender




                                 Geographical Determinants
                                                                                         Plow Usage
                                    of Plow Agriculture


Figure 8: Geographical Determinants of Plow-based Agriculture, Plow Usage & Grammatical Gender

            Table 7: Geographic Origins of Plow Usage and Sex-Based Grammatical Gender

                                                                                               Mechanism
                                                                                Plow Usage             Grammatical Gender
                                                                          (1)                (2)           (3)           (4)
   Plow Negative Crops (Average Caloric Yield, pre-1500)               -0.26***         -0.06**
                                                                       (0.02)           (0.02)
   All Crops (Average Caloric Yield, pre-1500)                         0.26***          0.09***
                                                                       (0.02)           (0.02)
   Plow Usage                                                                                          0.38***         0.23**
                                                                                                       (0.08)          (0.11)
   All Geographic Controls                                             No               Yes            No              Yes
   Regional FE                                                         No               Yes            No              Yes
   Adjusted-R2                                                         0.19             0.47           0.14            0.31
   Observations                                                        1175             1175           145             145
   Notes: This table establishes, based on OLS regression, the positive statistically and economically significant association
   between the geographical determinants of plow usage and the existence of sex-based grammatical gender in a language. The
   first two columns provide the associations between the geographical determinants of plow suitability and actual usage of the
   plow, and columns (3) and (4) provide evidence on the association between actual usage of the plow and the emergence of
   sex-based grammatical gender. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes
   statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



of the usage of the plow. Similarly, a one-standard deviation increase in pre-1500CE caloric suitability
of all crops is associated with a 9 percentage points increase in the probability of the usage of the
plow. Moreover, columns (3) and (4) establish the positive association between the usage of the plow
in a pre-colonial ethnic group and the probability of the existence of sex-based grammatical gender in
the language used by this ethnic group. The results suggest that a one standard deviation increase
in the usage of the plow is associated with a 23 percentage points increase in the probability of the
existence of sex-based grammatical gender.

5.4    Gender Bias and Sex-Based Grammatical Gender
This section explores the association between the existence of a gender bias in a given community and
the existence of sex-based grammatical gender in the language the members of the community speak.
In light of the proposed hypothesis that sex-based grammatical gender is complementary to gender
biased behavior, the prevalence of gender biases within a given society is likely to be associated with the


                                                              30
presence of sex-based grammatical gender in the language used among members of this society. Indeed,
the common geographical origins (i.e., the geographical determinants of plow-based agriculture) of
gender bias as well as sex-based grammatical gender suggest that this positive association is likely to
be observed across various speech communities.

                              Table 8: Gender Bias and Sex-based Grammatical Gender

                                                                                                  Gender Bias

                                                                                      All                        Old World

                                                                               (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)

         Existence of Sex-Based Grammatical Gender                           0.27           0.42**        0.18          0.18*
                                                                             (0.23)         (0.16)        (0.23)        (0.09)
         Plow Negative Crops (Average Caloric Yield, pre-1500)                              0.16                        -0.25
                                                                                            (0.43)                      (0.29)
         All Crops (Average Caloric Yield, pre-1500)                                        -0.35                       0.19
                                                                                            (0.49)                      (0.34)

         Main Geographical Controls                                          No             Yes           No            Yes
                      2
         Adjusted-R                                                          0.04           0.33          -0.00         0.38
         Observations                                                        33             33            30            30
         Notes: This table establishes the statistically and economically significant association between the existence of sex-
         based grammatical gender and gender bias in society. The analysis accounts for the geographical origins of sex-
         based grammatical gender and other geographical characteristics of the contemporary homeland of the language.
         Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates clustered at the language family level are reported in parentheses;
         *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided
         hypothesis tests.


     Table 8 explores the association between the prevalence of gender biases within a given society and
the presence of sex-based grammatical gender in the language used among members of this society.45 It
establishes a positive association between the existence of sex-based grammatical gender and gender
biases.46 This positive association is present among speakers of languages in the world as a whole
(Columns (1) and (2)), as well as among speakers who reside in the Old World and speak languages
originated in the Old World (Columns (3) and (4)). These findings lend credence to the proposed
hypothesis that the prevalence of gender biases and the presence of sex-based grammatical gender
have coevolved in the course of human history.


6        The Origins of Politeness Distinctions in Pronouns
The hypothesized coevolution of hierarchical orientation (e.g., obedience, conformity, and power dis-
tance) and politeness distinctions suggests that in societies characterized by higher hierarchical ori-
    45
      The measure of gender bias is based on the first principal component to the answer of the following questions in the
World Values Survey (WVS): (i) “When jobs are scarce men should have more right to a job than women”, (ii) “Men
make better political leaders than women do”, (iii) “Women should have the same rights as men”, (iv) “A job is the
best way for women to be independent”, (v) “It is a problem if women have more income than husband”, and (vi) “Men
make better political leaders than women do”.
   46
      The sample of languages in the WVS for which grammatical gender data exists is small and has little regional
variation. This impedes the use of regional fixed-effects in the analysis and reduces the significance of the estimates.


                                                                  31
entation in the distant past, politeness distinctions have emerged and persisted over time, reinforcing
the existing hierarchical orientation in society. Thus, in view of the established positive association
between the extent of ecological diversity and the emergence of hierarchical societies (Fenske, 2014),
ecological diversity is hypothesized to affect the emergence and the prevalence of politeness distinctions
in the course of human history.

                         Table 9: Geographic Origins of Politeness Distinctions (OLS)

                                                               Existence of Politeness Distinctions
                                        (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)
    Ecological Diversity             0.15***          0.10***          0.10***           0.10**         0.10**          0.10**
                                     (0.03)           (0.04)           (0.04)            (0.04)         (0.04)          (0.04)
    Geographical Controls            No               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes
    Precipitation Controls           No               No               Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes
    Temperature Controls             No               No               No                Yes            Yes             Yes
    Unproductive Period              No               No               No                No             Yes             Yes
    Regional FE                      No               No               No                No             No              Yes
    Adjusted-R2                      0.09             0.18             0.20              0.20           0.21            0.32
    Observations                     198              198              198               198            198             198
    Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant association between ecological
    diversity and the existence of politeness distinctions in a language, accounting for regional fixed-effects and other
    geographical characteristics. All columns have the same specification and controls as Table 1. Geographical controls
    include absolute latitude, mean elevation, terrain ruggedness, and coast length, as well as other agriculture-related
    controls as precipitation and temperature means and standard deviations. All independent variables have been nor-
    malized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared
    and show the impact of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on the probability of having a future
    tense in the language. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes
    statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.


   This section analyzes the relation between the existence of politeness distinctions in pronouns across
contemporary languages and the extent of ecological diversity in their contemporary geographical
homelands (i.e., the indigenous regions that spoke the language in the pre-colonial as well as in the
post-colonial era), as well as in their ancestral homeland (i.e., their Urheimat). In particular, Table 9
explores the association between the extent of ecological diversity in the contemporary homeland and
the existence of politeness distinctions.47 As established in column (1), the association between the
extent of ecological diversity in the language’s contemporary homeland and the existence of politeness
distinctions is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level, suggesting that a one standard
deviation increase in the extent of ecological diversity in the language’s contemporary homeland is
associated with a 15 percentage points increase in the probability that the language is characterized
by the existence of politeness distinctions. Furthermore, as established in column (2), the estimated
relationship remains highly significant once the potentially confounding effects of the geographical
characteristics (i.e., absolute latitude, mean elevation, terrain ruggedness, and the length of its sea
coast) in the contemporary homeland of each language, are accounted for. Moreover, since ecological
diversity partly captures climatic conditions, it might be capturing the potentially direct impact of
climatic conditions on the existence of politeness distinctions. Nevertheless, as established in columns
(3) and (4), accounting for the potentially confounding effects of average temperature and precipitation,
  47
       Table C1 reports the estimated coefficients on the control variables in Table 9.


                                                                32
as well as their standard deviations, volatility, and spatial correlation, does not alter the results
qualitatively or quantitatively.
   Furthermore, the length of the period within each year in which the land is not suitable for agricul-
ture – the unproductive period – may have conceivably affected the profitability of trade and therefore
the association between ecological diversity and the emergence of hierarchical societies. Nevertheless,
as indicated by column (5), accounting for the length of the unproductive period has little impact
on the estimated association. Finally, as reported in column (6), accounting for regional fixed-effects,
and therefore for unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity at the regional level does not alter the qual-
itative results. In particular, a one standard deviation increase in the extent of ecological diversity
in the language’s contemporary homeland is associated with a 10 percentage points increase in the
probability that the language is characterized by politeness distinctions.

6.1     Robustness
The findings in Table 9 lend credence to the hypothesis that the extent of ecological diversity and its
effect on the emergence of hierarchical societies, contributed to the emergence of politeness distinctions.
Nevertheless, the results conceivably might be biased due to omitted institutional, cultural, and human
characteristics, precluding a causal interpretation of the estimated coefficients. While concerns about
omitted variables will be directly addressed and mitigated in the next subsection, the remaining
analysis in this section establishes the robustness of the results to: (i) an alternative estimation
method, (ii) spatial autocorrelation, and (iii) clustering of standard errors, while demonstrating that
the findings are unlikely to be driven by selection on unobservables. Moreover, the robustness to
alternative aspects of politeness distinctions are also considered.

6.1.1    Estimation Method, Spatial-Autocorrelation and Selection on Unobservables

Table C2 (Panel A) establishes that the estimated average marginal effects of the Probit model are
nearly identical to the estimated coefficients using OLS. Furthermore, Table C2 (Panel B) establishes
the robustness of the results to the clustering of the standard errors at the level of the language
genus (i.e., a group of phylogenetically related languages inside a linguistic family), as well as spatial
auto-correlation. In particular, the statistical significance is unaffected by the various methods used.
   Table C2 (Panel B) further explores the potential bias that could be generated by omitted variables.
In particular, using statistics on selection on observables and unobservables (Altonji et al., 2005; Oster,
2014), it establishes that the degree of omitted variable bias is low and is unlikely to explain the
magnitude of the estimated association between ecological diversity and the existence of politeness
distinctions. In particular, omitted factors would need to be 3-5 times more strongly correlated with
ecological diversity, in order to account for the estimated association between ecological diversity and
the emergence of politeness distinctions. Indeed, the bias-adjusted estimated coefficient of ecological
diversity is only slightly smaller than the value of the OLS estimate. In particular, as reported in
column (6), following Oster (2014), the bias-corrected coefficient of ecological diversity, assuming that
the unobservables are as strongly correlated with ecological diversity as the set of observables that



                                                    33
are accounted for, implies that a one standard deviation increase in ecological diversity is associated
with an 8 percentage points increase in the probability of the existence of politeness distinctions in
pronouns.

6.1.2    Alternative Aspects of Politeness Distinctions

Tables C4 and C10 establish qualitatively similar associations between ecological diversity and (i) an
alternative measure of politeness distinctions in pronouns, and (ii) the intensity of politeness distinc-
tions in a language. These results suggest that various aspects of politeness distinctions that have
reinforced hierarchical orientation, were associated with ecological diversity. Moreover, Tables C5
and C11 establish the robustness of these alternative associations to: (i) an alternative estimation
method, (ii) spatial autocorrelation, and (iii) clustering of standard errors, while demonstrating that
the findings are unlikely to be driven by selection on unobservables.

6.1.3    Ecological Diversity and Other Language Structures

The associations between the extent of ecological diversity and politeness distinctions may reflect a
broader association between ecological diversity and a wide range of linguistic traits, rather than its
unique association with politeness distinctions, weakening the proposed hypothesis. Moreover, the
association between the extent of ecological diversity and politeness distinctions in the language may
reflect a broader association between a whole range of linguistic traits and politeness distinctions.
    Table C3 establishes, however, that alternative language structures (as reported by WALS), such
as the existence of other temporal and non-temporal structures, are largely uncorrelated with the
geographical determinants of hierarchical society. In particular the extent of ecological diversity is
not significantly associated with the existence of the past and the perfect tense, and it is orthogonal
to non-temporal linguistic characteristics such as: (i) the existence of possessive classifications, (ii)
the existence of coding for evidentiality, (iii) the number of consonants, and (iv) the number of col-
ors. Furthermore, using all available data on language structures as reported in WALS, Figure C1
establishes the orthogonality of ecological diversity for all language structures that are not related to
politeness distinctions.48 These results lend further support to the hypothesis that ecological diversity
is uniquely associated with the emergence of politeness distinctions.

6.2     Geographical Origins: Contemporary Homeland vs. Urheimat
This subsection exploits the descent of contemporary languages from proto-languages to explore the
relative contributions of ecological diversity in (i) the contemporary homeland of the language and (ii)
   48
     Specifically, the only other structures that are statistically associated with ecological diversity are: consonant-vowel
ratio (variable 3A in WALS), inclusive/exclusive distinction in independent personal pronouns (39A), and existence of
passive constructions (107A). The significant correlation with the consonant-vowel ratio may reflect the positive impact
of this variable on the emergence of states (Depetris-Chauvin and Özak, 2016), and thus of hierarchical societies, which in
turn are also associated with politeness distinctions. The association with inclusive/exclusive distinction in independent
personal pronouns (39A) may reflect the commonality among certain aspects of languages or simply the fact that this
variable is not ordinal, and as such the correlation is merely due to randomness in the ordering of this variable. Finally,
the association with the existence of passive constructions seems to reflect its use as a politeness device (Brown and
Levinson, 1987; Sifianou, 1992).


                                                             34
the ancestral homeland of the language (i.e., its Urheimat) to the existence of politeness distinctions.

   Table 10: The Relative Contribution of Ecological Diversity in the Linguistic Homeland vs. the
                        Urheimat to the Existence of Politeness Distinction:
                             Daugther Languages Outside Urheimat

                                                                   The Existence of Politeness Distinctions
                                                                      Migratory Distance to Urheimat
                                                                 Any Distance               At Least 1 Week
                                                       Homeland Urheimat         Both     Homeland Urheimat         Both
                                                           (1)           (2)      (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
        Homeland’s Ecological Diversity                0.11***                  0.11*** 0.12***                   0.10***
                                                       (0.02)                   (0.02) (0.02)                     (0.02)
        Urheimat’s Ecological Diversity                               0.10***   0.05                  0.16***     0.07
                                                                      (0.03)    (0.03)                (0.04)      (0.05)
        Regional FE                                    Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
        Homeland’s Geographical Characteristics        Yes            No        Yes       Yes         No          Yes
        Urheimat’s Geographical Characteristics        No             Yes       Yes       No          Yes         Yes
        Adjusted-R2                                    0.41           0.41      0.51      0.37        0.43        0.49
        Observations                                   146            146       146       126         126         126
        Language Families                              36             36        36        28          28          28
        Notes: This table establishes the importance of ecological diversity in the contemporary homeland rather
        than in the Urheimat to the presence of politeness distinctions in daughter languages located outside of the
        Urheimat, accounting for regional fixed-effects and other geographical characteristics. Geographical controls
        include absolute latitude, mean elevation, terrain ruggedness, and coast length. Columns (1)-(3) consider
        daughter languages anywhere outside of the Urhemat while column (4)-(6) those who are at least a week of
        migratory distance from the Urheimat. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their
        mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the impact
        of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on the probability of having a future tense in the
        language. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates clustered at the language family level are reported
        in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level,
        all for two-sided hypothesis tests.


    Table 10 explores the relative contributions of the extent of ecological diversity in the contem-
porary language’s homeland vs. its Urheimat to the presence of politeness distinctions in daughter
languages. It establishes that the existence of politeness distinctions in pronouns among daughter lan-
guages located outside their Urheimat are predominantly associated with ecological diversity in their
contemporary homeland.           49   Columns (1) - (6) establish that the extent of ecological diversity in the
contemporary homeland of a language has a highly significant positive association with the existence of
politeness distinctions among migrant languages, dominating the association with the characteristics
in the Urheimat. Accounting for regional fixed-effects and other geographical characteristics of the
homeland, a one standard deviation increase in ecological diversity in the contemporary homeland of
the language is associated with a 10-12 percentage points increase in the probability that a migrant
daughter language would have politeness distinctions in pronouns. Similarly, Tables C7 and C13 es-
tablish analogous results of the association between ecological diversity and (i) an alternative measure
of politeness distinctions in pronouns and (ii) the intensity of politeness distinctions in pronouns.
    The analysis mirrors the epidemiological approach to cultural diffusion, and establishes the geo-
  49
      Given the potential dependence of languages within the same language family, standard errors are clustered at this
level.


                                                                 35
graphical origins of the existence of politeness distinctions based on variation across languages located
outside the Urheimat (i.e., ancestral homeland of their proto-language). This approach permits the
analysis to account for host region fixed-effects and thus to capture unobserved time-invariant hetero-
geneity at the regional level, thus mitigating concerns about omitted variables.
   These results suggests that politeness distinctions have emerged primarily during the demic diffu-
sion of the language. Indeed, these results can be interpreted as an outcome of sorting of hierarchy-
averse individuals into geographical locations where hierarchies are less likely to emerge. Interestingly,
this would suggest that hierarchical structures and thus politeness distinctions would be more preva-
lent in geographical locations characterized by ecological diversity, where individuals are not freely
mobile and could not flee oppression (Carneiro, 1970).
   The evidence provided in this section supports the proposed hypothesis that ecological diversity
affects the existence of politeness distinctions in a language, shedding light on the coevolution of lan-
guage and culture. Furthermore, consistent with evidence about the greater adaptability of politeness
distinctions to environmental and political changes (Wichmann and Holman, 2009; Greenhill et al.,
2010; Dediu and Levinson, 2012; Dediu and Cysouw, 2013; Greenhill et al., 2017), in comparison to
the structure of the future tense and sex-based grammatical gender, the findings suggest that while
geographical characteristics in the Urheimat are associated with the existence of the periphrastic fu-
ture tense and sex-based grammatical gender, the geographical characteristics in the homeland of the
daughter languages are associated with the existence of politeness distinctions. In particular, in line
with the conventional wisdom among linguists about the relative fluidity of politeness distinctions, the
evidence suggests that the existence of politeness distinctions in contemporary languages are originated
predominantly in cultural processes that took place after proto-languages were formed and daughter
languages had started to emerge. Moreover, the evidence is consistent with the possible sorting of
hierarchy-averse individuals into geographical locations that are less prone to be conducive for the
emergence of hierarchical structures, which may have played a role in the positive association between
ecological diversity in the contemporary homeland of the language and the existence of politeness
distinctions.

6.3   Mechanism
This section presents additional supportive evidence for the hypothesized geographical origins of po-
liteness distinctions. In view of the evidence about the effect of ecological diversity on the emergence
of hierarchical structures (Fenske, 2014; Depetris-Chauvin and Özak, 2016), the effect of ecological
diversity on the emergence of politeness distinctions would necessitate the emergence of hierarchical
structures. In particular, as illustrated in Figure 9, the proposed hypothesis would imply that: (i)
ecological diversity ought to be associated with more hierarchical structures, and (ii) more hierarchical
structures ought to be associated with the existence of politeness distinctions.
   Table 11 presents supporting evidence for the proposed mechanism. In particular, it establishes
the robust positive association between ecological diversity and the level of jurisdictional hierarchy in
a pre-colonial ethnic group, which in turn is positively associated with the emergence of politeness
distinctions in pronouns. Using data from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock and White, 1969) on the


                                                   36
                                         Politeness
                                        Distinctions




                                         Ecological
                                                                             Hierarchy
                                         Diversity


                    Figure 9: Ecological Diversity, Hierarchy & Politeness Distinctions


level of jurisdictional hierarchy above the local level – a proxy for the size and strength of the State and
hierarchical structures – the analysis explores the association between ecological diversity and a pre-
colonial ethnicity’s level of jurisdictional hierarchy. In particular, columns (1) and (2) establish that
societies inhabiting regions with higher ecological diversity had higher levels of jurisdictional hierarchy.
The results suggest that a one-standard deviation increase in ecological diversity is associated with
0.12 standard deviations increase in jurisdictional hierarchy. Moreover, columns (3) and (4) establish
the positive association between the level of jurisdictional hierarchy in a pre-colonial ethnic group and
the probability of existence of politeness distinctions in the language spoken by the ethnic group. The
results suggest that a one standard deviation increase in jurisdictional hierarchy is associated with a
16 percentage points increase in the probability of existence of politeness distinctions in pronouns.

        Table 11: Geographic Origins of Politeness Distinctions and Jurisdictional Hierarchy

                                                                             Mechanism
                                               Jurisdictional Hierarchy                            Politeness
                                                 (1)                 (2)                   (3)                   (4)
        Ecological Diversity                  0.23***              0.12***
                                              (0.04)               (0.03)
        Jurisdictional Hierarchy                                                         0.21***          0.16***
                                                                                         (0.02)           (0.03)
        All Geographic Controls               No                   Yes                   No               Yes
        Regional FE                           No                   Yes                   No               Yes
        Adjusted-R2                           0.07                 0.32                  0.34             0.48
        Observations                          1154                 1154                  139              139
        Notes: This table establishes the positive statistically and economically significant association between the
        geographical determinants of statehood, as measured by jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local level, and
        politeness distinctions in a language. The first two columns provide the results of the association between
        ecological diversity and statehood, and columns (3) and (4) show the association between statehood and the
        emergence of politeness distinctions. The table shows the estimated coefficients in an OLS regression as the
        dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is not binary. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are
        reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the
        10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




6.4   Hierarchical Orientation and Politeness Distinctions
This section explores the association between the hierarchical orientation in a given community and
the existence of politeness distinctions in the language the members of the community speak. In light

                                                              37
of the proposed hypothesis that politeness distinctions in pronouns are complementary to hierarchical
structures and cultures, the prevalence of hierarchical orientation within a given society is likely to be
associated with the presence of politeness distinctions in the language used among members of this
society. Indeed, the common geographical origins (i.e., ecological diversity) of hierarchical orientation
as well as politeness distinctions suggest that this positive association is likely to be observed across
various speech communities.

                                         Table 12: Hierarchy and Politeness

                                                                                 Hierarchy Index

                                                                      All                            Old World

                                                           (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

                  Politeness Distinctions                0.37**             0.23**        0.45***           0.29***
                                                         (0.13)             (0.09)        (0.10)            (0.06)
                  Ecological Diversity                                      0.14                            0.05
                                                                            (0.13)                          (0.14)

                  Main Geographical Controls             No                 Yes           No                Yes
                  Adjusted-R2                            0.12               0.27          0.19              0.36
                  Observations                           53                 53            50                50
                  Notes: This table establishes the statistically and economically positive association between
                  of politeness distinctions and preferences for hierarchy in society. The analysis accounts
                  for the geographical origins of politeness distinctions and other geographical characteristics
                  of the contemporary homeland of the language. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error
                  estimates clustered at the language family level are reported in parentheses; *** denotes
                  statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
                  two-sided hypothesis tests.


    Table 12 explores the association between the prevalence of hierarchical orientation within a given
society and the presence of politeness distinctions in pronouns in the language used among members of
this society.50 It establishes the positive statistically and economically significant association between
the existence of the politeness distinctions in pronouns and hierarchical orientation.51 This significant
positive association is present among speakers of languages in the world as a whole (Columns (1) and
(2)), as well as among speakers who reside in the Old World and speak languages originated in the
Old World (Columns (3) and (4)). These findings lend credence to the proposed hypothesis that the
prevalence of hierarchical orientation and the presence of politeness distinctions have coevolved in the
course of human history.
   50
      The measure of hierarchical orientation is based on the following questions in the World Values Survey (WVS):
“Here is a list of qualities that children can be encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to be
especially important?” Individuals are considered to have higher hierarchical orientation if they answered “Obedience”
or “Religious Faith” and lower if they answered “Independence” or “Determination, Perseverance”. This measure is the
opposite of the Autonomy Index introduced in Welzel (2013).
   51
      The sample of languages in the WVS for which politeness distinctions data exists has little regional variation. This
impedes the use of regional fixed-effects in the analysis of the main measure of politeness distinctions. Reassuringly, as
established in Tables C9 and C15, exploiting the larger regional variations present in the additional measures of politeness
distinctions, permits the analysis to account for regional fixed-effects, obtaining qualitatively similar results.




                                                                 38
7    Concluding Remarks
This research explores the geographical origins of the coevolution of cultural and linguistic traits in the
course of human history, relating the geographical roots of long-term orientation to the structure of
the future tense, the agricultural determinants of gender bias to the presence of sex-based grammatical
gender, and the ecological origins of hierarchical orientation to the existence of politeness distinctions.
The study advances the hypothesis and establishes empirically that: (i) variations in geographical
characteristics that were conducive to higher natural return to agricultural investment contributed
to the existing cross-language variations in the structure of the future tense, (ii) the agricultural
determinants of gender gap in agricultural productivity fostered the existence of sex-based grammatical
gender, and (iii) the ecological origins of hierarchical societies triggered the emergence of politeness
distinctions.


References
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J. A. (2001). The colonial origins of comparative develop-
  ment: An empirical investigation, The American Economic Review 91(5): 1369–1401.
Alesina, A., Devleeschauwer, A., Easterly, W., Kurlat, S. and Wacziarg, R. (2003). Fractionalization,
  Journal of Economic growth 8(2): 155–194.
Alesina, A. and Ferrara, E. L. (2005). Ethnic diversity and economic performance, Journal of economic
  literature 43(3): 762–800.
Alesina, A., Giuliano, P. and Nunn, N. (2013). On the origins of gender roles: Women and the plough,
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2): 469–530.
Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E. and Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
  Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools, Journal of Political Economy 113(1): 151–184.
Ashraf, Q. and Galor, O. (2013a). Genetic diversity and the origins of cultural fragmentation, The
  American Economic Review 103(3): 528–533.
Ashraf, Q. and Galor, O. (2013b). The out of africa hypothesis, human genetic diversity, and compar-
  ative economic development, The American Economic Review 103(1): 1–46.
Bentivoglio, P. (2003). Spanish forms of address in the sixteenth century, in I. Taavitsainen and
  A. H. Jucker (eds), Diachronic Perspectives on Address Term Systems, John Benjamins Publishing,
  pp. 177–192.
Bickerton, D. (2007). Language evolution: A brief guide for linguists, Lingua 117(3): 510–526.
Bisin, A. and Verdier, T. (2000). Beyond the melting pot: cultural transmission, marriage, and the
  evolution of ethnic and religious traits, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3): 955–988.
Blench, R. (2013). African agricultural tools, Archaeology of African Plant Use 61: 243.
Bouckaert, R., Lemey, P., Dunn, M., Greenhill, S. J., Alekseyenko, A. V., Drummond, A. J., Gray,
  R. D., Suchard, M. A. and Atkinson, Q. D. (2012). Mapping the origins and expansion of the
  indo-european language family, Science 337(6097): 957–960.
Brown, P. and Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage, Vol. 4, Cam-
  bridge university press.
Brown, R. and Gilman, A. (1960). The pronouns of power and solidarity, in T. A. Sebeok (ed.), Style
  in Language, MIT Press, chapter 12.
Brown, R. and Gilman, A. (1989). Politeness theory and shakespeare’s four major tragedies, Language
  in society 18(02): 159–212.



                                                    39
Bybee, J. L. and Dahl, Ö. (1989). The creation of tense and aspect systems in the languages of the
  world, Studies in language 13(1): 51–103.
Bybee, J. L. and Pagliuca, W. (1987). The evolution of future meaning, Papers from the 7th interna-
  tional conference on historical linguistics, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 109–122.
Bybee, J. L., Perkins, R. and Pagliuca, W. (1994). The evolution of grammar.
Carneiro, R. L. (1970). A theory of the origin of the state: Traditional theories of state origins are
  considered and rejected in favor of a new ecological hypothesis, Science 169(3947): 733–738.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. (2000). Genes, peoples, and languages, 1st ed edn, North Point Press, New York.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., Menozzi, P. and Piazza, A. (1994). The history and geography of human genes,
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Chen, M. K. (2013). The effect of language on economic behavior: Evidence from savings rates, health
  behaviors, and retirement assets, The American Economic Review 103(2): 690–731.
Christiansen, M. H. and Kirby, S. (2003a). Language evolution, Vol. 3, Oxford University Press,
  Oxford.
Christiansen, M. H. and Kirby, S. (2003b). Language evolution: the hardest problem in science?,
  in M. H. Christiansen and S. Kirby (eds), Language evolution, Vol. 3, Oxford University Press,
  pp. 1–15.
Conley, T. G. (1999). GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence, Journal of econometrics
  92(1): 1–45.
Corbett, G. G. (2013a). Number of Genders, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
  Leipzig.
Corbett, G. G. (2013b). Sex-based and non-sex-based gender systems, in M. S. Dryer and M. Haspel-
  math (eds), The World Atlas of Language Structures Online, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
  Anthropology, Leipzig.
Corbett, G. G. (2013c). Systems of Gender Assignment, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary An-
  thropology, Leipzig.
Dahl, Ö. (1985). Tense and aspect systems, Basil Blackwell.
Dahl, Ö. (2000). The grammar of future time reference in european languages, Tense and Aspect in
  the Languages of Europe p. 309.
Dahl, Ö. and Velupillai, V. (2013). The future tense, in M. S. Dryer and M. Haspelmath (eds), The
  World Atlas of Language Structures Online, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
  Leipzig.
Davis, L. S. and Abdurazokzoda, F. (2016). Language, culture and institutions: Evidence from a new
  linguistic dataset, Journal of Comparative Economics 44(3): 541–561.
Dediu, D. and Cysouw, M. (2013). Some structural aspects of language are more stable than others:
  A comparison of seven methods, PloS one 8(1): e55009.
Dediu, D. and Levinson, S. C. (2012). Abstract profiles of structural stability point to universal ten-
  dencies, family-specific factors, and ancient connections between languages, PloS One 7(9): e45198.
del Castillo Mathieu, N. (1982). Testimonios del uso de vuestra merced, vos y tu en américa (1500-
  1650), Thesaurus. Boletin del Instituto Caro y Cuervo Bogota 37(3): 602–644.
Depetris-Chauvin, E. and Özak, Ö. (2016). Population diversity, division of labor and comparative
  development, Working Paper, Southern Methodist University, Department of Economics .
Desmet, K., Ortuño-Ortı́n, I. and Wacziarg, R. (2012). The political economy of linguistic cleavages,
  Journal of development Economics 97(2): 322–338.
Diamond, J. M. (1997). Guns, germs, and steel: the fates of human societies, 1st ed edn, W.W. Norton
  & Co., New York.
Dryer, Matthew S & Haspelmath, M. (ed.) (2013). The World Atlas of of Language Structures Online.,
  Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.



                                                  40
Durante, R. (2010). Risk, cooperation and the economic origins of social trust: an empirical investi-
  gation.
Easterly, W. and Levine, R. (1997). Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic divisions, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 1203–1250.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (2003). Language and gender, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
  bridge.
Falk, A., Becker, A., Dohmen, T., Enke, B., Huffman, D. and Sunde, U. (2018). Global evidence on
  economic preferences, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(4): 1645–1692.
Fearon, J. D. (2003). Ethnic and cultural diversity by country, Journal of Economic Growth 8(2): 195–
  222.
Fenske, J. (2014). Ecology, trade, and states in pre-colonial africa, Journal of the European Economic
  Association 12(3): 612–640.
Fernández, R. (2012). Does culture matter?, in J. Benhabib, A. Bisin and M. O. Jackson (eds),
  Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1B, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Figlio, D., Giuliano, P., Özek, U. and Sapienza, P. (2016). Long-term orientation and educational
  performance, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gallup, J. L., Sachs, J. D. and Mellinger, A. D. (1999). Geography and economic development,
  International regional science review 22(2): 179–232.
Galor, O. and Moav, O. (2002). Natural selection and the origin of economic growth, The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117(4): 1133–1191.
Galor, O. and Özak, Ö. (2016). The agricultural origins of time preference, American Economic
  Review 106(10): 3064–3103.
Ginsburgh, V. and Weber, S. (2018a). The economics of language.
Ginsburgh, V. and Weber, S. (2018b). The Palgrave Handbook of Economics and Language, Palgrave
  handbooks, Palgrave.
Glaeser, E. L., La Porta, R., Lopez-de Silanes, F. and Shleifer, A. (2004). Do institutions cause
  growth?, Journal of economic Growth 9(3): 271–303.
GLOBE Task Team and others (ed.) (1999). The Global Land One-kilometer Base Elevation (GLOBE)
  Digital Elevation Model, Version 1.0., National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National
  Geophysical Data Center, 325 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80303, U.S.A.
Greenhill, S. J., Atkinson, Q. D., Meade, A. and Gray, R. D. (2010). The shape and tempo of language
  evolution, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 277(1693): 2443–2450.
Greenhill, S. J., Wu, C.-H., Hua, X., Dunn, M., Levinson, S. C. and Gray, R. D. (2017). Evolutionary
  dynamics of language systems, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114(42): E8822–
  E8829.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L. (2004). The role of social capital in financial development,
  American Economic Review 94(3): 526–556.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L. (2006). Does culture affect economic outcomes?, Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 20(2): 23–48.
Harutyunyan, A. and Özak, Ö. (2016). Culture, diffusion, and economic development, SMU Working
  Paper Series .
Hellinger, M. and Bufimann, H. (2001). Gender across languages the linguistic representation of
  women and, in M. Hellinger and H. Motschenbacher (eds), Gender Across Languages, Vol. 4, John
  Benjamins Publishing, chapter 3, pp. 1–25.
Helmbrecht, J. (2003). Politeness distinctions in second person pronouns, Pragmatics and beyond New
  Series pp. 185–202.
Helmbrecht, J. (2005). Politeness distinctions in pronouns, The world atlas of language structures
  pp. 186–190.



                                                 41
Helmbrecht, J. (2013). Politeness distinctions in pronouns, in M. S. Dryer and M. Haspelmath (eds),
   The World Atlas of Language Structures Online, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropol-
   ogy, Leipzig.
Lakoff, R. (1973). Language and woman’s place, Language in society 2(1): 45–79.
Lal, R. (2009). The plow and agricultural sustainability, Journal of sustainable agriculture 33(1): 66–
   84.
Lal, R., Reicosky, D. and Hanson, J. (2007). Evolution of the plow over 10,000 years and the rationale
   for no-till farming, Soil & Tillage Research 1(93): 1–12.
Lestrade, S. and de Hoop, H. (2016). On case and tense: The role of grounding in differential subject
   marking, The Linguistic Review 33(3): 397–410.
Lewis, M. P., Simons, G. F. and Fennig, C. D. (2009). Ethnologue: Languages of the world, Vol. 16,
   SIL international Dallas, TX.
Michalopoulos, S. (2012). The origins of ethnolinguistic diversity, The American Economic Review
   102(4): 1508.
Murdock, G. P. (1967). Ethnographic atlas: a summary, Ethnology pp. 109–236.
Murdock, G. P. and White, D. R. (1969). Standard cross-cultural sample, Ethnology pp. 329–369.
Nunn, N. and Wantchekon, L. (2011). The slave trade and the origins of mistrust in africa, American
   Economic Review 101(7): 3221–52.
Olson, D. M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E. D., Burgess, N. D., Powell, G. V., Underwood, E. C.,
   D’amico, J. A., Itoua, I., Strand, H. E., Morrison, J. C. et al. (2001). Terrestrial ecoregions of the
   world: A new map of life on earth a new global map of terrestrial ecoregions provides an innovative
   tool for conserving biodiversity, BioScience 51(11): 933–938.
Oster, E. (2014). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and validation.
Pagel, M., Atkinson, Q. D., Calude, A. S. and Meade, A. (2013). Ultraconserved words point to deep
   language ancestry across eurasia, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110(21): 8471–
   8476.
Piggott, S. (1983). The earliest wheeled transport, from the Atlantic coast to the Caspian Sea.
Pinker, S. and Bloom, P. (1990). Natural language and natural selection, Behavioral and brain sciences
   13(4): 707–727.
Pokorny, J. (1948). Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch, Francke, Bern.
Pryor, F. L. (1985). The invention of the plow, Comparative Studies in Society and history 27(04): 727–
   743.
Richerson, P. J., Boyd, R. and Henrich, J. (2010). Gene-culture coevolution in the age of genomics,
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(Supplement 2): 8985–8992.
Riley, S., DeGloria, S. and Elliot, R. (1999). A terrain ruggedness index that quantifies topographic
   heterogeneity, Intermountain Journal of Sciences 5(1-4): 23–27.
Roberts, S. and Winters, J. (2012). Social structure and language structure: The new nomothetic
   approach, Psychology of Language and Communication 16(2): 89–112.
Siewierska, A. (2013). Gender Distinctions in Independent Personal Pronouns, Max Planck Institute
   for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig.
Sifianou, M. (1992). Politeness phenomena in England and Greece: a cross-cultural perspective, Claren-
   don Press, Oxford.
Solé, Y. R. (1970). Correlaciones socio-culturales del uso de tú/vos y usted en la argentina,
   perú y puerto rico, Thesaurus 1(2): 161–195.
Spolaore, E. and Wacziarg, R. (2013). Long-term barriers to economic development, Handbook of
   Economic Growth, Vol. 2, Elsevier, p. 121.
Stahlberg, D., Braun, F., Irmen, L. and Sczesny, S. (2007). Representation of the sexes in language,
   Social communication pp. 163–187.



                                                   42
Tabellini, G. (2010). Culture and institutions: economic development in the regions of europe, Journal
  of the European Economic Association 8(4): 677–716.
Welzel, C. (2013). Freedom rising: human empowerment and the quest for emancipation, Cambridge
  University Press, New York.
Wichmann, S. (2017). Modeling language family expansions, Diachronica 34(1): 79–101.
Wichmann, S. and Holman, E. W. (2009). Temporal stability of linguistic typological features, Lincom
  Europa.
Wichmann, S., Holman, E. W. and Brown, C. H. (eds) (2018). The ASJP Database (version 18).
Wichmann, S., Müller, A. and Velupillai, V. (2010). Homelands of the world’s language families: A
  quantitative approach, Diachronica 27(2): 247–276.
Wichmann, S., Müller, A., Velupillai, V., Brown, C. H., Holman, E. W., Brown, P., Urban, M., Sauppe,
  S., Belyaev, O., Molochieva, Z., Wett, A., Bakker, D., List, J.-M., Egorov, D., Mailhammer, R. and
  Geyer, H. (2009). The ASJP Database (Version 12).




                                                 43
