NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ORGANIZING GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAINS:
INPUT COST SHARES AND VERTICAL INTEGRATION
Giuseppe Berlingieri
Frank Pisch
Claudia Steinwender
Working Paper 25286
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25286

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018, Revised April 2019

We thank Laura Alfaro, Pol Antràs, Davin Chor, Bob Gibbons, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Veronica
Rappoport, Armando Rungi, Catherine Thomas, and John Van Reenen for their helpful
comments. We are especially grateful to Paola Conconi and Peter Egger (Pisch’s PhD
committee), and for discussions at the CEPR Conference on GVCs; NUS Conference on Global
Production; CEP Conference; SETC; and presentations at Harvard, MIT, ESSEC, Groningen and
St. Gallen. We thank Corcos et al. (2013) and Keiko Ito for sharing data; Jonathan Colmer for
code; Hanwei Huang for help with Chinese data. Access to French data benefited from the Centre
d’accès sécurisé aux données (CASD), part of the “Investissements d’Avenir” programme
(reference: ANR- 10-EQPX-17) and supported by a public grant overseen by the French National
Research Agency (ANR). Berlingieri acknowledges support by the ESSEC Research Centre and
Pisch by the Wachter Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Giuseppe Berlingieri, Frank Pisch, and Claudia Steinwender. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Organizing Global Supply Chains: Input Cost Shares and Vertical Integration
Giuseppe Berlingieri, Frank Pisch, and Claudia Steinwender
NBER Working Paper No. 25286
November 2018, Revised April 2019
JEL No. F10,F14,F23,L16,L22,L23,O14
ABSTRACT
We study how the technological importance of inputs – measured by cost shares – is related to the
decision to “make” or “buy” that input. Using detailed French international trade data and an
instrumental variable approach based on self-constructed input-output tables, we show that
multinationals vertically integrate high cost share inputs. A stylized incomplete contracting model
with both ex-ante and ex-post inefficiencies explains why: technologically more important inputs
are “made” when transaction cost economics type forces overpower property rights type forces.
However, additional results show that both types forces are needed to explain the full patterns in
the data.
Giuseppe Berlingieri
ESSEC Business School
3 Avenue Bernard Hirsch
95021 Cergy-Pontoise
France
giuseppe.berlingieri@gmail.com
Frank Pisch
University of St. Gallen
Bodanstrasse 8
CH-9000 St. Gallen
Switzerland
frank.pisch@unisg.ch

Claudia Steinwender
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-521
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
csteinwe@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Global supply networks, often termed Global Value Chains (GVCs), are the backbone of
21st century manufacturing. Offshoring has brought substantial productivity and welfare gains to firms and consumers in recent decades.2 Since international transactions
are typically conducted in an environment characterized by severe contractual frictions,
however, they are often distorted and the full gains from international sourcing remain
unrealized.3 Multinational firms have the option to alleviate these inefficiencies by assigning ownership optimally: for the hundreds, sometimes thousands of different inputs they procure internationally, they can decide whether to trade intrafirm or at arm’s
length.4
Naturally, the input-output linkage involved in a trade relationship is a first order consideration in this context. First, the multinational’s trade-off between different
organizational arrangements depends on how important each input is for its output.
Secondly, making efficient integration decisions can have significant consequences, especially for technologically important inputs: Aggregate productivity gains from offshoring the right inputs can be large – but so are losses due to sub-optimal organizational decisions.5 Motivated by these considerations, we study whether and how the
technological importance of an input affects the multinational’s decision of sourcing that
input from an international affiliate or from a stand-alone supplier.
We use detailed French firm-product level import data to document that inputs that
2 Access

to foreign intermediates is an important source for productivity gains, for a literature survey

see Shu and Steinwender (2019). For welfare effects see, for example, Caliendo and Parro (2015) and
Blaum et al. (2018).
3 See Antras and Staiger (2012).
4 This organizational margin is important in the aggregate: about 40% of all US trade is intrafirm (Ruhl,
2015).
5 In addition, the interplay between technological importance of individual inputs and the related
organizational decisions is a crucial aspect for how shocks, including those of international trade policy,
transmit to the supply and demand side of any economy (e.g., Acemoglu et al., 2012; Bernard et al., 2019).

2

are technologically important for a multinational’s output are substantially more likely
to be sourced in-house. To understand this pattern, we construct a stylized incomplete
contracting model with both ex ante and ex post inefficiencies that can explain this result when transaction cost economics type forces (TCE; favoring integration) overpower
property rights type forces (PRT; favoring outsourcing). Additional empirical results
consistent with our theoretical framework show that both TCE and PRT type forces are
actually needed to fully explain the empirical patterns in the data. Our work suggests,
therefore, that it is necessary and important to incorporate TCE mechanisms into models
of multinational activity in GVCs.6
In our main empirical exercise, we compare the sourcing strategies for detailed products sourced by the same firm. We use a cross section of firm level trade data from France
in 1999, which has two particularly useful features: first, product-firm level imports are
split into those that are sourced from affiliates and those that are not; and second, we
can identify the industry of the buyer. The technological importance of a product will be
reflected, among other things, in its cost share. To isolate the variation in cost shares that
is driven by technological linkages, we use variation related to input-output coefficients
across detailed upstream products within a highly disaggregated downstream industry
obtained from detailed self-constructed IO tables from France and other countries. Our
identification assumption is that these industry level linkages capture fundamental –
and thus exogenous to the organizational choice – technological relationships between
inputs and outputs.
Applying this empirical strategy, we show that technologically more important inputs
are more likely to be sourced from affiliated parties. The role of technological linkages
is economically significant: An input at the 75th percentile of the within industry cost
share distribution is about 7 percentage points more likely to be sourced in-house than
one at the 25th percentile, which amounts to about a quarter of the baseline share of
6 For

rare applications of TCE ideas in the trade context, see Costinot et al. (2011) or Alfaro et al. (2016).

3

integration. We document that input-output linkages are at least as important in driving
make-or-buy decisions of multinationals as previously studied determinants such as
capital intensity, skill intensity, or productivity (Corcos et al., 2013).
This is a surprising result, as the property rights frameworks that are typically used
in the current literature on multinational firms would predict exactly the opposite: A
downstream firm faces stronger incentives to outsource the production of more important inputs to independent suppliers, because it wants to limit underinvestment for these
crucial parts and components (PRT type force).7 In the theoretical part of the paper we
show that in order to rationalize our main results, one needs to incorporate the transaction cost economics theory of the firm, as pioneered by Williamson (1985) and Klein et
al. (1978), which emphasizes ex post contracting problems between suppliers and their
customers.8 In these models, suppliers of more important inputs cause greater inefficiencies through haggling or mis-coordination, which the downstream firm tries to curb by
bringing the supplier under its control (TCE type force) — consistent with our empirical
findings.
To understand whether PRT forces are just weak on average or completely absent
and thus, whether both ex ante and ex post inefficiencies are present in the data, we
use our framework to derive additional predictions that hold only when PRT forces are
also at work. Specifically, we extend our model to show that when a supply relationship is subject to a better contracting environment ex ante, or when the multinational
importer’s investment into a relationship is more significant, technological importance
makes intrafirm trade even more likely; in other words, our main result is reinforced.
7 The

property rights framework was developed by Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore

(1990) to conceptualize firm boundaries. Early contributions that incorporate these models in the international trade literature include Antras (2003), Antras and Helpman (2004), and Grossman et al. (2006).
8 While there are several other models of firm boundaries, the most influential and empirically successful line of thought is tied to TCE considerations. Therefore, we view it as the natural starting point in
our context.

4

Intuitively, when ex ante investments are more contractible, or when the downstream
firm has an important investment to make, the incentives for the multinational importer
to outsource are generally weaker as underinvestment upstream is less severe. Since underinvestment matters more for technologically more important inputs, they are (even)
more likely to be ‘made’ rather than ‘bought’. In the final part of this paper, we provide robust empirical evidence related to the contracting environment and headquarters
intensity that are in line with these predictions.
Therefore, both TCE and PRT type forces are needed to fully explain the empirical
relationship between technological importance and vertical integration observed in the
data. So far, trade economists have predominantly viewed multinational activity through
the lens of the property rights theory of the firm. Our results suggest that it is necessary
and important to incorporate transaction cost economics mechanisms into trade models
and explore their implications. We view this as a main contribution of our paper, which
underlines the usefulness of an “integrative framework” as predicted in Gibbons (2005).9
Our second contribution to the literature consists of highlighting the technological
importance of an input as a causal factor in the sourcing decision.10 The existing literature has examined various aspects of GVCs that shape intrafirm sourcing decisions.
9 Other

examples of work that draws on multiple branches of the literature on firm boundaries simul-

taneously include Baker and Hubbard (2003) and, more recently, Kalnins et al. (2018).
10 Input-output coefficients have featured in empirical work on vertical integration elsewhere: Acemoglu et al. (2010) use direct requirements as measures for relative importance of overall upstream to
downstream investment and show that they amplify the effect of RnD intensity on vertical integration.
Our focus is different since we examine a given firm and explore how inputs with different cost shares
relative to each other are typically sourced. Alfaro et al. (forthcoming) use total requirements as a control in their empirical approach, while we focus on direct requirements in this paper. Finally, Alfaro et
al. (2018) find that direct requirements are positively correlated with upstream ownership (which does
not necessarily imply intra-firm trade) and note that this is consistent with their delegation model, while
we focus on intrafirm trade and how it can be explained with property rights and/or transaction cost
economics models.

5

Among these are location or country level characteristics11 and the technological features
of how individual products are developed, produced, and distributed.12 Only recently,
however, have technological characteristics of different supply chains or networks been
researched. Antras and Chor (2013), Alfaro et al. (forthcoming), and Del Prete and Rungi
(2017) explore whether multinationals produce in early or late stages of their (purely sequential) supply chains and conclude that they are typically active in activities close to
their core business.13 In this paper we focus on directly sourced inputs (as opposed to
inputs of suppliers, and inputs of suppliers of suppliers, etc.), and explore which of them
are integrated.
Furthermore, we shed new light on the anatomy of intrafirm trade. In particular,
we draw attention to and explain the fact that there is not only a skewed distribution
of intrafirm sourcing across firms (cf. Atalay et al., 2014; Ramondo et al., 2016), but also
within, and this can be explained by sufficiently detailed cost shares: Multinationals
produce only the technologically most significant inputs in-house. Moreover, we complement the findings of Alfaro and Charlton (2009), who show that a large share of FDI
is undertaken in vertical supply relationships. According to our findings, such vertical
FDI is much more likely to occur along technologically important supply relationships.
11 Examples

are the level of (intellectual) property rights protection, judicial quality, or the state of the

financial system (e.g., Levchenko, 2007; Nunn, 2007; Acemoglu et al., 2009; Macchiavello, 2012; Carluccio
and Fally, 2012; Eppinger and Kukharskyy, 2017), as well as the tax system (e.g., Flaaen, 2017), trade policy
(e.g., Ornelas and Turner, 2011; Diez, 2014; Alfaro et al., 2016), and geography (e.g., Antras and Helpman,
2004; Irarrazabal et al., 2013).
12 For example, the degree to which both parties of a transaction contribute to it marginally (see, for
example, Grossman and Helpman, 2002; Hart and Moore, 1990; Whinston, 2001), whether alternative
trading partners are available in case of a break up (e.g., Joskow, 1985; Monteverde and Teece, 1982), and
the ease with which comprehensive contracts can be written and enforced (e.g., Acemoglu et al., 2007). For
review articles, see Lafontaine and Slade (2007), Bresnahan and Levin (2012), and Legros and Newman
(2014).
13 Recently, Fattorini et al. (2017) explore network centrality in the IO network, while Bolatto et al. (2017)
investigate the role of intangible assets in sequential supply chains.

6

We first outline our data, empirical strategy, and main results in Section 2, where we
also present a number of robustness checks and our horse race exercise. In Section 3 we
introduce our stylized conceptual framework, use it to discuss our main finding, and
derive additional implications. We test these predictions in Section 4 and conclude with
Section 5.

2

Baseline Empirical Results

In this section we introduce the data, outline our empirical strategy, explain the instrumental variables used, and discuss our main empirical finding.

2.1

Data Sets and Summary Statistics

Two features make the French data particularly useful for studying the make-or-buy
decision of a firm for specific inputs: first, firm by product level imports are split into
those that are sourced from affiliates and those that are not; and second, we can identify
the industry and other characteristics of the buyer.
Our main dataset is the Enquête Échanges Internationaux Intragroupe (EIIG), a single
cross section in 1999, which covers information about intrafirm trade of French firms.14
The target population in the survey includes every French firm whose annual trade
volume was at least one million Euros and that was owned by a manufacturing group
that controls at least 50% of a foreign firm. In other words, the sample is representative
of the population of international sourcing flows of multinational firms. Out of this
target population (8,236 businesses) roughly half of all firms responded. These 4,305
firms account for about 80% of French trade conducted by French multinational entities.
For each responding firm, the EIIG has information about the value share of imports
14 Other

work that uses this data set includes Carluccio and Fally (2012), Corcos et al. (2013), Defever

and Toubal (2013), and Carluccio and Bas (2015).

7

from related parties for each HS 4 digit product that the firm imports, by country of
origin. In our final sample we focus on imports by the EIIG manufacturing firms (ISIC
Rev. 3 codes 15 to 37).15
We merge these trade data with the Enquête Annuelle d’Entreprise (EAE), which
provides us with balance sheet data on all French firms with more than 20 employees
and a random sample of smaller firms. We use these data to obtain total expenditure on
intermediate inputs, and to identify the industry of the sourcing firm.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for the firms in our data. There are about 3,000
firms in the final sample – we focus on manufacturers and exclude wholesalers and
retailers – and the total number of observations at the firm-product-country level is
85,550. Consistent with the target population of the EIIG, our firms are relatively large
with respect to employment or sales.
[Insert Table 1 here]

2.2

Empirical Strategy

We want to test whether the technological importance of an input affects whether a firm
sources the input from an international affiliate or from a stand-alone supplier.
The technological importance of a product will be reflected, among other things, in
its cost share. Our baseline regressor costshareip is therefore the share of the value of
a specific imported product relative to the cost of all other intermediate inputs that the
firm buys, domestically or abroad:

costshareip =

∑c importsipc
,
totcosti

(1)

where importsipc is the total value of all imports by firm i of input p from country c, and
15 The

EIIG survey data was amended with official international trade data by the statistical authorities.

This is described in the official documentation and our results are robust to excluding the affected flows.

8

totcosti is total expenditure on intermediate goods by firm i. The regressor varies at the
firm i by input p level, where each input is classified according to HS 4 digit (roughly
1,100 product categories). Figure B.1 in Appendix B.3 shows the empirical density of the
input cost shares, and Table 1 reports the average and median across all firms.
Our dependent variable is the share of product p imports that firm i acquires from
foreign affiliates versus from unaffiliated parties in a specific country c, and is denoted
by intrashareipc . Table 1 reports the average import share from affiliated parties across
all firms in the sample: The average firm carries out 27% of its transactions inside the
boundary of the firm (across products and origin countries). However, the distribution
of intrafirm trade is rather skewed towards a few large companies reporting a larger
share of intrafirm transactions: The median firm imports only 9% of its transactions
from affiliated parties.16
Combining this, the baseline structural equation we estimate is

intrashareipc = β 1 costshareip + αi + γcj + φcp + ε ipc ,

(2)

where j denotes the industry of the downstream, sourcing firm; and αi , γcj , and φcp
represent, respectively, firm, country × downstream-industry, and country × upstreaminput fixed effects.
A few comments regarding our choice of variables are in order. Since we are not
using the country variation in the dependent variable in the regression, we could in
principle aggregate it across all countries. However, keeping the country variation has
two advantages: First, we are able to control for country level sourcing determinants
directly in the regression, which reduces noise. Second, we will exploit the country
dimension in Section 4, when we test extensions of the stylized model. In any case, we
report estimates on the aggregated data in Online Appendix Table B.4; the results are
very similar to our baseline specification.
16 A

similar skewness has also been reported for the U.S. (Ramondo et al., 2016).

9

Our results are not sensitive to using other definitions of the dependent variable.
In particular, we have checked three binary versions: First, we define an integrated (as
opposed to outsourced) flow as intrashareipc ≥ 0.5. Second, we follow Corcos et al. (2013)
in that a flow is within firm iff intrashareipc ≥ 0.8 and outside iff intrashareipc ≤ 0.2.
Finally, we count as fully integrated only those observations that have intrashareipc = 1,
while observations with intrashareipc = 0 count as outsourced. We find very similar
results with all these dummy variables, which is due to the fact that few products at our
highly disaggregated level are sourced with a mix of outsourcing and integration. In
our context the share of intrafirm trade is conceptually the correct dependent variable,
because our theoretical mechanism operates at the finest input level and hence predicts
organizational mix at any more aggregate level, such as the HS 4 digit level.
While we believe that our cost share regressor is a good starting point to measure
technological importance, input-output linkages at the firm level can be specified in
different ways. We have therefore conducted robustness checks in which we use the
cost share of an input in total imports (instead of total expenditure), or the (log) value of
imports as regressors in Online Appendix Table B.5, columns (2) and (3). It turns out
that the firm specific intercepts provide an effective normalization, and the parameter of
interest is mainly identified by variation in the numerator of (1).
The great advantage of our international trade data is that they allow us to study the
properties of very detailed transactions, which is usually impossible to do with domestic
data sets. On the downside, this means that we base our measure of technological importance only on the value of internationally sourced inputs. At the highly aggregated
2-digit industry level we can observe both the cost share of imported inputs and the cost
share of domestic inputs (using the official French IO table). The two cost shares are
highly correlated: the correlation is 0.88 (0.78 if the diagonal in the IO table is excluded).
It is therefore plausible to assume that the technological importance of an input is reflected in both cost shares. Our fixed effects and identification strategy, which we will

10

discuss below, has the purpose to isolate the variation in import cost shares that is due
to technological importance, rather than other determinants.17
The firm fixed effects αi ensure that we compare the sourcing mode of different
products within the same firm i. In this way our estimates are not affected by any firmspecific characteristic that shapes the sourcing mode across all products, for example
the headquarters intensity of the downstream multinational firm — an example that
the literature has studied previously.18 It can be seen in Table 1 that the average firm
sources about ten different inputs from abroad, and therefore contributes to our withinfirm estimates.
The technological importance of a product will be reflected in its cost share, but
there are other determinants of the cost share which may also be related to the sourcing
decision. Because our data is so detailed, we are able to add a rich set of additional
fixed effects to control for many of these determinants. The fixed effects φcp and γcj
ensure that we do not mistake any other country × downstream-industry or country ×
upstream-input specific characteristics that increase the likelihood of intrafirm sourcing
for the effect of the importance of inputs in a firm’s production function.
17 Towards

the end of Section 2.4 we present explicit tests in order to understand how well our results

could generalize to domestic transactions and whether we should expect a biased estimate from offshoring
decisions. First, we show that our estimates are similar when focusing on sourcing from the EU alone,
where offshoring costs are low. Second, even within imports from the EU, the effect does not vary significantly with distance from France. These two tests imply that variation in offshoring costs is unlikely
to affect our estimates. Finally, we find that the effect of cost shares is the same regardless of whether a
firm sources a large or small share of its intermediates from abroad. This shows that significant domestic
sourcing that is not captured by our cost shares does not systematically bias our results.
18 Corcos et al. (2013) point to the fact that the EIIG survey suffered from non-response. They also show
that this poses a significant problem in their context since their results change meaningfully when they
apply a selection correction. Our firm fixed effects absorb their selection correction variable. In the horse
race exercise we conduct further below, we drop the firm specific intercepts and apply their selection
correction.

11

For example, origin country by input fixed effects φcp control for country specific
input price related factors that may drive integration decisions (Alfaro et al., 2016), or
for trade costs that vary by product and origin country. Country by product fixed effects
also absorb separate product p fixed effects and country c fixed effects. Our estimates are
therefore not affected by product specific characteristics like the relationship-specificity
of a particular input, or the codifiability of tasks required for the production of a certain input; or country specific characteristics such as gravity factors that influence the
patterns of FDI, like distance, market size, multilateral resistance etc.
On the other hand, origin country by downstream industry fixed effects γcj exclude
variation that stems from the interaction between financial development of the origin
country and financial constraints.19 They also account for comparative advantage to
the extent that different downstream industries need different intermediates that have
different factor intensities and some countries have these factors abundantly.
Despite the rich set of fixed effects, one might still be concerned that input cost shares
are endogenous to the integration decision. First, firms may substitute towards inputs
produced by their foreign affiliates (i.e., reverse causality), for example to trigger increasing returns for them and maximize global profits, or because information frictions
are less severe. Second, multinational firms frequently engage in transfer pricing, which
distorts input cost shares selectively in integrated relationships.20 In our setting, firms
might integrate to avoid paying higher prices due to “double marginalization” in the
presence of market power in the upstream markets;21 conversely, firms in relatively high
tax France may charge inflated prices for inputs produced by foreign affiliates in order to
artificially reduce their taxable income.22 Alternatively, transfer pricing is a way of alle19 See

Acemoglu et al. (2009) and Eppinger and Kukharskyy (2017).
is a substantial body of research that explores the nature and consequences of transfer pricing.

20 There

For recent examples see Davies et al. (2018), Flaaen (2017), and the citations therein.
21 See Garetto (2013).
22 Bernard et al. (2006) find that U.S. multinationals charge on average significantly lower export prices
for intrafirm transactions. The average arm’s length price is 43 percent higher than the price for intrafirm

12

viating the burden of tariffs. Third, it is possible that the values recorded in our data do
not reflect the economic cost structures of our firms, because inventories may fluctuate
significantly as a consequence of demand or supply shocks, and — as we estimate our
regressions in a single cross section — inventory states distort input cost shares. Moreover, international trade has been shown to be lumpy due to fixed costs of ordering.23
Consequently, the cost shares we calculate from international trade data are subject to
variation due to shipments arriving early or late with respect to a given accounting year.
Finally, cost shares reflect technological input-output relationships only to some extent
and depend on many other characteristics that may contribute to measurement error
when using input cost shares as proxies for technological importance.24
To isolate the variation in cost shares that is driven by technological importance,
and therefore exogenous, we use variation from input-output coefficients across detailed
upstream products within a highly disaggregated downstream industry obtained from
self-constructed IO tables from France and other countries to instrument for the firm
level cost shares. The basic identification assumption is that industry-level input-output
relationships affect organizational choice only through their effects on input cost shares.
This assumption is likely to hold since IO tables capture broad features of the underlying
production technology and are, in particular, not likely to be affected by individual firms
in a large economy like France. In the following section we provide details on how we
construct this instrument.

2.3

Instrument: Input-Output Tables

Our main instrument for the input cost shares is based on a self-constructed French
import IO table. In order to achieve a strong first stage we need relatively disaggretransactions.
23 See Alessandria et al. (2010).
24 For example, a mechanical reason to find a significant relationship is the fact that the denominator in
the intrashare variable is a component of the denominator of the cost share variable.

13

gated information (1) and in order to ascertain exogeneity we have to make sure that we
remove our EIIG firms’ trade flows from the data we use for an IV (2).
In principle, IO tables are readily available for most countries and France is no exception. However, the most commonly used, official 2 digit ISIC Rev. 3 French table for
the year 1999 satisfies neither of the two requirements mentioned. This IO table captures
mostly domestic transactions and, together with a high level of aggregation, yields a first
stage that is too weak for the demanding identification purposes in this paper. Unfortunately, there are no officially published disaggregated tables available for France (unlike
for the U.S.).
We therefore construct our own IO tables for the year 1996 from transaction level
import data for the whole of France.25 To obtain 4 digit NAF 1993 industry codes26
for all trading firms we rely on the FICUS database, which contains balance sheet and
administrative information for the near universe of French enterprises. The customs data
are matched to this firm information with a success rate of 91%. We use balance sheet
information to compute gross output by NAF industry and calculate the import direct
requirements at the NAF industry × HS 4 digit input level.27
To illustrate our approach, imagine the following example. Two car manufacturers in
France, PSA and Renault, import chassis of value EUR 1 (PSA) and EUR 2 (Renault) and
engines of value EUR 2 (PSA) and EUR 3 (Renault). To construct our IO tables we link
all import transactions of chassis and engines (classified according to HS 4 digit) to their
respective importers. Summing transactions across all firms in the downstream industry
(cars) gives us the total value imported of each HS 4 digit input by the downstream
industry. In our example, value(chassis → cars) = EUR 3 and value(engines → cars) =
25 We

plan to make our French import IO tables available on our websites for the future use of re-

searchers. Feenstra and Jensen (2012) follow a similar strategy for the U.S.
26 NAF is the French industry classification and more disaggregated than ISIC or NACE. In our sample,
we have 285 NAF manufacturing industries, while there are only 122 in ISIC.
27 The components we use for gross output are detailed in Appendix B.1.1.

14

EUR 5. Now we can use French firm level data to find the gross output for both firms,
say EUR 40 (PSA) and EUR 50 (Renault). We can add these up to get gross output
at the industry level, namely EUR 90. To compute our import IO direct requirements,
we divide the transacted volume by gross output, i.e. dr(chassis → cars) = 3/90 and
dr(engines → cars) = 5/90.
These tables are constructed directly from micro data and therefore we name them
“micro” tables. Moreover, since the upstream (product) dimension is classified at the HS
4 digit level and the downstream (industry) dimension follows the much coarser NAF
classification, we call these tables “asymmetric” in the sense that one dimension of the
matrix is much longer than the other.28
We perform two additional modifications to improve our instrument further. First,
when computing the industry level intermediate costs, we leave out a firm’s own trade
flows, effectively creating firm specific IO tables.29 Second, we compute the IO table
for 1996, three years prior to the date of the regressor: To the extent that import IO
tables capture mostly the underlying input-output linkages across inputs (and hence
their technological importance), the 1996 direct requirements are good predictors of 1999
input cost shares, while arguably being less suspicious of reverse causality or other
problems.30
28 Note

that in the language of IO tables, we have constructed a USE table, which is not a ‘proper’ IO

table in the inverse Leontief sense, but the meaningful table for the purpose of our estimation. We simplify
the exposition here by referring to our tables as “IO tables” and their elements as “direct requirements”,
acknowledging the fact that this is technically speaking imprecise.
29 For further robustness, we also removed trade flows of all our EIIG firms from our international trade
data when we constructed the import IO table. Our main results are unchanged when we use this IO table,
including a sufficiently strong first stage. Moreover, we obtain the same result when we retain all EIIG
flows in the data when we construct our IO tables.
30 Note that our rich set of fixed effects that we include in all specifications already addresses a number
of potential endogeneity concerns. For example, upstream product by country effects clean the instrument
of many price related considerations.

15

Figure 1, where we present a contour plot of several French IO tables, illustrates why
our self-constructed direct requirements are powerful allies. The upper left graph is well
known: in the 2 digit level official table by far most of the transaction volume takes
place on the main diagonal, while only few, usually proximate sectors are connected
off the main diagonal. When we construct our micro IO table at the 2 digit level, this
pattern is replicated quite well – an observation we interpret as validation for our approach. As expected, we do find differences between the upper two tables, which relate
to the fact that, in contrast to the official IO table, we do not need to make any strong
assumption regarding tradability and can simply let the actual trade transactions speak.
Furthermore, we focus on external trade only, which improves our first stage.
Constructing the tables at a more disaggregated level has two effects. First, the diagonal becomes relatively “thinner”. Second, the elements off the diagonal exhibit more
“contrast”. In other words, the cells in the lower two plots in Figure 1 have clear borders now and stand out properly from the background. Econometrically, we reduce
measurement error and bring the relevant variation to the fore.
The asymmetric IO table at the finest level of disaggregation – our preferred level –
exhibits a soft “diagonal”, which stems from the fact that product and industry classifications follow a similar ordering. Industry codes are usually assigned on the basis of
the product they produce (and vice versa).
[Insert Figure 1 here]
The actual instrument we use below is not the direct requirement itself, but a categorical variable that indicates quantiles of the direct requirement distribution. Figure
2 shows the empirical density of our self-constructed import requirements. It is very
skewed to the left and even the median is relatively small, because we normalize by
gross output. The vertical lines indicate quintiles and our preferred instrument is a
variable that takes the value 5 whenever the direct requirement of downstream industry j with respect to upstream input p falls into segment V, value 4 if it falls into IV,
16

and so on. In this way we semi-parametrically capture the skewed distribution of the
requirements and make the instrument more robust to measurement error.31
[Insert Figure 2 here]
We argued above that our self-constructed IO table solves the problem of cost shares
being endogenous to a firm’s integration decision provided the identification assumption
is satisfied. One may, however, be concerned that forces that operate in partial or general
equilibrium render the exclusion restriction violated despite our efforts. For example,
it may be that for some other historical reasons multinationals in industry j are more
likely to integrate some products than others. To address this concern, we make use of
IO tables from two other countries where such effects are very unlikely to play a first
order role. First, we apply the same methodology as above to construct direct import
requirements from Chinese micro data. For the year 2006 we have access to the universe
of import transactions in goods and can link these to the involved Chinese importer.32
To identify the industry of the buyer, we link the trade data to the Chinese Annual
Industrial Survey (CAIS), which covers all State Owned Firms (SOE) and non-SOEs with
sales above 5 million Chinese Yuan. From this data source we obtain the CIC code for
every importer and compute gross output at CIC level.33 Using a crosswalk, we finally
concord the CIC downstream industry to ISIC Rev. 3.34 While this Chinese table, like
our French micro table, also has the advantage of being very detailed, it uses variation
31 Our

main results are fully robust to using other functional forms, for example the direct requirements

themselves.
32 Chinese trade has undergone an historically unprecedented growth spurt in the years following its
accession to the WTO in late 2001, which was pronounced at the extensive product margin. In order to
limit the number of missings and measurement error in the Chinese IO table, we have chosen a late year
in the data available to us.
33 CIC is the Chinese industry classification.
34 We note that the need for concording puts a limit on the level of downstream disaggregation, since
ISIC Rev. 3 contains significantly fewer codes at the lowest level than the French NAF classification.

17

that is less relevant for France, since the two countries occupy different parts of global
value chains and rely on different comparative advantages. The correlation between
direct requirements is consequently only .21 (.52 for the instrument), implying a weaker,
but still strong enough, first stage.35
Second, as an alternative we use the 2002 U.S. benchmark USE table, which captures
a sourcing behavior much more similar to the one exhibited by French firms. However,
we do not have access to the U.S. micro data, and the officially available table is more
aggregate than our micro table, since the inputs are aggregated to the industry level
(U.S. IO classification). Furthermore, in order to utilize this table, we had to establish a
crosswalk to ISIC Rev. 3. Unfortunately, a concordance directly to NAF was not feasible,
and this introduces measurement error. The correlation between US and French direct
requirements is .35 (.28 for the instrument). Estimates using the U.S. instrument should
be interpreted with these caveats in mind.
One might argue that the organizational choice of a firm itself affects the market
structure in the upstream industry, which may result in reverse causality at the industry
level, after all. Or one could argue that other factors that influence the integration decision in a whole industry are correlated across countries, therefore even other countries’
IO tables cannot be taken as exogenous. While we cannot fully rule this possibility out,
below we obtain very similar results using IO tables from three substantially different
countries. We therefore think that this alternative explanation for our findings is relatively unlikely: The effect of a firm’s sourcing decision on the upstream industry would
have to be reflected in the IO tables of all three countries.
35 The

IO diagonal does not drive these correlations, since omitting them leads to an increase in the

correlation coefficient. Our IV estimates are also robust to dropping the diagonal transactions for the IVs
from all countries. In Appendix Table B.3 we report this robustness check.

18

2.4

Main Results

Baseline Results
We estimate equation (2) with two stage least squares (2SLS) and allow the error
term to be correlated across all observations that belong to the same broad downstream
industry and across all observations that belong to the same broad upstream industry –
either dimension creates about 50 clusters and is significantly more aggregate than our
IV.
The main result of this paper is documented in Table 2. In column (1) we present
the unconditional correlation between cost shares and the intrafirm share. In column
(2) we add our baseline fixed effects as detailed in equation (2). Finally, columns (3) to
(5) report the 2SLS estimates using our preferred asymmetric French table, the asymmetric Chinese table, and the U.S. benchmark table, respectively.36,

37

The first stage

Kleibergen-Paap (KP) statistics are large, so that we are confident about the relevance
of all three instruments. As expected given our discussion above, the Chinese and U.S.
tables are weaker predictors of French firms’ cost shares than the French table. Most
importantly, however, our coefficient of interest, β 1 , is always estimated to be positive
and highly significant. The IV results are significantly larger than the OLS estimates,
which is in line with an attenuation bias due to measurement error or a negative bias
due to the incentives of firms to integrate more in the presence of tariffs or to avoid
double marginalization, which would imply lower cost shares in case of integration (see,
for instance, Bernard et al., 2006).
According to our preferred estimate in column (3), an input at the median of the
input cost share distribution is about 0.0012 ∗ 11.586 ≈ 1.4 percentage points more likely
36 The
37 The

first stage and reduced form regressions are reported in Online Appendix B.3, Tables B.1 and B.2.
number of observations falls from column (1) to (2)-(5) since we exclude singletons. The sample

used for Table 2 is conditional on non-missing values for all three instruments.

19

to be integrated than a wholly insignificant input, over a baseline integration probability
of 27 percent. The interquartile difference within a NAF industry is about 7 percentage
points, which amounts to about one quarter of the baseline integration probability. These
magnitudes are also robust to using variation from Chinese or U.S. sourcing behavior to
identify β 1 .38
[Insert Table 2 here]

Robustness Checks
We next explore how robust these results are to various concerns and report our findings in Table 3, using our preferred instrument, the asymmetric, lagged French micro IO
table.39 The first column repeats the preferred baseline specification on an unrestricted
sample.
Since we are concerned with vertical integration in this paper, i.e., the mode of organization for the procurement of inputs, we want to make sure that our results are
not driven by horizontal transactions, i.e., sourcing of essentially finished items.40 As
an example, a French car manufacturer may assemble a specific model in France, but
have foreign production sites in which it assembles other models. If it imports some
other models and resells them in France, they will look like inputs in our data that are
sourced from affiliates. However, since the car manufacturer resells them, this is horizontal, rather than vertical integration, which we are not interested in. In order to make
sure not to capture horizontal integration, we drop all observations in which the down38 We

also estimate the baseline specification with Logit IV, rather than the linear probability model, to

take into account that our dependent variable is largely a binary variable. The results are robust.
39 The number of observations varies across columns due to different sample restrictions and to different
sets of singletons. The number of observations can be higher than in Table 2, since we only condition on
the French direct requirement being non-missing, rather than all IO tables.
40 These could be intermediates that are sold on to other firms or final goods that are sold on to consumers.

20

stream importer i is mainly active in the industry j that also produces the good sourced,
p. In IO terminology, this means we drop all observations on the IO diagonal. Since our
asymmetric table does not have a well defined diagonal, we exclude all observations on
the 4 digit ISIC Rev. 3 diagonal. This strategy is conservative in that we do not use the
full detail available to us from our micro data and drop many transactions that are in
fact purely vertical.
The result for this robustness check is reported in column (2) of Table 3, where the
number of observations shrinks by about one third compared to the full sample that is
available for our empirical strategy. Even though the KP statistic falls, it is still sufficiently high to take the estimates seriously. Importantly, the point estimate is not significantly different from our baseline result, so that we can conclude that our results are not
driven by the high cost shares for horizontally traded products.41
In columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 we show that our results are not driven by technical
similarity, which may be positively correlated with cost shares. Imagine a producer of
foodstuffs (ISIC Rev. 3 code 1549) and a pharmaceutical company (ISIC Rev. 3 code 2423)
that source coffee beans (HS code 0901) and formaldehyde (HS code 2912). It should not
come as a big surprise that the pharmaceutical company does not buy coffee for its employees (a low cost share input) from its own roastery in Nicaragua and that a foodstuffs
company typically refrains from integrating its supplier of machine disinfectant (again
a low cost share input). The reason is that firms may be more likely to ‘make’ inputs
that are technically similar to its current production in order to exploit, for example,
economies of scale in production or RnD.42
To check that our results are not driven by technical similarity, we show in two different ways that they also hold within technically similar inputs. We first include 4 digit ISIC
41 In

appendix Table B.3 we report the specifications from the full baseline Table 2 when we drop the

diagonal transactions.
42 Empirical evidence on a potential role of technical similarity for horizontal integration is provided by
Boehm et al. (2017).

21

Rev. 3 downstream industry × HS 4 digit upstream product fixed effects in column (3),
meaning that we only use variation coming from comparing the same input across very
similar downstream firms.43 To use the example above, we compare different producers
of ingredients for beverages and examine whether a company for which coffee beans
are a more important input is also more likely to source them from its own roastery.
Next, we replace the specific intercepts with downstream firm × upstream 4 digit ISIC
Rev. 3 industry fixed effects in column (4), effectively comparing two very similar inputs sourced by the same firm – a pharmaceutical company sourcing formaldehyde and
formic acid (HS code 2915), for example. The point estimates fall, but remain significant
and large, even when we identify β 1 off very little variation.
We would like to point out that the robustness checks with interacted upstream ×
downstream fixed effects serve two additional purposes. When we focus on a particular supply relationship between two industries, we hold their relative upstreamness, i.e.,
their relative distance to each other in the value chain, constant. For example, when
comparing different inputs sourced by a firm and produced by the same, highly disaggregated upstream industry (column 4 in Table 3), then these inputs all have the same
“distance” in the value chain from the downstream firm. Equally, comparing the same
input sourced by different firms in the same downstream industry (column 2 in Table 3),
the latter have a very similar “distance” from the upstream product.
The first implication of the fact that our results are still statistically and economically
significant is that our finding is not driven by relative upstreamness. Antras and Chor
(2013) and Alfaro et al. (forthcoming) show that firms typically integrate the most proximate stages of production relative to their own position in the supply chain. Since our
cost shares may be positively correlated with relative downstreamness, this mechanism
could potentially account for our finding. The exercises in columns (3) and (4) in Table 3
43 Our

instrument varies at the 4 digit NAF level, which is significantly more disaggregated than 4 digit

ISIC Rev. 3.

22

show, however, that even when relative upstreamness is kept constant, our main finding
persists. This is reassuring for technological importance as a separate determinant of
integration decisions in supply networks.
More conceptually, with our firm fixed effects, we zoom in on integration decisions
across the legs of a spider, i.e., into parallel segments of supply chains (Baldwin and Venables, 2013). Previous research has shown that more relatively downstream production
stages are integrated on average, and we show that within those (i.e., directly sourced)
inputs of a firm, the more important ones are integrated.
A further potential concern relates to our instrument. If the multinationals in our
EIIG sample play a dominant role in their respective industries, excluding their own
trade flows may not be enough for our purpose. In column (5) of Table 3 we estimate our
baseline specification on the sample of firms in highly competitive industries, i.e. those
where the Hirschman-Herfindahl-Index in 1999 was below 0.1.44 We retain a sizable part
of our sample and the cost share coefficient remains virtually unchanged compared to
the baseline. We interpret this finding as further support for our identification strategy.
Our results may still be biased by transfer pricing considerations, since cost shares
rely on input prices and the potential for within firm adjustments for tax purposes clearly
increases with the degree of vertical integration. Even when we rely on our IO tables
as a source of exogenous variation, these may still reflect transfer pricing motives at the
industry level. To address this concern, we include firm × origin country fixed effects in
our baseline specification and therefore compare only inputs that a firm sources from the
same country. Since incentives to transfer price mainly depend on the double taxation
treaties signed with the origin country, we abstract from the main portion of worrisome
variation in our data. The estimate reported in column (6) of Table 3 shows that our
44 We

compute these indices from the near universe of French firms in FICUS at the NAF 4 digit level.

The result is robust to using other thresholds around 0.1, but the latter is often referred to as a reference
point for antitrust considerations.

23

results are robust.45
Finally, we explore whether we should expect our results to be influenced by the
offshoring decision inherent to international sourcing flows. To this end, we restrict the
sample to imports from the EU in column (7) of Table 3. Fixed market access costs are
significantly lower within the EU than for origin countries outside it. The comparison between flows inside and outside the EU then reflects a difference in the ease of offshoring,
potentially similar to the difference one would expect between domestic sourcing and
importing from, say, Germany. We do not find any evidence that the effect of cost shares
depends on the difficulty of accessing foreign suppliers.46
[Insert Table 3 here]

Quantitative Significance
As a final exercise we want to develop an understanding as to how economically
significant technological importance is for the make-or-buy decision relative to other determinants. To do so we compare the magnitude of the cost share effect to those of firm
level characteristics that have been shown to correlate strongly with vertical integration.
In particular, we include (physical and intangible) capital intensity, skill intensity, and
productivity estimates following Corcos et al. (2013), who use very similar data.47,
45 In

48

Appendix Table B.5, column (1), we also report that the effect of cost shares does not vary with

effectively applied ad-valorem tariffs, which would provide a second rationale for distorting internal
prices.
46 In Online Appendix Table B.5, we report two further checks along the same lines. First, we find
that the effect of cost shares is the same regardless of whether a firm sources a large or small share of
its intermediates from abroad. This shows that significant domestic sourcing that is not captured by our
cost shares does not systematically bias our results. Secondly, the effect does not vary significantly with
distance within the EU. The additional variable costs that may come with offshoring and distort our cost
shares are therefore also unlikely to be a first order concern.
47 The construction of all variables is detailed in Appendix B.1.1.
48 In unreported regressions, we investigate the effects of other determinants at the product (contractibil-

24

To be able to include determinants that vary at the firm level in the regression, we
need to drop the firm fixed effects. Furthermore, as mentioned above, the EIIG survey
suffered from selected non-response, which can bias estimates in across firm regressions.
We therefore follow Corcos et al. (2013) and apply a Heckman procedure to address this
potential bias.49 We report standardized coefficients throughout to enable direct comparisons. Column (1) of Table 4 shows our main result using standardized regressors,
dropping firm fixed effects and applying the Heckman selection. In columns (2) to (6)
we add the integration determinants that the previous literature has studied one by one.
An input with a cost share that is one standard deviation (SD) higher than the cost
share of another input is roughly one fifth of a SD more likely to be sourced from an
affiliate. This effect is of a similar order of magnitude across all columns, but larger than
those of all other determinants in our horse race, such as skill intensity or productivity
— even when we add them all together in column (6).50 The interquartile effect of
cost shares (column (1)) in this sample is 6.5 %, which compares, for example, to 2.7%
for intangible capital intensity, 5.5% for skill intensity, and 4.9% for value added per
worker. With the caveat that we do not attempt to causally identify the other firm
level determinants – which would be well beyond the scope of this article, and which
none of the previous literature has attempted to do – we conclude that cost shares are
quantitatively at least as powerful, if not more, in shifting vertical integration patterns
as other characteristics examined in the literature.
[Insert Table 4 here]
ity) and country level (institutional quality) as in Corcos et al. (2013). We find input shares being significant
throughout and with an effect of similar, if not larger, magnitude compared to the other determinants.
49 Corcos et al. (2013) estimate inverse Mill’s (IM) ratios for survey non-response and add a random
sample of large non-multinational importers. We obtain a larger sample than provided by the EIIG and
than the one used in Corcos et al. (2013), who aggregate inputs at the coarser CPA level. All further details
can be found in appendix B.1.2.
50 Value added is collinear with capital and skill intensity and hence omitted in the final column.

25

3

A Stylized Framework

Having presented the main empirical contribution of this paper, we want to explore the
mechanism behind our findings. For this purpose we consider the two most successful conceptual frameworks in the literature on multinational firms: the property rights
theory (focusing on ex ante inefficiencies) and transaction cost economics (focusing on
ex post inefficiencies), and ask how consistent either is with our empirical results. In
order to focus on the main trade-offs of the models, in this section we present a stylized
framework that incorporates both of these two influential theories — i.e., it incorporates
incomplete contracts both ex ante and ex post — but abstracts from certain complications discussed in the literature and makes two reduced form formulations that simplify
the exposition.
The framework makes clear that PRT and TCE type forces typically have opposite
predictions for the integration of technologically important inputs, and our empirical
findings are consistent with a world in which TCE forces are on average stronger than
PRT forces. To understand whether PRT forces are just weak on average or completely
absent and thus, whether both ex ante and ex post inefficiencies are present in the data,
we use our framework to derive additional predictions that hold only when PRT forces
are also at work. As we show in the following section, our empirical results imply that
PRT forces have to be present in order to fully rationalize the empirical results.
The finding that both PRT and TCE type forces are present in the data has an important implication for researchers: So far, trade economists have predominantly viewed
multinational activity through the lens of the property rights theory of the firm. Our results suggest that it is necessary and important to incorporate transaction cost economics
mechanisms into trade models and explore their implications.
We want to stress two points here. Of course, we are not the first to employ a TCE
style approach in thinking about intrafirm trade (e.g., Costinot et al., 2011). Our results
therefore underline the importance of such a line of research. Second, we do not attempt
26

to test different models of the boundary of the firm against each other, which is extremely difficult (see Whinston, 2001). Instead, we aim at a simple extension of the PRT
workhorse model of multinational firm behavior that incorporates TCE type features,
and use it to illustrate the two forces and their interaction with other variables.51

3.1
3.1.1

Baseline Model
Technology

A downstream multinational firm52 produces a quantity y of a final good for which it
requires a discrete number N ≥ 2 of inputs.53 With a slight abuse of notation, we use N
to address both the number and the finite set of inputs. The production technology is
N

y=

∑ m ( n )δ(n) ,

δ(n) ∈ (0, 1) ∀n ∈ N,

(3)

n

where m(n) > 0 denotes either the quality or quantity of input n and the inputs may
differ by their elasticities with respect to final output (δ).54 It is this parameter δ, which
governs the marginal contribution of an input, that we refer to as technological significance or importance. Moreover, δ is the only source of heterogeneity across inputs and,
as we will show below, there will be a positive association between δ(n) and a firm’s
cost shares in equilibrium. Note that all inputs are used in production as δ(n) < 1.
Clearly, equation (3) implies that the contributions of the different inputs to overall
51 Note

that while we model TCE type forces in a way consistent with a wide range of TCE approaches,

inevitably we are unable to capture the vast breadth of ideas in this literature (e.g., the ideas in Klein et
al., 1978).
52 We label the upstream and downstream firms according to the data available to us for ease of exposition.
53 Clearly, with fewer than two inputs, the concept of cost shares is not meaningful.
54 We could generalize this production function to include heterogeneous weights in the basket of inputs. What matters, however, for the make-or-buy decision is elasticity of output with respect to inputs
(see Grossman and Hart, 1986). Consequently, we omit these weights from the outset to avoid confusion.

27

output are independent from each other and we make this assumption to abstract from
interactions between the different supply relationships, as these complicate the model
greatly. Indeed, as Nowak et al. (2016) show, any integration pattern across inputs can be
optimal in a PRT model with constant technical (and demand) elasticities of substitution
across inputs. We abstract from these considerations here to zero in on the main ideas
of PRT and TCE mechanisms.
Suppliers of the various inputs can invest into quantity/quality and their costs of
producing a unit of input n with quantity/quality m(n) is c M < 1; production upstream
is subject to constant returns to quality investments.55

3.1.2

Consumer Preferences and the Downstream Market

To simplify matters, the downstream multinational takes the price of its output as given.
Two implications follow: first, revenues are proportional to output and we can normalize
the price of the final output good py ≡ 1. Secondly, we have shut down interactions
between inputs arising from market power and downward sloping demand, which once
again helps us focus on the key trade-offs in this stylized framework.

3.1.3

Further Assumptions, Contracting and Timing

There is a continuum of homogeneous suppliers abroad that can potentially produce
any given input n, but none of them can produce more than one variety. Contracts are
– for now – fully incomplete in the sense that only property rights can be contractually
specified and enforced at any point in the game. Crucially, quantity/quality investments
and other decisions are non-contractible. The timing of the game is as follows:
1. Contract written that includes arrangements regarding ownership
2. Supplier invests in quantity/quality
55 We

assume that c M is sufficiently small so that the surplus from a relationship grows in δ.

28

3. Output sold and revenues split in bilateral bargaining subject to haggling
In the context of our game we follow the convention that actions, contractual incompleteness, and inefficiencies in stage 1 and 2 are referred to as “ex ante”, and in stage 3 as “ex
post”. While there is no random shock, this nomenclature supports our exposition.
Similar to Antras and Chor (2013), we do not specify the details of the bargaining
game in stage 3 to simplify the model and allow for closed form solutions. We assume
that property rights over the inputs convey an advantage in outside options – whoever
has ownership can sell the input outside of the relationship at a discount, which is
tantamount to a better disagreement point and more bargaining power. The share of
the surplus appropriated by the downstream firm thus increases in the (endogenous)
ownership share it holds in the inputs, β ∈ [0, 1].
Furthermore, we assume that the foreign supplier engages in actions that are designed to increase its bargaining share, which we refer to as ”haggling” and which
cannot be avoided due to fully incomplete contracts ex post. The original exposition
of these activities by Williamson (1985) viewed them as pure opportunism, where firms
try to tilt the balance in their favor by wasteful effort; the most obvious examples are
perhaps suppliers spending excessive time on price negotiations or over-staffing their
factories under cost plus contracting. Alternatively, the downstream firm may have
to take costly precautions in the form of inventories or the development of alternative
sources for an input (Klein et al., 1978). Since then, other researchers have examined
further mechanisms that rely on contracting problems ex post, like adaptation (Forbes
and Lederman, 2009) or coordination (Hart and Holmstrom, 2010). Here, inefficiencies
arise because upstream and downstream parties have to take ex post actions in response
to unforeseen shocks that have to be aligned in some way. To the extent that they are not
a productive inefficiency emerges, which is typically disruptive for the buyer’s supply
chain. What is common to all these frameworks is that ownership by one party fully
erases such inefficiencies at the cost of some “governance cost”, which remains largely
29

unspecified. Arguably, these TCE considerations are particularly salient in international
transactions, where both contractual incompleteness and monitoring problems tend to
be more severe.
We capture these TCE mechanisms in a reduced form way by assuming that the part
of the total surplus from the relationship that accrues to the multinational in stage 3 is
diminished by a factor βγ with γ > 0.56,

57

A higher ownership share reduces the ex

post inefficiency – until haggling is eliminated with β = 1 – in line with the idea in Hart
and Holmstrom (2010) that ownership can confer residual decision rights: if productive
assets are owned by the downstream firm, it can threaten to fire the upstream firm (now
an employee) if it behaves in an undesired, opportunistic way. Due to the functional
form, the TCE inefficiency increases in strength with γ, and is shut down with γ = 0.
Furthermore, γ is a function of δ, where ∂γ/∂δ > 0. Intuitively, we thus acknowledge that failure to make aligned decisions with more important suppliers will cause
a greater inefficiency or that haggling by crucial upstream suppliers will cause greater
disruption. If output responds more elastically to the quantity/quality of an input, the
same (proportional) deficiency will lead to a greater loss in output. Consequently, the
same threat to hold the downstream firm up will carry more weight in haggling and
a supplier of a technologically important input can extract relatively larger rents. Alternatively, mis-coordination in an uncertain environment will cause a relatively higher
efficiency loss, for example because of higher precautionary inventories.
Finally, we refrain from modelling an atheoretical “bureaucracy” cost. As will be ex56 While

the upstream supplier may face a private cost for haggling in reality, it is immaterial in our

setting (the downstream firm allocates property rights unilaterally).
57 For the most part, TCE models have been notoriously informal. As a consequence, there is, in contrast
to PRT, no standard approach even to the basic ingredients of a TCE framework. In our intentionally
stylized model a micro-foundation would introduce complications without adding to the insights we
are after. For examples of somewhat more explicit structural approaches, see Bajari and Tadelis (2001),
Bresnahan and Levin (2013), Legros and Newman (2013), or Alfaro et al. (2016).

30

plicit below, even without it we have a well defined trade-off between vertical integration
and outsourcing.58,

3.1.4

59, 60

Solution

We solve the game via backward induction and focus on a single input n (we drop the
input indexation from now on to improve the exposition). The surplus generated by
adding an input n of quantity/quality m to the final product is equal to mδ , of which the
offshore supplier gets a share 1 − β. Consequently, it n has to solve

maxm (1 − β)mδ − c M m,
which leads it to optimally invest (∗ denotes optimal choices)

∗

m =



(1 − β ) δ
cM



1
1− δ

.

(4)

This result illustrates the typical insight gained when contracts are incomplete ex ante
and can therefore not support a first best solution. Since the supplier only obtains a fraction (1 − β) of the surplus, and the investment is sunk at stage 3, it will choose to under58 We

can assume a separate cost of vertical integration in the spirit of TCE, but our results are the same,

and unnecessarily more complicated, as long as this cost’s elasticity to ownership is less sensitive to δ than
γ ( δ ).
59 A comment regarding ex ante transfers – for example due to ex ante market power of the downstream
firm and ensuing take-it-or-leave-it offers – is in order. Allowing for these implies that the multinational
firm maximizes the joint ex ante surplus of the relationship by picking β. Since it can appropriate all profits
through the transfer, there is no incentive to increase its ownership and hence all inputs are outsourced.
Clearly, there is no heterogeneity across inputs. This result relies, however, on our assumption that there
are no relationship-specific investments to be made downstream. We do not incorporate ex ante transfers
here to keep the baseline model as simple as possible.
60 In our model, we interpret all products as intermediate inputs. Accordingly, we have checked that
our baseline result is fully robust to restricting the sample to intermediates.

31

invest ex ante. This investment distortion caused by downstream ownership is stronger
when δ is large: an important supplier has a larger absolute loss in its marginal investment benefit from downstream ownership and hence limits investment more severely.
More important inputs in terms of δ also receive more investment in quality ceteris
paribus as the marginal return on these is higher.
The multinational chooses β to maximize its total profits in the first stage, which include the ex post inefficiency as a proportional cost. A simple way to derive predictions
regarding β is to consider what Antras and Chor (2013) call the “unconstrained problem”, i.e. choosing the value of β freely from IR. The total surplus that accrues to the
downstream firm is


δ
cM



δ
1− δ

βγ
|{z}

β
|{z}

PRT benefit TCE benefit

δ

( 1 − β ) 1− δ .
| {z }

(5)

PRT cost

The surplus illustrates the main trade-off that shapes the downstream firm’s ownership decision. First, a higher β will directly increase the slice of the total pie it obtains,
which we call the “PRT benefit” of ownership. Secondly, higher ownership directly increases the pie through curbing the ex post inefficiency (less haggling). We refer to this
aspect as the “TCE benefit” of ownership.61 The final term in (5) captures the costs
of downstream ownership, namely that ex ante investments are distorted under fully
incomplete contracts. We call this part “PRT cost” in the spirit of the property rights
literature (Grossman and Hart, 1986).
The optimal choice of β is

β∗ =
61 In

(1 + γ)(1 − δ)
.
δ + (1 + γ)(1 − δ)

(6)

line with the key prediction of TCE – that the costs of outsourcing increase in the total appropriable

quasi-rents – the TCE benefit is larger whenever the surplus of the relationship is bigger (see, for example,
Monteverde and Teece, 1982; Masten, 1984; Joskow, 1985).

32

The solution rests on a balance of PRT (ex ante) and TCE (ex post) forces. Setting γ = 0
shuts down all ex post inefficiencies and allows us to focus on the predictions from a
pure PRT model. The PRT force pushes for more important inputs to be outsourced as
∂β∗ /∂δ|γ=0 = −1 < 0. The multinational chooses β = 0 in order to give maximal investment incentives to the supplier. For γ > 0, however, the overall effect of technological
importance on ownership is the result of the PRT force and the TCE force combined.
The latter pushes for vertical integration, since control over the foeign supplier limits
haggling and coordination losses. Taking all these insights together, we can derive the
following lemma.
Lemma 1 More important inputs are more likely to be integrated iff

ε 1+γ,δ >

1
,
1−δ

where ε k,l is the elasticity of k with respect to l.
Proof. The derivative
∂β∗
[δ + (1 + γ)(1 − δ)]∆ − (1 + γ)(1 − δ)(1 + ∆)
=
∂δ
[δ + (1 + γ)(1 − δ))]2
with
∆ ≡ γ 0 (1 − δ ) − (1 + γ ).
This expression is stricly positive iff
γ0 δ
1
>
.
1+γ
1−δ

Intuitively, if the TCE force (embodied in ε 1+γ,δ ) is relatively strong in an elasticity
sense, it can overpower the PRT force (embodied in 1/(1 − δ) above) and lead to a result
consistent with our main finding.
33

One final comment is in order. As discussed, if we shut down the TCE force, the
highly stylized PRT framework we are left with unambiguously predicts that more important inputs will be less likely to be vertically integrated — inconsistently with our
empirical findings. While arguably most PRT frameworks in the literature would also
have this feature, it is possible to make assumptions that create the opposite prediction. In particular, Nowak et al. (2016) show that, depending on relative parameter
values, technological and demand side interactions between inputs that are combined
in CES fashion can make integration of more important inputs optimal. Second, if the
downstream firm’s outside option (not explicitly modelled in our framework) under
outsourcing becomes increasingly bad as we move to more important suppliers, it is
possible that, at some point, the balance tilts towards vertical integration.62 Finally, the
marginal investment costs could be assumed to depend positively on δ (see Acemoglu
et al., 2010). All these assumptions are either very difficult to test empirically or seem
unlikely to hold except in special cases, or both. Since TCE type theories of the firm
enjoy substantial empirical support, in our view it is more promising to view the world
as being shaped by both ex ante and ex post forces.63

3.2

Extensions

A simpler alternative to incomplete contracting both ex ante and ex post – and with
the same implication regarding vertical integration and cost shares – is of course a pure
TCE framework. In the following two subsections we extend our baseline model in two
62 Kohler

and Smolka (2018) also construct a PRT framework with multiple suppliers and show that

more productive firms integrate a larger share of their suppliers – but they do not show which ones.
63 The equilibrium payment to the supplier of input n is proportional to
"
∗

∗ δ(n)

[1 − β ( n ) ] [ m ( n ) ]

=

δ ( n )1+ δ ( n )
1 + (1 − δ(n))γ(δ(n))

#

1
1− δ ( n )

δ(n)
δ(n)−1

cM

,

so that for small enough marginal investment costs and therefore high enough contributions to output
m(n)∗ , the cost share increases in technological importance in our stylized conceptual framework.

34

different ways that give us insights about the conditions under which the PRT force may
be stronger or weaker relative to the TCE force. We test the predictions derived from
these extensions empirically in the subsequent section and thus examine whether PRT
forces are in fact needed to understand our main finding – as a large body of literature
on multinationals would suggest.

3.2.1

Contracting Environment

We first explore how the effect of technological significance depends on ex ante contractibility. We analyze our baseline model, but introduce the following generalizations.
The foreign suppliers no longer choose a single investment under fully incomplete contracts ex ante, but make a continuum of investment choices xn ( j), j ∈ [0, 1], which
R1
translate into quantity/quality through m(n) = exp[ 0 ln xn ( j)dj]. We assume that all
investments j < µ with µ ∈ [0, 1] are fully contractible and are chosen by the multinational after ownership has been allocated, but before the offshore supplier has made
its investment choices (Acemoglu et al., 2007). All investments with j ≥ µ are fully
non-contractible ex ante and the costs of investing are c M xn ( j).
In sum, µ serves as a parameter that indicates the quality of contracting institutions
or the inverse of contract intensity ex ante: If µ = 1 all contracts are fully complete and
enforceable ex ante, while with µ = 0 we are back in the case of the baseline model, i.e.
with fully incomplete contracts ex ante. Our comparative static of interest will be about
this parameter.
The solution of the model proceeds as before and is relegated to the theory Appendix
B.2.1. The optimal solution for the ownership share is now

β∗ =

(1 + γ)[1 − δ(1 − µ)]
,
δ(1 − µ) + (1 + γ)[1 − δ(1 − µ)]

(7)

and we can, once again, show under what condition we obtain a prediction consistent
with our main empirical result.
35

Lemma 2 More important inputs are more likely to be integrated iff

ε 1+γ,δ >

1
.64
1 − δ (1 − µ )

Proof. The derivative
∂β∗
δγ0 [1 − δ(1 − µ)] − (1 + γ)
>0
= (1 − µ )
∂δ
{δ(1 − µ) + (1 + γ)[1 − δ(1 − µ)]}2

(8)

iff
δγ0
1
>
.
1+γ
1 − δ (1 − µ )

We are now in a position to state the main prediction about how a better contracting
environment ex ante affects our baseline result.
Prediction 1 A better contracting environment ex ante leads to a stronger relationship between
the importance of an input and the probability that it is integrated.
The proof for this prediction is relegated to the Theory appendix B.2.2, but the intuition is the following. Making ex ante investments more contractible reduces the incentive for the downstream firm to outsource more important inputs (relative to less
important ones): Assuming control over an offshore supplier is now less costly in general, as many sub-investments are contractually fixed and there is less underinvestment
overall. Since underinvestment is always particularly problematic for more important
inputs, these become even more likely to be integrated. In other words, the PRT force
that pushes for outsourcing becomes weaker, while the TCE force remains strong.
64 It

is easy to verify that there always exists an a > 0 such that ∀δ ∈ (0, 1) this expression is satisfied

with γ(δ) = exp( a/(1 − δ)) − 1.

36

3.2.2

Headquarters intensity

For our second prediction, we return to our baseline model, but assume that the multinational firm has to make a complementary investment h(n) into every input’s quality.
These investments can be interpreted as effort to adapt an input to the overall product
or how diligently and carefully an input is processed during production. Consequently,
the new production function in terms of quantity/quality is
N

y=

∑



h ( n ) η m ( n )1− η

δ

,

(9)

n

where η is our parameter of interest. It captures the relative importance of the two
investments and is commonly referred to as headquarters intensity.65 For η = 0 we are
back in our baseline setting. All other baseline assumptions remain intact and we omit
the input indexation.
The solution of the model can be found in the Theory appendix B.2.3 again. The
optimal ownership share of the multinational is now

β∗ =

(1 + γ)[1 − δ(1 − η )]
.
δ(1 − η ) + (1 + γ)[1 − δ(1 − η )]

(10)

Lemma 3 once again shows that if the TCE force is stronger than the PRT force, the
model with headquarters intensity predicts a relationship between technological importance and integration that is consistent with our main empirical result.
Lemma 3 More important inputs are more likely to be integrated iff

ε 1+γ,δ >

1
.
1 − δ (1 − η )

Proof. The derivative
65 Since

it is the multinational that undertakes a backwards vertical integration decision in our setting,

it is called “headquarters”.

37

∂β∗
δγ0 [1 − δ(1 − η )] − (1 + γ)
>0
= (1 − η )
∂δ
{δ(1 − η ) + (1 + γ)[1 − δ(1 − η )]}2
iff
δγ0
1
>
.
1+γ
1 − δ (1 − η )

Prediction 2 Higher headquarters intensity leads to a stronger relationship between the importance of an input and the probability that it is integrated.
The proof for this prediction is fully analogous to the proof for prediction 1 in the
Theory appendix B.2.2. If the downstream firm has an important investment to make,
the underinvestment costs of vertical integration that pushed for outsourcing of technologically more important inputs (relative to less important ones) in the baseline model
are lower. After all, the multinational can both substitute for the foeign supplier’s investment with its own contribution and encourage it through the complementarity implied
by Cobb-Douglas technology in (9). As a consequence, the incentives to give ownership
to the supplier are reduced and this effect is stronger for more important inputs, which
become relatively more likely to be ‘made’ as opposed to ‘bought’.

4

Testing further Empirical Predictions

In this section we implement empirical tests of the two theoretical predictions we derived
in the previous part and examine the roles of contracting environment and headquarters
intensity in turn. We first briefly outline and discuss the empirical strategy. Then we
introduce the additional data sources required for the exercise and finally present our
results.

38

4.1

Contracting Environment

Empirical Specification
To test prediction 1, we interact our main variable of interest, costshare, with proxies
for contractibility, i.e., the ease with which contracts can be written and enforced. The
structural equation for this exercise is

intrashareijpc = β 1 costshareip + β 2 costshareip × 1(contractibility)

+ αi + γcj + φcp + ε ijpc . (11)
We have deliberately omitted the index for our contractibility variable in order to highlight that we employ different empirical measures – to be introduced in the next subsection – that vary along various dimensions. Our fixed effects will, however, always
absorb its level effect. The interacted indicator variables take the value one whenever
a characteristic is above the median of its relevant distribution – for example, if a firm
characteristic is above the within 4 digit NAF industry median.
We employ the same identification strategy as for the baseline results in column (3) of
Table 2. In addition, we instrument the interaction term with our instrument interacted
with the measure for contractibility. In line with Prediction 1, we expect that the sign of
our estimates of β 2 will be positive.
Data
For the contracting environment, we first make use of three country level variables,
namely the index for property rights protection from V-Dem, a rule of law index from
the World Governance Indicators, and an intellectual property rights protection index

39

from Park (2008).66
We furthermore take inspiration from Nunn (2007) and compute several different
contractibility measures that rely on product differentiation. First, we concord the liberal Rauch index to our HS 4 digit products (using French import values in 1996 as
weights) and generate an indicator that equals one whenever a product is not traded on
an exchange or reference priced in trade journals. This is our first variable. Secondly, we
create a Nunn type contractibility measure at the buyer firm level by calculating the 1996
import value weighted share of homogeneous inputs in total products sourced, which is
the second variable we employ. Finally, we calculate the same measures for the downstream industries of our buyer firms to obtain the third variable. We also concord the
routineness measure developed by Costinot et al. (2011) to our upstream industries k.67
Results
Our results are reported in Table 5. Each column from (1) to (7) introduces a separate interaction variable. Except for the Rauch indicator and firm level contractibility,
all variables are significantly positive and very precisely estimated. Overall, we interpret these results as rich evidence in support of Prediction 1, because our measures of
contractibility capture several different aspects of the contracting environment in which
international trade takes place.
[Insert Table 5 here]

Robustness
66 The
67 We

country indicator variables are equal to one if a country is among the top 25 in the world.
cannot rule out the possibility that the proxies we use may also partially capture ex post con-

tractibility. In Appendix B.2.4 we show that higher ex post contractibility would typically work in the
opposite direction of prediction 1, i.e. weaken the effect of technological importance. If we do find a positive interaction effect in our exercise here, it is therefore (even stronger) evidence in favor of PRT forces
being operative.

40

Larger, more productive firms tend to be different from their less well performing
peers along many dimensions, which is documented by a large literature. It is therefore possible that we mistake mere scale effects – larger firms can afford to establish
subsidiaries abroad – for our mechanisms of interest. To address this issue, we control
for (and instrument) interactions of cost shares with firm size (log employment) and
productivity (value added per worker) measures. The results are reported in appendix
Table B.6 and show that the patterns we find are fully robust to this concern.

4.2

Headquarters Intensity

Empirical Specification
For testing our prediction 2 regarding headquarters intensity, we estimate equation

intrashareijpc = β 1 costshareip + β 2 costshareip × 1(hqintensity)down
j

+ αi + γcj + φcp + ε ijpc . (12)
We measure importance of investment at the downstream industry j level and instrument all level and interaction terms. As in the previous exercise, we use dummy variables that indicate when headquarters intensity is larger than the median. According to
our theoretical predictions our estimates of β 2 are expected to have a positive sign.
Data
As is common in the literature, we proxy headquarters intensity alternatively by
physical or intangible capital intensity, skill intensity, or service intensity at the downstream firm using the EAE as our data source. Service intensity hereby refers to the share

41

of service sector employees in total employment of a firm.68 Finally, we make use of the
RnD intensity variable constructed by Nunn and Trefler (2013) for the whole world.
Results
Results are reported in Table 6. All estimates for the headquarters intensity interactions are positive. We obtain highly significant results for capital intensity, which is very
much in line with the findings in Antras (2003). Skill intensity as a proxy for the provision of key conceptual input into the relationship exhibits a similarly significant pattern.
In contrast with Acemoglu et al. (2009) and Nunn and Trefler (2013) we do not find a
significant impact of RnD intensity, which may stem from the fact that there is considerable measurement error in this variable due to classification crosswalks. Overall, we
interpret these findings as evidence in favour of our second prediction.
Robustness
Addressing the same concerns about scale effects as above – larger, more productive
firms are more capital intensitive etc. than their smaller counterparts – we control for
labor productivity and employment interactions. The results are reported in appendix
Table B.7.
Moreover, the exercise for headquarters intensity is complicated by the fact that what
matters for ownership decisions in the theory is the relative importance of the upstream
to the downstream investment (cf. Acemoglu et al., 2010). In our extended model above,
this was captured by the parameters η and 1 − η. Empirically, we would not, however,
expect that upstream and downstream importance of the (marginal) investment follow
a one-to-one relationship. In a final robustness exercise we therefore add upstream
investment intensity as a control, i.e., the same interaction variables as before, but for
the 4 digit ISIC Rev. 3 industry that produces the product imported into France. The
68 All

variables are described in Appendix B.1.1.

42

results (appendix Table B.8) are fully robust to this check.69
[Insert Table 6 here]

5

Conclusion

Technological importance of an input – in the sense of a cost share – is a major determinant of the make-or-buy decision: Important inputs are significantly more likely to
be produced in-house. We use detailed trade and firm level data from France to document this fact and show that it is robust and economically significant. Through the
lens of a stylized model with incomplete contracting between a buyer and its suppliers, we interpret this finding as the combination of two effects. In general, firms want
to outsource production of their most important inputs to encourage their suppliers’ investments into the quality of an input. However, trading high cost share intermediates at
arm’s length potentially leads to expensive adaptation/coordination failures and opportunistic behavior on the part of the upstream partner, so that vertical integration may be
favored. Our baseline estimates are consistent with a world in which the latter, TCE type
incentives dominate. We provide additional empirical evidence for this interpretation of
our estimates. Consistent with predictions from an extended version of our model, the
positive relationship between technological importance and the likelihood of in-house
sourcing is stronger if a) contracts are more complete and b) the downstream firm also
has an important relationship-specific investment to make. Therefore, both PRT and TCE
type forces are needed to fully explain the empirical relationship between technological
importance and vertical integration observed in the data.
Our work highlights two promising avenues for further research on multinational
firms. First, we believe that the characteristics of supply networks and of the respective
69 Interestingly,

upstream investment intensity carries a negative sign almost throughout, which is fully

consistent with our theoretical model.

43

markets have a substantial bearing on how firms organize production. There already
exist a few important contributions in this area (e.g., Antras and Chor, 2013; Alfaro et al.,
forthcoming), but more work is needed to provide the theoretical and empirical evidence
sought-after by policy makers and academics alike (e.g., Bresnahan and Levin, 2012). The
results in this article make progress on this frontier. Secondly, with a few exceptions,
trade economists view multinational activity as shaped by the risk of underinvestment
in the spirit of the property rights theory of the firm. While this paradigm delivers
explanations for a variety of empirical patterns, its pervasiveness may also lead to a more
narrow research agenda. Our results, which complement other work such as Costinot
et al. (2011), provide further encouragement to view the international trade landscape
through a wider range of conceptual lenses, including transaction cost economics.

44

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Rachel Griffith, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Vertical
Integration and Technology: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 2010, 8 (September), 989–1033.
, Pol Antras, and Elhanan Helpman, “Contracts and Technology Adoption,” American
Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 916–943.
, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton, “Determinants of Vertical Integration: Financial
Development and Contracting costs,” Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (3), 1251–1290.
, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza TahbazSalehi, “The Network
Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, September 2012, 80 (5), 1977–2016.
Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan, “Inventories, Lumpy
Trade, and Large Devaluations,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (5), 2304–2339.
Alfaro, Laura and Andrew Charlton, “Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Investment,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (5), 2096–2119.
, Nicholas Bloom, Paola Conconi, Harald Fadinger, Patrick Legros, Andrew F. Newman, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen, “Come Together: Firm Boundaries and
Delegation,” NBER Working Paper No. 24603, 2018.
, Paola Conconi, Harald Fadinger, and Andrew F. Newman, “Do Prices Determine
Vertical Integration?,” Review of Economic Studies, 2016, 83 (3), 855–888.
, Pol Antras, Davin Chor, and Paola Conconi, “Internalizing Global Value Chains: A
Firm-Level Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Antras, Pol, “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003,
118 (November), 1375–1418.
45

and Davin Chor, “Organizing the Global Value Chain,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (6),
2127–2204.
and Elhanan Helpman, “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (3),
552–580.
and Robert W. Staiger, “Offshoring and the Role of Trade Agreements,” American
Economic Review, December 2012, 102 (7), 3140–3183.
Atalay, Enghin, Ali Hortaçsu, and Chad Syverson, “Vertical Integration and Input
Flows,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (4), 1120–1148.
Bajari, Patrick and Steven Tadelis, “Incentives versus Transaction Costs: A Theory of
Procurement Contracts,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 2001, 32 (3), 387–407.
Baker, George P. and Thomas N. Hubbard, “Make Versus Buy in Trucking:Asset Ownership, Job Design, and Information,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (3), 551–572.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Anthony J. Venables, “Spiders and Snakes: Offshoring and
Agglomeration in the Global Economy,” Journal of International Economics, 2013, 90 (2),
245–254.
Bernard, Andrew B., Emmanuel Dhyne, Glenn Magerman, Kalina Manova, and Andreas Moxnes, “The Origins of Firm Heterogeneity: A Production Network Approach,” NBER Working Papers 25441, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
January 2019.
, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott, “Transfer Pricing by U.S.-Based Multinational Firms,” mimeo, 2006.
Blaum, Joaquin, Claire Lelarge, and Michael Peters, “The Gains from Input Trade with
Heterogeneous Importers,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2018,
10 (4), 77–127.
46

Boehm, Johannes, Swati Dhingra, and John Morrow, “Product Diversification in Indian
Manufacturing,” CEP Discussion Papers dp1509, Centre for Economic Performance,
LSE November 2017.
Bolatto, Stefano, Alireza Naghavi, Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano, and Katja Zajc Kejzar,
“Intangible Assets and the Organization of Global Supply Chains,” Working Papers
wp1105, Dipartimento Scienze Economiche, Universita’ di Bologna August 2017.
Bresnahan, Timothy and Jonathan Levin, “Vertical Integration and Market Structure,”
in Robert Gibbons and John Roberts, eds., The Handbook of Organizational Economics,
Introductory Chapters, Princeton University Press, 2012.
and

, “Transaction Cost Economics,” in Robert Gibbons and John Roberts, eds., The

Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton University Press, 2013.
Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
NAFTA,” Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 1–44.
Carluccio, Juan and Maria Bas, “The Impact of Worker Bargaining Power on the Organization of Global Firms,” Journal of International Economics, 2015, 96 (1), 162–181.
and Thibault Fally, “Global Sourcing under Imperfect Capital Markets,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (3), 740–763.
Coppedge, Michael, John Gerring, Carl Henrik Knutsen, Staffan I. Lindberg, SvendErik Skaaning, Jan Teorell, David Altman, Michael Bernhard, M. Steven Fish,
Agnes Cornell, Sirianne Dahlum, Haakon Gjerløw, Adam Glynn, Allen Hicken,
Joshua Krusell, Anna Lührmann, Kyle L. Marquardt, Kelly McMann, Valeriya
Mechkova, Juraj Medzihorsky, Moa Olin, Pamela Paxton, Daniel Pemstein, Josefine Pernes, Brigitte von Röomer Johannes Seim, Rachel Sigman, Jeffrey Staton,
Natalia Stepanova, Aksel Sundström, Eitan Tzelgov, Yi ting Wang, Tore Wig, Steven
Wilson, and Daniel Ziblatt, “Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) Project,” 2018.
47

Corcos, Gregory, Delphine M. Irac, Giordano Mion, and Thierry Verdier, “The Determinants of Intrafirm Trade : Evidence From French Firms,” The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 2013, 95 (July), 825–838.
Costinot, Arnaud, Lindsay Oldenski, and James Rauch, “Adaptation and the Boundary
of Multinational Firms,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (1), 298–308.
Davies, Ronald B., Julien Martin, Mathieu Parenti, and Farid Toubal, “Knocking on
Tax Haven’s Door: Multinational Firms and Transfer Pricing,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 2018, 100 (1), 120–134.
Defever, Fabrice and Farid Toubal, “Productivity, Relationship-specific Inputs and the
Sourcing Modes of Multinationals,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2013,
94, 345–357.
Del Prete, Davide and Armando Rungi, “Organizing the Global Value Chain: A Firmlevel Test,” Journal of International Economics, 2017, 109, 16–30.
Diez, Federico J., “The Asymmetric Effects of Tariffs on Intra-firm Trade and Offshoring
Decisions,” Journal of International Economics, 2014, 93 (1), 76–91.
Eppinger, Peter and Bohdan Kukharskyy, “Contracting Institutions and Firm Boundaries,” mimeo, 2017.
Fattorini, Loredana, Armando Rungi, and Zhen Zhu, “The Organization of Global Supply Networks,” IMT Lucca EIC Working Paper Series, 2017, 8.
Feenstra, Robert C. and J. Bradford Jensen, “Evaluating Estimates of Materials Offshoring from US Manufacturing,” Economics Letters, 2012, 117 (1), 170 – 173.
Flaaen, Aaron, “The Role of Transfer Prices in Profit-Shifting by U.S. Multinational
Firms: Evidence from the 2004 Homeland Investment Act,” mimeo, 2017.

48

Forbes, Silke J. and Mara Lederman, “Adaptation and Vertical Integration in the Airline
Industry,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (5), 1831–1849.
Garetto, Stefania, “Input Sourcing and Multinational Production,” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics, 2013, 5 (2), 118–151.
Gibbons, Robert, “Four formal(izable) theories of the firm?,” Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 2005, 58 (2), 200–245.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, “Integration versus Outsourcing in Industry Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (February), 85–120.
,

, and Adam Szeidl, “Optimal Integration Strategies for the Multinational Firm,”

Journal of International Economics, 2006, 70, 216–238.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A
Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 1986, 94 (4),
691–719.
Hart, Oliver D. and Bengt Holmstrom, “A Theory of Firm Scope,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 2010, 125 (May), 483–513.
and John Moore, “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,” The Journal of Political
Economy, 1990, 98 (6), 1119.
Irarrazabal, Alfonso, Andreas Moxnes, and Luca D. Opromolla, “The Margins of Multinational Production and the Role of Intrafirm Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 2013,
121 (1), 74–126.
Joskow, Paul L., “Vertical Integration and Long-term Contracts: The Case of Coalburning Electric Generating Plants,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1985,
1 (1), 33–80.

49

Kalnins, Arturs, Stephen F. Lin, and Catherine Thomas, “In-House and Arm’s Length:
Productivity Heterogeneity and Variation in Organizational Form,” CEP Discussion
Paper Series, 2018, 1579.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi, “The Worldwide Governance
Indicators: Methodology and Analytical Issues,” Hague Journal on the Rule of Law, 2011,
3 (02), 220–246.
Klein, Benjamin, Robert G. Crawford, and Armen A. Alchian, “Vertical Integration,
Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process,” The Journal of Law &
Economics, 1978, 21 (2), 297–326.
Kohler, Wilhelm and Marcel Smolka, “Productivity and Firm Boundaries,” CESifo
Working Paper Series, 2018, 7214.
Lafontaine, Francine and Margaret Slade, “Vertical Integration and Firm Boundaries:
The Evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2007, 45 (3), 629–685.
Legros, Patrick and Andrew F. Newman, “A Price Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (2), 725–770.
and

, “Contracts, Ownership, and Industrial Organization: Past and Future,” Jour-

nal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 2014, 30, 82–117.
Levchenko, Andrei A., “Institutional Quality and International Trade,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (3), 791–819.
Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
Control for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 70 (2), 317–341.
Macchiavello, Rocco, “Financial Development and Vertical Integration: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2012, 10 (2), 255–289.

50

Masten, Scott E., “The Organization of Production: Evidence from the Aerospace Industry,” The Journal of Law & Economics, 1984, 27 (2), 403–417.
Monteverde, Kirk and David J. Teece, “Supplier Switching Costs and Vertical Integration in the Automobile Industry,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 1982, 13 (1), 206–213.
Nowak, Verena, Christian Schwarz, and Jens Suedekum, “Asymmetric Spiders: Supplier Heterogeneity and the Organization of Firms,” Canadian Journal of Economics,
2016, 49 (2), 663–684.
Nunn, Nathan, “Relationship-specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of
Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 569–600.
and Daniel Trefler, “Incomplete Contracts and the Boundaries of the Multinational
Firm,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2013, 94, 330–344.
Ornelas, Emanuel and John L. Turner, “Protection and International Sourcing,” Economic Journal, 2011, 122 (559), 26–63.
Park, Walter G., “International Patent Protection: 1960-2005,” Research Policy, 2008, 37
(4), 761–766.
Pemstein, Daniel, Kyle L. Marquardt, Eitan Tzelgov, Yi ting Wang, Joshua Krusell, and
Farhad Miri, “The V-Dem Measurement Model: Latent Variable Analysis for CrossNational and Cross-Temporal Expert-Coded Data,” University of Gothenburg, Varieties
of Democracy Institute: Working Paper No. 21, 2018, 3.
Ramondo, Natalia, Veronica Rappoport, and Kim J. Ruhl, “Intrafirm Trade and Vertical
Fragmentation in U.S. Multinational Corporations,” Journal of International Economics,
2016, 98 (March), 51–59.
Rauch, James E., “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 1999, 48 (1), 7–35.
51

Ruhl, Kim J, “How Well is US Intrafirm Trade Measured?,” American Economic Review:
Papers & Proceedings, 2015, 105 (5), 524–529.
Shu, Pian and Claudia Steinwender, “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Firm Productivity and Innovation,” Innovation Policy and the Economy, 2019, 19 (1), 39–68.
Whinston, Michael D., “Assessing the Property Rights and Transacion-Cost Theories of
Firm Scope,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (2), 184–188.
Williamson, Oliver E., The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York: The Free Press,
1985.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., “On Estimating Firm-level Production Functions using Proxy
Variables to Control for Unobservables,” Economics Letters, 2009, 104 (3), 112–114.

52

Notes
70 Our

numbers deviate slightly from those reported in Corcos et al. (2013), since various versions of the

EIIG data were published over time.
71 This

is equivalent to what Corcos et al. (2013) call their ‘large sample’, but at the level of HS 4 digit,

rather than CPA.

53

Appendices
A

Figures and tables for the main text
Figure 1: Contour Plots of Various French IO Tables

In reading pattern starting with upper left: Official 2 digit, 2 digit self-constructed, 4 digit symmetric
self-constructed, 4 digit asymmetric self-constructed.

54

Figure 2: Empirical Density of Direct Requirements (Asymmetric French IO Table in
1996)

55

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Employment
Sales
Average Input Cost Share
Average Intrafirm Trade Share
Average Number of Products
Capital Intensity
Intangible Cap. Int.
Skill Intensity
TFP Wooldridge (ln)
VA per worker

mean
468
160.4k
0.0068
0.27
10
900
106
185
1.53
1,262

median
sd
198
1,187
38.8k
1,137.8k
0.0012
0.0166
0.09
0.34
7
12
445
7103
17
1022
172
71
1.24
1.16
650
7,788

count
3,101
3,149
3,101
3,151
3,151
3,097
2,965
3,097
2,997
3,090

Summary statistics are computed at the firm level and refer to imports only. The
average intrafirm trade share is the within firm average computed along the input
× country dimension. The average input cost share is the within firm average
computed along the input dimension. The average number of products is the within
firm average computed along the input dimension. All variables are explained in
Appendix B.1.1.

56

Table 2: Baseline Estimates
VARIABLES

cost share

Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
R-squared
Instrument

KP-stat 1st stage

(1)
intra-firm
share

(2)
intra-firm
share

(3)
intra-firm
share

(4)
intra-firm
share

(5)
intra-firm
share

3.222***
(0.550)

2.479***
(0.320)

11.586***
(1.400)

11.281***
(1.615)

10.246***
(2.108)

76,897
0.015

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.686

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.638
Micro
1996
excl own firm
241.8

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.641
Micro China
2006
excl France
103.4

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.651
Official US
2002
4 digit
98.66

57

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall imports of the
firm for that input × country pair. The regressor is the input × firm level cost share in the firm’s total expenditure
on intermediates. Common sample across columns (2)-(5) and singletons are always removed. The French industry
classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at
the 3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.1.

Table 3: Baseline Robustness
VARIABLES

cost share

58

Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
ISIC 4dig FE*HS4 product
Up ISIC 4dig*Firm
Country*Firm
Observations
Sample
R-squared
Instrument
KP-stat 1st stage

(1)
intra-firm
share

(2)
intra-firm
share

(3)
intra-firm
share

(4)
intra-firm
share

(5)
intra-firm
share

(6)
intra-firm
share

(7)
intra-firm
share

11.577***
(1.392)

10.706***
(2.164)

8.533**
(4.111)

6.229**
(2.979)

10.354***
(1.517)

12.301***
(1.284)

12.497***
(1.384)

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
75,549
all
0.638

55,201
(1)
0.697

231.3

98.2

72,024
68,856
42,848
all
all
(2)
0.736
0.825
0.653
Micro 1996 excl own firm
19.9
40.5
118.5

YES
66,385
all
0.754

60,712
(3)
0.646

274.2

217.9

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall imports of the firm for that
input × country pair. The regressor is the input × firm level cost share in the firm’s total expenditure on intermediates. Sample (1):
We drop all observations in which the downstream importer i is mainly active in the industry j that also produces the good sourced
(p). In IO terminology, this means we drop all observations on the IO diagonal. Since our asymmetric table does not have a well
defined diagonal, we exclude all observations on the 4 digit ISIC Rev. 3 diagonal. Sample (2): Firms in highly competitive industries,
i.e. those where the Hirschman-Herfindahl-Index in 1999 was below 0.1. The Hirschman-Herfindahl-Index HH I downstr is computed
within NAF 4 digit industries, using the population of French firms’ sales. Sample (3): All import flows from EU countries. The French
industry classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries, while ISIC is more aggregated with its 122 categories. Number of
observations varies due to different sets of singletons (dropped) and availability of tariffs. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way
clustered at the 3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
p < 0.1.

Table 4: Horse Race with Integration Determinants at Firm Level
VARIABLES

cost share

(1)
intra-firm
share

(2)
intra-firm
share

(3)
intra-firm
share

(4)
intra-firm
share

(5)
intra-firm
share

(6)
intra-firm
share

(7)
intra-firm
share

0.214***
(0.413)

0.216***
(0.413)
0.068***
(0.005)

0.215***
(0.408)

0.207***
(0.402)

0.209***
(0.406)

0.220***
(0.414)

0.220***
(0.401)
0.042**
(0.007)
0.025**
(0.003)
0.100***
(0.042)

0.144***
(0.009)
0.177***
(0.027)

0.134***
(0.010)
0.134***
(0.010)

YES
YES
258,020
0.372

YES
YES
258,020
0.381

136.3

133

(log) capital intensity
(log) intangible cap. Int.

0.056***
(0.003)

(log) skill intensity

0.101**
(0.061)

(log) VA per worker

0.101***
(0.008)

(log) TFP

59

IM ratio

0.181***
(0.027)

0.169***
(0.027)

0.176***
(0.027)

0.178***
(0.032)

0.173***
(0.027)

Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Observations
R-squared
Instrument
KP-stat 1st stage

YES
YES
258,020
0.370

YES
YES
258,020
0.372

137.1

137

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
258,020
258,020
258,020
0.372
0.377
0.377
Micro 1996 excl own firm
134.4
136.6
137.4

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall imports of the firm for that input
× country pair. The main regressors are the firm × input level cost share in total expenditure on intermediates (instrumented) and the
IM ratios from a Heckman first stage non-response adjustment (for details, see Appendix B.1.2). Details on how the other variables
are constructed can be found in Appendix B.1.1. The French industry classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries.
Singletons are dropped. Standard errors in parentheses are bootstrapped and two-way clustered at the 3 digit downstream ISIC Rev.
3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

Table 5: Contracting Environment
CONTRACTIBILITY PROXY

cost share

× 1(proxy)
Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
R-squared
Instrument
KP-stat 1st stage

(1)
PR Protect.

(2)
Rule of Law

(3)
IPR Protect.

(4)
Contractibility
Product

(5)
Contractibility
Firms

10.048***
(1.623)
3.564***
(1.039)

9.507***
(1.796)
3.100**
(1.483)

2.507
(2.269)
9.827***
(2.323)

12.106***
(1.363)
0.297
(2.448)

11.430***
(1.315)
1.559
(1.337)

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.637

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.638

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.640

108

86.56

23

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
72,307
72,307
0.638
0.636
Micro 1996 excl own firm
42.09
111.2

(6)
(7)
Contractibility
Upstr.
Industry
Routineness
9.735***
(1.784)
6.076**
(2.308)

8.588***
(2.236)
5.369**
(2.501)

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.627

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.633

81.93

64.72

60

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall imports of the firm for that input × country pair. The regressor
is the input × firm level cost share in the firm’s total expenditure on intermediates. The interaction variables are described in Appendix B.1.1 and we interact with
dummies that equal one if a variable is above the median across the relevant distribution or if a country belongs to the top 25 origins according to an index. Common
sample imposed across all columns and singletons are dropped. The French industry classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries. Standard errors in
parentheses are two-way clustered at the 3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

Table 6: Headquarters Intensity
HQ Intensity Proxy

cost share

× 1( proxy)
Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
R-squared
Instrument
KP-stat 1st stage

(1)
RnD
Intensity

(2)
(3)
Capital Intangible Cap.
Intensity
Intensity

(4)
Skill
Intensity

(5)
Service
Intensity

10.917***
(1.985)
1.884
(2.390)

8.607***
(1.335)
7.151***
(1.990)

9.188***
(1.589)
4.996*
(2.557)

11.635***
(2.041)
0.877
(2.901)

YES
YES
YES
72,329
0.635
64.28

11.180***
(1.553)
1.991
(2.470)

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
72,329
72,329
72,329
0.630
0.636
0.628
Micro 1996 excl own firm
80.20
76.62
58.88

YES
YES
YES
72,329
0.636
102.9

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall
imports of the firm for that input × country pair. The regressor is the input × firm level cost share in the
firm’s total expenditure on intermediates. The interaction variables are described in appendix B.1.1 and
we interact with dummies that equal one if a variable is above the median across the relevant distribution.
Common sample imposed across all columns and singletons are dropped. The French industry classification
NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the
3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

61

B

Online Appendix

B.1

Data

In this appendix we first describe how we construct our variables. In the second part, we
give a detailed account of our replication of the Heckman correction procedure following
Corcos et al. (2013).

B.1.1

Variables

In this section we provide the details on how we construct our variables for the empirical
analysis.
• totcost: Total intermediate costs are computed from EAE and defined as the sum of
purchases of goods (R210), purchases of raw materials (R212), and other purchases
and charges (R214). In a robustness check we add total labor costs (R216), social
contributions (R217), and other charges (R222).
• Gross Output: It is computed from FICUS and defined as the sum of turnover
(CATOTAL), change in inventories (PRODIMM, PRODSTO), and other revenues
(AUTPREX).
• Capital Intensity: The ratio of the physical capital stock to total employment, where
the capital stock is measured as the total of tangible capital assets at end of year
(EAE item I150) and total employment is the total number of full time equivalent
employees (EAE item E101).
• Intangible Capital Intensity: Same as capital intensity, but uses only the total stock
of intangible capital assets at end of year (EAE item I456).
• Skill Intensity: Is defined as average wage, i.e., the ratio of total wage expenses to
the employment of the firms, as in Corcos et al. (2013).
62

• TFP: It is computed using the revised Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) methodology
proposed by Wooldridge (2009). The coefficient of a Cobb-Douglas value-added
production function are estimated at the 3 digit NACE industry level using intermediate inputs as the proxy for the productivity shock. Real value added is
obtained by double-deflation using deflators for output and intermediates from
the OECD STAN database. Output is defined as the sum of turnover (R310) and
other sales (R315), while intermediate costs are defined as above. Capital is defined as above and deflated using a deflator for gross fixed capital formation. All
variables are logged. TFP at the firm level is then calculated as a residual between
the actual and predicted value added using the estimated coefficients.
• Scale: average number of employees over the year (EAE item E101).
• Value added per employee: It is computed from EAE, with value added defined as
the difference between turnover (R310) and the sum of purchases of goods (R210)
and purchases of raw materials (R212).
• Firm level contract intensity: the variable is constructed using information about
firms imports. The firm-level contract intensity is an import value weighted average of the contract intensity of its inputs, where the measure of contract intensity is
a dummy equal to one if an input is (liberally) classified as differentiated in Rauch
(1999). It is therefore similar to the measure used in in Nunn (2007) and Corcos et
al. (2013), except that we weight by import value.
• Industry level contract intensity: same as firm level contract intensity, but weighting by total downstream industry (NAF) imports.
• Service intensity: ratio of workers employed in branches that produce services
(NACE codes from 50 to 93) to total employment.
• Property Rights Protection: We use the V-Dem indicator “v2xcl prpty”, which
63

codes the property rights index. The description reads: “Private property includes
the right to acquire, possess, inherit, and sell private property, including land. Limits on property rights may come from the state which may legally limit rights or fail
to enforce them; customary laws and practices; or religious or social norms. This
question concerns the right to private property, not actual ownership of property.”
The scale is ordinal, but converted to the unit interval. See Coppedge et al. (2018)
and Pemstein et al. (2018).
• Rule of Law: We use the Rule of Law index for 1998 provided in the World Governance Indicators, see Kaufmann et al. (2011).
• IPR Protection: We use the IPR protection index provided by Park (2008).
• Routine Task Intensity: We concord the indices (average routineness content of
tasks) provided in Costinot et al. (2011) to our NAF industry classification.
• Relationship-specificity: We use the classification in Rauch (1999) and recode every HS 4 input to ”relationship-specific” if it is differentiated, while it is ”not
relationship-specific” if it is traded on exchanges or reference priced (aggregation
to HS 4 digit is done by weighting with 1996 import values). Therefore, our variable
is a simple indicator at the product level.
B.1.2

Selection Adjustment for Horse Race

As discussed in Corcos et al. (2013), the EIIG survey suffered from significant nonresponse, which the authors addressed with a Heckman control function approach. All
our results with firm fixed effects are fully robust to these concerns due to the fact that
we use only within firm variation. Our quantitative explorations in the cross section
are liable to sample selection bias, however. Consequently, we implement the two step
procedure suggested by Corcos et al. (2013). We are grateful to these authors for giving
us access to the target population of EIIG.
64

In a first step we add the 3,841 firms in the EIIG target population that did not
respond to the survey, giving us a total of 4, 305 + 3, 841 = 8, 146 firm observations in the
target population.1 In line with the focus of our paper as well as of Corcos et al. (2013),
we focus on the 5,333 firms that operate mainly in manufacturing. Using the universe of
customs data for these firms, we are able to compute three excluded selection variables
as in Corcos et al. (2013). In particular, the selection stage of our two step Heckman
procedure is

1(responded)i = α + β 1 log(importvaluei )

+ β 2 log(# products) + β 3 log(# countries) + γk + ηi , (B.1)
where we regress a dummy for whether or not a firm responded to the survey on its total
import value, the number of imported HS 4 digit products, and the number of origin
countries for these flows in 1999. γk denotes a set of indicators for the firms’ three digit
ISIC Rev. 3 industry codes in the output market. Having estimated (B.1), we predict
inverse Mill’s (IM) ratios for our firms.
Again following Corcos et al. (2013) as closely as possible, we extend the EIIG sample
with a random sample of non-multinational manufacturing firms who are present in the
EAE and who traded more than one million EUR in the previous year (large traders).
To do so, we first obtain the full EAE sample of large trader manufacturers by means of
the universe of customs data and subtract the EIIG firms. Then we draw a 52.85 percent
random sample and add it to the EIIG firms. To run our second stage regressions, we add
all necessary international trade and firm level information for this composit sample.2
1 Our

numbers deviate slightly from those reported in Corcos et al. (2013), since various versions of

the EIIG data were published over time.
2 This is equivalent to what Corcos et al. (2013) call their ‘large sample’, but at the level of HS 4 digit,
rather than CPA.

65

In the random sample of non-multinational manufacturers we set the IM ratios equal
to zero and assume that all their imported inputs come from third parties – just as in
Corcos et al. (2013). We bootstrap all standard errors, clustering two-way at the 3 digit
up- and downstream industry level as throughout the paper.

66

B.2

Theory

B.2.1

Solution for the model with partially incomplete contracting ex ante

The surplus created by the relationship can now be written as

exp

δ

1

Z

ln xn ( j)dj

0

of which the supplier obtains a share (1 − β) at the third stage. It hence chooses its
non-contractible investments xnnc (k ) in stage 2 to maximize its profits minus the costs
R1
nc
µ c M xn ( j )dj. The optimal choice is
xnnc,∗ ( j) = xnnc,∗ =

(1 − β)δ c δ nc,∗ δ
(mn ) (mn ) ,
cM

(B.2)

where mc denotes

exp

Z

µ
0

ln

xnc ( j)dj


,

i.e. the composite of all contractible investments. Note that non-contractible investments
are fully symmetric, so that we can compute the index of non-contractible investments
as

∗
mnc,
n



=

(1 − β ) δ
cM



1− µ
1− δ (1− µ )

δ (1− µ )

( m c ) 1− δ (1− µ ) .

(B.3)

The downstream firm now chooses the levels of the contractible investments in order
to maximize its profit from the relationship. The reader should keep in mind that the
TCE costs fall exclusively on the downstream firm. Therefore, the profits are

γ

c δ

ββ (m ) (m

∗,nc δ

) −

Z µ
0

c M xnc ( j)dj,

where we assume that the supplier can recuperate the investment costs fully in its con-

67

tract with the downstream firm – it therefore does not matter, who pays the investment
costs.
Optimal contractible investments are

xnc,∗

= ββ (1 − β)
γ

δ (1− µ )
1− δ (1− µ )



δ
cM



1
1− δ (1− µ )

δ
1
(mc,n ∗ ) 1−δ(1−µ) .
1 − δ (1 − µ )

(B.4)

Again, we note that all contractible investments are symmetric. Therefore the expression for the index of contractible investments is

∗
mc,
n = β

µ[1−δ(1−µ)]
1− δ

β

µ[1−δ(1−µ)]
γ
1− δ

(1 − β )

µδ(1−µ)
1− δ



δ
cM



µ
1− δ

[1 − δ(1 − µ)]−

µ[1−δ(1−µ)]
1− δ

.

(B.5)

We can now plug the expressions (B.3) and (B.5) into mc and mnc to obtain the downstream firm’s net profits from the relationship

ββγ (mc,∗ )δ (mnc,∗ )δ =
β

1− δ (1− µ )
1− δ

β

γ

1− δ (1− µ )
1− δ

(1 − β )

δ (1− µ )
1− δ



δ
cM



δ
1− δ

µδ

[1 − δ(1 − µ)]− 1−δ , (B.6)

which it maximizes by choosing β at the first stage of the game. The first order condition
is

(1 + γ)[1 − δ(1 − µ)](1 − β∗ ) = δ(1 − µ) β∗ .
The solution to this first order condition is given in expression (7) in the main text.

68

B.2.2

Proof of Prediction 1

We want to show that the second order derivative of the optimal ownership share (7) is
strictly positive. First, note that we can rewrite the derivative ∂β∗ /∂δ in (8) as
1−µ
× {δγ0 [1 − δ(1 − µ)] − (1 + γ)} .
2
{z
}
{1 + γ[1 − δ(1 − µ)] } |
|
{z
}
≡ f (µ)
≡ g(µ)

We furthermore defined the two parts of the first order derivative as functions of µ.
Restating the goal of the proof, we want to show that
∂ f (µ)/∂µ
∂g(µ)/∂µ
>−
.
f (µ)
g(µ)
We find that

−

∂g(µ)/∂µ
1 + γ[1 + δ(1 − µ)]
=
g(µ)
1 + γ[1 − δ(1 − µ)]

and
∂ f (µ)/∂µ
δγ0 [1 − δ(1 − µ)] − (1 + γ)
=
.
f (µ)
δγ0
After a few algebraic steps one arrives at the inequality

δγ0 [2δ(1 − µ) − 1] − δγ0 γ[1 − δ(1 − µ)] > −(1 + γ){1 + γ[1 + δ(1 − µ)]}

(B.7)

Next, we assume that the inequality in Lemma 2, i.e. δγ0 [1 − δ(1 − µ)] > 1 + γ is
satisfied. Note that dividing (B.7) by this inequality gives us a sufficient condition for

(∂β∗ )2 /∂δ∂µ > 0, namely

69

2δ(1 − µ)
− γ > −{1 + γ[1 + δ(1 − µ)]}.
1 − δ (1 − µ )
Rearranging this inequality shows that our proof is successful:

1 > γ[1 − δ(1 − µ)].

B.2.3

Solution for the model with headquarters intensity

The surplus of the relationship can be written as

hδη mδ(1−η ) .
Therefore, in the second stage, the two firms choose their respective investments to
maximize

(1 − β)hδη mδ(1−η ) − c M m
in the case of the supplier and

ββγ hδη mδ(1−η ) − c H h
in the case of the downstream firm. Solving this system of equations we find the optimal
investments, namely

∗

m = (1 − β )

1−δη
1− δ

δη

β

(1+ γ ) 1− δ



δη
cH



δη
1− δ



δ (1 − η )
cM

 1−δη
1− δ

and

∗

h = (1 − β )

δ (1− η )
1− δ

β

(1+ γ )

1− δ (1− η )
1− δ



70

δη
cH

 1− δ (1− η ) 
1− δ

δ (1 − η )
cM

 δ (1− η )
1− δ

.

Using these two optimal investment levels, we can compute the downstream firm’s
payoff at stage 1,

(1 − β )

δ (1− η )
1− δ

β

(1+ γ )

1− δ (1− η )
1− δ



δη
cH



δη
1− δ



δ (1 − η )
cM

 δ (1− η )
1− δ

.

The solution for the optimal ownership share is given by the first order condition
from maximizing the last expression with respect to β.

B.2.4

The model with incomplete contracts ex post

We assume that the ex post inefficiency now depends on µ p :

β (1− µ

p )γ

,

while ex ante contracts are fully incomplete without loss of generality. With this specification we assume that the downstream firm can avoid some of the haggling or coordination/adaptation frictions through enforceable contracts. Clearly, more contractibility
(higher µ p ) reduces the ex post inefficiency and makes it less sensitive to changes in γ.
The solution of the model proceeds as before in the baseline and imperfect contracting cases. The optimal solution for the ownership share becomes

β∗ =

[1 + γ(1 − µ p )](1 − δ)
.
δ + [1 + γ(1 − µ p )](1 − δ)

(B.8)

We can, once again, show under what condition we obtain a prediction consistent
with our main empirical result.
Lemma 4 More important inputs are more likely to be integrated iff

ε 1+γ(1−µ p ),δ >
Proof. The derivative
71

1
.
1−δ

∂β∗
δγ0 (1 − µ p )(1 − δ) − [1 + γ(1 − µ p )]
>0
=
∂δ
{δ + [1 + γ(1 − µ p )](1 − δ)}2

(B.9)

iff
δγ0 (1 − µ p )
1
>
.
p
1 + γ (1 − µ )
1−δ

We now show that, in our typical setting, ex post contractibility weakens the effect of
technological importance on vertical integration. First, rewrite
∂β∗
(1 − µ p )[δγ0 (1 − δ) − γ] − 1]
=
.
∂δ
[1 + γ(1 − µ p )(1 − δ)]2
We want to show that

(∂β∗ )2
<0
∂δ∂µ p
or

δγ0 [γ(1 − δ)(1 − µ p ) − 1] < γ

1 − 2δ
.
1−δ

(B.10)

In our data, the cost shares of the vast majority of products is very low as can be
discerned from the summary statistics presented above. Consequently, δ will in general
be quite low and we expect that

γ(1 − δ)(1 − µ p ) − 1 < 0,
and

γ

1 − 2δ
>0
1−δ

72

in which case the inequality (B.10) is satisfied.

73

B.3

Figures and tables
Figure B.1: Empirical Density of Input Cost Shares

74

Table B.1: Baseline First Stages
VARIABLES
Quintile Micro Table FR ’96

(1)
cost share

(2)
cost share

(3)
cost share

0.002***
(0.000)

Quintile Micro Table CN ’06

0.002***
(0.000)

Quintile 4 digit IO table US ’02

0.003***
(0.000)

Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
R-squared
KP-stat 1st stage

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.597
241.8

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.593
103.4

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.594
98.66

The dependent variable is the firm × input level cost share in total expenditure
on intermediates. The 1996 French import IO table was constructed dropping a
firm’s own trade flows. The 2006 Chinese IO table was constructed dropping all
imports from France. Common sample imposed across all columns and singletons
are dropped. The French industry classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing
industries. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the 3 digit
downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

75

Table B.2: Baseline Reduced Forms
VARIABLES

Quintile Micro Table FR ’96

(1)
intra-firm
share

(2)
intra-firm
share

(3)
intra-firm
share

0.023***
(0.002)

Quintile Micro Table CN ’06

0.019***
(0.002)

Quintile 4 digit IO table US ’02

0.025***
(0.005)

Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
R-squared

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.638

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.641

YES
YES
YES
70,016
0.651

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall imports of the firm for that input × country pair. The 1996
French import IO table was constructed dropping a firm’s own trade flows. The
2006 Chinese IO table was constructed dropping all imports from France. Common
sample imposed across all columns and singletons are dropped. The French industry classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries. Standard errors in
parentheses are two-way clustered at the 3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry
and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

76

Table B.3: Baseline Estimates (diagonal dropped)
VARIABLES

cost share

Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
R-squared
Instrument

KP-stat 1st stage

(1)
intra-firm
share

(2)
intra-firm
share

(3)
intra-firm
share

(4)
intra-firm
share

(5)
intra-firm
share

2.373***
(0.706)

1.878**
(0.756)

10.196***
(2.191)

11.741***
(3.092)

18.446**
(7.495)

56,253
0.004

YES
YES
YES
50,654
0.718

YES
YES
YES
50,654
0.699
Micro
1996
excl own firm
102.7

YES
YES
YES
50,654
0.692
Micro China
2006
excl France
73.75

YES
YES
YES
50,654
0.643
Official US
2002
4 digit
16.74

77

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall imports of
the firm for that input × country pair. The regressor is the firm by input level cost share in total expenditure on
intermediates. Common sample imposed across columns (2)-(5) and singletons are dropped. The French industry
classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at
the 3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.1.

Table B.4: Baseline Estimates (aggregated across countries)
VARIABLES

cost share

Firm
HS4 product
NAF 4dig FE*HS4 product
Observations
R-squared
Instrument

KP-stat 1st stage

(1)
intra-firm
share

(2)
intra-firm
share

(3)
intra-firm
share

(4)
intra-firm
share

(5)
intra-firm
share

(6)
intra-firm
share

4.347***
(0.765)

3.098***
(0.558)

13.473***
(1.777)

14.372***
(2.020)

14.329***
(3.096)

8.651*
(4.393)

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

28,014
0.640

28,014
0.573
Micro
1996
excl own firm
225

28,014
0.561
Micro China
2006
excl France
119.2

28,469
0.018

YES
YES
YES
28,014
23.945
0.562
0.714
Official US
Micro
2002
1996
4 digit
excl own firm
234.4
19.55

78

The dependent variable is the input × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall imports of the firm for that input. The
regressor is the firm by input level cost share in total expenditure on intermediates. Common sample imposed across columns (2)(5) and singletons are dropped. The French industry classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries. Standard errors in
parentheses are two-way clustered at the 3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

Table B.5: Additional Robustness
VARIABLES

cost share

× 1(Eff. Appl. Tariff)

(1)
intra-firm
share

(2)
intra-firm
share

(3)
intra-firm
share

10.706***
(2.164)
1.499
(12.830)

(4)
intra-firm
share

(5)
intra-firm
share

10.206***
(1.261)

12.562***
(1.421)

× 1(distance)

-0.155
(1.232)

import value share

0.611***
(0.073)

(log) import value

Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
Sample
R-squared
Instrument
KP-stat 1st stage

0.032***
(0.004)
YES
YES
YES
75,533
all
0.638
118.5

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
76,154
70,596
51,348
all
all
(1)
0.670
0.684
0.646
Micro 1996 excl own firm
273.1
236.2
197.9

YES
YES
66,385
(2)
0.754
274.2

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall
imports of the firm for that input. The regressor is the firm by input level cost share in total expenditure
on intermediates. Data on effectively applied tariffs come from TRAINS; the interaction of cost shares
with a dummy equal one if a country × product tariff lies above the sample median is instrumented
with the same interaction with the instrument. The analogous strategy is used for origin country distance
to France, which comes from the CEPII gravity data set. Sample (1): Firms whose overall share of
imported inputs in overall expenditure on intermediates is above the median across all firms. Sample
(2): All import flows from EU countries. Singletons are dropped. The French industry classification NAF
contains 285 manufacturing industries. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the 3
digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

79

Table B.6: Contract Environment: Scale and Productivity Controls
CONTRACTIBILITY PROXY

cost share

× 1(proxy)
Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
R-squared
Instrument
KP-stat 1st stage

(1)
PR Protect.

(2)
Rule of Law

(3)
IPR Protect.

(4)
Contractibility
Product

(5)
Contractibility
Firms

5.616***
(1.488)
4.514**
(1.773)

5.324***
(1.453)
3.073**
(1.518)

-1.672
(2.920)
10.103***
(2.416)

7.813***
(1.407)
0.293
(2.473)

7.325***
(1.252)
1.207
(1.411)

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.641

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.643

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.645

53.80

42.11

12.32

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
72,307
72,307
0.642
0.641
Micro 1996 excl own firm
22.64
43.72

(6)
(7)
Contractibility
Upstr.
Industry
Routineness
4.951**
(1.952)
6.310***
(2.322)

4.895**
(2.022)
5.058**
(2.544)

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.631

YES
YES
YES
72,307
0.638

39.17

48.59

80

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall imports of the firm for that input × country pair. The
regressor is the input × firm level cost share in the firm’s total expenditure on intermediates. The interaction variables are described in appendix B.1.1, coefficients for
employment and value added per worker are omitted, and we interact with dummies that equal one if a variable is above the median across the relevant distribution
or if a country belongs to the top 25 origins according to an index. Common sample imposed across all columns and singletons are dropped. The French industry
classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the 3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and
at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

Table B.7: Headquarters Intensity: Scale and Productivity Controls
HQ Intensity Proxy

cost share

× 1( proxy)
Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
R-squared
Instrument
KP-stat 1st stage

(1)
RnD
Intensity

(2)
(3)
Capital Intangible Cap.
Intensity
Intensity

(4)
Skill
Intensity

(5)
Service
Intensity

9.590***
(2.467)
2.369
(2.564)

7.445***
(1.274)
7.495***
(1.892)

8.496***
(1.625)
4.722*
(2.507)

10.662***
(2.016)
1.042
(2.829)

YES
YES
YES
72,173
0.632
27.42

10.478***
(1.469)
1.711
(2.472)

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
72,173
72,173
72,173
0.627
0.634
0.626
Micro 1996 excl own firm
40.37
39.29
28.38

YES
YES
YES
72,173
0.634
50.08

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall
imports of the firm for that input × country pair. The regressor is the input × firm level cost share in
the firm’s total expenditure on intermediates. The interaction variables are described in appendix B.1.1,
coefficients for employment and value added per worker are omitted, and we interact with dummies that
equal one if a variable is above the median across the relevant distribution. Common sample imposed across
all columns and singletons are dropped. The French industry classification NAF contains 285 manufacturing
industries. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the 3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3
industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

81

Table B.8: Headquarters Intensity: Upstream Controls
HQ Intensity Proxy

cost share

× 1(proxy downstr)
× 1(proxy upstr)
Country*HS4 product FE
Country*NAF 4dig FE
Firm
Observations
R-squared
Instrument
KP-stat 1st stage

(1)
RnD
Intensity

(2)
(3)
Capital Intangible Cap.
Intensity
Intensity

(4)
Skill
Intensity

(5)
Service
Intensity

12.931***
(2.291)
3.469
(2.813)
-4.272
(3.361)

8.759***
(1.371)
7.293***
(2.369)
-0.409
(2.484)

11.155***
(1.890)
6.552**
(2.901)
-4.704
(2.891)

12.962***
(2.333)
2.796
(3.304)
-4.771
(2.946)

YES
YES
YES
72,329
0.637
34.91

10.641***
(1.776)
1.649
(2.413)
1.442
(2.850)

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
72,329
72,329
72,329
0.630
0.635
0.633
Micro 1996 excl own firm
27.35
36.21
36.38

YES
YES
YES
72,329
0.635
34.87

The dependent variable is the input × country × firm level share of intrafirm import value in overall
imports of the firm for that input × country pair. The regressor is the input × firm level cost share in the
firm’s total expenditure on intermediates. The interaction variables are described in appendix B.1.1 and
we interact with dummies that equal one if a variable is above the median across the relevant distribution.
Common sample imposed across all columns and singletons are dropped. The French industry classification
NAF contains 285 manufacturing industries. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the
3 digit downstream ISIC Rev. 3 industry and at the 3 digit upstream ISIC Rev. 3 level. *** p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

82

