                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 TECHIES, TRADE, AND SKILL-BIASED PRODUCTIVITY

                                         James Harrigan
                                          Ariell Reshef
                                          Farid Toubal

                                      Working Paper 25295
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25295


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Mary Amiti, Zsofia Barany, Eric Bartelsman, Flora Bellone, Andrew
Bernard, Tibor Besedes, Esther Ann Bøler, Davin Chor, Chiara Criscuolo, Alon Eizenberg,
Georg Graetz, Giammario Impullitti, Beata Javorcik, Guy Michaels and Jean-Marc Robin for
helpful comments. The paper benefited from comments from seminar participants at Aarhus
University, American University, AMSE, Bar Ilan University, Ben Gurion University, CREST,
Dresden University, Gronigen University, France Stratégie, Hebrew University, University of Le
Mans, LSE, Nottingham University, New York University and the Paris Trade Seminar, as well
as workshop participants at DEGIT, ENEF, IFN (Stokholm), SAIS, SETC, and TRISTAN
(Bayreuth). This research was supported by the Bankard Fund for Political Economy at the
University of Virginia and by the Agence National de la Recherche under grant numbers
ANR-16-CE60-0001-01 and ANR-10-EQPX-17 (investissements d’avenir). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by James Harrigan, Ariell Reshef, and Farid Toubal. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Techies, Trade, and Skill-Biased Productivity
James Harrigan, Ariell Reshef, and Farid Toubal
NBER Working Paper No. 25295
November 2018
JEL No. D2,D24,F1,F16,F60,F66,J2,J23,J24,O52

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the impact of firm level choices of ICT, R&D, exporting and importing on the
evolution of productivity and its bias towards skilled occupations. We use a novel measure of the
propensity of a firm to engage in technology investment and adoption: its employment of workers
with STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) skills and experience who we call
“techies”. We develop a methodology for estimating firm level productivity that allows us to
measure both Hicks-neutral and skill-augmenting technology differences, and apply this to
administrative data on French firms in the entire private sector from 2009 to 2013. We find that
techies and importing of intermediate inputs raise skill-biased productivity, while imports also
raise Hicks-neutral productivity. We also find that higher firm-level skill biased productivity
raises low-skill employment even as it raises the ratio of skilled to unskilled workers. This is
because of the cost-reducing effect of higher productivity. The techie and trade effects are large,
and can account for much of the aggregate increase in skilled employment from 2009 to 2013.


James Harrigan                                           Farid Toubal
Department of Economics                                  Ecole Normale Supérieure de Paris Saclay
University of Virginia                                   Bureau 503, Bat Cournot
P.O. Box 400182                                          61, avenue du Président Wilson
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182                           94235 Cachan Cedex
and Paris School of Economics                            FRANCE
and also NBER                                            and CREST
harrigan@nber.org                                        and also CEPII
                                                         ftoubal@ens-cachan.fr
Ariell Reshef
Université Paris 1 - Panthéon Sorbonne
Maison des Sciences Economiques
106-112 Boulevard de l'Hopital
75647 Paris Cedex 13
France
and CNRS
and Paris School of Economics
and also CEPII
ariell.reshef@psemail.eu
1        Introduction

Economists have been studying the nexus between labor demand, globalization and technology
adoption for decades.1 Theory and anecdote suggest that some combination of technology and
globalization has raised the relative demand for more skilled workers, but quantifying the relative
importance of these forces has proved challenging. While there is a consensus that skill-biased
technological change (SBTC) has raised the relative demand for more skilled workers, direct micro
evidence on the drivers of SBTC is remarkably sparse. One reason for this absence of evidence is that
technological change is devilishly difficult to measure. In this paper we overcome these challenges,
and estimate the separate firm-level effects of research and development (R&D), information and
communication technology (ICT) adoption, exporting and importing on productivity and its bias
towards skilled workers. Our paper is the first to estimate the effects of firm-level technology
adoption and trade on productivity and labor demand in a unified framework. Using data from
France between 2009 and 2013, we find large effects of importing, ICT and R&D on the relative
demand for skill through their effects on skill-augmenting productivity.
        Quantifying the importance of technology adoption and globalization for relative labor demand
is hard for two reasons. First, while it is relatively easy to measure importing and exporting at the
level of the firm, it has proven very hard to measure technology adoption, except in case studies and
in particular industries.2 Second, it is difficult to identify causal effects since firms jointly choose
whether to import, export and adopt technology.
        In this paper, we solve both problems. We apply and extend new techniques from the structural
production function estimation literature in order to consistently estimate both Hicks-neutral and
skill-augmenting productivity shifters. We use a flexible specification of the firm’s productivity
process which permits us to make causal statements about the effects of firms’ investment in ICT
and R&D and of importing and exporting decisions on firm productivity. This then allows us to
quantify the impact of these factors on the demand for skilled and unskilled labor. The focus on
firms is important, because that is where decisions about technological change, globalization and
employment are made.
        In order to identify the effect of ICT and R&D on firm level productivity we use data on workers
in technology-related occupations. We call these workers “techies”. We view techies—engineers and
technicians with skills and experience in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)—as
    1
        Helpman (2018) and Acemoglu and Autor (2011) are insightful recent surveys of this literature.
    2
        We discuss this literature below.


                                                            1
essential to productivity growth, by virtue of being the creators of new products and processes,
and as mediators of technology adoption at the firm level. Techies are central in creating, planning,
installing, and maintaining ICT, as well as in training and assisting other workers in the use of ICT.
Techies are also involved in R&D. They design and lead R&D processes and ensure the transfer of
know-how to other workers in the firm. Using data on R&D techies offers an alternative to R&D
expenditure data.
   Using administrative data on the entire French private sector from 2009 to 2013 we find that
both technology and trade have large effects. Using our baseline estimates, we find that compared to
firms that don’t import and don’t employ techies, firms with a lot of techies have skill-augmenting
productivity which is 60 percent higher. Techies have no effect on Hicks-neutral productivity.
Turning to the effects of trade, we find that firms that import have skill-augmenting productivity
which is 120 percent higher, and Hicks-neutral productivity which is 50 percent higher.
   Because our estimation procedure also delivers estimates of the elasticities of substitution and
demand, we can translate the estimated effects on productivity into effects on firm-level labor
demand. Again compared to firms that don’t import and don’t employ techies, firms with a lot of
techies have employment of skilled labor that is 60 percent higher, employment of unskilled labor
that is 15 percent higher, and skill intensity that is 40 percent higher. The effects of importing
are even larger: firms that import have employment of skilled labor that is 115 percent higher,
employment of unskilled labor that is 25 percent higher, and skill intensity that is 70 percent
higher. When we aggregate across firms, we find that our model can match the overall increase in
skill intensity in our sample from 2009 to 2013.
   These results on the employment effects of techies and trade are crucial to public policy debates.
They show that unskilled workers are right to be wary of technology and trade, which we find do
indeed favor employment of skilled workers. But this is a relative effect: because of the powerful
productivity effects of technology and trade, both skilled and unskilled workers see labor demand
rise when the firms where they work hire techies and/or engage in offshoring.
   All the results we find in this paper are within-firm effects of firm level decisions. We do not
consider why firms choose to employ techies or import, nor do we consider the effects of these
firm-level decisions on industry or economy-wide equilibrium labor demand and wages. These
are limitations of the scope of our paper but do not impinge on the credibility of our research
strategy. Furthermore, any credible analysis of the equilibrium effects of technology adoption and
globalization on labor markets must be built on an understanding of what goes on inside firms.


                                                   2
This is where our contribution lies.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we discuss papers directly related
to our research questions and methodology. After a brief discussion of why not all firms employ
techies in section 3, we develop our econometric methodology in Section 4 and describe our data
and construction of the estimation sample in Section 5. Estimation results and the quantitative
implications for skill bias and labor demand are reported in Section 6.


2     Related research

SBTC and globalization have been of intense interest to economists for decades, but there are
remarkably few papers that look for SBTC at the firm or plant level, and none that simultaneously
estimate, as we do, the effect of ICT, R&D and globalization on SBTC. We discuss these few
papers here to put our contribution in context. We also review research on the role of techies in
production, and highlight recent developments in the estimation of production functions that we
build on.


2.1    Firm-level biased technological change and globalization

In this subsection we discuss papers that study firm- or plant-level changes in the composition of
employment as a result of technological change.3 Several excellent papers study a single industry or
firm. Bartel et al. (2007) look at the valve manufacturing industry between 1999 and 2003 to study
how adoption of ICT caused reorganization within firms. They show that ICT adoption increased
Hicks-neutral total factor productivity (TFP) (through faster setup times, greater customizability,
and better quality control) and also raised the skill-requirements for machine operators. Autor
et al. (2002) study how the introduction of digital check imaging affected reorganization and the
allocation of tasks across workers within one large bank. Acemoglu and Finkelstein (2008) find that
when a policy change in 1983 increased the relative price of labor for hospitals, hospitals increased
both their capital-labor ratio and their skill/unskill ratio among nurses - a result that is suggestive
of complementarity between capital and skilled labor. Our paper has a much broader scope, as we
study all private sector firms in France.
    Some of the most informative papers about firm-level SBTC are primarily descriptive. Dunne
et al. (2004) uses the Census’ Longitudinal Research Database and find that computer use within
  3
    To keep this literature review manageable, we eschew discussion of the many important papers that analyze
SBTC and related issues using industry-level data.


                                                     3
plants is not associated with higher overall labor productivity but is associated with greater non-
production worker intensity, a common proxy for skilled workers. Helper and Kuan (2018) per-
formed a 2011 survey of the auto parts industry, and find that most firms in this industry do
not perform R&D, but innovate nonetheless through the efforts of their engineers and technicians.
They also find that the tasks done by engineers overlap much more with skilled than with unskilled
workers. Barth et al. (2017) study plant-level data on US manufacturing firms, with a focus on
the role of scientists and engineers. In the private sector as a whole, they show that 80 percent of
scientists and engineers worked outside R&D occupations in 2013. They estimate a simple gross
revenue production function at the establishment level from 1992 to 2007 using fixed effects OLS,
and find statistically significant effects of the science and engineer share of employment on revenue,
a result suggestive of a positive effect of scientists and engineers on TFP. Bresnahan et al. (2002)
argue persuasively for a complementarity between IT, decentralized firm organization, and skilled
labor. They construct measures of “work organization”, computer capital, and employee skill for
a small number of very big publicly traded firms in the mid-1990s, and find robust correlations
that are consistent with their view. Building on these insights, our paper moves beyond descriptive
analysis to structural estimation.
   Two recent papers on firm level skill-biased technology both use data from Norway to estimate
causal effects. Akerman et al. (2015) exploit exogenous variation in the local availability of broad-
band internet in the 2000s, and find convincing intent-to-treat effects on both local skilled wages
and firms’ output elasticity for skilled workers. As they acknowledge, their evidence that firms who
adopt broadband internet increase their skill intensity is weaker. Bøler (2015) uses a 2002 tax break
for R&D expenditure to estimate the effects of R&D on firm-level skill intensity in manufacturing.
Her reduced form evidence is supportive of a very strong effect of R&D on skill intensity, while her
structural production function estimates find a smaller but still important effect. These Norwegian
papers are importnat antecedents to our paper, but the greater size and diversity of the French
economy, as well as our analysis of nonmanufacturing in addition to manufacturing firms, allows
us to estimate broader and more nuanced effects.
   Turning to the effects of globalization, Becker et al. (2013) use German micro data on em-
ployment and offshoring by multinational firms during 1998-2001. They find a positive association
between offshoring and plant-level skill intensity. For Indonesia, Kasahara et al. (2016) find that
plant-level use of imported materials raised the level of education within manufacturing plants




                                                  4
between 1995 and 2007.4 Bustos (2011) finds that Argentinian firms raised their productivity and
skill intensity after a major trade reform in 1991. She also finds an association between spending
on ICT and skill upgrading. Our results are consistent with the papers by Kasahara et al. (2016)
and Bustos (2011), but we are not able to investigate the channel identified by Becker et al. (2013)
since we don’t have information on foreign affiliates of the French firms in our data.
       Like us, Bender et al. (2018) use a framework that has both Hicks-neutral and management-
augmenting technological differences across firms. Applying the methodology of Abowd et al.
(1999), they construct individual-level measures of worker quality, which they match to firms. This
very creative paper is hampered by matching problems that lead to a sample size of just 361 German
firms across three years (2004, 2006, and 2009). As a consequence, their data analysis is mainly
descriptive, while our much larger dataset allows us to do structural estimation.
       Two recent papers estimate firm-level labor augmenting technology under the assumption that
firms produce using a CES production function of capital, labor, and materials, which is very similar
to what we do. Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2018) develop a production function estimator that
is relevant to our methodology, so we defer discussion of this paper until section 2.3 below. Raval
(2017) uses an equation implied by static cost minimization to estimate both the elasticity of
substitution and the level of labor-augmenting technology differences across U.S. manufacturing
plants between 1987 and 2007.5 Though these two papers are not directly about skill bias, their
findings of large labor augmenting technology differences across firms have a plausible interpretation
as differences in the skill mix across firms. By contrast, our structural model directly estimates
skilled labor augmenting technological differences across firms.


2.2      The role of techies

Though we are the first to analyze the impact of techies on SBTC, there is a small literature that
has looked at the impact of techies on output, the structure of employment, and productivity at
the firm level. The motivation for this literature is stated succinctly by Tambe and Hitt (2014):
“the technical know-how required to implement new IT innovations is primarily embodied within
the IT workforce”.
       Firm-level research on this proposition has been hampered by a lack of firm-occupation level
   4
      Amiti and Cameron (2012) also study firm-level data from Indonesia, but their primary focus is the skill premium
rather than skill intensity.
    5
      The industry-level estimates from an earlier version of Raval (2017) are used to compute the aggregate elasticity
of substitution in Oberfield and Raval (2014).



                                                          5
data in most administrative and survey datasets. An exception is our Harrigan et al. (2016), which
uses detailed occupational data (including data on techies) for the entire French private sector
from 1994 to 2007. Harrigan et al. (2016) shows that French firms with more techies in 2002 grew
more rapidly from 2002 to 2007, and also that increases in techies led to within-firm occupational
polarization. Lichtenberg (1995) and Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1996), working with a small number
of U.S. firms in the late 1980s and a simple Cobb-Douglas production function estimating equation,
find that IT labor has a positive output elasticity. Tambe and Hitt (2012) use a newer data source
and a more sophisticated estimation technique, and again find a positive output elasticity of IT
labor. However, none of these three papers test the null that IT and non-IT labor have the same
output elasticity. Using a remarkable dataset that tracks the movement of IT workers across firms,
Tambe and Hitt (2014) find what they interpret as evidence for knowledge spillovers across firms
through the channel of techie mobility. In the present paper, rather than treating IT labor as a
simple input we estimate the effect of IT labor on productivity. In addition, our specification is
not vulnerable to the endoegenity bias that plagues OLS estimation of Cobb-Douglas production
functions.
       The idea that engineers and other technically-trained workers are important for productivity
growth has also found support in the economic history literature. Kelly et al. (2014) and Ben Zeev
et al. (2017) highlight the importance of the British apprentice system during the British Industrial
Revolution in supplying the basic skills needed for technology adoption (whether British technology
or other). Maloney and Valencia-Caicedo (2017) construct a dataset of engineer intensity for the
Americas and for U.S. counties around 1880, and show that this intensity helps predicting income
today.6 Indeed, engineers are at the center of modern (endogenous) growth theory, e.g., Romer
(1990).


2.3      Production function estimation

The modern approach to firm-level productivity estimation is to specify output as a function of in-
puts, develop an estimation methodology that identifies the parameters of the production function,
and then back out the implied estimated productivity. The foundational papers in this literature are
Olley and Pakes (1996)[OP], Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)[LP], and Ackerberg et al. (2015)[ACF].
The OP/LP/ACF methodology takes it as given that data on real inputs and outputs are available.
   6
    See also Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1991) for evidence on the relationship between engineers (versus lawyers)
and income.



                                                        6
This methodology also treats productivity differences across firms as exogenous and Hicks-neutral.
We build on recent methodological developments that move beyond these assumptions.
      Most firm- or plant-level datasets (including ours) include information on revenue Rf t for firm
f in year t and the value of expenditures on materials Mf t but not data on the corresponding
output and materials prices pYft and pM
                                      f t . De Loecker and Goldberg (2014) give a clear exposition

of the estimation and interpretation problems that arise when real input and output quantities are
unavailable. Grieco et al. (2016) [GLZ] show how to estimate the parameters of a CES production
function even in the absence of real output or input data, by exploiting the firm’s first-order
conditions for profit maximization. In section 4.1 below, we extend the GLZ estimator to allow for
factor-augmenting productivity differences.
      Economists have long been interested in the determinants of firm level productivity, and there
are many papers that follow some variant of the OP/LP/ACF methodology to first estimate pro-
ductivity and then study its determinants, most often in the context of estimating the effects of
importing or exporting on productivity.7 De Loecker (2013) points out the limitations of this ap-
proach. In particular, he shows that if productivity is an endogenous function of exporting then
a measure of exporting must be included in the moment conditions to get a consistent estimator
for the production function. Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013) take a different approach to es-
timating endogenous productivity, combining the firm’s parametric labor demand function with
a nonparametric controlled Markov specification for productivity. Our estimation of endogenous
productivity in section 4.4 below builds on these two papers.
      Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2018) is the first paper in the production function estimation
literature to estimate both neutral and non-neutral technology differences. Their model has a
3-factor CES production function with Hicks-neutral ωH and labor-augmenting ωL technology
differences across firms. Labor and materials are static inputs, which implies that the optimal labor
to materials ratio depends on ωL but not on ωH . This insight motivates a two stage procedure. In
the first stage they recover ω
                             bL and the estimated elasticity of substitution σ
                                                                             b through estimation of
a relative factor demand equation implied by the CES functional form. They then use ω
                                                                                    bL and σ
                                                                                           b
as data in a second stage which allows them to recover ωH . In section 4.1 below we show how a
similar model can be estimated in a single step.
  7
      Pavcnik (2002) may have been the first to do this, and Amiti and Konings (2007) is another well-known example.




                                                          7
3    Why don’t all firms employ techies?

Many of the papers in section 2.1 find that employment of techies enhances productivity, which
raises a simple question: why don’t all firms employ them? As we will show in section 6.2, in our
sample of French firms techies are found to have strong positive effects on skill-biased productivity,
yet most firms do not employ techies. A similar finding is well-known to trade economists: in
some studies of developing countries, exporting is found to raise productivity, yet a minority of
firms export. Following Melitz (2003), the consensus explanation for this phenomenon is fixed
costs: firms choose to export only when the extra revenue from exporting exceeds the fixed costs
of exporting. Alternatively, the variable costs of exporting may make it unprofitable for high-cost
firms, as shown by Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). Here we sketch a simple model that makes a
similar point about techies, and that gives a rationale for a constant elasticity relationship between
techies and productivity. We do not estimate this model, rather we use it here to make a few simple
theoretical points.
    For maximum simplicity, suppose there are only two periods and one type of productivity.
The firm takes demand, costs and initial period log productivity ωf t−1 as given and has to choose
optimal techie employment Tf t−1 to maximize profits. The relationship from techies to changes in
productivity is

                                                             
                                                       Tf t−1
                           ωf t = ωf t−1 + M ax δ ln           ,0 ,     δ≥0
                                                        γ1f

Although the elasticity of productivity with respect to techies is constant and equal to δ, the level
of techie employment required to attain a given growth in productivity ∆ωf t will differ across firms
because of differences in γ1f . Fixed costs of employing positive techies are γ0f and the wage of
techies is r, so the cost of hiring techies is rTf t−1 + γ0f . With heterogeneity in the costs γ0f and γ1f
not all firms will employ techies, and we derive the following very intuitive conclusions in Appendix
A.2.6. First, the optimal amount of techies is more likely to be positive when demand and/or initial
productivity are higher. Conversely, the optimal amount of techies is more likely to be zero when
fixed costs of techies are high and/or when the efficiency of techies are low. Second, the optimal
amount of techies may be zero even if the fixed cost of employing techies is zero. Finally, when the
optimal amount of techies is positive, it is increasing in initial productivity and the efficiency of
techies. A further implication of this framework is that since firms that export will have a higher
demand level, they will also be more likely to employ techies.


                                                    8
        The evidence in Table 1 is consistent with these simple predictions. The table reports regressions
of firm-level outcomes on an indicator for positive techie employment (column 1) and the techie
share of the wage bill when it is positive (column 2). All regressions include firm × industry
fixed effects, so the reported results are identified by variation across firms within industry-years.
Just 11 percent of firm-year observations have positive techies, as shown by the relative sample
sizes in the two columns. The results show that techies are associated with greater revenue and
a greater propensity to import and export and, in a preview of our structural analysis below, are
also associated with a higher share of managers in the firm’s wage bill. Column (1) shows that
larger firms, importing and exporting firms, and firms that have a higher managerial intensity are
far more likely to employ techies.8 Column (2) shows that these relationships are somewhat weaker
on the intensive margin: among firms who employ techies, the effect of size and export propensity
are smaller, and the effect is indistinguishable from zero for importing. The exception is the large
marginal effect of the share of the managerial wage bill share. The final row of Table 1 hints at our
findings in Section 6.2, where we show that more techies lead to greater employment of managers.


4        Econometric methodology

The modern approach to firm-level productivity estimation is to specify output as a function of in-
puts, develop an estimation methodology that identifies the parameters of the production function,
and then back out the implied estimated productivity. The foundational papers in this literature are
Olley and Pakes (1996)[OP], Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)[LP], and Ackerberg et al. (2015)[ACF].
The OP/LP/ACF methodology takes it as given that data on real inputs and outputs are available.
But this is rarely the case. This methodology also treats productivity differences across firms as
exogenous and Hicks-neutral. We build on recent methodological developments that move beyond
these assumptions.
        Most firm- or plant-level datasets (including ours) include information on revenue Rf t for firm
f in year t and the value of expenditures on materials Mf t but not data on the corresponding
output and materials prices pYft and pM
                                      f t . De Loecker and Goldberg (2014) give a clear exposition

of the estimation and interpretation problems that arise when real input and output quantities are
unavailable. Grieco et al. (2016) [GLZ] show how to estimate the parameters of a CES production
function even in the absence of real output or input data, by exploiting the firm’s first-order
    8
    Since we exclude techies from the wage bill in these regressions, the techie correlation with manager’s wage bill
is not mechanical.


                                                         9
conditions for profit maximization.
       Many papers follow some variant of the OP/LP/ACF methodology to first estimate produc-
tivity and then study its determinants, often in the context of estimating the effects of exporting
or importing on productivity.9 De Loecker (2013) points out the limitations of this approach.
In particular, he shows that if productivity is an endogenous function of exporting then a mea-
sure of exporting must be included in the moment conditions to get a consistent estimator for
the production function. Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013) take a different approach to esti-
mating endogenous productivity, combining the firm’s parametric labor demand function with a
nonparametric controlled Markov specification for productivity.
       Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2018) is the first paper in the production function estimation
literature to estimate both neutral and non-neutral technology differences. Their model has a
3-factor CES production function with Hicks-neutral ωH and labor-augmenting ωL technology
differences across firms. Labor and materials are static inputs, which implies that the optimal labor
to materials ratio depends on ωL but not on ωH . This insight motivates a two stage procedure. In
the first stage they recover ω
                             bL and the estimated elasticity of substitution σ
                                                                             b through estimation of
a relative factor demand equation implied by the CES functional form. They then use ω
                                                                                    bL and σ
                                                                                           b
as data in a second stage which allows them to recover ωH .10
       Our approach extends Grieco et al. (2016) [GLZ] in two ways. First, we separate labor into
three components: skilled and unskilled labor S and L, which contribute to output in the standard
way, and workers T in technical occupations (“techies”) who are assumed to affect production
only through their lagged impact on productivity. Second, we allow firm production functions
within an industry to differ in two dimensions: in addition to a Hicks neutral term ΩHf t = eωHf t ,
already present in GLZ, we add a skilled-labor augmenting term ΩSf t = eωSf t . Here we outline our
approach, with details discussed in Appendix A.2.


4.1      Estimating productivity

We begin with a CES function where physical output Yf t is produced using skilled labor Sf t ,
unskilled labor Lf t , capital Kf t , and materials Mf t . This function is assumed to be the same for
all firms in an industry up to the two productivity levels ΩHf t and ΩSf t . For reasons discussed
   9
    For example, Pavcnik (2002) and Amiti and Konings (2007).
  10
    In their application to Spanish manufacturing data in 1990–2006, Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2018) find great
heterogeneity in the level and growth of labor-augmenting productivity differences, with weighted average annual ωL
growth of 1.5 percent per year..



                                                        10
by GLZ, it is important for identification to normalize each data series by its geometric mean, and
we choose units/minimize notation such that the geometric means L = S = K = M = Y = 1.11
Skilled labor services are the product of hours worked and skilled labor augmenting productivity
ΩSf t . The normalized production function is then

                              h                                                         i1          σ−1
                        ΩHf t αL Lγf t                   γ
                                                                αK Kfγt       αM Mfγt
                                                                                         γ
               Yf t =                    + αS (ΩSf t Sf t ) +             +                  , γ=       ≤1      (1)
                                                                                                     σ

Higher skill-augmenting technology ΩSf t increases the effective supply of skilled labor services hold-
ing hours worked constant. Similarly, better Hicks-neutral technology ΩHf t shifts physical output
holding all physical inputs and skill-augmenting technology constant. Input and output prices
may differ across firms, but the researcher only observes revenue Rf t and the value of materials
purchases EfMt , along with physical L, S and K and wages. The labor and materials inputs are
assumed to be chosen after ΩHf t and ΩSf t are observed. To go from revenue to output requires an
assumption on demand, and we follow GLZ in assuming that firms face a common, industry-level
constant elasticity of demand η < −1. The inverse demand function facing the firm is

                                                                   −1
                                                     Pf t = At Yf tη                                            (2)

where At is an exogenous industry-level demand shifter.
       A revenue shock uf t is realized after all input choices have been made and both productivity
levels have been realized.


4.1.1      The estimating equation

Our approach to developing an estimating equation uses economic theory. Since L, S and M are
static inputs, their first order conditions for expected profit maximization will always hold with
equality.12 As shown in Appendix A.2, these imply

                                                                   !1/γ
                                                            M
                                                        αL Ef t
                                              Mf t =                      Lf t                                  (3)
                                                        αM EfLt
  11
     To fully understand the relevance and importance of normalizing the CES production function, see the discussion
and references on page 668 of Grieco et al. (2016). Below we illustrate one important outcome of normalization: it
helps identifying the distribution parameters of the production function.
  12
     That is, before the revenue shock uf t is realized.




                                                             11
                                                                                     σ
                                                                 1              !
                                                                      αS WfLt       1−σ
                                                           
                                                     Sf t       σ−1
                                       ΩSf t =                                                                     (4)
                                                     Lf t             αL WfSt

where EfMt = PM f t Mf t is expenditures on materials and EfLt = WLf t Lf t is the unskilled labor
wage bill. The derivation of (3) and (4) requires that σ 6= 1, which ironically rules out the Cobb-
Douglas case that is the assumption in most of the productivity estimation literature, including
OP/LP/ACF.13 A few more steps yields an estimating equation,


                                                                  αK Kf t γ
                                                                      
                                 η          S      M      L
                  lnRf t   = ln       + ln Ef t + Ef t + Ef t 1 +              + uf t                              (5)
                                1+η                               αL Lf t

where EfSt = WSf t Sf t is the skilled labor wage bill.14 Equation (5) has just three parameters
(η, γ and αK /αL ), and as in GLZ it can be estimated by nonlinear least squares. The key to the
derivation is that there are three static inputs (S, L and M ), which gives us two ratios of static first
order conditions, (3) and (4). These two equations allow us to eliminate the two unobservables, Mf t
and ΩSf t , and (A.19) in the Appendix allows us to eliminate ΩHf t . Because we have eliminated
the unobserved productivity terms from our estimating equation, we do not need to use the proxy
methods of the OP/LP/ACF methodology. Our timing assumptions, which are the same as in
OP/LP/ACF, are key: firms choose static inputs after observing both productivity shocks but
before observing the revenue shock.
       The model has six parameters of interest (η, γ, αS , αL , αK and αM ). Given the estimates of η, γ
and αK /αL , the four distribution parameters are identified by the following equations,


                                            αL + αS + αK + αM = 1                                                  (6)



                                                            L          M
                                                 αM E = αL E                                                       (7)



                                                  αS Ē L = αL Ē S                                                (8)

Equation (6) is implied by constant returns to scale. Equations (7) and (8) follow by taking the
geometric means of (3) and (4) respectively, and using the normalization conditions.
  13
     In our results below in Table 5, the point estimate for σ exceeds one for every industry, and we can always reject
the null hypothesis that σ = 1,
  14
     See Appendix A.2.1 for the derivation of (5).



                                                                12
   Our estimator for (5) is weighted nonlinear least squares, with weights given by total employ-
ment in firm f. This is appropriate given that we want to estimate population average partial effects,
where the population of interest is industry employment (see Solon et al. (2015) for a discussion of
this rationale for weighting). In the absence of employment weights, firms with few workers would
have the same influence on the estimates as firms with very many workers, which we want to avoid.


4.1.2    Recovering productivity

Once this estimator is implemented, we can recover estimated Hicks neutral and skill augmenting
productivity using (A.20) in the Appendix and (4), respectively. Fully recovering Hicks neutral
productivity would also require an estimate of the unobservable aggregate At . This doesn’t matter
for the cross sectional distribution at a point in time, but it does imply that our Hicks neutral
productivity estimates are comparable over time only in relative terms. That is, we can compare
two firm’s productivity in a given year, and we can say how this comparison changes over time,
but we cannot compare Hicks-neutral productivity shifters for a given firm over time.
   Formally, the Hicks neutral parameter ΩHf t is physical TFP. This follows from deflating revenue
by price using equation (2). In practice, it is not plausible that the simple demand system given by
(2) solves all the problems related to unobservable prices and quality that are required to distinguish
revenue TFP from physical TFP, the way that Foster et al. (2008) do in their classic paper. Our
interpretation of ΩHf t will be as revenue TFP, where some but not all of the variation in revenue
has been controlled for by the demand system.


4.2     Skill-augmenting productivity and skill bias

Hicks-neutral technology differences ΩHf t have no implications for relative skill demand because
they do not affect the relative marginal products of different inputs. Re-arranging equation (4)
shows that the effect of skill augmenting technology differences ΩSf t on relative skill demand
depends crucially on the elasticity of substitution σ,

                                                                 !σ
                                      Sf t             αS WfLt
                                           = Ωσ−1
                                              Sf t                                                 (9)
                                      Lf t             αL WfSt

If σ > 1, a higher level of ΩSf t raises relative skill demand, which is to say that skill augmenting
technology differences are skill biased. In our empirical results below we estimate σ
                                                                                    b > 1 for all




                                                  13
industries.15 When σ > 1, the identification of ΩSf t is transparent from equation (4): it is a
residual that rationalizes greater skill intensity, conditional on parameters and factor prices.
      Estimating equations similar to (9) in log-linear form and identifying the elasticity of substitu-
tion have a long history in the macro-labor literature on SBTC; see Acemoglu and Autor (2011)
for discussion and references. More recently, Raval (2017) and Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2018)
estimate the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor and labor-augmenting technology
shifters using similar equations. In our methodology this source of variation is only part of what
identifies σ in the data; as (5) illustrates, variation in levels also plays an important role. See Grieco
et al. (2016) and references therein on the advantages of our approach.


4.3      Output and employment effects of productivity

When productivity differences are solely Hicks-neutral across firms, the output effect of productivity
is obvious: the elasticity of output with respect to productivity is one. Because skill-augmenting
productivity ΩS enters the production function by multiplying skilled labor hours S, the output
elasticity with respect to ΩS is the same as the output elasticity with respect to S.
      There are two effects of productivity improvements on factor demand, holding product demand
curves and factor prices constant. First, greater productivity lowers costs which increases final
demand and thus the demand for inputs. Second, greater productivity means fewer inputs are
required per unit output, which reduces the demand for inputs. The net effect on factor demand
depends on the balance between these two effects. When technological change is pervasive, there
will be general equilibrium effects on both factor prices and market demand which are beyond the
scope of this paper. But holding factor prices and market demand constant, we show in Appendix
A.2.4 that the effects of productivity differences across firms on employment are

                         dSf t
                               = (η − 1) d ωHf t + [σ − 1 + (η − σ) λSf t ] d ωSf t                  (10)
                          Sf t
                         dLf t
                               = (η − 1) d ωHf t +          (η − σ) λSf t d ωSf t ,
                         Lf t

where λSf t is the share of S in cost. For Hicks-neutral productivity ωH , the intuition for the
elasticity of η − 1 is that the labor-saving effect has an elasticity of -1, while the demand effect
through lower costs has an elasticity η. The elasticities with respect to skill-augmenting productivity
ωS incorporate both the demand effect through η, which tends to raise employment, and the
 15
      See Table 5.


                                                    14
substitution effect through σ. When σ > 1, the substitution effect raises S/L when d ωS > 0, which
is the SBTC case. We apply equations (10) in our empirical analysis below.


4.4       Endogenous productivity

In the OP/LP/ACF methodology, productivity is treated as completely exogenous. But one reason
to do firm-level productivity estimation (and one of our main research questions) is to be able to
study what causes the estimated productivity differences. In the trade literature, this has been
done repeatedly in the context of explaining the fact that exporters have higher productivity: is
this fact due to selection à la Melitz (2003), or is there an additional causal “learning-by-exporting”
effect?
   In developing our estimating equation (5), we made no assumptions about the stochastic pro-
cesses that characterize productivity. Because of this, we are free to study the determinants of
productivity in a flexible way, using firm-level explanatory variables. Following Doraszelski and
Jaumandreu (2013), we now assume that productivity is given by a “controlled Markov” process,
where productivity depends on three factors: (1) lagged productivity, (2) a k × 1 vector of lagged
characteristics of the firm zf t−1 , and (3) a shock which is orthogonal to all the other shocks in the
model.
   The lagged firm characteristics zf t−1 include choice variables of the firm such as exporting,
importing and employment of techies as well as predetermined firm characteristics such as age and
size which are known to help predict productivity. To allow ωHf t and ωSf t to influence each other
we specify the following two equations,


                     ωHf t = µHt + βHH ωHf t−1 + βHS ωSf t−1 + βHZ zf t−1 + ξHf t                  (11)



                      ωSf t = µSt + βSH ωHf t−1 + βSS ωSf t−1 + βSZ zf t−1 + ξSf t                 (12)

The shocks ξHf t and ξSf t are assumed to be serially uncorrelated. The industry×time fixed effects
µHt and µSt control for among other things the demand shifter At . These equations can be con-
sistently estimated by OLS. De Loecker (2013) and Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013) estimate
more general non- or semi-parametric versions of (11) and (12). A virtue of our parametric specifi-
cation is that it is straightforward to calculate the steady-state cross-sectional effects of persistent
differences in firm characteristics,


                                                  15
                                                                                     
                  ωHf                                      βHH   βHS                βHZ
                        = (I − B)−1 βZ zf ,    B=                    , βZ =                 (13)
                  ωSf                                      βSH   βSS                βSZ

4.4.1     Interpretation and identification

It is important to be clear about what is meant by a “controlled Markov process”. The key is that
the Markov assumption breaks realized productivity into expected and unexpected components.
Thus, statistical exogeneity of lagged productivity and firm characteristics in (11) and (12) is
assured, but can we interpret the estimated effects of (say) techies as causal in the cross section?
For example, if the estimated effect of techies in (11) is positive, can we say “techies cause higher
Hicks-neutral productivity”? If the answer is yes, that raises the question, what determines the
choice of techies and trade status, and why don’t all firms make the same choices? In the trade
context, underlying differences in firm-specific trade costs have been used to explain why not all
firms trade, and similar reasoning can be applied in the case of techies: some products/processes
are simply harder to improve using ICT, and/or firms have unobservable heterogeneity in their
aptitude for applying IT and thus employing techies. In Section 3 above, we presented a simple
model of optimal techie choice to clarify the insight that equations (11) and (12) can consistently
estimate the effect of techies on productivity even in the absence of a structural model of techie
choice.
   De Loecker (2013) has a persuasive discussion of how to interpret the learning-by-exporting
effect in his version of the controlled Markov process (page 8). He emphasizes two things. One,
it is lagged exporting that enters the Markov process, which is to say that productivity (more
precisely, the shock to productivity ξHf t ) is realized after the exporting decision is made. Two, the
persistence of the exporting decision is controlled for by having lagged realized productivity in the
equation for current productivity. These arguments extend directly to our setting.
   The way that Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013) discuss their estimated effects of R&D on
productivity is to remain silent on the issue of how R&D decisions are decided. That is, they
answer the question: given that a firm has decided to do R&D, what is the estimated effect on
productivity? We will take the same approach, and will interpret our estimates as answering the
question: given that a firm has decided to trade and/or employ techies, what is the estimated effect
on productivity?
   As in De Loecker (2013) and Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013), identification of the effects of



                                                  16
firm choices on productivity is based on cross-sectional differences in productivity growth between
firms that do or do not make a given choice. For example, consider two firms with the same lagged
productivity and all other explanatory variables except that one firm chooses to employ techies
and the other does not. If the firm with techies has higher productivity in the next period, the
estimator attributes that to the firm’s employment of techies.
   In our application we measure techies by the share of techies in the firms’ wage bill, which has the
virtue of capturing both the extensive and intensive margin of techie employment. Imported inputs
are already included in a firm’s purchases of materials Mf t , though our data do not allow us to
distinguish between domestic and imported inputs. To allow for a productivity effect of importing
while avoiding double counting of imported inputs, we measure importing by an indicator variable.
As discussed in Grieco et al. (2017), the importing indicator can be thought of as measuring the
firm’s access to a broader and/or cheaper range of inputs than are available domestically. For
symmetry with how we treat imports, we also measure a firm’s exporting activity by an indicator
variable.


4.4.2   Do techies belong in the production function?

A central element of our methodology is that we assume that techies affect output only through
their effect on future productivity, and not through any contemporaneous contribution to factor
services that affect current output. This assumption is analogous to the standard assumption that
investment in t-1 has no effect on output in t-1, but raises output in t through its contribution to
Kt . Our reasons for specifying the role of techies in this way are both theoretical and empirical.
Theoretically, if techie employment in t affects output in t as part of labor input in t as well as
productivity in t+1, then the static first order conditions for optimal employment would not hold
and the derivation of our estimating equation (5) does not go through. Empirically, if techies enter
the production function (1) as a separate factor, an implication is that employment of techies would
be strictly positive for all firms in all periods, which is emphatically not the case in our data, where
only 11 percent of firms employ techies. As discussed above, a number of empirical studies provide
support for our specification of the effect of techies on output.
   While our assumption that techies affect output only through their effect on future productivity
is well-grounded, it is important to consider how our measurement of productivity could go awry
if techies do in fact increase current output directly, which we will call the “orthodox case”. If
the orthodox case is the right specification, then leaving techies out of the first-stage production


                                                  17
function (1) will understate labor inputs in the first stage. In Appendix A.2.3 we show that the
greater is the underestimate of true inputs the greater will be the overestimate of Hicks-neutral
productivity. Less obviously, we also show that when σ > 1, firms with high techie shares will have
measured ωS which is biased down by more than for firms with low techie shares. The reason is that
with σ > 1 greater ωS leads to greater employment of skilled workers S, which implies that higher S
indicates higher true ωS . Incorrectly removing techies from S will thus lead to an underestimate of
ωS , and the underestimate will be larger the greater is the share of techies in S. The key implication
is that if the orthodox model is correct, our estimated effect of techies on ωH in equation (11) may
be biased up, and our estimated effect of techies on ωS in equation (12) may be biased down.
However, these biases are largely mitigated due to two related reasons. First, any biases in the
estimated levels of productivity appear on both sides of equations (11) and (12). Second, although
mis-specification leads to a mechanical intra- temporal correlation between techies and ωS and
between techies and ωH , since we estimate the effect of techies on future productivity controlling
for current productivity, i.e. an inter-temporal relationship, this direct effect washes out.
       A further implication of the orthodox model is that if we do include techies as part of labor
input in the first-stage estimating equation (5), they should have no explanatory power in the
second stage regressions (11) and (12). We test this possibility be estimating the first stage with
techies as part of labor input, and then testing the null that techies have no effect in the second
stage. The null is rejected at the 0.01 percent significance level.


4.5      Estimation details

We estimate equation (5) by nonlinear least squares, separately for 16 industries including both
manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors, with observations weighted by employment (Section
4.1.1 above discusses estimation in greater depth).16 Standard errors are clustered by firm. Each
industry NLLS regression is an unbalanced panel, which raises the issue of selection bias due to
endogenous exit. As pointed out by Ackerberg et al. (2007), endogenous exit will not bias production
function estimation as long as the firm exits in the period after the exit decision has been made.
This (often implicit) assumption is now standard in the literature, and we make it here. The
                                                                      b)−1 , with the standard error
                                                             b = (1 − γ
estimated elasticity of substitution is given by the formula σ
  16
    GLZ show that this is equivalent to the GMM estimator. Two sectors (coke and refined petroleum, and phar-
maceutical products) are dropped because they have tiny shares of total hours worked and very few firms, and two
sectors (transport equipment and publishing/broadcasting) are dropped because estimation of equation (5) failed to
converge. We also drop the financial intermediation sector.



                                                       18
of σ
   b computed by bootstrapping (see discussion below). Our estimation sample is summarized in
Table 4.
         Industry-level production function estimation generates estimated Hicks neutral and skill aug-
menting productivity for each firm-year, computed using equations (4) and (A.20). After dropping
the highest and lowest percentile of estimated productivity to trim outliers, we estimate the con-
trolled Markov processes given by equations (11) and (12). In these regressions, we measure techies
by the lagged share of techies in the firm’s wage bill, and import and export participation are
measured by indicator variables. We also include lagged firm size (measured by lagged revenue)
and firm age as additional controls. Estimation is by weighted least squares with industry × year
fixed effects and bootstrap standard errors clustered by firm.17


5         Data

We use detailed panel data on firms in the French private sector economy between 2009 and 2013.
Estimating productivity requires information on firms’ revenue, labor force composition, capital,
and materials expenditures. As our second step hypothesizes that productivities are determined
by techies, trade and other firm characteristics, we need additional information at the level of the
firm. We therefore merge a set of three confidential firm-level datasets. This matching process is
straightforward because firms in France are identified by the same identification number (SIREN),
which can be followed across years in each of the three datasets. We highlight key features of the
data here, and relegate other details to Appendix A.1.


5.1        The composition of labor within firms

Our first source of information is taken from the annual declaration of social data (DADS) dataset.
The DADS is a requirement for all businesses with employees. Employers provide information
on employees in each of their establishments, which are identified by their SIRET.18 The first
    17
     Since the regressors in (11) and (12) are generated by first-stage estimation of (5) for each industry, we bootstrap
the full two-stage procedure to calculate standard errors. Our bootstrap re-samples firms rather than individual firm-
year observations, so the resulting bootstrap co variance matrices are effectively clustered by firms. All bootstrap
results are computed using 400 replications. For more details on how we compute standard errors, see Appendix
A.2.2.
  18
     The declaration file serves both fiscal and social administrative purposes. All employers and their employees
are covered by the DADS declaration with the exception of self-employed and government bodies, domestic services
(section 97-98 of NAF rev. 2) and employees in businesses outside French territory (section 99 of NAF rev. 2). The
data do not include worker identifiers, so we cannot track workers over time, but this does not concerns us given our
focus on firm-level rather than individual outcomes.



                                                           19
nine digits of each SIRET is the firm-level identification number, SIREN, which makes it easy to
aggregate across establishments for each firm. For each worker, the DADS reports gross and net
wages, hours paid, tenure, gender, age and occupation. It also reports the sector of activity of the
firm. There is no information about workers’ education.
       We use the French occupational classification PCS-ESE to allocate all workers to one of three
broad categories (Appendix Table A1 lists the two-digit PCS codes). Detailed four-digit occupa-
tional codes are reported in the DADS beginning in 2009, which determines the first year of our
sample.
       Table 2 lists the 4-digit occupations that we classify as techies, based on the occupational
descriptions. Techie occupations are a subset of the two digit occupations “technical managers and
engineers” (38) and “technicians” (47), and are closely related to the installation, management,
maintenance, and support of ICT, as well as product and process design and longer-term R&D
activities. In our empirical anaylysis, we will exploit the distinctions in our data between the
more senior and highly-educated technical managers engineers and the lower-ranked technicians.
Similarly, we will look separately at the effect of techies whose job descriptions mention ICT and
those who work in R&D occupations. Table 3 reports the shares of ICT and R&D workers, as well
as of engineers and technicians, within the overall techie wage bill. R&D workers are a somewhat
larger share of the techie wage bill than the share of ICT workers, and the R&D share increases
slightly from 2009 to 2013. The share of engineers in the techie wage bill is more than twice as
large as the share of technicians, and also increases from 2009 to 2013. Table 3 also reports wide
dispersion in these shares across industries.
       The techie share of hours as a measure of firm-level technological sophistication can be compared
to R&D expenditures, a common metric for technology adoption in the literature. Firm-level R&D
is a useful measure, but it excludes much of the ongoing expenditure and managerial attention that
firms devote to technology adoption and ICT use.19 In fact, reported R&D is not even a necessary
condition for technology adoption and innovation, and firms employ many scientists and engineers
in non-R&D occupations.20 . Conversely, R&D is likely to be impossible without the employment of
techies, who are needed to install, maintain and manage the ICT used in R&D departments. Thus,
the techie share is a more comprehensive measure of firm-level effort devoted to technology adoption
  19
      Firm-level R&D expenditures also include expenditures on R&D capital goods, which are a component of the
firm’s investment. Thus using R&D expenditures in the context of production function estimation raises the potential
for double-counting of inputs.
   20
      As noted above, Barth et al. (2017) find that 80 percent of U.S. private sector scientists and engineers worked
outside R&D occupations in 2013.


                                                         20
than R&D expenditures. The wage bill of techies is a big chunk of overall ICT spending: Saunders
and Brynjolfsson (2016) found that for a sample of US firms, more than half of all spending on IT
was on techies21 .
       One potential threat to our approach that treats firm-level techies as an indicator of firm-level
technological sophistication is that firms can purchase ICT and R&D consulting services. By hiring
a consultant, firms can obtain and service ICT without increasing its permanent staff of techies.
However, less than 4% of techie hours are in the IT and R&D consulting sectors, which implies that
over 96% of the hourly services supplied by techies are obtained in-house rather than purchased
from consultants.22
       In order to construct the broad managerial occupation category S we aggregate the number of
hours worked by firm owners (proprietors, CEOs or directors of firms), workers in top management
positions, and professionals and engineers whose tasks are not related to either ICT or R&D. These
are non-technical management and professional occupations that are dominated by workers with
a university education. We allocate to the broad non-managerial occupation category category L
clerical employees, blue-collar workers, services workers, and technicians who do not work in ICT
or R&D related occupations. Though our mnemonic for these workers is “unskilled”, the category
L includes a wide variety of occupations, some of which are highly skilled. Overall, relatively few of
the jobs in this category require a university degree, with the exception of the fairly large category
of “middle managers”, most of whom probably have university degrees.
       A key feature of our methodology is that firms are assumed to be able to choose their labor inputs
to satisfy the static first order conditions for profit maximization after observing productivity.23
Most French workers are on permanent labor contracts which make them very difficult and expensive
to lay off, which at first glance makes it implausible that firms can choose employment to satisfy
their static first order conditions. However, many French workers are on temporary labor contracts
which make adjustment of labor input at the margin cheap and easy.24 This is all that is required
for our estimating equation (5) to be appropriate for French firms.
  21
     Saunders and Brynjolfsson (2016) find that for a sample of 127 large publicly traded US firms from 2003 to 2006,
half of all spending on IT is for “Internal IT Services (e.g., custom software, design, maintenance, administration)”.
Including training services brings the share to 0.54.
  22
     We refer to the IT and R&D consulting sectors as industry codes 62 (Computer Programming, consultancy and
related activities), 631 (Data Processing, Hosting and related activities ; web portals), and 72 (Scientific R&D) in
the NAF classification.
  23
     See equations (A.15) and (A.16) in the appendix.
  24
     In our sample, the share of hours worked on temporary contracts is 3 percent for S, 11 percent for L, and 4
percent for T.




                                                         21
5.2         Other firm level data

Firm balance sheet information comes from the FARE dataset for the years 2009-2013.25 The
source of the information is firms’ tax declarations. We use information on total revenues, material
expenditures and the necessary series that we need to construct the capital stock at the level of
the firm. Appendix A.1 describes the source data and explains how we construct firm-level capital
stocks using this data.
         Data on bilateral exports and imports of firms located in France are provided by French Cus-
toms. For each observation, we know the importing or exporting firm, trading partner country, the
product traded, and the value of trade. We use the firm-level SIREN identifier to match the trade
data to our two other data sources. This match is not perfect: we fail to match about 11 percent
of imports and exports to firms. The reason for the imperfect match is that there are SIRENs in
the trade data for which there is no corresponding SIREN in our other data sources. This is likely
to lead to a particular type of measurement error: for some firms, we will observe zero trade even
when true trade is positive.
         In some of our specifications, we classify trade by country and/or product category. Countries
are classified as High Income based on the 2011 World Bank classification.26 In order to identify
intermediate inputs, we use the Broad Economic Categories (BEC rev. 4) classification from
the United Nations that classifies HS6 products into final, intermediate and capital goods. See
Appendix A.1 for details.


6         Estimation results

In this section we start by reporting the results of production function estimation (equation 5), in
Table 5. We then turn to the central results of our paper, estimation of endogenous productivity
(equations 11 and 12). Tables 6, 7 and 8 show the effects of techies and trade on productivity. Using
our regression results, Table 10 shows the implications for skill-bias and employment. Finally, we
estimate the aggregate effect of techies and imports on relative demand for skill.
    25
         Fichier Approché des Résultats Ésane (FARE)
    26
         https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups




                                                          22
6.1   Production function estimates

Table 5 reports industry-by-industry estimates of the parameters identified by equations (5)-(8).
While estimation of these parameters is central to our research strategy, most of the results reported
in Table 5 are not that interesting in and of themselves, so we discuss this Table briefly.
   The derivation of the estimating equation (5) requires σ 6= 1. All of our estimates of σ are
greater than one, and in all but one industry (Textiles and apparel) we can reject the null that
σ = 1 at conventional levels of statistical significance (t-statistics for this null are reported in the
final column of the Table). The fact that σ
                                          b > 1 implies that skill augmenting technological progress
is skill-biased (see equation 9), an implication that we will return to below.
   Economic logic requires that the estimated elasticity of demand η satisfies ηb > 1, which holds
for all industries and is statistically statistically significant in all but one industry (Transport and
storage). The estimated η’s are plausible in magnitude, with a weighted average value of 6.3. For
example, we find particularly large elasticities in Wholesale and Retail, which makes sense based
on the nature of these industries.
   For each industry, we find that ηb > σ
                                        b. Equations (10) show that this is a necessary condition for
skill-augmenting technological progress to raise employment of both skilled and unskilled workers.
This is an important finding, since it implies that skill-biased technological change at the level of the
firm is good news for less skilled workers despite the fact that they are easily substitutable (b
                                                                                                σ > 1)
for skilled workers. The finding that ηb > σ
                                           b is also important when we calculate the employment
effects of techies and trade in Table 10 below.
   Our estimation procedure imposes that the distribution parameters αL , αS , αM and αK are
strictly positive and sum to one, which helps explain the generally small standard errors on these
parameters. The final row of the table reports the weighted average of the parameters (purely
for descriptive purposes), and the results are reasonable given average shares in factor payments:
the materials and capital parameters are the largest while the managerial labor parameter is the
smallest.
   Our finding of σ > 1 contrasts with σ < 1 found by Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2018) for
Spanish manufacturing firms and Raval (2017) for U.S. manufacturing plants. Like us, these two
papers assume a CES functional form with Hicks-neutral productivity differences across firms, where
capital and materials are two of the inputs. The key difference from our paper is that Doraszelski
and Jaumandreu (2018) and Raval (2017) combine all workers into a single labor aggregate and



                                                   23
allow for labor-augmenting technological differences, while we divide labor into two categories and
allow for skill-augmenting technological differences. Both Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2018) and
Raval (2017) acknowledge that their findings of labor-augmenting technological progress may be
conflating skill-composition differences with labor augmenting technological differences across firms.
Our finding of σ > 1 is consistent with the findings of Bøler (2015), who estimates a model much
like ours on Norwegian manufacturing firms. Our result is also consistent with most of the industry-
and macro-level labor literature on substitution between skilled and unskilled labor (see the results
and discussion in Acemoglu and Autor (2011)).


6.2      Endogenous productivity

We begin by discussing the impact effects of techies and trade on productivity before reporting the
steady state effects.
       The first five rows of Table 6 report different specifications of the impact effect of techies
on productivity. Whatever the specification, techies have a statistically significant effect on skill
augmenting productivity ωS , but no significant effect on Hicks-neutral productivity ωH .27 .
       The second and third rows of the table show the separate techie effects that come from higher-
paid and more-educated technical managers and engineers (about 70 percent of the techie wage bill,
as shown in Table 3) versus less senior technicians. The overall effect on ωS is driven by engineers
rather than technicians, with the point estimate for technicians actually small and negative (though
not statistically significant). The next two rows of the Table report estimates when techies are
broken down by their detailed job descriptions. ICT techies have twice as big an effect on ωS as
do R&D techies.28
       Turning to the effects of trade participation on productivity, we find that the impact effect of
exporting is very small and (except in the final two specifications for ωS ) statistically insignificant.
This does not imply that exporting firms are not more productive and/or skill intensive, as has been
shown in countless studies. Rather, our estimates show that conditional on lagged productivity,
exporting does not cause higher productivity. Thus our results for France contrast with the results
of De Loecker (2013), who finds that exporting leads to productivity increases for Slovenian firms
during the 1990s using a very similar specification. Slovenia in the 1990s was an emerging transition
  27
     Similarly, Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2018) find that firm level R&D expenditure has a larger effect on labor-
augmenting than Hicks-neutral technological progress.
  28
     What about the separate effects of ICT engineers, ICT technicians, R&D engineers and R&D technicians? When
we estimated this specification the results were very imprecise, so to reduce table clutter we do not report them. We
conclude that the data do not allow separately estimating these effects.


                                                         24
economy while France is a mature developed country, so our results are consistent with the consensus
in the literature that learning-by-exporting is found only in (some) developing countries.
       By contrast, we find statistically significant effects of importing on productivity: firms that
import have about 2.5 percent higher Hicks-neutral and 6.6 percent higher skill-augmenting pro-
ductivity. Our result for ωH is consistent with studies of developing and transition economies that
find that access to foreign intermediate inputs leads to productivity increases, but we are the first
to find such a result for a developed country.29 Our results for ωS are more novel. When combined
with our Table 5 results that σ > 1, our estimated effect of importing on ωS offers direct support
for the hypothesis that offshoring leads to skill upgrading within firms.30
       Table 7 reports additional results about the effect of importing on productivity. In columns (1)
and (4), we add an indicator variable for imports of intermediate goods. Introducing this channel
shows that the importing effect on ωS is primarily through imported inputs. Columns (2) and (5)
of Table 7 consider an alternative split, with separate indicators for importing from high income
countries and all other countries.31 Although not very precisely estimated, this split implies that
most of the effect of importing on ωH comes from high income countries, which is consistent with
higher quality imports sourced from such countries. In contrast, the effect of importing on ωS is
somewhat larger when coming from lower income countries, though the difference is not statistically
significant. Finally, in columns (3) and (6) we report the interactions of the indicator variables for
income class and intermediate imports. The effect of importing inputs from both high income and
other countries is the sum of the two coefficients, and these linear combinations are reported in
the bottom panel of the Table. We find that importing inputs from both high and lower income
countries raises ωS , with a small and statistically insignificant difference across country groups.
Overall, Table 7 shows that offshoring (that is, imports of intermediate inputs) increases within-
firm skill intensity, as suggested by Feenstra and Hanson (1996), Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg
(2008) (in very different models) and many others. Our baseline estimate of 0.075 in column 4 of
Table 7 means that the impact effect of offshoring is to raise ωS by 7.5 percent compared to firms
who source only from France. The effect on ωH is one-third as large.
       The final rows of Table 6 report the effects of other controls. Productivity is very persistent,
  29
     See Halpern et al. (2015) for Hungary, Amiti and Konings (2007) for Indonesia, Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008)
for Chile, and Topalova and Khandelwal (2011) for India.
  30
     Other studies that have found evidence for within firm/plant skill upgrading due to importing include Kasahara
et al. (2016) for Indonesia and Martins and Opromolla (2011) for Portugal. Becker et al. (2013) do not study firm-level
importing, but they do find that increases in foreign affiliate employment raises skill intensity at home for German
multinationals.
  31
     Countries are defined as high income on the basis of the 2002 World Bank classification.


                                                          25
with a coefficient on lagged productivity of nearly 0.9 for both ωH and ωS . By contrast, lagged
ωH has virtually no effect on ωS , and vice versa. Firm size has a small negative effect on ωH ,
which is consistent with the well-known result that larger firms have slower productivity growth. By
contrast, firm size has a positive effect on ωS . Firm age has no independent effect on productivity.32
       Because of the persistence of productivity, the techie and trade effects reported in Table 6
understate the long-run impact of these variables on cross-sectional productivity differences. Table
8 reports the associated steady-state effects, using equation (13). In addition to reporting the
long-run effects and their standard errors, Table 8 also reports scaled long-run techie effects in
italics. These are computed by multiplying the long-run coefficients times the 75th percentile of
the corresponding variable, as reported in Table 9. The number 0.48 in the third row of column
(4) means that compared to firms with no techies, firms with a lot of techies have ωS which is 0.48
higher, or 62 percent. This is a very big effect in economic terms. It is also large relative to the
variation in ωS , as 0.48 is equal to about a quarter of the 75th − 25th percentile range of ωS , which
is 1.95 (second row, last column of Table 9). This scaled effect is entirely due to engineers, and is
split roughly 50–50 between the effect of ICT and R&D techies.
       The long-run trade effects of importing are also very big, both in economic terms and relative to
the variation in productivity. Since the trade variables are indicators, they are simple to interpret:
the number 0.78 at the bottom of column 4 of Table 8 means that compared to firms that don’t
import, importing firms have ωS which is 0.78 higher, or 118 percent. The effect is smaller but still
big for ωH : looking at the bottom of columns 1 to 3, firms that import have ωH which is higher by
0.42 (52 percent) compared to non-importers.


6.3      The skill bias of techies and trade

Since the estimated effects of techies on ωH are statistically insignificant in Tables 6 through 8,
here we focus on quantifying the employment effects of techies and trade through their effects on
ωS . Applying equations (10), our quantification uses the industry-level estimates of η and σ from
Table 5 together with the long-run effects reported in Table 8. To arrive at an economy-wide
number, we compute the elasticities defined in equations (10) for each industry, setting the cost
share of skilled labor λSf t equal to the CES distribution parameter αS .33 We then construct an
  32
    As a robustness check, in unreported results we re-estimated equations (11) and (12) with two lags of all variables.
The sum of the coefficients is not appreciably different than the corresponding baseline coefficients with only one lag.
This implies that the long-run effects with one or two lags are essentially the same.
 33
    This holds identically at the geometric mean of the sample as a consequence of our data normalization.



                                                          26
employment-weighted average of the industry elasticities, which we report in the first line of Table
10. In Panel A of Table 10 we multiply the elasticities times the estimated effects of techies and
trade from Table 8. Finally, to give a sense of the magnitude of the techie effects, in Panel B we
multiply the Panel A estimates by the 75th percentile of the employment-weighted distribution of
techies. Thus, the numbers in Panel B of Table 10 answer the question: how does employment
differ between a firm with no techies and a firm with a lot of techies?
   The first line of Table 10 shows that skill augmenting productivity raises S, L and S/L, and the
elasticities are big: a one percent increase in ΩS raises skilled employment by almost one percent,
unskilled employment by 0.3 percent, and skill intensity by 0.7 percent. Techies are an important
driver of these effects: as shown in the first row of Panel B, high techie firms have employment
of S that is 0.47 log points higher than firms with no techies, employment of L that is 0.14 log
points higher, and a skill intensity that is 0.33 log points higher. This effect is driven entirely by
engineers, and is about equally driven by ICT and R&D techies.
   The last line of Panel A shows that importing is also strongly pro-employment and skill biased:
firms that import have employment of S that is 0.76 log points higher than firms that do not
import, employment of L that is 0.22 log points higher, and a skill intensity that is 0.54 log points
higher.
   Table 10 is one of the bottom lines of our paper. For the first time in the literature, we
have estimated the effects of technology and globalization in a unified firm-level framework, which
allows us to compare their importance. Table 10 shows that techies and importing raise both
skill intensity and employment, and the effects are big. These are firm-level effects, calculated
holding market demand and factor prices fixed. In a general equilibrium full employment model,
the partial equilibrium effects found here would have clear implications for relative wages: techies
and importing raise the skill premium.


6.4   Aggregating the effects of techies and trade

Our final empirical exercise asks: how much of the change in the aggregate skill intensity in our
sample period can be explained by firms’ choices on techies and trade? To do this we proceed in
three steps.
   First, we construct predicted changes in productivity shifters across firms. Starting from es-
timated Hicks-neutral and skill augmenting productivity levels (in logs) in 2009, we predict pro-
ductivity levels in 2013 using actual techie and importing decisions from 2009 through 2012 by


                                                 27
iterating forward using the estimated parameters of equations (11) and (12). The log differences
between the predicted productivity in 2013 and the actual values in 2009 are due to techies and
trade choices made by firms between 2009 and 2012. In the second step we use the predicted
changes in productivity from the first step to calculate the predicted change in employment of S
and L for each firm between 2009 and 2013 using equation (10). Finally, we sum over all firms
to get predicted aggregate skill intensity. These calculations take into account both within-firm
adjustment as well as changes in firm sizes, but exclude firm entry and exit (85% of employment is
accounted by firms who exist throughout our sample). Details of how we perform these calculations
are given in Appendix A.2.5.
    We measure aggregate skill intensity by the employment share of S (= S/(L+S)). This measure
increases in our sample by 0.0186, from 0.141 in 2009 to 0.160 in 2013 (the numbers for the entire
French private sector are similar). Our aggregation of firm level techie employment decisions in
2009–2013 implies an increase in relative demand for skill amounting to 0.011. The same exercise
using importing decisions amounts to a somewhat larger increase in relative demand for skill of
0.016. Adding these two effects together gives an increase of 0.027, which is more than the actual
increase of 0.019. This is not surprising, since the calculations do not take into account equilibrium
conditions in the markets for goods and of labor. Nonetheless, these calculations illustrate the
quantitative importance of the firm-level techie and offshoring channels that we estimate.


7    Conclusion

In this paper we have shown, for the first time in the literature, that technology adoption and
importing are both skill biased at the firm level. The focus on firms is important, because firms
are where decisions about technological change, globalization and employment are made. Because
we identify these effects in a common framework it is simple to compare their magnitudes, and we
find that they are big and of the same order of magnitude.
    Our findings do not challenge the common wisdom that R&D is the key to expansion of the
set of available technologies. However, in order for these technologies to diffuse in the economy,
firms need to adopt them. We identify the adoption of ICT through the employment of ICT
techies. Under this interpretation of our results, it is not surprising that R&D techies increase
firm productivity less than ICT techies on the margin. This interpretation also offers an important
policy implication, which is that investments in technology adoption may be at least as important



                                                 28
as investment in basic research. This conclusion has implications for a whole range of public policies
related to education, research, and investment.
     We reach these conclusions using administrative data that cover the whole French private sector
from 2009 to 2013. Our methodology applies new techniques from the structural production func-
tion literature to consistently estimate both Hicks-neutral and skill-augmenting technology. This
methodology also allows us to identify the causal effects on productivity and employment of firms’
decisions on trade and employment of techies. This identification is well-founded even though we
remain silent on what drives firm decisions on techies and trade. Understanding why some, but not
all, firms employ techies and engage in offshoring is an important research question that is beyond
the scope of this paper.
     Our bottom line is that both employment of techies and offshoring lead to greater employment
of both skilled and less skilled workers. The result for unskilled workers is surprising but easy
to explain: the direct substitution effect away from unskilled labor is outweighed by the powerful
employment-enhancing effect of greater productivity. These are firm-level conclusions, calculated
holding market demand and economy-wide aggregates constant. Analyzing market and general
equilibrium effects that are consistent with our firm-level findings is an important task for future
research.


8     References



Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999). High wage workers and high wage firms.
    Econometrica 67 (2), 251–333.

Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011). Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment
    and earnings. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Hanbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4b.
    North Holland.

Acemoglu, D. and A. Finkelstein (2008). Input and technology choices in regulated industries:
    Evidence from the health care sector. Journal of Political Economy 116 (5), 837–880.

Ackerberg, D., C. L. Benkard, S. Berry, and A. Pakes (2007). Econometric tools for analyzing




                                                  29
  market outcomes, Volume 6, Chapter James J. Heckman and Edward E. Leamer, pp. 4171–4276.
  Elsevier.

Ackerberg, D. A., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2015). Identification properties of recent production
  function estimators. Econometrica 83 (6), 2411–2451.

Akerman, A., I. Gaarder, and M. Mogstad (2015). The skill complementarity of broadband internet.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (4), 1781–1824.

Amiti, M. and L. Cameron (2012). Trade liberalization and the wage skill premium: Evidence from
  Indonesia. Journal of International Economics 87, 277–287.

Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007). Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs, and productivity:
  Evidence from Indonesia. The American Economic Review , 1611–1638.

Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2002). Upstairs, downstairs: Computers and skills on
  two floors of a large bank. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55 (3), 432–447.

Bartel, A., C. Ichniowski, and K. Shaw (2007). How does information technology affect productiv-
  ity? plant-level comparisons of product innovation, process improvement, and worker skills. The
  quarterly journal of Economics 122 (4), 1721–1758.

Barth, E., J. C. Davis, R. B. Freeman, and A. J. Wang (2017, June). The effects of scientists and
  engineers on productivity and earnings at the establishment where they work. Working Paper
  23484, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Becker, S. O., K. Ekholm, and M.-A. Muendler (2013). Offshoring and the onshore composition of
  tasks and skills. Journal of International Economics 90 (1), 91–106.

Ben Zeev, N., M. Joel, and K. Van Der Beek (2017). Flexible supply of apprenticeship in the british
  industrial revolution. The Journal of Economic History 77 (1), 208–250.

Bender, S., N. Bloom, D. Card, J. Van Reenen, and S. Wolter (2018). Management practices,
  workforce selection, and productivity. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1), S371–S409.

Bøler, E. A. (2015, November). Technology-skill complementarity in a globalized world. University
  of Oslo mimeo.




                                                30
Bonleu, A., G. Cette, and G. Horny (2013). Capital utilization and retirement. Applied Eco-
  nomics 45 (24), 3483–3494.

Bresnahan, T. F., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. M. Hitt (2002). Information technology, workplace
  organization, and the demand for skilled labor: Firm-level evidence. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 117 (1), 339–376.

Brynjolfsson, E. and L. Hitt (1996). Paradox lost? firm-level evidence on the returns to information
  systems spending. Management science 42 (4), 541–558.

Bustos, P. (2011). The impact of trade on technology and skill upgrading: Evidence from Argentina.
  Working Papers, Universitat Pompeu Fabra. Departamento de Economı́a y Empresa.

Cette, G., N. Dromel, R. Lecat, and A.-C. Paret (2015). Production factor returns: the role of
  factor utilization. Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (1), 134–143.

De Loecker, J. (2013). Detecting learning by exporting. American Economic Journal: Microeco-
  nomics 5 (3).

De Loecker, J. and P. K. Goldberg (2014). Firm performance in a global market. Annual Review
  of Economics 6, 201–27.

Doraszelski, U. and J. Jaumandreu (2013). R&D and productivity: Estimating endogenous pro-
  ductivity. The Review of Economic Studies 80 (4), 1338–1383.

Doraszelski, U. and J. Jaumandreu (2018). Measuring the bias of technological change. Journal of
  Political Economy 126 (3), 1027–1084.

Dunne, T., LuciaÂ Foster, JohnÂ Haltiwanger, and KennethÂ Troske (2004). Wage and produc-
  tivity dispersion in United States manufacturing: The role of computer investment. Journal of
  Labor Economics 22 (2), 397–429.

Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson (1996). Foreign investment, outsourcing, and relative wages. In
  G. M. Grossman, R. C. Feenstra, and D. R. Irwin (Eds.), The Political Economy of Trade Policy,
  pp. 89–127. Oxford: MIT Press.

Foster, L., JohnÂ Haltiwanger, and S. Chad (2008). Reallocation, firm turnover, and efficiency:
  Selection on productivity or profitability? American Economic Review 98 (1), 394–425.


                                                31
Grieco, P. L., S. Li, and H. Zhang (2016). Production function estimation with unobserved input
  price dispersion. International Economic Review 57 (2), 665–690.

Grieco, P. L., S. Li, and H. Zhang (2017). Imported inputs, productivity, and the impact of import
  liberalization: Evidence from chinese paint manufacturers.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008). Trading tasks: A simple theory of offshoring. The
  American Economic Review 98 (5), 1978–97.

Halpern, L., M. Koren, and A. Szeidl (2015). Imported inputs and productivity. The American
  Economic Review 105 (12), 3660–3703.

Harrigan, J., A. Reshef, and F. Toubal (2016). The March of the Techies: Technology, trade,
  and job polarization in France, 1994-2007. Working Paper 22110, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Helper, S. and J. Kuan (2018). What goes on under the hood? how engineers innovate in the
  automotive supply chain. In US Engineering in the Global Economy. University of Chicago
  Press.

Helpman, E. (2018). Globalization and Inequality. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Kasahara, H., Y. Liang, and J. Rodrigue (2016). Does importing intermediates increase the demand
  for skilled workers? plant-level evidence from Indonesia. Journal of International Economics 102,
  242 – 261.

Kasahara, H. and J. Rodrigue (2008). Does the use of imported intermediates increase productivity?
  plant-level evidence. Journal of development economics 87 (1), 106–118.

Kelly, M., J. Mokyr, and C. Ó. Gráda (2014). Precocious albion: a new interpretation of the british
  industrial revolution. Annu. Rev. Econ. 6 (1), 363–389.

Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin (2003). Estimating production functions using inputs to control for
  unobservables. The Review of Economic Studies 70 (2), 317–341.

Lichtenberg, F. R. (1995). The output contributions of computer equipment and personnel: A
  firm-level analysis. Economics of innovation and new technology 3 (3-4), 201–218.




                                                 32
Maloney, W. F. and F. Valencia-Caicedo (2017). Engineering Growth: Innovative Capacity and
  Development in the Americas. Working Paper 6339, CESIfo Working Paper.

Martins, P. S. and L. D. Opromolla (2011). Why ex (im) porters pay more: Evidence from matched
  firm-worker panels.

Melitz, M. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
  productivity. Econometrica 71, 1695–1725.

Melitz, M. J. and G. I. Ottaviano (2008). Market size, trade, and productivity. The Review of
  Economic Studies 75 (1), 295–316.

Oberfield, E. and D. Raval (2014, August). Micro data and macro technology. Technical report.

Olley, G. S. and A. Pakes (1996). The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equip-
  ment industry. Econometrica, 1263–1297.

Pavcnik, N. (2002). Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: Evidence from
  Chilean plants. The Review of Economic Studies 69 (1), 245–276.

Raval, D. (2017, February). The micro elasticity of substitution and non-neutral technology. RAND
  Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Economy 98 (5),
  S71–S102.

Saunders, A. and E. Brynjolfsson (2016). Valuing information technology related intangible assets.
  MIS Quarterly 40 (1).

Solon, G., S. J. Haider, and J. M. Wooldridge (2015). What are we weighting for? Journal of
  Human resources 50 (2), 301–316.

Tambe, P. and L. M. Hitt (2012). The productivity of information technology investments: New
  evidence from it labor data. Information Systems Research 23 (3-part-1), 599–617.

Tambe, P. and L. M. Hitt (2014). Job hopping, information technology spillovers, and productivity
  growth. Management Science 60 (2), 338–355.

Topalova, P. and A. Khandelwal (2011). Trade liberalization and firm productivity: The case of
  India. Review of economics and statistics 93 (3), 995–1009.

                                               33
                                   Table 1: Covariates of techies
                                                  (1)                  (2)
                                                             Techie wage bill share
                                            I (techies > 0)      for techies > 0
                Log revenue                    0.131***             0.003***
                                                (0.003)              (0.001)
                Exporter dummy                 0.548***              0.004**
                                                (0.013)              (0.002)
                Importer dummy                 0.591***               -0.002
                                                (0.012)              (0.002)
                Manager wage bill share        0.525***             0.134***
                                                (0.049)              (0.013)
                 Industry × year                   Yes                   Yes
                 Obs.                            612,769                69,175
Notes to Table 1: Each entry is the weighted least squares coefficient in a regression of the column
dependent variable on the row explanatory variable. All regressions include industry × year fixed
effects. Techie measures are: column (1) indicator equal to 1 if the firm employs any techies, column
(2) the share of techies in the firm’s wage bill for firms that employ techies. Regressions weighted
by firm employment. Standard errors clustered by firm in parenthesis. Asterisks indicate statistical
significance, * = 0.10, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01.




                                     Table 2: Techie occupations
          Technical managers & engineers (Ingénieurs et cadres techniques d’entreprise)
          383a R&D Engineers and R&D managers, electricity and electronics
          384a R&D Mechanical engineers and R&D managers
          385a R&D Materials and chemical engineers and R&D managers
          386a R&D Engineers and R&D managers, intermediate goods
          388a ICT       Information technology R&D engineers and managers
          388b ICT       Information technology support engineers and managers
          388c ICT       Information technology project managers
          388e ICT       Telecommunications engineers and specialists
          Technicians (Techniciens)
          473b R&D R&D technicians, electrical and electronic equipment
          474b R&D R&D technicians, mechanical and metalworking equipment
          475a R&D R&D technicians, processing industries
          478a ICT       R&D technicians, information technology
          478b ICT       Computer production and operation technicians
          478c ICT       Computer installation and maintenance technicians
          478d ICT       Telecommunications and computer network technicians
Notes to Table 2: First column is the occupational code of the PCS classification, and the third
column is our translation of the official descriptions. The second column is our categorization based
on the descriptions.



                                                 34
                          Table 3: Wage bill shares within Techies (%)
                                                Whole economy
                                    ICT R&D Engineers Technicians
                        2009         43     57        71            29
                        2013         41     59        73            27
                                      Variation across industries in 2009
                        std. dev. 30.1 30.1          10.0          10.0
                        Min         17.5    4.8      49.9          17.8
                        Max         95.2 82.5        82.2          50.1
Notes to Table 3: Wage bill shares sum to 100 across the two categories ICT, R&D, and also across
the two categories Engineers and Technicians.




                              Table 4: Estimation sample, 2009-2013
 Industry                                      Obs. Obs.        Firms Firms Revenue Hours
                                                      (%)                 (%)      (%)       (%)
  Food, beverage, tobacco                    26,407     3.1     6,516     3.0     7.08       5.48
  Textiles, wearing apparel                   9,732     1.1     2,337     1.1     0.94       1.39
  Wood, paper products                       19,892     2.3     4,808     2.2     1.72       2.42
  Chemical products                           5,748     0.7     1,292     0.6     3.68       2.29
  Rubber and plastic                         15,960     1.9     3,702     1.7     3.04       4.06
  Basic metal and fabricated metal           34,074     4.0     7,960     3.7     3.96       5.29
  Computer, electronic                        5,462     0.6     1,267     0.6     1.64       2.09
  Electrical equipment                        4,597     0.5     1,063     0.5     1.54       1.79
  Machinery and equipment                    11,475     1.3     2,605     1.2     2.33       2.72
  Other manufacturing                        27,648     3.2     6,722     3.1     1.98       3.47
  Construction                              159,641    18.6    41,175 19.2        7.18      12.14
  Wholesale                                 176,180    20.5    42,846 20.0       37.6       17.6
  Retail                                    210,097    24.5    52,078 24.3       17.1       15.3
  Transportation and storage                 27,683     3.2     6,899     3.2     5.94       8.76
  Accommodation and food services            95,571    11.1    25,817 12.0        1.93       6.29
  Administrative and support activities      28,674     3.3     7,557     3.5     2.42       6.98
  Total                                    858,841    100     214,644     100      100       100
Notes to Table 4: We lose 10.2% of total revenue and 7.5% of total hours due to dropping the sectors
of coke and refined petroleum, pharmaceutical products, transport equipment, and publishing and
broadcasting.




                                                35
                                                      Table 5: Production function estimates
         Industry                       αL          αS          αM           αK          σ          η       Obs.    Firms t, H0 : σ = 1
         Food, beverage, tobacco     0.190*** 0.051*** 0.574*** 0.185*** 2.856*** 5.085*** 26,407                   6,516   4.78
                                      (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.010)      (0.014)    (0.388)    (0.366)
         Textiles, apparel           0.295*** 0.109*** 0.549*** 0.047** 2.240*** 2.947*** 9,732                     2,337   1.59
                                      (0.006)     (0.002)     (0.011)      (0.019)    (0.782)    (0.136)
         Wood, paper products        0.285*** 0.099*** 0.433*** 0.182*** 1.156*** 3.481*** 19,892                   4,808   1.79
                                      (0.006)     (0.002)     (0.010)      (0.018)    (0.087)    (0.169)
         Chemical products           0.137*** 0.070*** 0.553*** 0.239*** 1.316*** 4.729*** 5,748                    1,292   2.34
                                      (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.014)      (0.020)    (0.135)    (0.477)
         Rubber & plastic            0.230*** 0.072*** 0.567*** 0.131*** 2.919*** 3.443*** 15,960                   3,702   2.95
                                      (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.013)      (0.019)    (0.651)    (0.187)
         Basic & fabricated metal 0.249*** 0.073*** 0.307*** 0.371*** 1.484*** 5.866*** 34,074                      7,960   4.52
                                      (0.018)     (0.005)     (0.022)      (0.045)    (0.107)    (1.283)
         Computer, electronic        0.186*** 0.124*** 0.463*** 0.228** 1.536*** 2.985*** 5,462                     1,267   2.22
                                      (0.021)     (0.014)     (0.053)      (0.089)    (0.242)    (0.539)
         Electrical equipment        0.184*** 0.079*** 0.533*** 0.205*** 1.382*** 5.068*** 4,597                    1,063   2.85
                                      (0.008)     (0.003)     (0.022)      (0.033)    (0.134)    (0.937)
         Machinery & equipment       0.190*** 0.085*** 0.485*** 0.241*** 1.404*** 4.852*** 11,475                   2,605   2.35




36
                                      (0.009)     (0.004)     (0.023)      (0.035)    (0.172)    (0.738)
         Other manufacturing         0.253*** 0.101*** 0.347*** 0.299*** 1.334*** 4.076*** 27,648                   6,722   4.70
                                      (0.009)     (0.004)     (0.012)      (0.024)    (0.071)    (0.378)
         Construction                0.280*** 0.098*** 0.377*** 0.245*** 1.238*** 2.870*** 159,641 41,175 4.26
                                      (0.011)     (0.004)     (0.015)      (0.030)    (0.056)    (0.234)
         Wholesale                   0.092*** 0.054*** 0.764*** 0.091*** 1.475*** 7.966*** 176,180 42,846 2.27
                                      (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.005)      (0.006)    (0.209)    (0.432)
         Retail                      0.087*** 0.042*** 0.758*** 0.114*** 1.774*** 11.991*** 210,097 52,078 3.97
                                      (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.006)      (0.007)    (0.195)    (1.705)
         Transport & storage         0.303*** 0.051*** 0.081*** 0.565*** 1.362***                 4.225     27,683  6,899   4.95
                                      (0.082)     (0.014)     (0.022)      (0.117)    (0.073)    (3.032)
         Accommodation and food 0.299*** 0.085*** 0.273*** 0.342*** 1.668*** 6.729*** 95,571                        25,817 5.02
                                      (0.020)     (0.006)     (0.019)      (0.045)    (0.133)    (2.252)
         Admin & support             0.427*** 0.133*** 0.087*** 0.352*** 2.515*** 5.606*** 28,674                   7,557   8.51
                                      (0.020)     (0.006)     (0.004)      (0.030)    (0.178)    (0.983)
         weighted average              0.209       0.073       0.485        0.233      1.690      6.262
     Notes to Table 5: Each row reports weighted nonlinear least squares estimates of equation (5) for a given industry. Reported parameters
     are functions of the parameters of (5). Regressions weighted by firm employment. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered by firm in
     parentheses. The final column reports t-statistics for the null hypothesis that σ = 1. The final row reports hours-weighted averages of
     the industry level parameters. Asterisks indicate statistical significance, * = 0.10, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01.
                         Table 6: Techie and trade effects on productivity
                             (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)            (5)        (6)
                                  Hicks neutral ωfHt                      Skill augmenting ωfSt
  Techies                 0.042                                    0.700***
                         (0.115)                                 (0.215)
  Techies : engineers                  -0.008                                     1.015***
                                       (0.152)                                  (0.300)
  Techies : technicians                 0.188                                    -0.233
                                       (0.166)                                  (0.249)
  Techies : ICT                                     0.086                                   0.908***
                                                  (0.163)                                  (0.276)
  Techies : R&D                                    -0.012                                   0.450*
                                                  (0.173)                                  (0.252)
  Exporting              -0.011        -0.011      -0.011          0.033          0.034*    0.033*
                         (0.012)       (0.012)    (0.013)        (0.020)        (0.021)    (0.019)
  Importing               0.026**       0.025**     0.026***       0.066*** 0.068*** 0.066***
                         (0.011)       (0.011)    (0.009)        (0.016)        (0.017)    (0.017)
  lagged ωfHt             0.904*** 0.904*** 0.905***               0.025*** 0.025*** 0.025***
                         (0.010)       (0.010)    (0.011)        (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.007)
  lagged ωfSt             0.018*** 0.018*** 0.018***               0.901*** 0.901*** 0.901***
                         (0.004)       (0.004)    (0.004)        (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.009)
  firm size              -0.031*** -0.030*** -0.030***             0.027*** 0.026*** 0.028***
                         (0.005)       (0.005)    (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.007)
  firm age               -0.000        -0.000      -0.000         -0.000         -0.000    -0.000
                         (0.000)       (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)    (0.000)
Notes to Table 6: Weighted least squares estimation of equations (11) and (12), pooled across indus-
tries, with industry × year fixed effects. Observations weighted by firm employment. Bootstrapped
standard errors clustered by firm in parentheses. Sample: 612,769 observations on 205,472 firms
during 2009-2013. Asterisks indicate statistical significance, * = 0.10, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01.




                                                37
                 Table 7: Techie and trade effects on productivity, importing detail
                                          (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)
                                                             H
                                            Hicks neutral ωf t                                S
                                                                           Skill augmenting ωf t
  Techies                                0.042    0.040      0.042    0.700*** 0.684*** 0.680***
                                       (0.115) (0.115) (0.114)         (0.214)     (0.211)   (0.213)
  Exporting                             -0.010    -0.007    -0.006      0.030       0.024     0.022
                                       (0.012) (0.011) (0.011)         (0.020)     (0.019)   (0.020)
  Importing                              0.034                          0.023
                                       (0.022)                         (0.020)
  Importing inputs                      -0.009                        0.052***
                                       (0.026)                         (0.020)
  Importing high income                           0.017      0.020                0.040***    0.017
                                                 (0.011) (0.026)                   (0.014)   (0.022)
  Importing other income                          -0.001     0.011                0.054***   0.032*
                                                 (0.014) (0.020)                   (0.014)   (0.018)
  Importing inputs high income                              -0.005                            0.029
                                                           (0.025)                           (0.022)
  Importing inputs other income                             -0.016                            0.028
                                                           (0.020)                           (0.021)
  Linear combinations of estimates
  Importing + inputs                    0.024*                        0.075***
                                       (0.013)                         (0.006)
  Imp. high income + inputs                                  0.015                          0.046***
                                                            (0.01)                           (0.009)
  Imp. other inc. + inputs                                  -0.004                          0.059***
                                                           (0.012)                           (0.019)
  Other controls                          Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
Notes to Table 7: Weighted least squares estimation of equations (11) and (12), pooled across
industries, with industry × year fixed effects. Estimates of other controls (lagged productivity,
firm size and age) omitted. Effects reported in bottom panel are linear combinations of WLS
estimates. Regressions weighted by firm employment. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered by
firm in parentheses. Sample: 612,769 observations on 205,472 firms during 2009-2013. Asterisks
indicate statistical significance, * = 0.10, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01.




                                                38
                     Table 8: Long run techie and trade effects on productivity
                                  (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                      Hicks neutral ωfHt                Skill augmenting ωfSt
     Techies                    1.87                               7.57***
                              (1.41)                              (2.23)
                               0 .12                               0 .48
     Techies : engineers                   1.96                                10.7***
                                          (1.91)                               (3.21)
                                           0 .09                                0 .49
     Techies : technicians                 1.59                                -1.95
                                          (1.93)                               (2.61)
                                           0 .04                               -0 .05
     Techies : ICT                                     2.78                                9.90***
                                                     (2.04)                               (2.95)
                                                      0 .07                                0 .25
     Techies : R&D                                     0.78                                4.76*
                                                     (2.06)                               (2.64)
                                                      0 .05                                0 .28
     Exporting                -0.06       -0.05      -0.06         0.32         0.33       0.32)
                              (0.15)      (0.14)     (0.15)       (0.22)       (0.22)     (0.21)
     Importing                  0.42*** 0.42*** 0.42***            0.78***      0.79*** 0.77***
                              (0.14)      (0.14)     (0.12)       (0.19)       (0.19)     (0.20)
Notes to Table 8: Effects are long-run steady state effects on productivity given by equation
(13), based on results in Table 6. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered by firm in parentheses.
Scaled techie coefficients, defined as the estimate times the 75th percentile of the techie distribution
reported in Table 9, are reported in italics. Sample: 612,769 observations on 205,472 firms during
2009-2013. Asterisks indicate statistical significance, * = 0.10, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01.




                                                  39
                       Table 9: Summary statistics for second stage regressions
                                            Mean Std Dev p25           p50      p75    p75-p25
        Hicks neutral productivity ωH          0      1.80    -0.97 0.03       1.10       2.07
        Skill augmenting productivity ωS       0      2.25    -1.00 -0.05 0.95            1.95
        Techie share of wage bill           0.054    0.086    0.008 0.024 0.064          0.055
        Techies: engineers                  0.043    0.076    0.006 0.017 0.045          0.039
        Techies: technician                 0.019    0.032    0.002 0.009 0.025          0.022
        Techies: ICT                        0.026    0.055    0.005 0.013 0.025          0.020
        Techies: R&D                        0.046    0.069    0.003 0.021 0.058          0.055
        Exporting                            0.59     0.49      0        1       1          1
        Importing                            0.65     0.48      0        1       1          1
Notes to Table 9: Summary statistics for variables used to estimate equations (11) and (12),
weighted by firm employment. Statistics for the five Techie variables are for firms with positive
employment of each techie variable separately. p25 is the value of the variable at the 25th percentile
of it’s distribution, etc. Sample: 612,769 observations on 205,472 firms during 2009-2013.




             Table 10: Employment effects of skill augmenting technology differences
                                                 S            L           S/L
                     Elasticities             0.972       0.282         0.690
                     A. Elasticities × second stage estimates
                     Techies                  7.36***     2.135*** 5.224***
                     Techies : engineers     10.40***     3.018*** 7.385***
                     Techies : technicians -1.896        -0.550       -1.346
                     Techies : ICT            9.625*** 2.793*** 6.833***
                     Techies : R&D            4.628*      1.343*        3.285*
                     Exporting                0.311       0.09          0.221
                     Importing                0.758*** 0.220*** 0.538***
                     B. Elasticities × second stage estimates × p75
                     Techies                  0.468*** 0.136*** 0.333***
                     Techies : engineers      0.473*** 0.137*** 0.336***
                     Techies : technicians -0.047        -0.014       -0.033
                     Techies : ICT            0.240*** 0.070*** 0.170***
                     Techies : R&D            0.269*      0.078*        0.191*
Notes to Table 10: This table reports estimated steady-state effects of skill augmenting productivity
differences on employment of managers S, other workers L, and their ratio. The first row reports
employment-weighted averages of industry level elasticities, computed using equation (10) and the
estimates from Table 5. Panel A multiplies the elasticities by the corresponding estimates from
Table 8. Panel B multiplies the panel A numbers by the 75th percentile of the distribution of
techies, from Table 9. Asterisks denote the statistical significance of the corresponding estimates
from Table 8.




                                                 40
A        Appendix

A.1       data definitions and construction

Here we discuss in detail the three administrative datasets used in our paper, as well as details on
supplementary publicly available data.
       A key feature of the French statistical system is that establishments are identified by a unique
number, the SIRET, which is used by all data sources. The first 9 digits of an establishment’s
SIRET comprise the SIREN of the firm to which the establishment belongs. This makes it easy to
aggregate from establishments to firms.


A.1.1       Workers: DADS Poste

Our source for information on workers is the DADS Poste, which is based on mandatory annual
reports filed by all firms with employees, so our data includes all private sector French workers
except the self-employed.34 The DADS Poste is an INSEE database compiled from the mandatory
firm-level DADS ("Déclaration Annuelle de Données Sociales") reports. Our unit of analysis is
annual hours paid in a firm, by occupation. The data is reported at the level of establishments,
which are identified by their SIRET. The first nine digits of each SIRET is the firm-level SIREN,
which makes it easy to aggregate across establishments for each firm. For each worker, the DADS
Poste reports gross and net wages, hours paid, occupation, tenure, gender and age. There is no
information about workers’ education or overall labor market experience. The data do not include
worker identifiers, so we can not track workers over time, but this is of no concern to us given our
focus on firm-level rather than individual outcomes.35


A.1.2       Balance sheet data: FARE

Firm-level balance sheet information is reported in an INSEE dataset called FARE.36 The balance
sheet variables used in our empirical analysis include revenue, expenditure on materials, and the
book value of capital. We do not use balance sheet data on employment or the wage bill, because
  34
     All employers and their employees are covered by the DADS declaration with the exception of self-employed
and government bodies, domestic services (section 97-98 of NAF rev. 2) and employees in businesses outside French
territory (section 99 of NAF rev. 2). However, local authorities and public-employed hospital staff are included since
1992. Public institutions of industrial and commercial nature are also included.
  35
     A related dataset, made famous by Abowd et al. (1999), is the DADS Panel. This sample from of the DADS
data does include worker identifiers.
  36
     FICUS (Fichier complet unifié de SUSE ) reports balance sheet data through 2007, while FARE (Fichier approché
des résultats Ésane) starts in 2008. The underlying data sources are identical.



                                                         41
                                                            Table A1: Occupational codes
         PCS code official description                                                           unofficial English translation
            21      Artisans                                                                     Small business owners and workers
            22      Commerçants et assimilés                                                   Shopkeepers
            23      Chefs d’entreprise de 10 salariés ou plus                                   Heads of businesses
            34      Professeurs, professions scientifiques                                       Scientific and educational professionals
            35      Professions de l’information, des arts et des spectacles                     Creative professionals
            37      Cadres administratifs et commerciaux d’entreprise                            Top managers and professionals
            38      Ingénieurs et cadres techniques d’entreprise                                Engineers and Technical managers
            42      Professeurs des écoles, instituteurs et assimilés                          Teachers
            43      Professions intermédiaires de la santé et du travail social                Mid-level health professionals
            46      Professions intermédiaires administratives et commerciales des entreprises Mid-level managers and professionals
            47      Techniciens                                                                  Technicians




42
            48      Contremaı̂tres, agents de maı̂trise                                          Supervisors and foremen
            53      Policiers et militaires                                                      Security workers
            54      Employés administratifs d’entreprise                                        Office workers
            55      Employés de commerce                                                        Retail workers
            56      Personnels des services directs aux particuliers                             Personal service workers
            62      Ouvriers qualifiés de type industriel                                       Skilled industrial workers
            63      Ouvriers qualifiés de type artisanal                                        Skilled manual laborers
            64      Chauffeurs                                                                   Drivers
            65      Ouvriers qualifiés de la manutention, du magasinage et du transport         Skilled transport and wholesale workers
            67      Ouvriers non qualifiés de type industriel                                   Unskilled industrial workers
            68      Ouvriers non qualifiés de type artisanal                                    Unskilled manual laborers
     Notes to Table A1: The PCS (Professions et Catégories Socioprofessionnelles) system of occupational codes is used to classify all workers
     in France. PCS codes are assigned by employers. This Table omits public sector and agricultural occupations that are not in our data.
the DADS Poste data is more detailed, but the FARE wage bill and employment data are extremely
highly correlated with the corresponding DADS Poste data.
       To construct capital stocks, we begin with the book value of capital recorded in FARE. We
follow the methodology proposed by Bonleu et al. (2013) and Cette et al. (2015). Since the stocks
are recorded at historical cost, i.e. at their value at the time of entry into the firm i’s balance sheet,
                                                                            BV ) to stocks valued
an adjustment, has to be made to move from stocks valued at historic cost (Ki,s,t
at current prices (Ki,s,t ). We deflate K BV by a price by assuming that the sectoral price of capital
is equal to the sectoral price of investment T years before the date when the first book value was
available, where T is the corrected average age of capital, hence pK        I
                                                                   s,t+1 = ps,t−T . The average age of
                                                              BV in the capital stock at historical
capital is computed using the share of depreciated capital, DKi,s,t
cost.

                                                        BV
                                                      DKi,s,t
                                                T =     BV
                                                                ×A
                                                                 e
                                                       Ki,s,t

       where                                                               !
                                                                  BV
                                                                 Ki,s,t
                                         A
                                         e = mediani∈S
                                                                   BV
                                                                ∆DKi,s,t

with S the set of firms in a sector. We use the median value A
                                                             e to reduce the volatility in the data,

as investments within firms are discrete events.


A.1.3       Trade data: Douanes

Our source for firm-level trade data is the French Customs (Douanes). For each trade observation,
we know the importing or exporting firm, trading partner country, the product traded, and the
value of trade. We use the firm-level SIREN identifier to match the trade data to our two other
data sources. This match is not perfect: we fail to match about 11 percent of imports and exports
to firms. The reason for the imperfect match is that there are SIRENs in the trade data for which
there is no corresponding SIREN in our other data sources. This is likely to lead to a particular
type of measurement error: for some firms, we will observe zero trade even when true trade is
positive.
       In some of our specifications we classify trade by exporter per capita income and/or whether
they are imports of intermediate goods. Countries are classified as High Income based on the 2011
World Bank classification37 . We use the Broad Economic Categories (BEC rev. 4) classification
  37
       https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups


                                                        43
from the United Nations that classifies HS6 products into final, intermediate and capital goods.


A.2     Methodology

This section gives details on our two-step estimation procedure and related calculations.


A.2.1    Deriving the estimating equation

Using equations (1) and (2), revenue is given by



                                                                                                           i η+1
                                    uf t + η+1
                                                         h
                                               ωHf t
                                                       At αL Lγf t + αS (ΩSf t Sf t )γ + αK Kfγt + αM Mfγt
                                                                                                              ηγ
   Rf t = euf t Pf t Yf t = e               η                                                                    ,                       (A.14)


Equation (A.14) contains three unobservable shocks (uf t , ωHf t and ωSf t ) and one unobservable
variable Mf t . The first-order conditions for profit maximization are


                                                                 −1/σ
                                                            αL Lf t     Xf t = WLf t                                                     (A.15)



                                                   αS ΩγSf t (Sf t )−1/σ Xf t = WSf t                                                    (A.16)



                                                                  −1/σ
                                                         αM M f t        Xf t = PM f t                                                   (A.17)
                h         i           h                                                 i η(1−γ)+1
                    1+η
                              At ΩHf t αL Lγf t + αS (ΩSf t Sf t )γ + αK Kfγt + αM Mfγt
                                                                                             γη
where Xf t =         η                                                                             . Dividing (A.15)
by (A.17) and solving for Mf t gives equation (3), and dividing (A.15) by (A.16) and solving for
ΩSf t gives (4). Next, substitute for Mf t and ΩSf t into the revenue function using (3) and (4)
respectively,

                                                            "                         !                            # η+1
                                  uf t + η+1 ωHf t              EfLt + EfSt + EfMt                                   ηγ

                      Rf t = e            η            At                                 αL Lγf t   +   αK Kfγt                         (A.18)
                                                                         EfLt
                                                                                                                             η+1
                                                                                                                                 ωf t
Next, substitute (3) and (4) into (A.15), multiply both sides by Lf t and solve for e                                         η         to get

                                                                "                                       !                 #−δ
                                        EfLt                                    EfLt + EfSt + EfMt
                                                   
                    η+1
                        ωHf t                           η
                e    η          =                                 αL Lγf t                                   +   αK Kfγt                 (A.19)
                                     At αL Lγf t       1+η                             EfLt

which can be solved for Hicks-neutral productivity,


                                                                        44
                                                                                                                              
                                               "                                     !                         # −1       η+1
                                                         ELf t +   EfSt   + EM f t                               γ         η
                                                                                                                               
             η         1     η                                                                                                 
  ωHf t   =     log               L−γ
                                   f t ELf t × αL                                        Lγf t   +   αK Kfγt
            1+η     
                     At αL 1 + η                                  ELf t                                                        
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                           (A.20)
Plugging (A.19) into (A.18) and taking logs gives the estimating equation (5).


A.2.2      Calculation of standard errors

All co variance matrices are computed by the bootstrap, with 400 replications (increasing the
number of replications to 1000 has no effect on inference). For the first stage estimates reported
in Table 5, the bootstrap is computed by drawing firms without replacement, which amounts to
clustering standard errors by firm. For the second stage estimates reported in Tables 6 and 7, the
bootstrap is run over the full two-stage procedure. For the long-run estimates reported in 8, we
sample directly from the estimated second stage co variance matrix.
   The empirical bootstrap distributions have thicker tails than the normal distribution. To accu-
rately reflect this while maintaining standard reporting conventions, the reported standard errors
in Tables 6 through 8 are computed so that the bootstrap 90% confidence intervals have the same
width as 90% confidence intervals computed using the normal distribution with the reported stan-
dard error.


A.2.3      Effect of techies on output

A central element of our methodology is that we assume that techies affect output only through
their effect on future productivity, and not through any contemporaneous contribution to factor
services that affect current output. This assumption is analogous to the standard assumption that
investment in t-1 has no effect on output in t-1, but raises output in t through its contribution to
Kt . While our assumption that techies affect output only through their effect on future productivity
is well-grounded, it is important to consider how our measurement of productivity could go awry
if techies do in fact increase current output directly, a case that we will call the “orthodox case”.
For concreteness, we suppose that in the orthodox case techies are a component of skilled labor S,
so that techies T and managers B (for “bosses”) together make up skilled labor S, and that the
ratio of techies to managers, δf t = Tf t /Bf t , varies across firms and time. In levels, this amounts to




                                                    45
                                            Sf t = Bf t + Tf t = (1 + δf t ) Bf t

Using the approximation log (1 + δf t ) ' δf t and the notation that lower case letters are the log of
upper case variables gives sf t = δf t + bf t . Similarly, define λf t as the ratio of the techie to manager
wage bill in S,


                                           EfSt = EfBt + EfTt = (1 + λf t ) EfBt

Under the assumption that our model is correct, we can write true Hicks-neutral productivity as

                                                   (                                !                           )
                                          1                 EfLt + EfBt + EfMt
                          1
                         ωHf t    = θf t − log        αL                                  Lγf t   +   αK Kfγt
                                          γ                           EfLt
                          n                          o
                η               1    η   −γ
where θf t =   1+η log        At αL 1+η Lf t ELf t    . Under the assumption that the orthodox model is correct,
the term EfBt in this expression is multiplied by (1 + λf t ), giving

                                            (                                                 !                         )
                                  1                    EfLt + (1 + λf t ) EfBt + EfMt
                   2
                  ωHf t   = θf t − log        αL                                                  Lγf t   +   αK Kfγt
                                  γ                                   EfLt
                                                                                                1 ,
If the orthodox model is correct, but we incorrectly estimate Hicks-neutral productivity using ωHf t

then the error is


                                             (                                                    !                     )
                                     1                  EfLt + (1 + λf t ) EfBt + EfMt
                 1
                ωHf      2
                    t − ωHf t       = log        αL                                                   Lγf t + αK Kfγt
                                     γ                                 EfLt
                                             (                                !                           )
                                     1                 EfLt + EfBt + EfMt
                                    − log       αL                                Lγf t   +   αK Kfγt
                                     γ                         EfLt

This expression is strictly positive and increasing in the techie share λf t . The intuition is simple:
the larger is λf t , the greater is the underestimate of true inputs under the wrong model and thus
the greater the overestimate of Hicks-neutral productivity.
     Under the assumption that our model is correct, we can write true skill-augmenting productivity
as

                                                                                          !
                                           1                     1            αL EfBt
                                          ωSf t   = lf t − bf t + log
                                                                 γ            αB EfLt



                                                               46
Under the assumption that the orthodox model is correct, and using log (1 + λf t ) ' λf t , we can
write true skill-augmenting productivity as

                                                                                                         !
                                    2                             λf t  1                   αL EfBt
                                   ωSf t   = lf t − bf t − δf t +      + log
                                                                   γ    γ                   αS EfLt

If the orthodox model is correct, but we incorrectly estimate skill-augmenting productivity using
 1 , then the error is
ωSf t

                                                                                                
                                        1           2               λf t  1                 αS
                                       ωSf t   −   ωSf t   = δf t −      + log
                                                                     γ    γ                 αB

The third term in this expression is a constant, while the first is positive. In our application we
always estimate 1 > γ > 0, so the second term is negative. If techies are paid on average the same
as managers, then δf t = λf t and we have

                                                                                                  
                                      1           2                   γ−1            1          αS
                                     ωSf t   −   ωSf t   = δf t                     + log
                                                                       γ             γ          αB
                 
            γ−1
Since        γ        < 0, we conclude that the error is negatively correlated with the techie share in the
cross section: firms with high techie shares δf t will have measured ωSf t which is biased down by
more than for firms with low techie shares. The intuition is as follows. When 1 > γ > 0, greater
ωSf t leads to greater employment of skilled workers S, which implies that higher S indicates higher
true ωSf t . Incorrectly removing techies from S will thus lead to an underestimate of ωSf t , and the
underestimate will be larger the greater is the share of techies in S.


A.2.4       Output and employment elasticities

For the normalized CES production function (1), the output elasticity of ΩSf t is


                         ∂ ln Yf t                                         αS (ΩSf t Sf t )γ
                                   = Y Sf t =                                                          
                        ∂ ln ΩSf t                     γ               EfMt                     γ      γ
                                                   αL Lf t 1 +         EL
                                                                              + αS (ΩSf t Sf t ) + αK Kf t
                                                                           ft


where we use (3) to eliminate the unobservable Mf t . At the point of normalization where both
productivity and factor inputs equal unity, the elasticity simplifies to Y Sf t = αS . The output
effect of Hicks-neutral and skill augmenting technology differences together is


                                              d lnYf t = d ωHf t + Y Sf t d ωSf t                             (A.21)


                                                                      47
   The partial equilibrium effects of productivity on employment depend on elasticities of substi-
tution and demand. Given factor prices and market demand, begin with the unit cost function
corresponding to (1),

               "                                          # 1
                   wL 1−σ        wS 1−σ                     1−σ
                                  
             1   σ           σ              σ  1−σ   σ 1−σ         1    1
         c=     αL        + αS          + α M wM + α K wK       =    X 1−σ
            ΩH     ΩL            ΩS                               ΩH

apply Shepard’s Lemma, and set unit cost equal to marginal revenue from (2) to obtain

                                                                              −σ
                                                ασ
                                                                                     σ−η
                                                                      wSf t
                                       Sf t   = S Bt Ωη−1
                                                      Hf t                          Xf1−σ
                                                                                       t
                                               ΩSf t                  ΩSf t

                                                   σ                         −σ     σ−η
                                                  αL                  wLf t
                                      Lf t =           Bt Ωη−1
                                                           Hf t                     Xf1−σ
                                                                                       t
                                                 ΩLf t                ΩLf t
                        η
                 η−1
where Bt =        η At        . Log differentiating these two equations gives the elasticities of employment
with respect to productivity differences in equation (10).


A.2.5    Quantifying the aggregate effect of techies and trade on relative demand for
         skill

Here we describe in detail how we quantify the effect of techies and trade on changes in the aggregate
skill ratio between 2009 and 2013.
   To get predicted values for productivity, we set all error terms to zero and iterate forward.
Starting from t − 1 = 2009, and setting the time fixed effects equal to zero to eliminate notational
clutter, we have


                                              ω
                                              bf 2010 = βZ zf 2009 + Bωf 2009 ,

where βZ and B are estimated parameters from equations (11) and (12), ωf 2009 is estimated pro-
ductivity in 2009, and ω
                       bf 2010 is predicted productivity in 2010. All ωf t (whether predicted or not)
are 2 × 1 vectors with elements ωHf t and ωSf t . Iterating forward gives


             bf 2013 = βZ zf 2012 + Bβ Z zf 2011 + B 2 βZ zf 2010 + B 3 βZ zf 2009 + B 4 ωf 2009 .
             ω                                                                                       (A.22)

Suppose that beginning in 2009, zf t = 0. Plugging this into (A.22) we can define




                                                             48
                                             bf02013 = B 4 ωf 2009
                                             ω

and thus the effect of the actual path of firm decisions (captured in the sequence of zf t s) on predicted
productivity is


          ω         bf02013 = x = βZ zf 2012 + Bβ Z zf 2011 + B 2 βZ zf 2010 + B 3 βZ zf 2009 .
          bf 2013 − ω                                                                              (A.23)

   The 2 × 1 vector x defined by equation (A.23) is key in what follows. Note that (A.23) is not
affected if we explicitly account for the estimated time fixed effects: since the terms involving the
fixed effects are unchanged when we set zf t = 0, they would show up in the definition of both ω
                                                                                               bf 2013
    bf02013 and thus would cancel out in the definition of (A.23). The same holds for any elements
and ω
of the vector zf t that we are not interested in (such as size and age): since these are identical in
the definitions of both ω           bf02013 , their effects cancel out in (A.23).
                        bf 2013 and ω
   When we consider the effect of firm decisions on techies, all elements of zf t in (A.23) are
set to zero, except for firm expenditures on techies. Similarly, when we consider the effect of firm
importing decisions, the only non-zero element of zf t in (A.23) are the firm indicators for importing.
   To get the effect of predicted productivity on predicted Sf 2013 and Lf 2013 , we substitute the
elements of x (under each experiment: techies or importing) for d ωHf t and d ωSf t in equations (10).
In doing so, we replaceλSf t by the industry-specific αS , because the data do not permit us to gauge
the expenditure share on skilled labor. The reason is that we do not know the costs of firms, since
we do not observe the cost of capital (we observe all other components of costs). Since we normalize
all of our input data by the geometric mean for each industry, at the point of normalization λS = αS
(see Grieco et al. (2016) for more details on the importance of normalization). We then use these
predicted percent changes between 2009 and 2013 to get predicted levels in 2013, based on the
actual 2009 levels of Sf 2009 and Lf 2009 . Finally, we sum across the predicted Sf 2013 and Lf 2013
to get predicted aggregate levels S2013 and L2013 in 2013. These are used to compute predicted
S2013 /(L2013 + S2013 ).
   We compare the predicted change S2013 /(L2013 + S2013 ) − S2009 /(L2009 + S2009 ) to the actual
change in the data, as described in the main text.




                                                      49
A.2.6    Firm choice of techies

In this section we describe a very simple model of a firm’s choice of how many techies to employ.
The purpose is to give intuition about why some but not all firms choose to hire techies, and to
motivate the correlations that are reported in Table 1. We describe the firm’s optimal choice of
techies, given a simple function from current techies to future productivity. A simple two-period
model is sufficient to illustrate the mechanisms at work. We also assume that there is just one
dimension to productivity, and that the firm faces the demand curve given by equation (2).
   The relationship from techies to changes in log productivity is

                                                               
                                                         Tf t−1
                           ωf t   = ωf t−1 + M ax δ ln           ,0 ,            δ≥0                    (A.24)
                                                          γ1f
                                                                            1
Here, effective techie services per unit of techies employed is            γ1f   ≤ 1. Fixed costs of employing
positive techies are γ0f . Although the elasticity of productivity with respect to techies is constant
and equal to δ, the level of techie employment required to attain a given ∆ωf t will differ across
firms because of differences in γ1f .
   The production function is
                                               Yf t = Ωf t Lf t

where Lf = F (Xf ) , F is the CES aggregator, Xf is vector of inputs, and Ωf t = eωf t . Let w be
the cost of the input bundle. By equation (2), revenue is

                                                                   η−1
                                           Rf t = A [Ωf t Lf t ]    η




The static profit-maximizing input choice is

                                                                    η
                                                              η−1A
                                          Lf t =   Ωη−1
                                                    ft         η w

Plugging this back into the expression for revenue gives optimized revenue for given productivity,

                                                                         η−1
                                                                   η−1
                            Rf t = BΩη−1
                                     ft ,           B = Aη                       w1−η
                                                                    η

   With no discounting, the firm chooses Tf t−1 to maximize two-period profits,


                         Πf = BΩη−1       η−1
                                f t−1 + BΩf t − rTf t−1 − δ0f I (Tf t−1 > 0)



                                                      50
where I () is the indicator function. There will be two solutions, one the corner solution with
Tf t−1 = 0 and the other an interior optimum with Tf t−1 > 0. When Tf t−1 > 0, equation (A.24)
                T t−1 δ
              h      i
implies Ωf t = γf 1f    Ωf t−1 . Substituting this into the expression for profits gives

                                                                                              δ            !η−1
                                                                                     Tf t−1
                         ΠTf = BΩfη−1
                                   t−1 − rTf t−1 − γ0f + B                                          Ωf t−1                              (A.25)
                                                                                      γ1f

At the interior solution, the firm chooses Tf t−1 to maximize ΠTf . The solution of this problem is

                                                                                  δ(η−1)             1−η
                                                   1                 1
                                                                                 δ(η−1)−1
                             Tf t = (δη − δ)    1−δ(η−1)      r   1−δ(η−1)   γ1f               Ωfδ(η−1)−1
                                                                                                  1                                     (A.26)

For high enough values of δ, the second order condition of the profit maximization problem doesn’t
                                                                                                                         1
hold and optimal techie employment is infinite. To rule this out we assume δ <                                          η−1     < 1. This
restriction implies that the elasticities of techies with respect to r and γ1f are negative, and that
the elasticity of techies with respect to ωf 1 is positive.
   Plugging the solution (A.26) back into the expression for Ωf t gives

                                                                       −δ
                                                                                           1
                                                γ1f r                 1−δ(η−1)
                                    Ωf t   =                                     Ωf1−δ(η−1)
                                                                                    t−1                                                 (A.27)
                                             δ (η − 1)

This equation establishes the intuitive result that optimized Ωf t is decreasing in r and γ1f , and
increasing in Ωf t−1 .
   To figure out whether Tf 1 = 0 or Tf 1 > 0 yields higher profits, the firm simply computes
maximized profits in each case. Profits at the corner solution are


                                                             η−1
                                                     ΠC
                                                      f = 2BΩf 1


To compute profits at the interior solution, substitute (A.26) and (A.27) into (A.25) to obtain


                                               !     η−1                                      δ(η−1)
                                                                                                                                    
                                                   1−δ(η−1)                              
                                      Ωf 1                           r                        δ(η−1)−1                     1
       ΠTf = BΩη−1
               f 1 − rγ0f + +          δ
                                                              B                                         − rδ (η − 1)   1−δ(η−1)    
                                      γ1f                        δ (η − 1)


Thus the difference between the two profit levels is

                                           !     η−1                                      δ(η−1)
                                                                                                                                
                                               1−δ(η−1)                              
                                    Ωf 1                         r                        δ(η−1)−1                      1
         ΠTf − ΠC
                f = −rγ0f +          δ
                                                          B                                          − rδ (η − 1)   1−δ(η−1)   
                                    γ1f                      δ (η − 1)


                                                              51
A necessary condition for this to be positive is that the term in brackets is positive. This will be
more likely when demand (captured by B ) is higher, and less likely when r is higher. If the term
in brackets is positive, the whole expression is more likely to be positive the smaller is γ1f and γ0f
and the larger is Ωf 1 . If the term in brackets is negative, then ΠTf − ΠC
                                                                          f < 0 even if γ0f = 0, which

shows that fixed costs are not a necessary condition for zero techies to be optimal.
   The lessons from this exercise are quite simple and intuitive:

   • The optimal amount of techies is more likely to be positive when demand and/or initial
     productivity are higher.

   • The optimal amount of techies is more likely to be zero when fixed costs of techies are high
     and/or when the efficiency of techies are low.

   • The optimal amount of techies may be zero even if the fixed cost of employing techies is zero.

   • When the optimal amount of techies is positive, it is increasing in initial productivity and
     the efficiency of techies.

Firms that export will have a higher demand level A, and thus will be more likely to employ techies.
The predictions from this simple model are consistent with the correlations in Table 1.




                                                 52
