NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PARTISAN PROFESSIONALS:
EVIDENCE FROM CREDIT RATING ANALYSTS
Elisabeth Kempf
Margarita Tsoutsoura
Working Paper 25292
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25292

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We thank Pat Akey, John Barrios, Marianne Bertrand, Kimberly Cornaggia (discussant), Steve
Davis, Carola Frydman (discussant), Jiekun Huang (discussant), Emir Kamenica, Anil Kashyap,
Stefan Lewellen (discussant), Raghuram Rajan, David Schoenherr (discussant), Jesse Shapiro,
Chester Spatt, Laura Starks (discussant), Amir Sufi, Vikrant Vig, and seminar participants at
Aalto University, Bocconi University, Chicago Booth, Cornell University, Dartmouth College,
the 2018 FRA Conference, Imperial College, the 2019 NBER Corporate Finance Summer
Institute, MIT Sloan, New York Fed, the 2019 Political Economy of Finance Conference, Rice
University, Stockholm School of Economics, the 2019 UNC/Duke Corporate Finance
Conference, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Luxembourg, University of
Minnesota Carlson, University of Rochester, UVA Darden, Vanderbilt University, and Yale
University for valuable comments. Kempf gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
James S. Kemper Foundation, the Initiative on Global Markets, and the Fama-Miller Center for
Research in Finance at the University of Chicago, Booth School of Business. We thank Yu Gao,
Dong Ryeol Lee, Tianshu Lyu, Michael Schwartz, and Pan Yingru for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Elisabeth Kempf and Margarita Tsoutsoura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Partisan Professionals: Evidence from Credit Rating Analysts
Elisabeth Kempf and Margarita Tsoutsoura
NBER Working Paper No. 25292
November 2018, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G14,G24,G41
ABSTRACT
Partisan perception affects the actions of professionals in the financial sector. Using a novel
dataset linking credit rating analysts to party affiliations from voter records, we show that
analysts who are not affiliated with the U.S. president's party downward-adjust corporate credit
ratings more frequently. By comparing analysts with different party affiliations covering the same
firm in the same quarter, we ensure that differences in firm fundamentals cannot explain the
results. We also find a sharp divergence in the rating actions of Democratic and Republican
analysts around the 2016 presidential election. Our results show analysts' partisan perception has
sizable price effects on rated firms and may influence firms' investment policies.

Elisabeth Kempf
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
elisabeth.kempf@chicagobooth.edu
Margarita Tsoutsoura
SC Johnson College of Business
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
tsoutsoura@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

Recent evidence suggests a large increase in polarization across political parties in the U.S.
(e.g., Iyengar, Sood, and Lelkes (2012); Mason (2013); Lott and Hassett (2014); Mason
(2015); Gentzkow (2016); Boxell, Gentzkow, and Shapiro (2017)). In particular, voters
have an increased tendency to view the economy through a “partisan perceptual screen;”1
that is, their assessment and interpretation of economic conditions and economic policies
depend on whether the White House is occupied by the party they support (e.g., Bartels
(2002); Gaines, Kuklinski, Quirk, Peyton, and Verkuilen (2007); Gerber and Huber (2009);
Curtin (2016); Mian, Sufi, and Khoshkhou (2018)).
To understand how partisan perceptions may affect the U.S. economy, establishing
whether and when they translate into differences in the behavior of economic agents is
important. Whereas researchers have documented partisan bias in households’ assessment
of future economic conditions, evidence on actual economic behavior is mixed.2 Moreover, the extent to which partisan perception influences the economic expectations and
actions of individuals with greater economic sophistication, and in high-stake professional
environments, has remained an open question.3
We aim to fill this gap by investigating whether partisan perception affects the actions of
an important set of professionals in the financial sector: credit rating analysts. Focusing on
credit analysts provides an interesting setting, because their expertise and career concerns
should reduce the effect of partisan perception (e.g., Gentzkow, Glaeser, and Goldin (2006);
Hong and Kacperczyk (2010)). At the same time, any effect of partisan perception on credit
rating actions is likely to have implications for firms’ cost of financing (Fracassi, Petry, and
Tate (2016)), as well as their financial policy and investment decisions (Chernenko and
Sunderam (2011); Begley (2015); Almeida, Cunha, Ferreira, and Restrepo (2017)).
To identify the effect of partisan perception, we test whether the rating actions of
credit analysts depend on their political alignment with the U.S. president. This test
poses a number of empirical challenges. First, it requires observable actions at the level
of the individual analyst. Second, analysts need to be linked to information about their
1

Campbell, Converse, Miller, and Stokes (1960) introduced the idea of the partisan perceptual screen;
“Identification with a party raises a perceptual screen through which the individual tends to see what is
favorable to his partisan orientation” (Campbell, Converse, Miller, and Stokes (1960), p. 133). In this
paper, we use “partisan perceptual screen,” “partisan perception,” and “partisan bias” interchangeably.
2
Whereas Makridis (2019) documents a significant effect of partisan bias on household spending, McGrath (2017) and Mian, Sufi, and Khoshkhou (2018) find no significant effect. Focusing on households’
investment decisions, Meeuwis, Parker, Schoar, and Simester (2018) show political affiliation affects portfolio choice around the U.S. election of November 2016.
3
Notable exceptions are Jelveh, Kogut, and Naidu (2018), who document partisan bias in economic
research, and Posner (2008), McKenzie (2012), and Chen (2019), who document partisan bias among
judges.

1

political affiliation. Third, it requires comparing the actions of analysts with different
political affiliations on the same task and in the same information environment. Fourth,
we need to separate the effect of political alignment with the president from time-invariant
characteristics of Democratic and Republican analysts.
To address these challenges, we compile a novel hand-collected dataset that links credit
rating analysts to the ratings they issue, as well as to information on party affiliation from
voter registration records. Our sample consists of 557 corporate credit analysts with nonmissing information on their party affiliation, working at Fitch, Moody’s, and Standard
and Poor’s (S&P) between 2000 and 2018. These analysts cover a total of 1,984 U.S. firms.
By comparing rating actions of analysts who rate the same firm at the same point in time,
we ensure our results cannot be driven by differences in the fundamentals of rated firms
(i.e., we can compare analysts on the same “task”).
We find partisan perception affects credit ratings. Analysts who are not affiliated with
the president’s party are more likely to adjust ratings downward, relative to other analysts
covering the same firm at the same point in time. Specifically, analysts who are not
affiliated with the president’s party downward-adjust ratings more by 0.013 notches per
quarter. This effect corresponds to 11.4% relative to the average absolute quarterly rating
adjustment and is therefore economically sizable. Over a four-year presidency (i.e., 16
quarters), these estimates imply analysts who are misaligned with the president downwardadjust the rating of the average firm by 0.21 (=0.0134 × 16) notches more than aligned
analysts. This amount corresponds to a one-notch rating downgrade (e.g., A to A–) of
approximately one out of every five firms. Overall, the effect of partisan perception that
we document is comparable to other non-fundamental factors influencing rating agencies’
information production identified in the literature, such as the effect of competition or the
home-bias effect.
Our empirical strategy ensures this result cannot be explained by several potential confounding factors. Most importantly, following Fracassi, Petry, and Tate (2016), we control
for non-random matching of analysts to firms by including firm × quarter fixed effects in
the regressions. Thus, we can rule out the possibility that Democratic analysts rate firms
that tend to do well under the policies of Democratic presidents. Our empirical strategy
also allows us to control for differences in rating methodologies across rating agencies via
agency × quarter fixed effects. Finally, we control for unobserved time-invariant differences across analysts with different party affiliations via party-affiliation fixed effects. In
other words, we focus on how the behavior of analysts changes depending on whether
their preferred party is in power, as opposed to static differences between Democratic and
Republican analysts.

2

To further support our conclusion that the above finding reflects partisan perception, we
conduct an event study around the 2016 presidential election. The 2016 election provides
a particularly clean setting because the outcome was unexpected and the two candidates
had very different views on economic policy. We find a sharp and sizable divergence in
the rating actions of Democratic and Republican analysts (see Figure 4). To the best
of our knowledge, this study is one of the first to document that the highly polarized
2016 election was accompanied by a differential response in the behavior of sophisticated
economic agents. Furthermore, we find substantially larger effects for analysts who are
more politically active, proxied by the frequency with which an analyst votes.
We proceed to show that rating actions by partisan analysts have non-negligible price
as well as real effects. Regarding price effects, we begin by documenting that the stockprice response to a downgrade is very similar, regardless of whether the downgrade is
announced by an analyst who is ideologically misaligned or aligned with the president.
In other words, securities prices do not seem to differentiate between analysts’ ideological
leanings. As a result, replacing an analyst who is aligned with the president with an analyst
who is misaligned leads to a difference in the firm’s market capitalization of 0.52%–0.62%,
or $89 million–$107 million, over a four-year presidential term. We also find a significant
increase in bond yields, which corresponds to 5.9 basis points over a four-year period.
As we argue below, these effects likely represent lower bounds for the true price effects
of analysts’ partisan perception. Finally, we also show that firms rated by analysts who
transition from aligned to misaligned with the president experience a significant decrease
in firm investment around presidential elections.
After establishing the consequences of partisan perception on credit ratings, securities
prices, and firm investment, we next investigate the economic mechanism. We interpret the
evidence in this paper as showing that analysts with opposing political views differ in their
beliefs about how the economic policies of the U.S. president affect the credit risk of firms
in the economy. One important advantage of our setting for isolating belief disagreement
from other factors is that the rating actions of analysts are unlikely to be driven by how
the election of their preferred candidate affects analysts’ personal economic condition. To
further support our interpretation, we provide three additional pieces of evidence. First,
we conduct an online survey of credit rating analysts and find striking differences in the
assessment of current economic conditions by Democrats and Republicans, consistent with
the existing evidence from U.S. households. Second, we show analysts’ alignment with
the president’s party has no effect on the ratings of firms with low cyclicality. Hence,
the disagreement is focused precisely on the set of firms whose fundamentals should be
most affected by changing aggregate economic conditions. Third, we investigate whether

3

the effect is more pronounced in periods when views of economic conditions are more
politically polarized in the U.S. population. We use the absolute difference in the views of
economic conditions between Democrats and Republicans from the Gallup Daily Survey
as a measure of political polarization in economic views. The effect of political alignment
with the president is 83% larger when polarization increases by one standard deviation.
This study is the first to identify a significant effect of partisan perception on the actions
of finance professionals; specifically, on the rating actions of credit analysts. If partisan
perception affects the decisions of credit rating analysts, it may also affect decisions of
other relevant economic agents. Given that the effect of partisan perception prevails even
in a setting where pecuniary and professional gains are at stake, it may be even more
pronounced in less competitive labor markets. We look forward to future research exploring
this phenomenon in other labor market settings.
The rest of this study proceeds as follows. In the next section, we discuss the related
literature. Section 3 presents the data, the sample construction, and summary statistics.
Section 4 describes the empirical strategy. Section 5 examines whether analysts’ rating
actions are influenced by partisan perception. Section 6 investigates the price and real
effects of partisan perception. Section 7 discusses the economic mechanism, and section 8
concludes.

2

Motivation and Related Literature

Our study is motivated by the growing evidence that partisanship has become more pervasive in the U.S., and that partisan conflict penetrates into a greater number of issue areas
(e.g., Brewer (2005)). According to Pew Research Center (2017), party identification is
now a more significant predictor of Americans’ fundamental political values than any other
social or demographic divide, including gender, race, education, and religion. Similarly,
Bertrand and Kamenica (2018) find that differences in social attitudes by political ideology
have increased in the U.S. since the 1970s, whereas they did not find a similar increase
in differences across gender or race. Moreover, a growing literature, described in detail
below, documents the importance of political partisanship as af predictive variable for the
economic expectations of U.S. households. The documented importance of partisan perception for individuals’ economic views and society more broadly highlights the need for an
empirical study on how political partisanship shapes information production in financial
markets. Our paper fills this gap and contributes to several strands of the literature.
First, our findings contribute to a growing literature on the connection between partisanship and economic behavior. Most of the existing studies have focused on households,

4

and studies of consumption behavior have produced mixed results. In an early paper,
Gerber and Huber (2009) demonstrate consumption changes following a political election
are correlated with whether the election was won by the respondent’s preferred political
party. Gillitzer and Prasad (2018), analyzing Australian elections, find that changes in
sentiment around elections are also associated with future vehicle purchase rates. Benhabib and Spiegel (2018) document a positive relation between partisan-related sentiment
and state-level GDP growth. Makridis (2019) uses individual-level data from Gallup and
shows that self-reported consumption of non-durable goods rose more among conservatives
around the 2016 presidential election. However, other studies have not found a significant
connection between partisanship and household consumption. McGrath (2017) extends
the sample in Gerber and Huber (2009) and concludes that no evidence exists of an effect of partisan ideology on spending. Mian, Sufi, and Khoshkhou (2018) combine data
on vehicle purchases and credit-card spending with an estimated propensity to vote for
the Republican candidate in presidential elections at the county and state level. They
find a significant relationship between party affiliation and economic expectations, but not
between party affiliation and household spending.4 In addition to consumption, studies
have examined partisanship and household asset allocation. Addoum and Kumar (2016)
show the industry-level composition of investors’ portfolios changes when the party in
power changes. Bonaparte, Kumar, and Page (2017) find investors’ portfolio allocation to
risky assets is influenced by whether their preferred party is in power. Similarly, Meeuwis,
Parker, Schoar, and Simester (2018) document Republican investors actively increase the
equity share and the market beta of their portfolios relative to Democrats following the
U.S. election of November 2016. We add to this literature by establishing that partisan
perception affects the behavior of finance professionals and has non-trivial price and real
effects.
Moreover, our results contribute to studies that have investigated the effect of partisan
ideology among other groups of professionals. Hersh and Goldenberg (2016) find evidence
of partisan bias among medical doctors, as doctors with different political affiliations recommend different treatment plans for politically sensitive health issues. Posner (2008),
McKenzie (2012), and Chen (2019) document evidence of partisan biases among judges.
Our work complements these studies by focusing on financial experts.
Our study also adds to the literature on non-fundamental determinants of credit ratings
at the analyst level. Fracassi, Petry, and Tate (2016) find evidence of systematic optimism
and pessimism among credit analysts and show they affect credit spreads. Cornaggia,
4

Several factors could explain the mixed findings when linking partisan ideology to household consumption, such as using survey-based, self-reported consumption data versus administrative data, studying
different countries and time periods, as well as employing different methods to infer political affiliation.

5

Cornaggia, and Israelsen (2019) and Cornaggia, Cornaggia, and Xia (2016) document that
home bias and the revolving door, respectively, influence credit ratings. Adding to this
research, our study explores the role of partisan perception as a driver of credit ratings
that is not related to economic fundamentals. Our paper also relates more broadly to
the literature on the determinants and consequences of credit ratings (see, e.g., Becker
and Milbourn (2011); Kisgen and Strahan (2010); Xia (2014); Griffin and Tang (2012);
Cornaggia, Cornaggia, and Israelsen (2017); Cunha, Ferreira, and Silva (2019)).
Furthermore, our study contributes to the literature that studies how political affiliation correlates with the behavior of financial analysts, sell-side equity analysts, corporate managers, investment managers, and investors. Prior studies have documented that
mutual-fund managers who make campaign donations to the Democratic party hold less of
their portfolios in companies that are deemed socially irresponsible (Hong and Kostovetsky
(2012)), left-wing voters are less likely to invest in stocks (Kaustia and Torstila (2011)),
sell-side equity analysts who make political contributions to the Republican Party are less
likely to issue bold recommendations (Jiang, Kumar, and Law (2016)), and Republican
firm managers maintain more conservative corporate policies (Hutton, Jiang, and Kumar
(2014)). These studies focus on the time-invariant attributes that characterize Democrats
versus Republicans, whereas we focus on how the behavior of analysts changes depending
on whether their preferred party is in power. We can therefore separate the effect of partisan perception from unobserved time-invariant characteristics of individuals with different
political affiliations.
Finally, our findings relate to the broader literature on belief heterogeneity, which argues
agents do not interpret public information identically, and investigates the implications on
asset prices (e.g., Harris and Raviv (1993); Kandel and Pearson (1995); Bamber, Barron,
and Stober (1999); Banerjee and Kremer (2010); Banerjee (2011); Meeuwis, Parker, Schoar,
and Simester (2018)). Our setting allows us to provide direct evidence that Democratic
and Republican analysts update their beliefs about credit risk differently in response to the
same public event. Although we cannot distinguish between all possible theories of belief
formation, we can exclude several stories based on our findings. For example, since we
study presidential elections, which are very salient public signals, our results are unlikely
to be explained by limited attention (e.g., DellaVigna and Pollet (2009); Hirshleifer, Lim,
and Teoh (2009)).

6

3

Data and Sample Construction

3.1

Data

The main dataset used in the analysis is constructed from the combination of credit ratings
on corporate debt issuers, press releases with analyst information, and voter registration
records. We also complement the data with a variety of other data sources. The datasets
are described below, and further details can be found in Internet Appendix IA.A.
3.1.1

Corporate Credit Ratings

We collect rating actions on U.S. corporate debt issuers from all three major ratings agencies: Fitch, Moody’s, and S&P. We obtain these for S&P from S&P RatingXpress, for
Moody’s from Moody’s Default and Recovery Database (DRD), and for Fitch from Mergent FISD.5 The time period spans the years from the first quarter of 2000 to the first
quarter of 2018. We restrict the sample period to post 2000 because press releases with
analyst information are sparse prior to 2000. Credit ratings are transformed into a cardinal scale, starting with 1 for AAA (Aaa) and ending with 21 for D (C), as in Fracassi,
Petry, and Tate (2016). We match each rating action (i.e., new rating, downgrade, upgrade, affirmation, internal review, reinstatement, and withdrawal) to a press release that
contains the name(s) of the analyst(s) covering the firm. The press releases are collected
from Moody’s and Fitch’s websites and from S&P’s Global Credit Portal. They usually
contain two names: the name of the lead analyst as well as the name of a second analyst
(often the rating-committee chair or the backup analyst).
3.1.2

Political Affiliation

Our political-affiliation measure comes from the voter registration records from the State of
Illinois, the State of New Jersey, and New York City.6 The voter registration records contain identifying information, such as voter names, date of birth, and mailing address, the
voter’s party affiliation at the time of a given election, and an indicator for the election(s)
in which the individual has voted. The elections covered are general, primary, and municipal elections during the period of 1983–2017 for New York City, 1976–2017 for Illinois,
5

Because Mergent provides bond ratings rather than issuer ratings, we follow the procedure by Fracassi,
Petry, and Tate (2016) and select a representative issuer rating after excluding bonds that are exchangeable,
putable, convertible, pay-in-kind, subordinated, secured, or guaranteed, as well as zero-coupon bonds and
bonds with variable coupons.
6
We use data from New York City as opposed to the State of New York, because the State of New York
does not provide voter histories.

7

and 2007–2017 for New Jersey. In Internet Appendix IA.A, we describe the information
available in the voter registration records of each location in more detail.
For the purpose of our study, the voter registration data have several advantages. First,
relative to the commonly used data on financial contributions to political parties, candidates, and committees, found on the Federal Election Committee (FEC) website,7 the voter
registration data cover a larger part of the population. In fact, according to a study by
Hill and Huber (2017), less than 10% of registered U.S. voters are federal or state donors.
Although these differences in the sample restriction may not be as crucial when studying the influence of the political affiliation of high-profile individuals, such as CEOs and
board members, they are increasingly important when looking at employees who are not
at the highest level of the firm, such as credit analysts, who are less likely to contribute
financially to political campaigns. Second, voter registration records are able to capture
political beliefs separately from the intention of political influence and social pressure. The
latter is a particularly important concern, given the evidence in Babenko, Fedaseyeu, and
Zhang (2019) that CEOs influence the political contributions of their employees. Political
affiliation inferred from voter registration records is less likely to be subject to such influence. Third, party registration has been shown to be a good predictor of self-reported
party identification. Igielnik, Keeter, Kennedy, and Spahn (2018) match commercial voter
files, which are based on data from voter registration records, with a large-scale survey
on political attitudes and voter behavior and show that, for more than two-thirds of the
panelists, the party affiliation in the commercial voter file correctly infers the self-reported
party identification. The accuracy is even higher for states with party registration, such
as New York.
3.1.3

Additional Data Sources

We rely on a variety of complementary data sources. First, to measure political polarization
in the views of economic conditions in the general public, we use the Daily Survey by Gallup,
Inc. The Gallup Daily data cover around 1,000 individuals every day for years 2008 to 2017.
We require two main variables from the survey in order to measure the polarization in
economic views: (i) a measure of an individual’s view on the current economic conditions,
and (ii) a measure of her political affiliation. To measure the views on current economic
conditions, the Gallup survey asks the following question: “How would you rate economic
conditions in this country today — as excellent, good, only fair, or poor?” The responses to
this question are converted into a numerical scale that ranges from 1 (poor) to 4 (excellent).
Moreover, the Gallup survey contains two questions about political affiliation, which allows
7

https://www.fec.gov/

8

classification of survey respondents into Democrats, Republicans, or Independents. Our
measure of political polarization in economic views is the absolute difference in the average
economic views of Democrats and Republicans in a given calendar quarter.
For additional robustness tests, we use an alternative measure of the views of economic
conditions based on the Michigan Survey. Specifically, we use the Current Economic Conditions Index. We provide more details on the two surveys in the Internet Appendix, and
we plot the time series of both measures of polarization in economic views in Internet
Appendix Figure IA.1.
Second, we obtain quarterly firm-level financial information from Compustat. Third,
we obtain bond transactions from TRACE and merge them with the Mergent FISD issue
file using CUSIPs. Following Fracassi, Petry, and Tate (2016), we remove bonds with
special features, that is, bonds that are exchangeable, putable, convertible, pay-in-kind,
subordinated, secured, guaranteed, or denominated in foreign currency. We further drop
zero-coupon and variable-coupon bonds, as well as bonds with missing maturity dates. We
compute daily bond prices as the trade size-weighted average transaction price in TRACE,
after applying several filters to reduce the influence of erroneous entries.8 We then use
daily bond prices to calculate the yield to maturity and the duration of each bond. We
remove bonds with a duration of less than one year. The benchmark rate that we use to
compute credit spreads is based on an interpolation of the yields of the two government
bonds with the next lower and the next higher duration relative to the corporate bond.
Finally, we further supplement the data with hand-collected biographical information
from online searches. We also use analysts’ first and last names to obtain additional
characteristics. For example, we infer analysts’ ethnicity from their first and last names,
using the API name-prism.com (see Ye, Han, Hu, Coskun, Liu, Qin, and Skiena (2017)
for details). Moreover, we infer the gender of the analysts from their first name, using the
publicly available API genderize.io, as well as manual online searches.9

3.2

Sample Construction

The rating actions are converted into an analyst-firm-quarter panel by using the most
recent rating at the end of a given quarter and the analyst information from the most
recent press release for the firm. To minimize measurement error in the analyst assignment,
we do not use analyst information from press releases that are older than three years as
8
As in Dick-Nielsen (2009), we delete duplicates, reversals, cancellations, and same-day corrections. We
further follow Dion Bongaerts and Goetzmann (2012) and remove trades that include a commission, have
a settlement period of more than 5 days, or a negative reported yield.
9
The API uses a large dataset of first names and known genders gathered from user profiles across
major social networks in order to predict gender. See http://api.genderize.io/.

9

of quarter end, and we do not assign analysts to quarters beyond the date of the final
report for a given agency-firm pair. After we focus on analysts who work in the offices of
Chicago and New York City, our sample consists of 2,402 issuers rated by 1,211 analysts.10
Because we require information on political-party affiliation, we further restrict the sample
to analysts who can be matched to a voter registration record. We match analysts to
voters as follows. In a first step, we merge analysts to voters using first name, middle
initial, and last name, keeping only exact matches. In the case of duplicate matches, we
try to determine the correct match based on voter age and ZIP code.11 In a second step, we
merge the remaining unmatched analysts to voter records using only their first name and
last name. The merging procedure is described in more detail in the Internet Appendix.
Our final sample includes 557 analysts, covering 1,984 firms.
To put the resulting match rate of approximately 46% (=557/1,211) in context, consider the following statistics. The share of registered voters among the total voting-age
population of individuals aged 25 to 64 years with a Bachelor’s degree or higher is approximately 75.6%, as of November 2016.12 We lose analysts who work in New York City
but reside in Connecticut or in other parts of the State of New York. According to New
York City commuter data, approximately 12% of analysts should fall in this category.13
Moreover, we lose analysts who did not update their voter registration to the state of their
work location, whose names are spelled differently in the press releases than in the voter
records, and who match to multiple voters among whom we cannot determine a single
correct match.14 Of course, these statistics have to be treated with caution, because we do
not know how the population of credit rating analysts compares to the U.S. population.
We nevertheless find them useful because they suggest a match rate with voter registration
records of 46% is not unreasonable.
Even though our analysis does not require a random sample, we would still like to
understand the potential differences between our sample and the overall population of
analysts and firms. First, we investigate whether analysts whom we are able to match to
voter records rate different types of companies. The results, reported in Table IA.3 in the
Internet Appendix, show that analysts for whom we are able to obtain party affiliation
10

When the press release does not provide any office information, we assume the analyst is based in New
York. Given that more than 85% of all analysts with non-missing office location are based in New York,
we believe this assumption is reasonable.
11
Analyst age is approximated by assuming the analyst was 21 years old upon graduation from college,
following Chevalier and Ellison (1999). Information on analysts’ graduation year is obtained via manual
online searches.
12
U.S. Census Bureau. Data available at https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/
voting-and-registration/p20-580.html.
13
NYC Department of City Planning. Data available at https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/planning/
download/pdf/data-maps/nyc-population/acs/ctpp_p6_nyc_boro_06_10.pdf.
14
For 65 analysts, we are unable to determine a unique match out of multiple potential voter matches.

10

rate firms that are not statistically different on observable characteristics from firms rated
by analysts without a matching voter record. Second, in terms of selection based on
observable analyst characteristics, we do not expect analysts who are registered voters to
be representative of the overall analyst population. Given the focus of our study, which
is to estimate the importance of political alignment with the president on the decisions
of financial experts, restricting the sample to analysts who are registered voters, even if
they differ from the general population of analysts, is justified. We provide a comparison of
partisan analysts relative to the population of unregistered analysts, as well as a comparison
of Democratic and Republican analysts, in Table IA.4 in the Internet Appendix.
Our analysis relies on comparisons of rating actions across agencies. We note that we
do not need split-ratings, but split-rating actions (i.e., one rating agency changing the
rating differently than another agency). Our sample has 9,464 firm-quarters in which a
firm is rated by more than one rating agency. Of these 9,464 firm-quarters, 1,617 have a
split-rating action.

3.3

Summary Statistics

Table 1 and Figure 1 report summary statistics. Twenty-six percent of the analysts who
are registered voters are unaffiliated, 39% are registered Democrats, 34% are Republicans,
and 1% are registered with a party other than the Democratic or Republican party. Figure
1a reports the average party affiliation by GICS sector. The sectors with the highest share
of Democratic analysts are utilities (63%) and consumer staples (50%), and the sector with
the highest share of Republican analysts is energy (59%). These patterns could be driven
by factors such as the geography of where analysts grew up, which may influence both
their party affiliation and the sectors they choose to cover. For example, analysts who
grew up in New York (a “blue state”) likely had more exposure to the financial sector,
whereas analysts from Texas (a “red state”) may be more familiar with energy companies.
Figure 1b shows the percentage of Democratic analysts is higher in New York City (44%)
than in Chicago (27%). Figure 1c compares the political affiliation of analysts in the three
different rating agencies. At S&P, Fitch, and Moody’s, 54%, 34%, and 33% of the analysts
are Democrats, respectively. The median analyst is in the sample for approximately five
years (unreported for brevity).
Our main dependent variable is the quarterly change in the credit rating (measured in
notches). To limit the influence of outliers, we winsorize the quarterly rating change at
the top and bottom 1%.15 Because credit ratings are transformed into a cardinal scale,
15
Table IA.8 in the Internet Appendix shows that our results are robust to using unwinzorized changes
(Panel A), removing firms which are in default, where ratings are less likely to be subjective (Panel B),

11

starting with 1 for AAA (Aaa) and ending with 21 for D (C), as in Fracassi, Petry, and
Tate (2016), a positive rating change indicates a downgrade. The average credit rating
change is 0.023 notches, confirming evidence from prior studies that downgrades are more
common than upgrades (Dichev and Piotroski (2001); Hand, Holthausen, and Leftwich
(1992); Holthausen and Leftwich (1986)). Ten percent of the observations in our sample
have a rating change, which is also consistent with the literature (e.g., Becker and Ivashina
(2014)).
Figure 2 presents the average adjusted rating change for Democratic, Republican, and
unaffiliated analysts during the five presidential terms in our sample period. Adjusted
rating changes are computed by taking the quarterly rating change and subtracting the
average rating change within the same firm and quarter across all agencies rating the firm.
This measure allows us to control for the possibility that the party affiliation of the analysts covering a given firm may correlate with the firm’s fundamentals and investment
opportunities under different administrations. Even in this univariate comparison, we observe a pattern that is consistent with our main multivariate analysis: During a Republican
presidency, Republican analysts upward-adjust ratings more relative to Democratic analysts. Under Obama’s presidency, the sign of this difference reverses: Republican analysts
downward-adjust more than Democratic analysts. The Trump presidency is particularly interesting because the outcome of the 2016 election was unexpected, it led to the Republican
party controlling both the Senate and the White House, and the two candidates involved
in the election had very different views on economic policy. The disagreement between
Democratic and Republican analysts is particularly large during Trump’s presidency, with
Democratic analysts downward-adjusting more than Republicans. Importantly, the rating
behavior of unaffiliated analysts is relatively similar under Democratic and Republican
presidents. An additional pattern that emerges from Figure 2 is that the disagreement between Republican and Democratic analysts is greater during Republican administrations.
This finding is consistent with existing survey evidence on households, where the partisan
divide in views of the economy is also stronger under Republican presidents (e.g., Pew
Research Center (2019)).

4

Empirical Strategy

Measuring the influence of political alignment with the president on rating decisions by
credit analysts is empirically challenging. If analysts were randomly assigned to firms and
agencies and party affiliation was randomly assigned to analysts, we could measure the
and to dropping rather than winsorizing outliers (Panel C).

12

effect of partisan perception by comparing the rating actions of analysts who are aligned
with the president’s party with the rating actions of analysts who are not aligned with
the president’s party. However, analysts are unlikely randomly assigned to firms. Analysts
with a certain political ideology could specialize in sectors or firms whose fundamentals are
directly affected by presidential policies (see Figure 1a for the distribution of analyst party
affiliation across sectors). For example, Republican analysts could be more likely to rate
firms whose value increases under the policies of Republican presidents and decreases under
the policies of Democratic presidents (e.g., oil and gas companies), and therefore downgrade
more often under Democratic than under Republican administrations. In the presence of
such non-random matching, the estimated average difference in the rating actions between
analysts with different party affiliations may not reflect the effect of partisan perception,
but rather differences in the fundamentals of the firms they cover. Second, party affiliation
is not randomly assigned to analysts and may be correlated with other time-invariant
characteristics of the analyst, such as upbringing, education, prior work experience, or
attitudes towards certain industries or firms. Third, credit analysts may not be randomly
assigned to rating agencies. As Figure 1c shows, the mix of Democratic and Republican
analysts varies substantially across agencies. If political cycles correlate with asset returns
(see Pástor and Veronesi (2018)), and rating agencies’ methodologies differ in how they
incorporate economic variables into their models, differences in ratings between agencies
over the political cycles might not be due to partisan perception, but to the non-random
composition of political affiliations across agencies.
Our identification strategy removes the above confounding factors by regressing the
rating change for firm f rated by analyst i in quarter t on firm × quarter fixed effects,
political-affiliation fixed effects, as well as agency × quarter fixed effects:
∆Rif t = αf t + αjt + αp + βIdeological mismatchit + γ 0 Xit + if t ,

(1)

where ∆Rif t refers to the quarterly rating change, j denotes the rating agency, p denotes
the analyst’s political affiliation (Democrat, Republican, Unaffiliated, and Other), and
ideological mismatchit is an indicator equal to 1 if the analyst’s party affiliation does not
match the party of the elected president in quarter t. In a presidential-election quarter, we
define ideological mismatch using the newly elected president, because the election result
is known by the end of the quarter. Xit refers to analyst-level controls, including analyst
tenure and the number of firms rated by the analyst.
In our baseline definition, ideological mismatch is equal to 1 for analysts whose party
affiliation does not match the president’s, and zero for analysts whose party affiliation
matches that of the president as well as for unaffiliated analysts. This definition results in
13

37% of the analyst-firm-quarters having misalignment with the president’s party (see Table
1). Due to the inclusion of party-affiliation fixed effects in all regressions, the coefficient on
ideological mismatch will be identified only based on Republican and Democratic analysts,
because their party switches at least once from aligned to misaligned with the president.16
The main benefit of including unaffiliated analysts in our analysis is that it allows us to
estimate the fixed effects and coefficients on control variables more precisely. In Internet
Appendix Table IA.5, we show we obtain very similar results if we only keep Democratic
and Republican analysts.
We study rating changes instead of rating levels for two main reasons. First, rating
changes allow us to better isolate the decisions of the current analyst from other confounding factors, such as the influence of the previous analyst. Second, rating levels are sticky
because analysts do not adjust them very frequently. We will show in Section 5.3.1 that
in levels, the effect is there but takes some time to show up, consistent with the view that
there is slow adjustment of ratings.
By including firm × quarter fixed effects, we are effectively comparing analysts who
cover the same firm at the same point in time. Hence, our results cannot be driven by
analysts with ideological mismatch covering different types of firms. Including agency
× quarter fixed effects addresses concerns that different methodologies of credit agencies
might be correlated with the political cycle during our sample period. Furthermore, we
present specifications where we include agency × sector instead of agency × quarter fixed effects to address any concerns related to agencies with different compositions of Democratic
and Republican analysts having different rating models for different industries. Finally,
our estimator of partisan perception is, by construction, orthogonal to the baseline effect
of the analyst’s political affiliation, and hence to a number of unobserved time-invariant
analyst characteristics that may be correlated with party affiliation. Thus, our estimator
of partisan perception captures how the behavior of Democratic and Republican analysts
changes depending on whether their preferred party occupies the White House, and not
time-invariant characteristics correlated with party affiliation.
Although it would also be possible to control for unobserved analyst heterogeneity via
analyst fixed effects, what heterogeneity analyst fixed effects capture that is (i) correlated
with our measure of ideological mismatch and (ii) orthogonal to party affiliation is unclear.
Because including analyst fixed effects is much more demanding on the data — doing so
would require estimating more than 500 additional parameters — we have chosen to include only party-affiliation fixed effects in our baseline, while reporting a specification with
16

Because unaffiliated analysts and analysts with other party affiliations never change from aligned to
misaligned with the president, whether we code them as aligned or misaligned does not affect our estimate
of β in equation (1).

14

analyst fixed effects in our robustness tests in Table 3. Our main results are qualitatively
and quantitatively very similar if we include analyst fixed effects.
We double-cluster standard errors at the analyst and firm level throughout the analysis.
In Table 3, we show our results are robust to triple clustering by firm, analyst, and quarter.

4.1

Can Individual Analysts Influence Ratings?

A necessary condition for analysts’ political ideology to affect ratings is that the ratings
process needs to provide sufficient room for individual analysts to affect the rating of an
issuer. Whether individual analysts can affect ratings is not obvious given that the final rating decision is taken by a committee. Upon receiving a rating application from a
potential customer, rating agencies typically assign a lead analyst to the ratings process.
The lead analyst meets with the customer to discuss relevant information, which she subsequently analyzes with the help of an analytical team. She then proposes a rating and
provides a rationale to the rating committee, which consists of a number of credit-risk professionals determined by the analyst in conjunction with the committee chair. Once the
rating committee has reached its decision, the rating agency communicates the outcome
to the customer and publishes a press release.17 The ratings process therefore provides
ample opportunities for individual analysts to influence the final rating, even if the final
decision is taken by a committee. Lead analysts guide meetings with the customer, request and interpret information, and play a key role in the rating committee by proposing
and defending a rating recommendation based on their own analysis. In addition, the
rating-committee chair serves a special role by influencing the composition of the rating
committee and acting as the moderator.
How much individual analysts are able to influence ratings is ultimately an empirical
question. Fracassi, Petry, and Tate (2016) attribute a substantial part of the variation
in corporate bond ratings to individual analysts: They explain 30% of the within-firm
variation in ratings. For securitized finance ratings, Griffin and Tang (2012) provide evidence that CDO ratings by a major credit rating agency frequently deviated from the
agency’s main model, reflecting room for subjectivity in the ratings process. In addition,
Kisgen, Nickerson, Osborn, and Reuter (2019) and Kempf (2020) document that the rating decisions of lead analysts and committee chairs predict both internal promotions and
17

See Fracassi, Petry, and Tate (2016) and https://www.moodys.com/sites/products/
ProductAttachments/mis_ratings_process.pdf for a description of the ratings process at Moody’s,
https://www.standardandpoors.com/en_AU/delegate/getPDF?articleId=2053416&type=COMMENTS&
subType=REGULATORY for the ratings process at S&P, and https://www.fitchratings.com/site/dam/
jcr:b05b5bd2-0443-4338-815b-81a809840e65/Form%2025-101F1%20Item%205.pdf for the ratings
process at Fitch.

15

external hiring by investment banks, suggesting that, by revealed preference, these parties
see valuable information in analysts’ rating decisions.

4.2

Why Do Corporate Credit Analysts Provide a Useful Setting?

Corporate credit rating analysts provide a suitable setting to study the effect of partisan
perception on economic behavior in a high-stakes environment for a number of reasons.
First, it is one of the few settings where decisions can be linked to the identity of the
individual decision maker. Second, credit ratings have been shown to affect firms’ cost of
financing (Fracassi, Petry, and Tate (2016)), as well as their financial policy and investment decisions (Chernenko and Sunderam (2011); Almeida, Cunha, Ferreira, and Restrepo
(2017)). Hence, the views and actions of credit rating analysts have real consequences for
the rated firms. Third, because multiple analysts can rate the same firm at the same point
in time, we are able to control for differences in the type of firms that analysts rate. Finally, one of the challenges of addressing our question is that we need to match individual
analysts to voter registration data. The geographical location of credit analysts is very
concentrated in New York City and Chicago, which reduces problems related to heterogeneous data availability and data quality in the voter registration records across different
U.S. states.

5

Analysts’ Partisan Perception and Credit Rating
Actions

This section presents our main results. We first document that partisan perception has a
significant influence on analysts’ credit rating decisions, by showing that analysts whose
party affiliation does not match the president’s are more likely to adjust ratings downward. This result is robust to various measures of rating changes, sample restrictions, and
estimation methods. Next, we focus on presidential elections. We document a sharp divergence in the rating actions of Democratic and Republican analysts during the month of
the 2016 presidential election, with Democratic analysts downward adjusting ratings more
than Republican analysts.

16

5.1

Main Results

We estimate the regression from equation (1) with different sets of fixed effects and report
the results in Table 2. Specifically, we regress quarterly ratings changes on ideological
mismatch, an indicator equal to 1 if the analyst’s party does not match the current president’s, and 0 otherwise, as well as on controls. We include party-affiliation fixed effects in
all regressions.
We begin by including agency fixed effects in addition to firm × quarter fixed effects and
analyst’s party-affiliation fixed effects, because Figure 1 documents pronounced differences
in political ideological across different agencies. The results, reported in column (1), suggest
partisan perception affects analysts’ rating behavior. Specifically, analysts who do not
support the president’s party are more likely to adjust ratings downward by 0.0168 notches
relative to analysts who are aligned with the president’s party. The economic and statistical
significance of the effect of partisan perception remains high as we tighten the identification
to include agency × sector (column (2)) as well as agency × quarter fixed effects (column
(3)). The estimate in column (3) suggests an analyst who is misaligned with the president’s
party on average downward-adjusts ratings more by 0.0134 notches. Relative to the average
absolute rating change of 0.118 notches, this change is an economically sizable increase of
11.4%. Over a four-year presidency (i.e., 16 quarters), these estimates imply analysts who
are misaligned with the president downward-adjust the rating of the average firm by 0.21
(=0.0134 × 16) notches more than aligned analysts.18 As a reference point, a one-notch
downgrade would be equivalent to moving from A to A– on the credit rating scale.
Comparing the effect of the analyst’s political alignment with the president to other
unobserved factors at the analyst level is also informative. We measure the importance of
unobserved analyst factors using the distribution of analyst fixed effects (i.e., we estimate
the regression with analyst fixed effects reported in Table 3, Panel C). We find that the
effect of ideological mismatch is roughly equivalent to moving from the 50th to the 75th
percentile of the analyst fixed-effects distribution.
The effect of partisan perception that we document is comparable to other non-fundamental factors influencing information production at rating agencies identified in the literature. For example, the effect of competition among rating agencies documented by Becker
and Milbourn (2011) is equal to 0.19 notches, the revolving-door effect documented by
Cornaggia, Cornaggia, and Xia (2016) is equal to 0.23 notches, and the home-bias effect
documented by Cornaggia, Cornaggia, and Israelsen (2019) is equal to 0.10 notches on
18

Since coefficient β in equation (1) captures the difference between misaligned and aligned analysts
during the average quarter, we need to multiply by 16 quarters in order to obtain the cumulative effect
over a presidential term.

17

average.19
Our set of high-dimensional fixed effects eliminates a lot of potentially confounding
variation and allows us to overcome some of the central challenges in empirical studies of
partisan behavior. Most importantly, firm × quarter fixed effects address the possibility
that the relationship between partisan perception and rating actions may be confounded
by non-random matching of analysts to firms. Second, by including agency × quarter fixed
effects, we can remove any differences in rating methodologies across rating agencies. Third,
by including party-affiliation fixed effects, we are removing any time-invariant differences
across individuals with different party affiliations, and can isolate changes in their rating
behavior as the president changes.
In Internet Appendix Table IA.5, we repeat our main analysis but report the effects
separately for Democratic and Republic analysts (Panel A) as well as for Democratic,
Republican, and unaffiliated analysts (Panel B). In Panel A, the coefficient on Democrat
captures the difference in the average rating adjustment between Democratic and Republican analysts under Republican presidents, which is equal to 0.0268 notches (column (3)).
Under Democratic presidents, the difference between Democratic and Republican analysts
is equal to -0.0031 notches (=0.0268-0.0299) and statistically insignificant. Hence, consistent with Figure 2, we find the difference between Democratic and Republican analysts is
more pronounced under Republican presidents than under Democratic presidents. Moreover, Panel B further shows Democratic analysts behave more similarly to unaffiliated
analysts, because the difference between Democratic and unaffiliated analysts is almost
never statistically significant.
A potential concern could be that our ideological mismatch variable picks up the effect of other analyst characteristics that may be correlated with party affiliation. Note
such unobservable characteristics would pose a threat to our identification only if they can
explain differential behavior under Democratic versus Republican administrations. What
characteristics that might be is not obvious. To still directly address this potential issue,
Table IA.6 in the Internet Appendix repeats the analysis from Table 2, while including additional analyst characteristics as well as their interaction with an indicator for Democratic
presidents. We include characteristics that are known to be important predictors of political affiliation: ethnicity, gender, and age. Across all three specifications, the coefficient
estimate on ideological mismatch is remarkably stable.
19

This comparison has to be taken with a grain of salt, because the various studies differ in their
econometric specification and empirical setting.

18

5.2

Presidential Elections

5.2.1

All Presidential Elections

To further support the interpretation that our results reflect the effect of analysts’ partisan perception, we conduct an event study around presidential elections. We focus on
presidential elections where the party of the president changes (i.e., the 2000, 2008, and
2016 elections) in order to isolate the effect of a change in ideological alignment on rating
changes. Specifically, we estimate the following regression:
∆Rif t = αf t + αjt +

τX
=+4

βτ M ismatchi,τ =0 × Dtτ + if t ,

(2)

τ =−4

where M ismatchi,τ =0 refers to an indicator equal to 1 for analysts who switch from aligned
to misaligned with the president around the election in τ = 0, and Dtτ stand for calendar
quarter dummies. We restrict the analysis to Democratic and Republican analysts only.
αf t and αjt refer to firm × quarter and agency × quarter fixed effects, respectively.
Figure 3 plots the results. We find small and insignificant differences between aligned
and misaligned analysts during the quarters leading up to the election. During the election
quarter, we then see a striking and statistically significant divergence in rating actions, with
misaligned analysts downward-adjusting rating more by 0.0601 notches. Overall, we see
larger downward adjustments by misaligned analysts in the post-election period (quarters
0 to +4) than in the pre-election period (quarters –4 to –1), with the difference being
statistically significant at the 10% level.
5.2.2

2016 Presidential Election

We next focus on the 2016 election because it is unique — the outcome was unexpected
and the two candidates had very different positions on economic issues. Moreover, unlike
the 2008 election, the 2016 election did not overlap with any major economic events.
Figure 4 plots the difference in the average rating adjustment between Democratic and
Republican analysts around the 2016 election. We estimate the same regression as in
equation (2), but use monthly rather than quarterly data in order to better isolate the
effect of the election.
The difference in the average rating adjustment between Democrats and Republicans
is close to zero prior to the election. The difference then spikes significantly during the
election month, November 2016, indicating Democratic analysts downward-adjusted firms
more by 0.034 notches. Despite the data limitations related to this event study and the
fact that rating changes are infrequent events, the results indicate a significant change in
19

the rating behavior between Democratic and Republican analysts around the 2016 election.
We see a small reversal during February 2017, where Democratic analysts upward-adjust
ratings slightly more than Republican analysts, although the difference is not statistically
significant. When we expand the event window to span the period from 2015Q1 to 2018Q1,
we do not find that this reversal continues. Internet Appendix Table IA.11 reports the
results from this analysis that uses quarterly data. We find that Democratic analysts, on
average, downward-adjust credit ratings by 0.0245 notches more than Republicans in the
post-Trump period relative to the pre-Trump period.
Due to the unexpected outcome of the election, the event study allows us to rule out
several alternative stories. Given the evidence that economic conditions can influence voting behavior (see Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier (2000) for a review of the relevant literature), a
potential concern about our main analysis could be that the political affiliation of analysts
might change in response to presidential policies or economic conditions. The event study
mitigates such reverse-causality concerns, given that political attitudes of the analysts are
unlikely to change discontinuously during the election month. It also makes it unlikely that
we are picking up disagreement about other economic events unrelated to the presidential
election, because the election month did not coincide with other major events.

5.3

Robustness Tests

Table 3 presents additional robustness tests for the main result in Table 2 and shows our
main result is robust to a battery of additional tests. Unless otherwise mentioned, we report
results for the specification in Table 2, column (3), and suppress all control variables for
brevity.
In Panel A, we alter the definition of the dependent variable. To mitigate the concern
that our main result could be driven by outliers in the dependent variable, we modify
the rating-change variable to take only three possible values: +1 for downgrades, 0 for no
change, and −1 for upgrades. The result is very similar and the statistical significance, if
anything, increases. When we separate the propensity to upgrade versus downgrade, we
find the effect is coming from both sides: Analysts who are not aligned with the White
House are both more likely to downgrade and less likely to upgrade.
Panel B shows results for alternative definitions of mismatch. For example, we use a
definition of mismatch that uses only party-affiliation information from presidential elections, as opposed to all elections. We also test a definition of mismatch that complements
our party affiliation from voter registration records with party information from analysts’
financial contributions to political parties, candidates, and committees.20 Both alternative
20

Data on financial contributions are obtained from Stanford’s Database on Ideology, Money in Politics,

20

definitions of ideological mismatch yield results that are similar to our baseline.
In Panel C, we assess the robustness of our results with respect to alternative estimation
methods. Triple-clustering by firm, analyst, and quarter leads to smaller standard errors.
We also verify that we find similar results if we estimate the regression in equation (1)
at the agency-firm-quarter level instead of at the analyst-firm-quarter level; that is, we
compute the average ideological mismatch across all analysts from the same rating agency
covering the same firm at the same point in time. Next, we estimate a weighted regression,
where weights are proportional to the total book assets of the rated firm. We also show our
results are robust to including analyst fixed effects. The latter result is important, because
it reinforces our argument that we are capturing the effect of partisan perception separately
from time-invariant characteristics of the analyst, which may be correlated with party
affiliation. Moreover, our results are robust when we replace agency × quarter fixed effects
with agency × sector × quarter fixed effects, to address the possibility that rating agencies
with different compositions of Democratic and Republican analysts might use different
rating methodologies in different sectors across Democratic or Republican presidencies.
Furthermore, our results do not change when we introduce NBER recession interacted
with party-affiliation fixed effects. The latter mitigates the potential concern that our
baseline results reflect a differential response of Democratic and Republican analysts to
recessions, as opposed to a differential response to different White House administrations.
In Internet Appendix Table IA.10, we also test whether ideological mismatch with
the party that controls the U.S. Senate or the U.S. House of Representatives matters
for rating decisions. In column (1), we find analysts misaligned with the party majority
in the Senate downward-adjust ratings more. We do not find a significant effect from
misalignment with the party majority in the House of Representatives (column (2)). When
we add misalignment with the president as an additional control in columns (3) and (4),
neither ideological mismatch with the Senate nor with the House of Representatives has
incremental explanatory power. This insignificance of the party in control of Congress
is consistent with existing studies of political cycles and stock returns (Santa-Clara and
Valkanov (2003); Pástor and Veronesi (2018)), as well as with prior studies of political cycles
and GDP growth (Blinder and Watson (2016)). We do not have a complete explanation for
why disagreement with the president matters, whereas disagreement with Congress does
not matter incrementally. We speculate this result could be driven by the party of the
U.S. president being more salient to analysts than the identity of the party that controls
Congress. According to a Gallup poll from 2014, only 41% of the surveyed registered
and Elections (DIME) (see Bonica (2016)). We are able to match 57 analysts to a federal or statelevel contribution. In the Internet Appendix, we provide additional information regarding the merging
procedure.

21

voters were able to correctly identify the majority in both the Senate and the House (Saad
(2014)). Although this percentage could be different in the population of credit rating
analysts, it still highlights that the party of the president is more salient to voters than
the party majority in Congress. Moreover, only 32% of registered voters prefer a one-party
control of Congress (Jones (2014)), indicating they do not have a strong preference for
their own party controlling Congress.
Finally, Internet Appendix Figure IA.2 plots our coefficient estimates after sequentially
excluding each GICS sector that represents at least 5% of our total observations. The
coefficient estimate is remarkably consistent across all specifications, suggesting our main
result is not driven by a single sector. Moreover, in Internet Appendix Figure IA.3, we find
the effect of partisan perception is fairly consistent across issuers of different credit quality.
5.3.1

Robustness to Using Rating Levels

We also assess the robustness of our main results to studying rating levels instead of rating
changes. Figure 5 repeats the same analysis as in Figure 3, but uses the quarter-end rating
level as the dependent variable. The figure shows a change in the difference in rating levels
between aligned and misaligned analysts after the election, as it is evident from the change
in slope following the election. Moreover, consistent with Figure 3, we observe that the
effect on the rating level is gradual. It takes a few quarters quarters – until t = 2 – for
the difference in rating levels to switch sign. The difference between the average difference
in rating levels is statistically significant at the 10% level if we compare the average in
quarters 0 to +4 to the average in quarters –4 to –1. It is statistically significant at the
5% level if we allow for a gradual response and exclude quarters 0 and +1.
We also study the effect of alignment with the president on rating levels over the full
sample period. We use the same specification as in Internet Appendix Table IA.5 and
regress the quarter-end rating on an indicator for Democratic analysts and an interaction
between Democratic analysts and Democratic presidents. Internet Appendix Table IA.7
presents the results. Using the estimates in Panel A, column (3), we observe that, relative to Republican analysts, Democratic analysts are 0.137 notches more positive under
Democratic presidents than under Republican presidents (see coefficient on the interaction
term Democrat × DemPresident). The estimated effect of 0.137 notches is lower than our
baseline estimate of 0.21 notches mainly due to the slow adjustment of ratings. As we show
in Panel B, the coefficient gets closer to our baseline effect of 0.21 notches once we remove
quarters close to the election (here we remove quarters 0 and +1). Specifically, we obtain
an effect of 0.184 notches in Panel B, column (3).
In sum, these results highlight the robustness of our main results to using rating levels.
22

5.4

Heterogeneity across Analysts

We next test for heterogeneous effects across analysts. Specifically, we investigate whether
the effect of political alignment with the president is more pronounced among analysts who
are politically active.
In Table 4, we test three alternative proxies for political activeness, based on how
frequently the analyst votes. First, we identify analysts who have voted in a primary or
midterm election. Second, we compute the average time gap (in quarters) between the
elections in which the analyst votes. Third, we create an indicator variable Frequent voter
that is equal to 1 for analysts who either have voted in a midterm or primary election, or
for whom the the average election gap is in the bottom quartile across all analysts within
a given quarter indicator is equal to 1, and 0 otherwise (column (3)). Because some of
these measures are correlated with voter age, we also control for the interaction between
voter age and ideological mismatch. All three measures indicate the effect of partisan
bias is substantially stronger for analysts who vote more frequently. The importance of
voting frequency supports the interpretation that our results reflect differences in partisan
perception, and further raises the bar for alternative explanations.

6

Price and Real Effects of Analysts’ Partisan Perception

Our results so far show partisan perception affects corporate credit ratings. The goal of
this section is to gauge the potential consequences of the main result on firms’ cost of
financing and investment decisions. First, regarding price effects, we document that firms
that are rated by misaligned analysts experience a greater reduction in their stock prices
and a larger increase in their bond yields compared to firms rated by aligned analysts.
Second, to explore the effect of partisan perception on firm investment, we examine the
difference in the investment policies of firms rated by aligned versus misaligned analysts in
the quarters around presidential elections.

6.1

Stock Prices

A number of studies have documented the reaction of common stock prices to credit rating
changes. The general conclusion of this literature, starting with the work by Holthausen
and Leftwich (1986), is that downgrades are associated with significant negative abnormal
stock returns, even after eliminating observations that contain potentially contaminating

23

concurrent news releases. Little evidence supports the assertion that upgrade announcements trigger significant abnormal returns.
We replicate these findings for our sample of rating-change announcements. Retaining
all rating actions by analysts whom we can match to a voter record, we compute abnormal
stock returns around the date of the rating change reported in Moody’s DRD, S&P RatingXpress, and Mergent, respectively. Abnormal returns are calculated using the Fama and
French (1993) and Carhart (1997) model estimated over trading days (-300,-50) relative
to the rating change. In Figure 6, we plot the abnormal returns in the 21 days around
the upgrade and downgrade announcements in our sample. We also remove any rating
changes where the firm makes an earnings announcement or an M&A announcement inside the (-10,+10) window.21 Consistent with prior studies (e.g., Holthausen and Leftwich
(1986); Hand, Holthausen, and Leftwich (1992)), we find large negative average abnormal
returns (-1.9%) in the three days around rating downgrades, and very small abnormal returns (0.2%) around upgrades after excluding concurrent events. Further consistent with
prior evidence, we also find a substantial anticipation effect in stock prices prior to downgrades, indicating either information leakage or deteriorating creditworthiness prior to the
downgrade.
Given that we have established that analysts whose party affiliation does not match the
president’s downward-adjust more frequently, a remaining question is how well the market
is able to “correct” for analysts’ partisan perception. In other words, is the stock market
reaction to downgrades muted when they are issued by misaligned analysts? Figure 6
suggests it is not. The overall pattern in the cumulative abnormal returns is very similar
for analysts who are aligned and misaligned with the president.22
Why do stock prices not differentiate more between the downgrades by partisan analysts? Although a complete answer to this question is beyond the scope of this paper,
we suggest at least two possible reasons. First, because access to registered voter lists in
Illinois, New York City, and New Jersey is limited to the purpose of political campaigns
and education, analysts’ party affiliation is not public information and may therefore not
be fully reflected in the stock price. Second, in the presence of rating-based regulatory
frictions, downgrades may affect the supply of capital to firms, even if the rating change
itself does not reveal any new information to the market.23
21

Earnings-announcement dates are obtained from IBES and M&A announcement dates from SDC
Platinum.
22
Although Figure 6 indicates slightly higher cumulative abnormal returns for misaligned analysts over
a three-day window around rating downgrades, this difference disappears once we control for agency and
calendar month effects, as we do in Internet Appendix Table IA.12.
23
See Sangiorgi and Spatt (2017) for an excellent review of the literature on the regulatory role of credit
ratings.

24

Using the cumulative abnormal returns estimated above as a measure of the change
in the firm’s market capitalization induced by rating changes, we next examine whether
firms rated by misaligned analysts experience, on average, a greater reduction in their
market capitalization. We aggregate the three-day and seven-day cumulative abnormal
returns around rating changes within a given rating agency, firm, and quarter, and replace
them with zero when no rating change occurs in a given quarter. We then reestimate
the regression in equation (1), after replacing the dependent variable with the cumulative
abnormal returns around rating changes during the quarter.
Table 5 presents the results for cumulative abnormal returns measured over two event
windows, (–1,+1) (columns (1) and (2)), and (–3,+3) (columns (3) and (4)), respectively.
In columns (2) and (4), we exclude rating changes with a concurrent corporate event in the
event window. We find that, in any given quarter after excluding corporate events, firms
rated by misaligned analysts lose 3.2–3.9 basis points more of their market capitalization
when they are rated by a misaligned analyst, depending on whether cumulative abnormal
returns are measured over a (–1,+1) or a (–3,+3) event window. Because these losses
accumulate over time, they are economically sizable: Over a four-year political cycle, a
firm rated by a misaligned analyst loses 0.52% (=0.0322×16) to 0.62% (=0.0386×16) more
of its market capitalization if it is rated by a misaligned analyst as opposed to an analyst
who is politically aligned with the president. For the average-sized firm in our sample, this
difference amounts to a total dollar loss of $89 million–$107 million.
We believe the estimated losses above likely represent an underestimation of the true
losses in market capitalization due to analysts’ partisan perception. First, although voter
registration records provide a very useful proxy for analysts’ political-party affiliation, they
surely come with measurement error. Classical measurement will bias our estimates of the
effect of partisan bias downward. Second, if rating changes are partially anticipated by the
market, as Figure 6 suggests, the cumulative abnormal returns during the three or seven
days around the rating change will underestimate the actual change in the firm’s market
capitalization due to a rating change. Our estimates above should therefore be interpreted
as a lower bound on the magnitude of the stock price effect of analysts’ partisan perception.

6.2

Bond Yields

We next turn to investigate the changes in bond yields around rating changes. We obtain
daily yield to maturity and yield spreads for bonds issued by our sample of issuers from
TRACE (see section 3 for a more detailed description on how we process the TRACE
data). Yield spreads are computing using the closest maturity Treasury bond. Because
bonds trade less frequently than stocks, we follow Hand, Holthausen, and Leftwich (1992)
25

and compute the change in the bond yield (spread) around a rating action as the difference
between the bond yield (spread) from the first day following the event and the yield (spread)
on the most recent trading day prior to the event. For example, if a bond trades on days
–3, –2, +1, and +2, the yield (spread) change is calculated from transaction prices on day
–2 and day +1. We restrict the sample to bonds that are traded at least once in the 30
days prior and in the 30 days post the rating-change announcement. If multiple bonds of
the same issuer are traded on the same day, we select a maximum of five bonds with the
highest trading volume. In the analysis that follows, yield (spread) changes for each bond
for a given firm are equally weighted and the average is treated as a single observation.
First, in Internet Appendix Table IA.13, we investigate whether yield spreads respond
differently to a rating change depending on whether the rating change was initiated by an
aligned or misaligned analyst. Consistent with our findings for stock returns, we do not
find significant differences in the yield spread reaction. Moreover, Table 5, Panel B, mirrors
our analysis of abnormal stock returns by examining whether firms rated by misaligned
analysts experience on average larger increases in bond yields (spreads) due to rating
changes. We first compute the average change in bond yields around the rating actions
in our sample.24 Next, we replace the bond-yield change with zero in quarters where no
rating change occurs. Finally, we reestimate the regression in equation (1), after replacing
the dependent variable with the yield change around rating changes during the quarter. In
columns (3) and (4), we repeat the same procedure, using the yield spread change around
the rating action rather than the yield change. Our most conservative estimate in column
(4) suggests firms rated by a misaligned analyst experience an increase of 5.9 basis points
(=0.3680 × 16) over a four-year term relative to firms rated by aligned analysts.
This point estimate indicates a 28.1 (=5.9/0.21) basis-point increase in bond yields for a
one-notch rating change. Our estimate is smaller than the estimates from Almeida, Cunha,
Ferreira, and Restrepo (2017), who exploit exogenous variation in corporate ratings due
to rating agencies’ sovereign ceiling policies and find a 0.7-notch decrease in credit ratings
is associated with an increase in bond yields of 34 basis points over three months.25 Our
estimate is closer to causal estimates from the U.S. municipal bond market: Cornaggia,
Cornaggia, and Israelsen (2017) exploit exogenous variation in municipal bond ratings due
to a recalibration of Moody’s rating scale and find a one-notch upgrade is, on average,
associated with a decrease in bond yields of 12 to 18 basis points.
For the same reasons as we discussed in section 6.1, our estimated effects on bond yields
24

In case there are multiple rating actions within a given agency, firm, and quarter, we sum up the
average change in bond yields around each rating action.
25
A potential explanation for this difference could be the different geographical focus of our study:
whereas we focus on U.S. issuers, Almeida, Cunha, Ferreira, and Restrepo (2017) study an international
sample of issuers.

26

likely represent a lower bound for the true effect of partisan perception. By focusing on
a relatively narrow window around the rating change, we are missing some of the sizable
anticipation in bond yields prior to the rating change. In Internet Appendix Table IA.14,
we further show that firms rated by misaligned analysts issue new bonds at higher yields
than otherwise similar firms rated by aligned analysts. This set of results is less well
identified, because we cannot include firm × quarter fixed effects as we do in the analysis
above. Instead, we estimate a regression with lagged median rating × quarter fixed effects
and control as best as we can for observable firm characteristics. Unfortunately, we cannot
include firm fixed effects as we have very few repeated issuers. In terms of magnitude,
the yield spreads of new bonds issued by firms with majority misaligned analysts are 12
basis points higher than yields on new bonds issued by firms with majority aligned analysts.
These results are useful because they provide direct evidence that firms rated by misaligned
analysts experience an increase in their cost of borrowing.

6.3

Firm Investment

Finally, we test whether partisan perception influences firm investment. In Figure 7, we
examine whether firms rated by misaligned analysts experience, on average, a decrease
in investment around the election of a new president. As in Figure 3, we focus again on
presidential elections where the party of the president changes (i.e., the 2000, 2008, and
2016 elections) in order to isolate the effect of a change in analysts’ ideological alignment
with the president on firm investment. Because investment is observed at the firm-quarter
level, we compute a firm-quarter-level measure of ideological mismatch, which is the share
of misaligned analysts covering the firm. Specifically, we estimate the following regression:
Ln(Capexf t ) = αf + αt +

τX
=+4

βτ M ismatchf t,τ =0 × Dtτ + f t ,

(3)

τ =−4

where M ismatchf t,τ =0 is the share of misaligned analysts in a given quarter, where alignment is computed based on the party of the president who is elected in τ = 0. To compute the share of misaligned analysts, in each firm-quarter we first compute the share of
Democratic (Republican) analysts rating the firm, while treating unaffiliated analysts as in
between Democrats and Republicans. Around the 2000 and 2016 election, we use the share
of Democratic analysts as the share of misaligned analysts, and around the 2008 election,
we use the share of Republican analysts as the share of misaligned analysts.26 Ln(Capex)
is the logarithm of the firm’s quarterly capital expenditures. αf and αt refer to firm and
26

In unreported results, we find qualitatively similar results if, rather than using the continuous share
of misaligned analysts, we sort firms into terciles or quartiles based on their share of misaligned analysts.

27

quarter fixed effects, respectively.
Figure 7 shows a strong decline in capital expenditures around the election for firms
that are rated by analysts who are misaligned with the newly elected president relative to
firms rated by aligned analysts. The difference between the average difference in investment
levels post election (quarters 0 to +4) and the average difference in investment levels preelection (quarters –1 to –4) is statistically significant at the 5% level (see column (1) of
Table IA.15 in the Internet Appendix). In terms of economic magnitude, the decrease
in investment by firms who transition from 0% misaligned analysts to 100% misaligned
analysts is equal to 10.2%, which corresponds to a decrease of $17 million for the average
firm in our sample. This suggests that firms are curtailing capital expenditures when they
are rated by misaligned analysts. Moreover, in Internet Appendix Table IA.15, columns (2)
and (3), we show the robustness of the result when sorting firms into terciles or quartiles
based on their share of misaligned analysts. In unreported results, we also repeat the
analysis using the full sample and find qualitatively similar results, although they are not
statistically significant.
A potential concern about the analysis above is that firms rated by aligned versus misaligned analysts could differ on unobserved dimensions, which could lead to a differential
response to a presidential election even in the absence of differential rating actions. This
concern is difficult to address, because it would require exogeneity in the assignment of analysts to firms. Although the analysis of firm investment has more shortcomings compared
to our previous tests, which include firm × quarter fixed effects, we nevertheless find the
above analysis useful because it provides strong suggestive evidence that the differences in
analysts’ rating behavior documented above have real consequences. This finding is also
in line with prior evidence in the literature that credit ratings affect firm investment (e.g.,
Almeida, Cunha, Ferreira, and Restrepo (2017)).

6.4

Analyst Accuracy

Our main results suggest analysts make different rating adjustments for the same firm
at the same point in time depending on whether the White House is controlled by the
party with which they are affiliated. Because, by construction, these rating differences
are orthogonal to firm fundamentals, we would expect partisan perceptions to also affect
credit rating accuracy. What we cannot disentangle based on the existing results is which
of the two groups of analysts – those with and without ideological mismatch – is relatively
more “right” or “wrong.” In other words, whether the analysts who are aligned with
the president’s party downward-adjust by too little, or whether those who are misaligned
downward-adjust by too much, or both is unclear.
28

Finding suitable measures of analyst accuracy is challenging for a number of reasons.
First, no clear benchmark of analysts who are not subject to partisan perception exists.
Using unaffiliated or unregistered analysts as a “neutral” benchmark might be tempting,
but both groups suffer from substantial measurement error. In particular, given the location
of the analysts in our sample (Chicago and New York), the chance that an unaffiliated or
unregistered analyst is leaning Democratic is high, which would bias us toward finding
that Democratic analysts are less biased. Second, the firm’s true probability of default and
expected loss given default are unobservable, and traditional metrics of rating accuracy
that are based on ex-post default rates by rating category rely on a large number of sample
events in order to be meaningful. Third, due to the causal effect of credit ratings (see
Almeida, Cunha, Ferreira, and Restrepo (2017)), ex-post firm outcomes reflect both, firm
fundamentals in the absence of credit ratings, as well as the causal effect of the credit rating.
Fourth, determining systematic differences across analysts in their ex-post rating accuracy
across Democratic and Republican presidents requires a long time-series of election cycles.
To at least partially address these challenges, we present two distinct tests of analyst
accuracy. To rule out that our coding of unaffiliated analysts influences the results, we
restrict our analysis below to Democratic and Republican analysts. Our first measure builds
on work by Fracassi, Petry, and Tate (2016) and Kisgen, Nickerson, Osborn, and Reuter
(2019), by capturing the correlation between rating changes and future movements in yield
spreads. Intuitively, if the analyst issues a downgrade (∆Rif t > 0), and subsequently credit
spreads on the firm’s bonds increase (decrease), she would be considered more accurate
(inaccurate). We operationalize this idea by regressing future changes in yield spreads
(sf,t+h − sf t ) on the analyst’s current-quarter change in the rating (∆Rif t ), ideological
mismatch (Mit ), an interaction term, and controls:
sf,t+h − sf t = αjt + αp + β1 ∆Rif t + β2 ∆Rif t × Mit + β3 Mit + γ 0 Xf t + if t .

(4)

We control for agency × quarter and party-affiliation fixed effects as in our baseline regression. Because we are unable to include firm × quarter fixed effects as yield spreads do not
vary within firm-quarter, we include median lagged rating × quarter fixed effects as well
as controls for observable firm characteristics (Xf t ). A positive (negative) coefficient β2 in
equation (4) would indicate higher (lower) accuracy for mismatched analysts.
Table 6, Panel A, reports the results. We vary the horizon over which the future
change in yield spreads is measured from 4 to 8 to 12 quarters. Across all horizons, we
find the interaction between the current-quarter rating change and ideological mismatch is
negative, indicating lower accuracy for misaligned analysts. However, when movements in
yield spreads are measured over 12 quarters, we no longer find statistical significance, which
29

could be due to the fact that we lose more observations. Taken together, the results imply
that rating changes by ideologically mismatched analysts are less positively correlated with
future changes in spreads.
An important drawback of spread-based accuracy measures is that credit spreads may
be directly affected by analysts’ rating actions. In particular, Almeida, Cunha, Ferreira,
and Restrepo (2017) show bond yields continue to increase for several months following
a downgrade. To somewhat mitigate this problem, our second measure builds on existing work by Kempf (2020) and Jiang, Kumar, and Law (2016) by measuring analyst
(in)accuracy based on future revisions of the previously assigned rating. Specifically, we
measure accuracy as –1 times the absolute difference between the current rating and the
prevailing rating 4, 8, or 12 quarters in the future. The intuition behind this measure is
that larger revisions in the future indicate less accurate ratings.
Table 6, Panel B, reports the results from regressing this measure of accuracy on analysts’ ideological mismatch. All specifications include agency × quarter fixed effects, firm
× quarter fixed effects, and party-affiliation fixed effects. Across all horizons, we observe
that ideologically mismatched analysts are less accurate, because their ratings need to be
revised more in the future. The point estimate in column (3) indicates ideological mismatch
reduces analyst accuracy by 0.102 notches, which corresponds to 11.2% of the mean in analyst accuracy measured over 12 quarters. These results therefore confirm the conclusion
from our first test that misaligned analysts are less accurate.
To sum up, the results in Table 6 suggest analysts who do not support the president
tend to be less accurate. Measuring rating accuracy using yield spreads and deviations
between the initial rating and subsequent ratings has important advantages. First and
foremost, it does not require a large number of ratings for each individual analyst in order
to be meaningful. Second, it allows us to capture smaller changes in the expected default
probability that may not always lead to a default. Third, to the extent that future rating
revisions or changes in spreads are driven by the arrival of new information, this information
would affect the accuracy measure of all analysts rating the same firm at the same point
in time.
Although these tests allow us to address some of the empirical challenges associated
with establishing differences in accuracy that we highlighted above, some important caveats
remain. First, determining systematic differences across analysts in their ex-post rating
accuracy under Democratic and Republican presidents with sufficient confidence requires
a much longer time-series of election cycles than our current sample period. Second, and
perhaps more importantly, any test of analyst accuracy involves a comparison of ex-ante
credit ratings with ex-post outcomes (e.g., defaults, rating revisions, or credit spreads).

30

Due to the causal effect of credit ratings, ex-post outcomes reflect both firm fundamentals
in the absence of the credit rating, and the causal effect of the rating. Hence, one of the
crucial advantages of our setting – credit ratings having causal effects on securities prices
and firm policies – is also a drawback when testing analyst accuracy.

7

Mechanisms

So far, we have documented that partisan perception affects credit ratings and has price
and real effects for firms. In this section, we investigate potential channels through which
political-party affiliation influences credit ratings.

7.1

Belief Disagreement

The existing literature has established a strong influence of political alignment with the
U.S. president on households’ beliefs about aggregate economic conditions (e.g., Bartels
(2002); Gerber and Huber (2009); Mian, Sufi, and Khoshkhou (2018)). Thus, a natural
explanation for our results could be that analysts with different party affiliations differ in
their views on how the economic policies and regulations of the U.S. president will affect
the credit risk of firms in the economy.
We provide three pieces of evidence to support the interpretation that our results are
driven by belief disagreement. First, we conduct an online survey of credit rating analysts
and document more pessimistic views on current economic conditions among credit rating
analysts who are not aligned with the president. Second, we find the effect is stronger
when political polarization in views of the economic condition is high. Third, we show that
differences in rating behavior disappear when analysts rate firms whose fundamentals are
less correlated with the U.S. economy and with presidential policies.
7.1.1

Survey Evidence

We first present survey evidence to directly support our interpretation that credit analysts
with different partisan identities differ in their economic beliefs. To keep the survey as
brief as possible and maximize the potential response rate, we focused on the state of
the economy as the object of analyst disagreement. Specifically, we conducted an online
survey of current and former credit rating analysts to ask them about their views on
current economic conditions as well as about their political ideology and demographic
characteristics. We invited alumni of Cornell University Johnson School of Management
and of the University of Chicago Booth School of Business who work or used to work at

31

credit rating agencies, as well as members of the LinkedIn group “Credit Rating Agency
Alumni + Friends,” to participate in the survey. Overall, we invited 402 individuals and
received 91 responses (i.e., we have a response rate of 22.6%).
To infer analysts’ views on current economic conditions, we used the following question
from the Gallup Daily survey: “How would you rate economic conditions in this country
today?” with possible answers of “excellent,” “good,” “fair,” and “poor.” We code the
answers with numerical values from 1 to 4, with 1 indicating the least favorable view and
higher values representing more favorable views. In addition to the question on economic
views, we also asked analysts about the number of years of experience and their demographic characteristics, such as age, gender, ethnicity, and residence. To infer the political
affiliation of the analysts, we used the following question (same as in the Gallup Daily
survey): “In politics, as of today, do you consider yourself a Republican, a Democrat, an
Independent or Unaffiliated?” We classify a respondent’s political affiliation as Republican, Democrat, or Independent (if she responded Independent or Unaffiliated). We drop
17 individuals who indicated they had never worked as credit rating analysts and 17 respondents who did not finish the survey. Our final sample of individuals who responded
to both questions consists of 57 responses.
Table IA.2 in the Internet Appendix presents summary statistics of the respondents.
The vast majority of the respondents had more than 10 years of work experience as credit
rating analysts, with 35% of the respondents having more than 15 years of experience.
Regarding their political affiliation, 39% identified as Democrat, 28% as Republican, and
33% as Independent, which is very similar to the political composition in our main sample.
Also consistent with our main dataset, the majority of the respondents were white and
male.
Table 7 presents the analysis of analysts’ self-reported views on the state of the economy.
We observe that Republicans held a more positive view of current economic conditions than
Independents, whereas Democrats were statistically indistinguishable from Independents.
The difference is robust to including controls for analysts’ demographic characteristics
(gender, age, and ethnicity) and years of experience. The difference between Democrats
and Republicans is statistically significant at the 1% level in column (1) and at the 10%
level in columns (2) and (3), and ranges between 0.366 (column (2)) to 0.432 (column
(1)). Because the survey was conducted under a Republican administration, the results
confirm the findings from prior household surveys that individuals’ views of economic
conditions depend on whether the White House is occupied by their preferred political
party (Bartels (2002); Gaines, Kuklinski, Quirk, Peyton, and Verkuilen (2007); Gerber
and Huber (2009); Curtin (2016); Mian, Sufi, and Khoshkhou (2018)). The economic

32

magnitude of the difference between Democrats and Republican is also plausible. As of
the fourth quarter of 2017, the last quarter with available data from the Gallup Daily
survey, the difference in views of economic conditions between Republican and Democratic
households was 0.57. The difference in our sample of credit rating analysts is somewhat
smaller, but it is still economically large, which is remarkable given that we are studying
a sample of financial experts who have a much higher level of economic sophistication
than the average U.S. household. Moreover, the result provides direct evidence for our
interpretation that the differences in credit rating actions documented above could be
driven by differences in economic beliefs.
7.1.2

Political Polarization in Views of Economic Conditions

To further support the interpretation that our results reflect differences in economic beliefs,
we investigate whether the effect of partisan bias is more pronounced during periods in
which views of economic conditions are more politically polarized in the U.S. population.
To measure political polarization in the views of economic conditions, we use data from
the Gallup Daily survey. To measure the views on current economic conditions, Gallup asks
the following question: “How would you rate economic conditions in this country today —
as excellent, good, only fair, or poor?” The responses to this question are converted into a
numerical scale that ranges from 1 (poor) to 4 (excellent). Our measure of polarization is
the absolute difference in the average economic views between Democrats and Republicans
in a given calendar quarter. We standardize the measure to have a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation of 1.
In Table 8, we interact ideological mismatch with the polarization in economic views
Econ. polarization Gallup. The estimates in column (1) imply the effect of misalignment
with the president increases by 0.011 notches for a one-standard-deviation increase in
polarization, thereby increasing the baseline effect by 83% (=0.0087/0.0105). The result
is robust when we add agency × sector fixed effects (column (2)) and agency × quarter
fixed effects (column (3)). Internet Appendix Table IA.16 shows we find similar results if
we construct our measure of polarization in economic views based on the Michigan Survey.
7.1.3

Firm Heterogeneity

If the main result in this paper is driven by credit analysts with different party affiliations
having different views on how the economic policies of the U.S. president affect the credit
risk of firms in the economy, we should see smaller differences in rating behavior when
analysts rate firms whose fundamentals are less correlated with the U.S. economy. To
measure cyclicality, we compute firms’ equity market betas using the Fama and French
33

(1993) and Carhart (1997) model estimated on monthly returns and a five-year rolling
window. We then interact ideological mismatch with the estimated market beta. Table
9, columns (1) and (2) report the results. We find that the partisan disagreement is
substantially more pronounced for firms with high market betas, i.e., high cyclicality. We
obtain a very similar result if we compute the average market beta within a given GICS
sector and quarter and then interact ideological mismatch with the sector-level market beta
(columns (3) and (4)). The effect of partisan perception thus appears to be concentrated
in firms with high exposure to the U.S. economy.

7.2

Alternative Mechanisms

Although the analysis above strongly supports belief disagreement as a potential mechanism driving our results, other non-mutually exclusive mechanisms could be present. Although we cannot exclude all potential alternative explanations, our evidence so far allows
us to rule our several alternative stories.
Analysts’ Personal Economic Situation. An important advantage of our setting
is that rating actions are unlikely driven by differences in how analysts’ personal economic
situation changes when their preferred party is in power. This confounding factor represents
a key challenge for studies of household behavior, but how analysts’ professional assessment
of the credit risk of firms in the economy could be affected by their personal economic
situation is not obvious. Moreover, because the analysts whom we are comparing work
for the same rating agency at the same point in time, their income is unlikely to be
differentially affected by the elected president. Hence, the concern that our results could
reflect differences in the wealth or income of the individuals whom we study is mitigated
in our setting.
Strategic Behavior. Prior literature has shown equity analysts may be biased due
to strategic behavior (e.g., Laster, Bennett, and Geoum (1999); Hong and Kostovetsky
(2012)). In light of these studies, it is conceivable that our documented effect could reflect
strategic behavior rather than belief disagreement.
We believe that our empirical setting substantially mitigates this concern. For strategic
behavior to affect our estimates, it would not only have to correlate with political affiliation,
but it would also have to vary with the party of the president. We feel it is nontrivial to
think of plausible stories that could generate such strategic behavior.
One potential strategic behavior that would vary with the president’s party could be
that misaligned analysts downgrade firms more frequently in an effort to harm the economy and punish the president’s party. Although this explanation is theoretically consistent
with many results that we document, we find it less plausible for two main reasons. First,
34

it assumes a high degree of coordination among analysts, because the rating decisions of
any individual corporate analyst are unlikely to materially affect the economy. Such coordination would be especially difficult given that each analyst has an incentive to deviate,
because her future promotion and career outcomes may depend on how accurately she
assesses credit risk. Second, the results from the event study around the 2016 election
are more consistent with belief disagreement and less consistent with misaligned analysts
attempting to harm the president. If analysts were trying to harm the president, we would
have expected no divergence in rating actions in response to the election outcome and a
larger divergence when Donald J. Trump took office. Instead, we find Democratic analysts
downward-adjusted credit ratings more relative to Republican analysts during the month
when the election result became public, and no significant difference in the month when
President Trump took office.
Another source of strategic behavior could be related to analysts’ career concerns.
For example, analysts could be rewarded with a career in the public sector in return for
expressing positive views when the own party is in power, and negative views when the
other party is in power. We think this story is unlikely to explain our results for two
reasons. First, much more direct and visible ways to support a political party are available
than issuing optimistic or pessimistic corporate bond ratings. For example, sovereign credit
ratings would likely be more salient to a party’s administration. Second, as an empirical
fact, corporate credit analysts rarely pursue a career in the public sector. We hand-collected
information on the career paths of the analysts in our sample and find only five out of 557
analysts started a public-sector job following their employment at the agency.
Political Connections. Another potential explanation is that analysts who are affiliated with the president’s party may have “inside” information due to political connections.
We think political connections are unlikely to explain our results, for at least three reasons.
First, inside information due to political connections would predict a difference in rating
accuracy, but not necessarily a difference in the direction of the average rating change,
because why the inside information that analysts receive from their sources is always more
positive relative to the beliefs of other analysts is not obvious. Second, it is again inconsistent with the timing of the effect around the 2016 presidential elections documented
above. In fact, if the results reflected political connections, we should start to see a divergence shortly after Trump is inaugurated. Instead, we see a sizable divergence during
the month of the election, and no significant divergence in the month when he takes office.
Third, we hand-collected information on the career paths of the analysts in our sample and
found only three analysts ended up transitioning to a job in the federal government after
their employment at the rating agency. These numbers suggest a relatively low degree of

35

political connections in our sample of analysts.
To conclude, although there is a large literature on the consequences of investor disagreement on asset prices, we know relatively little empirically about the sources of disagreement or factors that can intensify disagreement (e.g., Cookson and Niessner (2020)).
Our empirical evidence above establishes political partisanship as an important source of
disagreement. Compared to other studies which have inferred differences in beliefs from
differences in trading behavior, the strength of our empirical setup is that we can rule out
other important drivers of dispersion in trading decisions, such as differences in hedging
demands or liquidity needs as well as differences in private information. Moreover, by complementing our analysis of rating actions with the survey, we can provide direct evidence
that the differences in rating actions we observe are likely due to differences in economic
beliefs. Another important insight from our study is that analyst beliefs do not converge
over the course of a presidency, which is consistent with frictions in learning (Xiong (2013)).

8

Conclusion

We show partisan perception affects the decisions of financial analysts. Using a novel
dataset that links credit rating analysts to party affiliations from voter registration records,
we show analysts who are not aligned with the president’s party are more likely to adjust
ratings downward. Our identification approach compares analysts with different party
affiliations covering the same firm at the same point in time, ensuring that differences in
firm fundamentals cannot explain the observed differences in rating actions. We further
show rating actions by partisan analysts have significant price effects and may influence
firms’ investment decisions.
What could be the source of the partisan perception documented in this paper? Although a complete answer to this question is beyond the scope of this paper, we speculate
that partisan perception could reflect two things. It could reflect a causal effect of party
affiliation, where analysts, similar to sports fans, feel optimism or pessimism because their
team won the election (Mason (2015)). Alternatively, party affiliation could be a powerful
statistic that summarizes ideological differences across analysts beyond ethnicity, gender,
and age and has strong incremental predictive power for their rating decisions and their
response to public signals.
Given the documented increase in political polarization, understanding the potential
implications of this trend for the U.S. economy is important. One potential channel for how
polarization can have real effects is through the economic beliefs and actions of relevant
economic agents. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to quantify the

36

influence of partisan perception on the actions of an important set of finance professionals
(credit rating analysts), as well as on securities prices and firm investment. Because the
effect of partisan perception prevails even in a setting where pecuniary and professional
gains are at stake, it may influence the behavior of many other relevant economic agents,
such as firm managers and asset managers. This avenue is a fruitful one for future research
in our view.

37

References
Addoum, Jawad M., and Alok Kumar, 2016, Political Sentiment and Predictable Returns,
Review of Financial Studies 29, 3471–3518.
Almeida, Heitor, Igor Cunha, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Felipe Restrepo, 2017, The real
effects of credit ratings: The sovereign ceiling channel, Journal of Finance 72, 249–290.
Babenko, Ilona, Viktar Fedaseyeu, and Song Zhang, 2019, Do CEOs affect employees’
political choices, Review of Financial Studies Forthcoming.
Bamber, Linda Smith, Orie E. Barron, and Thomas L. Stober, 1999, Differential interpretations and trading volume, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 34, 369–386.
Banerjee, Snehal, 2011, Learning from prices and the disperion in beliefs, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3025–3068.
, and Ilan Kremer, 2010, Disagreement and learning: Dynamic patterns of trade,
Journal of Finance 65, 1269–1302.
Bartels, Larry M., 2002, Beyond the running tally: Partisan bias in political perceptions,
Political Behavior 24, 117–150.
Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2014, Reaching for yield in the bond market, Journal
of Finance 70, 1863–1902.
Becker, Bo, and Todd Milbourn, 2011, How did increased competition affect credit ratings?,
Journal of Financial Economics 101, 493–514.
Begley, Taylor A., 2015, The real costs of corporate credit ratings, Working Paper.
Benhabib, Jess, and Mark M. Spiegel, 2018, Sentiments and economic activity: Evidence
from U.S. states, Economic Journal 129, 715–733.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Emir Kamenica, 2018, Coming apart? Cultural distances in the
United States over time, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24771.
Blinder, Alan S., and Mark W. Watson, 2016, Presidents and the U.S. economy: An
econometric exploration, American Economic Review 106.
Bonaparte, Yosef, Alok Kumar, and Jeremy K. Page, 2017, Political climate, optimism,
and investment decisions, Journal of Financial Markets 34, 69–94.
Bonica, Adam, 2016, Database on ideology, money in politics, and elections: Public version
2.0. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Libraries., https://data.stanford.edu/dime.
Boxell, Levi, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro, 2017, Is the internet causing political polarization? Evidence from demographics, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 23258.

38

Brewer, Mark D., 2005, The rise of partisanship and the expansion of partisan conflict
within the American electorate, Political Reserach Quarterly 58, 219–229.
Campbell, Angus, Philip E. Converse, Warren E. Miller, and Donald E. Stokes, 1960, The
American Voter (New York: John Wiley & Sons).
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance
52, 57–82.
Chen, Daniel L, 2019, Priming ideology: Why presidential elections affect U.S. judges,
Working Paper.
Chernenko, Sergey, and Adi Sunderam, 2011, The real consequences of market segmentation, Review of Financial Studies 25, 2041–2069.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Are some mutual fund managers better than
others? Cross-sectional patterns in behavior and performance, Journal of Finance 54,
875–899.
Cookson, J. Anthony, and Marina Niessner, 2020, Why don’t we agree? Evidence from a
social network of investors, Journal of Finance 75, 173–228.
Cornaggia, Jess, Kimberly J. Cornaggia, and Ryan D. Israelsen, 2017, Credit ratings and
the cost of municipal financing, Review of Financial Studies 31, 2038–2079.
Cornaggia, Jess, Kimberly J. Cornaggia, and Han Xia, 2016, Revolving doors on Wall
Street, Journal of Financial Economics 120, 400–419.
Cornaggia, Jess, Kimberly Rodgers Cornaggia, and Ryan D. Israelsen, 2019, Where the
heart is: Information production and the home bias, Management Science Forthcoming.
Cunha, Igor, Miguel Almeida Ferreira, and Do Silva, Rui, 2019, Do financial markets affect
election outcomes? Evidence from municipal bond ratings, Working Paper.
Curtin, Richard, 2016, Economic policy preferences, Survey of Consumers, University of
Michigan, November.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Joshua M. Pollet, 2009, Investor inattention and Friday earnings
announcements, Journal of Finance 64, 709–749.
Dichev, Ilia D., and Joseph D. Piotroski, 2001, The long-run stock returns following bond
ratings changes, Journal of Finance 56, 173–203.
Dick-Nielsen, Jens, 2009, Liquidity biases in trace, Journal of Fixed Income 19, 43–55.
Dion Bongaerts, K. J. Martijn Cremers, and William N. Goetzmann, 2012, Tiebreaker:
Certification and multiple credit ratings, Journal of Finance 67, 114.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
39

Fracassi, Cesare, Stefan Petry, and Geoffrey Tate, 2016, Does rating analyst subjectivity
affect corporate debt pricing?, Journal of Financial Economics 120, 514–538.
Gaines, Brian J., James H. Kuklinski, Paul J. Quirk, Buddy Peyton, and Jay Verkuilen,
2007, Same facts, different interpretations: Partisan motivation and opinion on Iraq,
Journal of Politics 69, 957–974.
Gentzkow, Matthew, 2016, Polarization in 2016, Toulouse Network of Information Technology White Paper.
, Edward Glaeser, and Claudia Goldin, 2006, The rise of the fourth estate:
How newspapers became informative and why it mattered, in Corruption and Reform:
Lessons from America’s Economic history 187–230.
Gerber, Alan S., and Gregory A. Huber, 2009, Partisanship and economic behavior: Do
partisan differences in economic forecasts predict real economic behavior?, American
Political Science Review 103, 407––426.
Gillitzer, Christian, and Nalini Prasad, 2018, The effect of consumer sentiment on consumption: Cross-sectional evidence from elections, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
Griffin, John M., and Dragon Yongjun Tang, 2012, Did subjectivity play a role in CDO
credit ratings?, Journal of Finance 67, 1293–1328.
Hand, John R. M., Robert W. Holthausen, and Richard W. Leftwich, 1992, The effect of
bond rating agency announcements on bond and stock prices, Journal of Finance 47,
733–752.
Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, 1993, Differences of opinion make a horse race, Review
of Financial Studies 6, 473–506.
Hersh, Eitan D., and Matthew N. Goldenberg, 2016, Democratic and Republican physicians
provide different care on politicized health issues, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 113, 11811–11816.
Hill, Seth J., and Gregory A. Huber, 2017, Representativeness and motivations of the contemporary donorate: Results from merged survey and administrative records, Political
Behavior 39, 3–29.
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Seongyeon Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Driven to distraction:
Extraneous events and underreaction to earnings news, Journal of Finance 64, 2289–
2325.
Holthausen, Robert W., and Richard W. Leftwich, 1986, The effect of bond rating changes
on common stock prices, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 57–89.
Hong, Harrison, and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2010, Competition and bias, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 125, 1683–1725.
40

Hong, Harrison, and Leonard Kostovetsky, 2012, Red and blue investing: Values and
finance, Journal of Financial Economics 103, 1–19.
Hutton, Irena, Danling Jiang, and Alok Kumar, 2014, Corporate policies of Republican
managers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 49, 1279–1310.
Igielnik, Ruth, Scott Keeter, Courtney Kennedy, and Bradley Spahn, 2018, Commercial
voter files and the study of U.S. politics, Pew Research Report.
Iyengar, Shanto, Gaurav Sood, and Yphtach Lelkes, 2012, Affect, not ideology, Public
Opinion Quarterly 76, 405–431.
Jelveh, Zubin, Bruce Kogut, and Suresh Naidu, 2018, Political language in economics,
Working Paper.
Jiang, Danling, Alok Kumar, and Kelvin K. F. Law, 2016, Political contributions and
analyst behavior, Review of Accounting Studies 21, 37–88.
Jones, Jeffrey M., 2014, Most U.S. voters ok with split-party control
of
Congress,
Retrieved
from
https://news.gallup.com/poll/170261/
voters-split-party-control-congress.aspx/.
Kandel, Eugene, and Neil D. Pearson, 1995, Differential interpretation of public signals
and trade in speculative markets, Journal of Political Economy 103, 831–872.
Kaustia, Markku, and Sami Torstila, 2011, Stock market aversion? Political preferences
and stock market participation, Journal of Financial Economics 100, 98 – 112.
Kempf, Elisabeth, 2020, The job rating game: Revolving doors and analyst incentives,
Journal of Financial Economics 135, 41–67.
Kisgen, Darren J., Jordan Nickerson, Matthew Osborn, and Jonathan Reuter, 2019, Analyst promotions within credit rating agencies: Accuracy or bias?, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis Forthcoming.
Kisgen, Darren J., and Philip E. Strahan, 2010, Do regulations based on credit ratings
affect a firm’s cost of capital?, Review of Financial Studies 23, 4324–4347.
Laster, David, Paul Bennett, and In Sun Geoum, 1999, Rational bias in macroeconomic
forecasts, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 293–318.
Lewis-Beck, Michael S., and Mary Stegmaier, 2000, Economic determinants of electoral
outcomes, Annual Review of Political Science 3, 183–219.
Lott, John R., and Kevin A. Hassett, 2014, Is newspaper coverage of economic events
politically biased?, Public Choice 160, 65–108.
Makridis, Christos, 2019, Sentimental business cycles and the protracted Great Recession,
Working Paper.

41

Mason, Lilliana, 2013, The rise of uncivil agreement: Issue versus behavioral polarization
in the American electorate, American Behavioral Scientist 57, 140–159.
, 2015, I disrespectfully agree: The differential effects of partisan sorting on social
and issue polarization, American Journal of Political Science 59, 128–145.
McGrath, Mary C., 2017, Economic behavior and the partisan perceptual screen, Quarterly
Journal of Political Science 11, 363–383.
McKenzie, Mark Jonathan, 2012, The influence of partisanship, ideology, and the law on
redistricting decisions in the federal courts, Political Research Quarterly 65, 799–813.
Meeuwis, Maarten, Jonathan A. Parker, Antoinette Schoar, and Duncan I. Simester, 2018,
Belief disagreement and portfolio choice, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25108.
Mian, Atif R., Amir Sufi, and Nasim Khoshkhou, 2018, Partisan bias, economic expectations, and household spending, Working Paper.
Pástor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2018, Political cycles and stock returns, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23184.
Pew Research Center, 2017, Key takeaways on Americans’ growing partisan divide over
political values, Pew Research Center Author:Carroll Doherty.
, 2019, Trump begins third year with low job approval and doubts about his honesty,
Washington, D.C.
Posner, Eric A., 2008, Does political bias in the judiciary matter?: Implications of judicial
bias studies for legal and constitutional reform, University of Chicago Law Review 75,
853–883.
Saad, Lydia, 2014, In U.S., four in 10 say party control of Congress
matters,
Retrieved
from
https://news.gallup.com/poll/176522/
four-say-party-control-congress-matters.aspx/.
Sangiorgi, Francesco, and Chester Spatt, 2017, Foundations and Trends in Finance, vol.
12 . chap. The Economics of Credit Rating Agencies, 1–116 (Wiley).
Santa-Clara, Pedro, and Rossen Valkanov, 2003, The presidential puzzle: Political cycles
and the stock market, Journal of Finance 58, 1841–1872.
Xia, Han, 2014, Can investor-paid credit rating agencies improve the information quality
of issuer-paid rating agencies?, Journal of Financial Economics 111, 450–468.
Xiong, Wei, 2013, Bubbles, crises, and heterogeneous beliefs, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 18905.
Ye, Junting, Shuchu Han, Yifan Hu, Baris Coskun, Meizhu Liu, Hong Qin, and Steven
Skiena, 2017, Nationality classification using name embeddings, in Proceedings of the
2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management 1897–1906.
42

80
Percentage
40
60
20

fo

til
iti

m
m

rm

un

at

ic

io

n

at

io

R

n

U

ic
rv
Se

lE
ea

es

es

e
st

ia
er
at
M

no
ch
Te

at

ls

gy
lo

ria
st
du
In

H

Fi

ea

na

lth

nc

C

ia

ls

ar
e

ls

y
rg
En
e

su
on
C

er

D

m

is
c

er

re
t

St

io

ap

na

le

s

ry

0
m
su

Te

le

co

In

on
C

Democrat
Unaffiliated

Republican
Other

10
Chicago

0

0

10

Percentage
20
30

Percentage
20
30

40

40

50

(a) Party Affiliation by GICS Sector

New York
Democrat
Unaffiliated

Republican
Other

(b) Party Affiliation by City

Fitch

Moody's
Democrat
Unaffiliated

S&P
Republican
Other

(c) Party Affiliation by Rating Agency

Figure 1: Party-Affiliation Summary. The figure plots the distribution of Democratic,
Republican, unaffiliated, and other analysts by GICS sector (Panel (a)), city (Panel (b)),
and rating agency (Panel (c)).

43

Adjusted rating change
-.008-.006-.004-.002 0 .002 .004 .006 .008

BushW 1

BushW 2

Obama 1

Republican Analyst
Unaffiliated Analysts

Obama 2

Trump 1

Democrat Analyst

Figure 2: Average Rating Changes by Analyst Party Affiliation and Presidency.
The figure plots the average adjusted rating change separately for Democratic, Republican,
and unaffiliated analysts under each presidency during our sample period. Adjusted rating
changes are computed by taking the quarterly rating change and subtracting the average
rating change within the same firm and quarter.

44

.12
.1
.08
.06
.04
.02
0
-.02
-.04
-.06
-.08
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

+1

+2

+3

+4

Event Quarter

Figure 3: Quarterly Event Study around Presidential Elections. The figure plots
the difference in the average quarterly rating adjustment between misaligned and aligned
analysts around presidential elections. Specifically, we plot the coefficient estimates for
βτ from equation (2). The corresponding 95% confidence intervals are based on standard
errors that are double-clustered at the firm and analyst level. The green line indicates the
average difference in the rating change prior to the election (i.e., –4 to –1) and the blue
line indicates the average difference post election (i.e., 0 to +4).

45

.06
.04
.02
0
-.02
-.04
Jul-16

Aug-16

Sep-16

Oct-16

Nov-16

Dec-16

Jan-17

Feb-17

Mar-17

Calendar time

Figure 4: Monthly Event Study around the 2016 Presidential Election. The
figure plots the difference in the average monthly rating adjustment between Democratic
and Republican analysts around the 2016 presidential election. Specifically, we plot the
coefficient estimates for βτ from the following regression:
∆Rif t = αf q + αjq +

τ =M
ar17
X

βτ Democratit ×

τ =Jul16

Dtτ

+

τ =M
ar17
X

δτ × Dtτ + if t ,

(6)

τ =Jul16

where Democratit refers to an indicator equal to 1 for analysts who are affiliated with
the Democratic Party and 0 for Republican analysts; αf q and αjq are firm × quarter and
agency × quarter fixed effects, respectively; and Dtτ are calendar-time dummies. The corresponding 95% confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are double-clustered
at the firm and analyst level.

46

.2
.1
0
-.1
-.2
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

+1

+2

+3

+4

Event Quarter

Figure 5: Quarterly Event Study around Presidential Elections: Rating Levels.
The figure repeats the analysis presented in Figure 3, after replacing the quarterly rating
change with the quarter-end rating level as the dependent variable.

47

1
(-1

0
-1
(-1 0)
0
(-1 9)
0
(-1 8)
0
(-1 7)
0
(-1 6)
0
(-1 5)
0
(-1 4)
0
(-1 3)
0
(-1 2)
0
-1
(-1 )
0
0
(-1 )
0
1
(-1 )
0
2
(-1 )
0
3
(-1 )
0
4
(-1 )
0
5
(-1 )
0
6
(-1 )
0
7
(-1 )
0
8
(-1 )
0
(-1 9)
0
10
)

-5

Cumulative abnormal return
-4
-3
-2
-1
0

1
Cumulative abnormal return
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
-5
0
-1
(-1 0)
0
(-1 9)
0
(-1 8)
0
(-1 7)
0
(-1 6)
0
(-1 5)
0
(-1 4)
0
(-1 3)
0
(-1 2)
0
-1
(-1 )
0
0
(-1 )
0
1
(-1 )
0
2
(-1 )
0
3
(-1 )
0
4
(-1 )
0
5
(-1 )
0
6
(-1 )
0
7
(-1 )
0
8
(-1 )
0
(-1 9)
0
10
)

(-1

Trading day relative to date of rating change
No mismatch

Trading day relative to date of rating change

Mismatch

No mismatch

0
-1
(-1 0)
0
(-1 9)
0
(-1 8)
0
(-1 7)
0
(-1 6)
0
(-1 5)
0
(-1 4)
0
(-1 3)
0
(-1 2)
0
-1
(-1 )
0
0
(-1 )
0
1
(-1 )
0
2
(-1 )
0
3
(-1 )
0
4
(-1 )
0
5
(-1 )
0
6
(-1 )
0
7
(-1 )
0
8
(-1 )
0
(-1 9)
0
10
)

(-1

(-1

0
-1
(-1 0)
0
(-1 9)
0
(-1 8)
0
(-1 7)
0
(-1 6)
0
(-1 5)
0
(-1 4)
0
(-1 3)
0
(-1 2)
0
-1
(-1 )
0
0
(-1 )
0
1
(-1 )
0
2
(-1 )
0
3
(-1 )
0
4
(-1 )
0
5
(-1 )
0
6
(-1 )
0
7
(-1 )
0
8
(-1 )
0
(-1 9)
0
10
)

-5

-5

Cumulative abnormal return
-4
-3
-2
-1
0

Cumulative abnormal return
-4
-3
-2
-1
0

1

(b) Upgrades Excluding Corporate Events

1

(a) All Upgrades

Mismatch

Trading day relative to date of rating change
No mismatch

Trading day relative to date of rating change

Mismatch

No mismatch

(c) All Downgrades

Mismatch

(d) Downgrades Excluding Corporate Events

Figure 6: Cumulative Abnormal Stock Returns around Rating Changes. The
figure plots cumulative abnormal stock returns, measured in basis points, around rating
changes. Panels (a) and (b) show returns around upgrades, and panels (c) and (d) show
returns around downgrades, respectively. Abnormal returns are calculated using the Fama
and French (1993) and Carhart (1997) model estimated over trading days (-300,-50) relative
to the event date. In panels (b) and (d), we exclude all rating changes where a corporate
earnings announcement or an M&A announcement falls inside the (-10,+10) window around
the rating change.

48

.3
.2
.1
0
-.1
-.2
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

+1

+2

+3

+4

Event Quarter

Figure 7: Quarterly Event Study around Presidential Elections: Firm Investment. The figure plots the difference in log capital expenditures between firms rated by
misaligned versus aligned analysts around presidential elections which lead to a change
in the party of the president. Specifically, we plot the coefficient estimates for βτ from
equation (3). The corresponding 95% confidence intervals are based on standard errors
that are clustered at the firm level.

49

Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for our key variables. The sample consists of all rating
changes for U.S. corporate bond issuers by Fitch, Moody’s, and S&P between 2000Q1 and 2018Q1,
with available information on the analyst’s political-party affiliation. One observation is at the
analyst-firm-quarter level. All variables are defined in Appendix A.1.
N

Mean

St.Dev.

0.25

Median

0.75

Key Dependent Variables
Rating change
CAR(–1,+1) around rating changes
CAR(–3,+3) around rating changes
∆ Yield around rating changes
∆ Yield spread around rating changes
∆ Yield spread 4Q
∆ Yield spread 8Q
∆ Yield spread 12Q
Accuracy 4Q
Accuracy 8Q
Accuracy 12Q

72,732
71,631
71,631
68,171
68,171
24,201
20,923
17,946
63,087
52,880
43,907

0.026
-6.354
-10.622
0.229
0.228
-0.082
-0.140
-0.125
-0.406
-0.714
-0.947

0.387
158.734
234.623
12.350
11.276
2.177
2.552
2.578
0.907
1.180
1.318

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.572
-0.752
-0.851
-1.000
-1.000
-1.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.082
-0.096
-0.120
0.000
0.000
-1.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.396
0.469
0.521
0.000
0.000
0.000

Key Independent Variables
Ideological mismatch

76,969

0.370

0.483

0.000

0.000

1.000

Control Variables
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Votes in midterm or primary
Avg. election gap
Frequent voter
Age
Size
Investment
Leverage
Tobin’s Q
Cash
Cash flow
Median lagged rating
Beta
Sector avg. beta
Econ. polarization Gallup

76,969
76,969
76,969
74,678
76,969
76,969
65,705
60,528
65,677
53,993
65,692
59,878
74,805
49,626
76,956
62,015

3.234
2.418
0.754
0.263
0.782
3.852
8.820
0.113
0.330
1.530
0.084
0.017
11.017
1.179
1.140
0.001

0.761
0.978
0.431
0.440
0.413
0.204
1.607
0.104
0.231
0.683
0.095
0.025
3.865
0.669
0.251
0.986

2.833
1.792
1.000
0.000
1.000
3.738
7.707
0.042
0.179
1.065
0.017
0.009
8.000
0.709
0.862
-0.866

3.466
2.398
1.000
0.000
1.000
3.892
8.765
0.083
0.291
1.316
0.052
0.018
10.000
1.093
1.282
0.114

3.807
2.996
1.000
1.000
1.000
4.007
9.826
0.149
0.431
1.764
0.117
0.029
14.000
1.537
1.285
0.615

50

Table 2: Partisan Perception and Rating Changes
This table regresses quarterly rating changes on Ideological mismatch, an indicator equal to 1
for analysts whose party affiliation does not match the president’s party, and 0 otherwise. All
variables are defined in Appendix A.1. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard
errors that allow for double-clustering at the analyst and firm level.

Ideological mismatch
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

Rating Change
(2)

(3)

0.0168
(4.18)
0.0001
(0.03)
-0.0001
(-0.10)

0.0170
(4.26)
-0.0006
(-0.23)
0.0001
(0.05)

0.0134
(3.79)
-0.0004
(-0.15)
-0.0000
(-0.02)

49,792
0.804
Yes
Yes
No
No

49,792
0.804
Yes
No
Yes
No

49,790
0.808
Yes
No
No
Yes

51

Table 3: Robustness
This table presents robustness tests. The baseline regression refers to specification (3) from
Table 2. For brevity, we only report coefficients of interest and suppress control variables.
In Panel A, Rating change indicator is equal to 0 if the quarterly rating change is zero; –1
if the rating change is negative (i.e., upgrade); and +1 if the rating change is positive (i.e.,
downgrade). Downgrade (Upgrade) is an indicator equal to 1 if the quarterly rating change is
positive (negative), respectively, and 0 otherwise. In Panel B, we use alternative definitions
of ideological mismatch, using party affiliation from presidential elections only (first row), and
adding party-affiliation information from analysts’ political contributions. In Panel C, Triple
clustering by analyst, firm, and quarter refers to triple-clustering standard errors at the analyst,
firm, and quarter level. Firm-agency level refers to a regression of quarterly rating changes
on average ideological mismatch, after collapsing the data at the firm-agency-quarter level and
averaging ideological mismatch across all analysts rating the same firm for the same rating
agency in the same quarter. Weighted least squares refers to a weighted-least-squares regression,
where weights are proportional to the total lagged book assets of the rated firm. Add Analyst FE
adds analyst fixed effects. Add Agency × Sector × Quarter FE replaces Agency × Quarter fixed
effect with Agency × Sector × Quarter fixed effect. Add NBER Recession × Party affiliation
FE replaces party-affiliation fixed effects with party affiliation × recession dummy fixed effects.
Recessions are defined following the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). t-statistics
are based on standard errors that allow for double-clustering at the analyst and firm level (except
for the value in row Firm-agency level, where standard errors are clustered at the firm level).

Coeff.

t-statistic

Baseline

0.0134

3.79

Panel A: Alternative dependent variables
Rating change indicator
Downgrade
Upgrade

0.0111
0.0064
-0.0046

3.88
3.24
-2.21

Panel B: Alternative definitions of ideological mismatch
Use only party affiliation from presidential elections
Add party affiliation from political contributions

0.0144
0.0135

2.75
4.36

Panel C: Estimation
Triple-cluster standard errors (analyst, firm, and quarter)
Firm-agency level
Weighted least squares
Add Analyst FE
Add Agency × Sector × Quarter FE
Add NBER Recession × Party affiliation FE

0.0134
0.0298
0.0125
0.0108
0.0087
0.0150

4.33
3.82
3.35
2.40
2.82
4.03

52

Table 4: Interaction with Voting Frequency
This table regresses quarterly rating changes on ideological mismatch as well as interactions with
measures of voting frequency. Votes in midterm or primary is an indicator equal to 1 for analysts
who have voted during midterm or primary elections in the past, and 0 otherwise. Avg. election
gap is the logarithm of the average time gap (in quarters) between elections in which the analyst
has voted. Frequent voter is an indicator equal to 1 for analysts who are either in the bottom
quartile of the average election gap across all analysts in a given quarter, or for whom Votes in
midterm or primary is equal to 1, and 0 otherwise. Age is the logarithm of age of the analyst as
of the end of the quarter, and it is standardized to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for double-clustering
at the analyst and firm level.

(1)
Ideological mismatch
Votes in midterm or primary
Mismatch × Votes in midterm or primary

0.0014
(0.21)
0.0008
(0.25)
0.0140
(2.21)

Avg. election gap

Rating Change
(2)

(3)

0.0288
(3.69)

0.0003
(0.04)

0.0003
(0.12)
-0.0102
(-2.25)

Mismatch × Avg. election gap
Frequent voter

-0.0001
(-0.08)
-0.0007
(-0.25)
-0.0004
(-0.15)
-0.0006
(-0.45)

-0.0006
(-0.38)
-0.0006
(-0.20)
-0.0006
(-0.21)
-0.0004
(-0.28)

-0.0013
(-0.40)
0.0151
(2.33)
0.0001
(0.05)
-0.0009
(-0.33)
-0.0004
(-0.15)
-0.0005
(-0.39)

49,790
0.808
Yes
Yes
Yes

47,454
0.808
Yes
Yes
Yes

49,790
0.808
Yes
Yes
Yes

Mismatch × Frequent voter
Age
Mismatch × Age
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE

53

Table 5: Stock Returns and Bond-Yield Changes around Rating Actions
This table regresses cumulative abnormal stock returns and changes in bond yields around rating
changes on ideological mismatch. Panel A presents results for cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs), which are measured in basis points and calculated using an event window of (-1,+1)
(columns (1) and (2)) and (-3,+3) (columns (3) and (4)), respectively. Panel B shows results for
changes in bond yields (∆ Yield ) and bond-yield spreads (∆ Yield Spread ) around the rating
action, measured in basis points. In quarters with no rating change, the dependent variable is
set to 0. In columns (2) and (4) for both panels, we exclude rating changes where a corporate
earnings announcement or M&A announcement falls inside the event window. All variables are
defined in Appendix A.1. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that
allow for double-clustering at the analyst and firm level.
Panel A: Abnormal Stock Returns
CAR(–1,+1)
Ideological mismatch
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE
Excluding corporate events

CAR(–3,+3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-3.2115
(-1.98)
-0.3710
(-0.28)
0.0347
(0.06)

-3.2179
(-2.29)
-0.4749
(-0.40)
0.2822
(0.52)

-4.5770
(-2.04)
-1.5297
(-0.76)
-0.1611
(-0.18)

-3.8597
(-2.10)
-0.7088
(-0.49)
-0.3161
(-0.42)

48,147
0.744
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

47,580
0.750
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

48,147
0.755
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

46,934
0.766
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Bond-Yield Changes
∆ Yield
Ideological mismatch
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE
Excluding corporate events

∆ Yield Spread
(3)
(4)

(1)

(2)

0.4748
(2.11)
0.1188
(1.10)
-0.0057
(-0.06)

0.3878
(1.85)
0.0937
(0.97)
-0.0046
(-0.06)

0.4508
(1.97)
0.1658
(1.56)
-0.0810
(-0.92)

0.3680
(1.76)
0.1418
(1.48)
-0.0799
(-1.14)

46,724
0.697
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

46,724
0.696
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

46,724
0.703
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

46,724
0.694
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

54

Table 6: Analyst Accuracy
This table compares the rating accuracy of analysts with and without ideological mismatch. In
Panel A, the change in yield spreads over the following 4, 8, and 12 quarters is regressed on
the current-quarter rating change, ideological mismatch, as well as an interaction term. Firm
controls include lagged firm size, Tobin’s Q, investment, leverage, cash holdings, and cash flow.
In Panel B, analyst accuracy, defined as –1 times the absolute change between the current rating
and the rating 4, 8, and 12 quarters in the future, is regressed on ideological mismatch. The
sample is restricted to Democratic and Republican analysts in both panels. t-statistics, reported
in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for double-clustering at the analyst and
firm level.
Panel A: Accuracy Based on Future Changes in Yield Spreads

Ideological mismatch
Mismatch × Rating change
Rating change
Observations
R2
Agency × Quarter FE
Median lagged rating × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE
Firm controls

4Q
(1)

∆ Yield Spread
8Q
(2)

12Q
(3)

-0.0728
(-1.15)
-0.2724
(-2.04)
0.0110
(0.09)

-0.0595
(-0.75)
-0.2934
(-2.48)
-0.1456
(-1.29)

-0.0260
(-0.30)
-0.1863
(-1.58)
-0.1287
(-1.19)

15,544
0.646
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

13,573
0.659
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

11,706
0.648
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

4Q
(1)

Accuracy
8Q
(2)

12Q
(3)

-0.0406
(-1.99)
-0.0064
(-0.63)
0.0076
(1.25)

-0.0879
(-2.49)
-0.0191
(-0.94)
0.0199
(1.67)

-0.1021
(-2.64)
-0.0100
(-0.35)
0.0164
(0.96)

25,100
0.872
Yes
Yes
Yes

20,672
0.891
Yes
Yes
Yes

16,961
0.897
Yes
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Accuracy Based on Future Rating Revisions

Ideological mismatch
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE

55

Table 7: Survey of Credit Rating Analysts
This table shows the results from our online survey of credit rating analysts. We infer analysts’
views on current economic conditions by asking the following question: “How would you rate
economic conditions in this country today?”, with possible answers of “excellent,” “good,” “fair,”
and “poor.” We code the answers with numerical values from 1 to 4, with 1 indicating the least
favorable view and higher values representing more favorable views. To infer the political affiliation of the analysts, we ask, “In politics, as of today, do you consider yourself a Republican, a
Democrat, an Independent or Unaffiliated?” We classify a respondent’s political affiliation as Republican, Democrat, or Independent (if she responded Independent or Unaffiliated). Demographic
controls include gender, age, and ethnicity. Experience controls is the self-reported number of
years of work experience as a credit rating analyst. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based
on robust standard errors.

Democrat
Republican
Constant
Observations
R2
Demographic controls
Experience controls

(1)

Current Economic Conditions
(2)

(3)

0.1866
(1.19)
0.6184
(3.89)
2.6316
(23.15)

0.1903
(1.16)
0.5559
(3.14)
2.8109
(11.19)

0.1835
(1.11)
0.5639
(3.13)
2.8486
(10.66)

57
0.214
No
No

54
0.285
Yes
No

54
0.287
Yes
Yes

56

Table 8: Interaction with Polarization of Economic Views
This table regresses quarterly rating changes on ideological mismatch as well as on interactions
with a measure of political polarization of economic views (Econ. polarization Gallup). To
measure political polarization in the views of economic conditions, we use data from the following
question in the Gallup Daily survey: “How would you rate economic conditions in this country
today—as excellent, good, only fair, or poor?” The responses to this question are converted into
a numerical scale that ranges from 1 (poor) to 4 (excellent). Based on this question, our measure
of polarization of economic views, Econ. polarization Gallup, is the absolute average quarterly
difference between Democrats and Republicans. We standardize the measure to have a mean of 0
and a standard deviation of 1. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors
that allow for double-clustering at the analyst and firm level.

Ideological mismatch
Mismatch × Econ. polarization Gallup
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE

(1)

Rating Change
(2)

(3)

0.0105
(2.02)
0.0087
(2.96)
-0.0004
(-0.15)
-0.0001
(-0.08)

0.0109
(2.10)
0.0084
(2.82)
-0.0011
(-0.40)
0.0005
(0.39)

0.0085
(1.89)
0.0053
(1.93)
-0.0003
(-0.12)
0.0003
(0.22)

45,041
0.805
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

45,041
0.806
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

45,041
0.808
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

57

Table 9: Firm Heterogeneity
This table regresses quarterly rating changes on ideological mismatch as well as interactions with
two measures of firm cyclicality. Beta refers to the firm-level market beta and is estimated using
the Fama and French (1993) and Carhart (1997) four-factor model, monthly return data from
CRSP, and a five-year rolling window. Sector avg. beta is computed as the average Beta of all
the firms in a given GICS sector and quarter. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on
standard errors that allow for double-clustering at the analyst and firm level.
Rating Change
(2)
(3)

(1)
Ideological mismatch
Mismatch × Beta

-0.0013
(-0.18)
0.0130
(2.62)

-0.0023
(-0.33)
0.0115
(2.35)

Mismatch × Sector avg. beta
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE

-0.0091
(-0.85)

-0.0078
(-0.77)

0.0188
(2.10)
-0.0003
(-0.11)
-0.0001
(-0.08)
49,790
0.808
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

-0.0018
(-0.60)
0.0000
(0.02)

-0.0011
(-0.37)
-0.0002
(-0.18)

0.0227
(2.31)
0.0002
(0.08)
-0.0002
(-0.14)

33,745
0.789
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

33,739
0.794
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

49,792
0.804
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

58

(4)

A
A.1

Appendix
Variable Definitions
Table A.1: Variable descriptions

Variable
Dependent variables
Rating change

CAR(–1,+1);
CAR(–3,+3)
around
rating
changes

∆ Yield (spread)
around
rating
changes

Accuracy over 4, 8,
and 12 quarters

Description
The quarterly change (measured in notches) in the credit rating of a given firm by a given
rating agency. Credit ratings are transformed into a cardinal scale, as in Fracassi, Petry,
and Tate (2016), starting with 1 for AAA and ending with 21 for D or lower for S&P and
Fitch. For Moody’s, the scale starts with 1 for Aaa and ends with 21 for C. Credit ratings
are obtained for S&P from S&P RatingXpress, for Moody’s from Moody’s Default and
Recovery Database, and for Fitch from Mergent FISD. The variable is winsorized at the
top and bottom 1%.
Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) during trading days (–1,+1) and (–3,+3) around
a rating change, computed using the Fama and French (1993) and Carhart (1997) model
estimated over trading days (-300,-50) relative to the event date. CARs are aggregated
over all rating changes for a given agency, firm, and quarter, and are set to 0 when no
rating change occurs. We exclude rating actions with missing stock returns in the (–3,+3)
window around the event. The variable is measured in basis points and is winsorized at
the top and bottom 1%.
The change in bond yields (spreads) around a rating change, averaged across all outstanding bonds by the issuer. Bond-yield (spread) changes around a rating action are
computed as the difference between the bond yield (spread) on the first day following
the event and the yield (spread) on the most recent trading day prior to the event. Average bond-yield (spread) changes are then aggregated over all rating changes for a given
agency, firm, and quarter, and are set to 0 when no rating change occurs. We restrict
the sample to bonds that are traded at least once in the 30 days prior and in the 30 days
post the rating-change announcement. If multiple bonds of the same issuer are traded on
the same day, we select a maximum of five bonds with the highest trading volume. The
benchmark rate that is used to compute credit spreads is based on an interpolation of
the yields of the two government bonds with the next lower and the next higher duration
relative to the corporate bond. The variable is measured in basis points and is winsorized
at the top and bottom 1%.
–1 times the absolute difference between the current rating and the prevailing rating 4,
8, or 12 quarters in the future. The variable is measured in notches.
Continued on next page

59

Table A.1 – continued
Variable

Description

∆ Yield spread over
4, 8, and 12 quarters

The difference in the yield spread between quarter t and quarter 4, 8, and 12 in the
future, respectively. We compute yield spreads as the difference between a bond’s yield
to maturity on a given trading day and the benchmark rate, winsorized at the top and
bottom 1%. The benchmark rate is based on an interpolation of the yields of the two
government bonds with the next lower and the next higher duration relative to the
corporate bond. For each bond we keep the yield to maturity as of the last trading
day of the quarter and then average across all outstanding bonds by the same issuer. If
multiple bonds of the same issuer are traded on the same day, we select a maximum of
five bonds with the highest trading volume.

Main independent variables
Ideological
mis- Indicator function equal to 1 if the analyst’s party affiliation does not match the party of
match
the president in a given quarter, and 0 if the party matches or the analyst is unaffiliated.
Information on party affiliation is obtained after merging analysts to voter records from
Illinois, New Jersey, and New York City. Internet Appendix IA.A provides additional
details regarding the voter files and the merging procedure.
Control variables
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Votes in midterm or
primary
Avg. election gap
Size
Investment
Leverage
Tobin’s Q
Cash
Cash flow
Median lag rating
Econ. polarization
Gallup
Beta

Logarithm of one plus the number of quarters since the analyst’s first rating action for a
given rating agency.
Logarithm of the number of firms rated by the analyst in a given quarter.
An indicator equal to one for analysts who have voted in midterm or primary elections,
and zero otherwise.
Log average time gap (in quarters) between elections in which the analyst has voted.
The lagged logarithm of the firm’s total assets from Compustat.
The lagged ratio of the firm’s capital expenditures to the lagged value of property, plant
and equipment from Compustat.
The lagged ratio of the firm’s total long-term debt to total assets from Compustat.
The lagged ratio of the firm’s quarterly market value to book value of total assets from
Compustat. It is winsorized at the top and bottom 1%.
The lagged ratio of the firm’s cash and short-term investments to total assets from
Compustat.
The lagged ratio of the firm’s income before extraordinary items and depreciation to
lagged property, plant, and equipment from Compustat.
The median lagged rating across all rating agencies rating the firm.
The absolute difference between the average economic views of Democrats and Republicans in a given quarter from Gallup Daily survey.
Equity market beta estimated using the Fama and French (1993) and Carhart (1997)
four-factor model, using monthly return data from CRSP and a five-year rolling window.

60

Internet Appendix to
“Partisan Professionals:
Evidence from Credit Rating Analysts”

This internet appendix presents additional results to accompany the paper “Partisan Professionals: Evidence from Credit Rating Analysts.” The contents are as follows:
Internet Appendix IA.A describes the voter registration files used to obtain information
on analysts’ political affiliation.
Internet Appendix IA.B describes the measures of political polarization in the views of
economic conditions used in the paper.
Internet Appendix IA.C presents summary statistics for our sample of analysts from
the online survey.
Internet Appendix IA.D presents additional analyses to accompany our main empirical
results.

61

IA.A

Information on Political Affiliation

IA.A.1

Voter Registration Files

This section describes the voter registration files and merging procedure used to assign
party affiliations to individual analysts. Table IA.1 summarizes voters’ party affiliations
by election type for all three voter files.
IA.A.1.1

New York City

We obtain registered voter files and voter history files from the Board of Elections in the
City of New York. The New York City voter records contain two types of datasets. One
is the voting history, which contains the history of voting records for a given voter ID,
including election type, election date, and party affiliation. The second dataset contains
information regarding the full name, address, gender, date of birth, registration date,
and voter status for each voter ID. The party affiliation can be Democrat, Republican,
other (e.g., Conservative, Liberal, Independent), or blank. We treat blank observations
as unaffiliated. The dates of the covered elections range from 1983 to 2017. The election
types covered include General Elections, Primary Elections, Run-Off Elections, and Special
Elections. We take the following steps to clean the NYC voter data:
• We merge the dataset that contains the individual voting histories with the static
information on the voters’ demographics, address, date of birth, and so on, using the
voter ID. The voter address refers to his/her most recent address.
• We remove duplicates by first name, middle name, last name, and date of birth in
order to obtain a dataset in which each observation is uniquely identified by full name
and date of birth. The dataset contains 1,279 duplicates out of 3,780,569 observations.
We drop all duplicate observations because the majority of the duplicates do not have
the same voting history.
Following the two steps above, we obtain a cleaned NYC voter dataset with static voter
information as well as information on each voter’s voting history. Each voter is uniquely
identified by first name, middle name, last name, and date of birth.
IA.A.1.2

New Jersey

We obtain statewide registered voter files and voter history files from the New Jersey
Division of Elections. The information in the New Jersey voter records is very similar to
the data from New York City. The main difference is the time period spanned by the dates
62

of the covered elections, which ranges from 2007 to 2017. The party affiliation can be
Democrat, Republican, other (e.g., Conservative, Libertarian, Green), or unaffiliated. The
election types covered include General Elections, Primary Elections, Municipal Elections,
and Special Elections. As with the New York City data, we remove duplicates by first name,
middle name, last name, and age in order to obtain a dataset in which each observation
is uniquely identified by full name and age. The dataset contains 2,945 duplicates out of
5,715,810 observations.
IA.A.1.3

Illinois

We obtain state-wide registered voter files and voter history files from the Illinois State
Board of Elections. Three main differences exist between the Illinois voter records and
the records from New Jersey and New York City. First, we do not have date-of-birth
information; instead, we have information on voter age, which is measured at the time we
requested the data (February 2018). Second, in terms of the time period, the dates of the
covered elections range from 1976 to 2017. Third, the variable party affiliation is blank in
all general elections. Hence, we can infer party information only based on primary elections.
As a result, the rate of voters who switch between the Democratic and Republican party
is higher for Illinois (see Table IA.1). The party affiliation can be Democrat, Republican,
or other (e.g., Libertarian, Independent, Green).
We remove duplicates by first name, middle name, last name, and age, in order to
obtain a dataset in which each observation is uniquely identified by full name and age.
The dataset contains 110,604 duplicates out of 7,080,218 observations.
IA.A.1.4

Merging Analyst Data with Voter Registration Files

We merge the analyst-firm-quarter panel dataset with the cleaned voter records from New
York City, New Jersey, and Illinois, after retaining all analysts whose offices are in New
York or Chicago. Information on analysts’ office locations is obtained from press releases
published on the websites of Moody’s and Fitch, and from S&P’s Credit Portal. We assume
analysts with missing office location are based in New York. We then match analysts
located in New York with voter records from New York City and New Jersey, and analysts
whose office is in Chicago with voter records from Illinois. We use the following method
to match each analyst to an individual voter.
We first merge the analyst dataset and voter lists by first name, middle initial, and
last name. In case of multiple matches, we apply the following criteria to determine the
correct unique match. First, we retain the match with the smallest age difference between
the analyst and the voter, conditional on the absolute age difference being three years or
63

less. Information on analysts’ age is obtained from online searches.27 Second, if the age
criterion does not allow us to determine a unique match, we use the distance between
the ZIP code of the analyst’s office location and the ZIP code of the voter address as a
criterion. Specifically, we define a voter as a valid unique match if (i) the voter lives within
a 50-mile radius from the rating agency and (ii) the second-nearest voter match is located
more than 50 miles farther away from the rating agency than the nearest voter. Third,
for remaining analysts located in New York who match both to voter records from New
York City and from New Jersey, we keep the match from New York City. Fourth, if the
analyst matches to multiple voters who always have the same party affiliation, we keep the
voter with the longest history. For those analysts who are not matched in the first step,
we perform another merge by first and last name only. All other steps described above
remain the same.
After removing analysts who match to multiple voters and for whom a unique match
cannot be determined, as well as analysts whose implied age at the time of the rating is
younger than 22 or older than 65 according to the age information in the voter record, we
are able to match 557 analysts to a unique voter record.
In the merged analyst-firm-quarter dataset, we define the analyst’s party affiliation at
the end of a given quarter as the most recent non-blank party affiliation in the matched
voter record (using all elections). If the matched voter never had a non-blank party affiliation, we set the affiliation to unaffiliated.

IA.A.2

Political Contributions

This section describes the political-contribution data and merging procedure used to obtain
additional information on the political leaning of individual analysts.
IA.A.2.1

Stanford’s Database on Ideology, Money in Politics, and Elections
(DIME)

Political contributions are obtained from Stanford’s Database on Ideology, Money in Politics, and Elections (DIME) database, which contains local, state, and federal-level contributions from individuals and organizations between 1979 and 2014. The DIME database
includes information about contributors’ ZIP codes as well as their employer and occupation. It relies on data from the Federal Election Commission (FEC), the National Institute
on Money in State Politics, the New York City Campaign Finance Board, the Center for
Responsive Politics, and the Internal Revenue Service. We restrict the sample to federal
27

We are able to find age information for approximately 65% of the analysts with duplicate matches to
voter records.

64

and state-level contributions. For a more detailed description of the DIME dataset, see
Bonica (2016).
IA.A.2.2

Merging Analyst Data with Political Contributions

Analysts are matched to political contributions using a procedure similar to the one described in Hong and Kostovetsky (2012). Specifically, credit analysts are matched to contributions using first and last names, applying the following filters:
1. Exclude contributions with contradicting middle names.
2. Exclude contributions outside the metropolitan area of the rating agency (i.e., more
than 100 miles away from the credit rating agency’s office).
3. Exclude contributions for which the employer and occupation are unrelated to finance
or rating agencies. We search for related strings such as “credit,” “rating,” “finance,”
and “wealth,” as well as for names of the main rating agencies and other large financial
firms.
4. Exclude analysts who are matched to more than three different contributors, according to the contributor identifier provided in DIME.
Following the merging procedure described above, we are able to identify a federal
or state-level contribution for 57 analysts. Using this information, we create a quarterly
panel of analysts’ party affiliation, where Democratic analysts are defined as individuals
who made most of their contributions to Democratic candidates. Republicans are defined
analogously. An analyst is considered unaffiliated if none of the contributions by the analyst
can be attributed to a specific political party.
In 72% of the analyst-quarter observations where we have a non-missing party affiliation
from both the voter records and the contributions data, the party affiliations from both
sources agree. Moreover, once we condition on Democratic and Republican affiliations only,
the two sources agree in 96% of the cases.

65

Table IA.1: Summary Statistics – Voter Records
This table summarizes party affiliation for all registered voters in the New York City, New Jersey,
and Illinois voter files, by election type. Other refers to all voters who are affiliated with parties
other than Democratic and Republican. Total Count shows the total number of voters by election
type. Switch between Democratic and Republican shows the ratio of voters who have switched at
least once from Democratic to Republican, or vice versa.
New York City
General Elections
Primary Elections
Other Elections
Total

Democrat

Republican

Other

Unaffiliated

Total Count

0.725
0.869
0.950
0.784

0.116
0.097
0.040
0.100

0.029
0.006
0.004
0.022

0.129
0.028
0.007
0.095

21,800,991
3,663,031
5,749,550
31,213,572

Switch between Democratic and Republican
New Jersey
General Elections
Primary Elections
Other Elections
Total

0.028

Democrat

Republican

Other

Unaffiliated

Total Count

0.443
0.625
0.417
0.475

0.299
0.374
0.291
0.313

0.002
0.000
0.003
0.002

0.255
0.000
0.288
0.210

21,048,052
6,471,747
5,068,883
32,588,682

Switch between Democratic and Republican
Illinois
General Elections
Primary Elections
Other Elections
Total

0.015

Democrat

Republican

Other

Unaffiliated

Total Count

0.000
0.487
0.000
0.140

0.000
0.371
0.000
0.107

0.000
0.002
0.000
0.000

1.000
0.141
1.000
0.753

33,567,464
18,368,420
11,936,881
63,872,765

Switch between Democratic and Republican

66

0.120

IA.B

Measures of Political Polarization in the Views
of Economic Conditions

Our main measure of political polarization in the views of economic conditions is based on
the Gallup Daily survey by Gallup, Inc. We also construct an alternative measure based
on the Thomson Reuters University of Michigan Survey of Consumers. The Gallup Daily
survey is nationally representative and covers around 1,000 individuals every day for years
2008 to 2017. To measure the views on current economic conditions, the Gallup survey asks
the following question: “How would you rate economic conditions in this country today
— as excellent, good, only fair, or poor?” The responses to this question are converted
into a numerical scale that ranges from 1 (poor) to 4 (excellent). Moreover, the Gallup
survey contains two question about political affiliation, which allows classification of the
survey respondents into Democrats, Republicans, or Independents. The first question
asks, “In politics, as of today, do you consider yourself a Republican, a Democrat, or an
Independent?” If the individual answers Republican or Democrat, no further question is
asked regarding party affiliation. If the individual answers Independent, Other, or refuses
to answer, he or she is asked a second question: “As of today, do you lean more to the
Democratic Party or the Republican Party?” The individual can answer Republican or
Democrat. We follow Mian, Sufi, and Khoshkhou (2018) and classify an individual as
Republican if the individual answers Republican to either of these questions, and Democrat
if the individual answers Democrat to either of these questions. The remaining individuals
are classified as Independents. Our measure of political polarization in economic views is
the absolute difference in the average economic views of Democrats and Republicans in a
given calendar quarter.
The Michigan Survey covers around 500 individuals every month and is nationally
representative. We use the Current Economic Conditions Index from the Michigan Survey
to capture views of economic conditions. This index is a slightly adjusted average of the
answers to two different questions meant to capture the views of individuals on current
economic conditions. The first question is “We are interested in how people are getting
along financially these days. Would you say that you (and your family living there) are
better off or worse off financially than you were a year ago?” The second question is
“About the big things people buy for their homes such as furniture, a refrigerator, stove,
television, and things like that. Generally speaking, do you think now is a good time or
a bad time for people to buy major household items?” To classify the political affiliation
of the respondents, the survey asks the following question: “Generally speaking, do you
usually think of yourself as a Republican, a Democrat, an Independent or what?” with

67

possible answers being “Democrat,” “Republican,” or “Independent.” However, the survey
only asked the question on political affiliation in the following months: June 1980, January
1984, July 1984, January 1985, April 1985, May 1985, September through November 2006,
March 2008 through June 2009, March 2010 through November 2010, April 2012, May
2012, September through November 2012, June 2014, June 2015, June through October
2016, and February and March of 2017. Given that the Michigan Survey does not ask the
political affiliation between years 1985 and 2006, we use data from the Michigan Survey
starting in 2006. For quarters with one or two consecutive missing values, we impute them
by using the average of two non-missing quarters around these missing quarters. As with
the Gallup Survey, our main measure of political polarization is the absolute difference in
the average Current Economic Conditions Index between Democrats and Republicans in a
given calendar quarter.
We standardize both variables to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. We
plot the time-series of our two measures of polarization in economic views in Figure IA.1.

68

(a) Views of Republicans and Democrats from the Gallup Daily Survey

(b) Absolute Difference between Views of Republicans and Democrats

Figure IA.1: Political Polarization in the Views of Economic Conditions. The
figure plots the time series of our political polarization in economic views. In panel (a),
we plot the average economic views of Democrats and Republicans from the Gallup Daily
Survey. In panel (b), we plot the absolute difference in economic views between Democrats
and Republicans based on data from the Gallup Daily Survey (Econ. polarization Gallup),
and the Current Economic Conditions Index from the Michigan Survey (Econ. polarization
Michigan). Both measures in panel (b) are standardized to have a mean of 0 and a standard
deviation of 1.
69

IA.C

Summary Statistics for Online Survey
Table IA.2: Summary Statistics – Credit Analyst Survey

This table summarizes the responses from our online survey of credit rating analysts. The sample
consists of 57 responses from individuals who indicated they have worked as credit rating analysts
and who responded to the question on their view of economic conditions and their political
affiliation. The survey is described in more detail in section 7.1.1 in the main paper.

N

Mean

SD

Dependent Variables
Current Economic Conditions

57

2.87

0.54

Years of Experience as a Credit Rating Analyst
<5
5–10
10–15
>15

57
57
57
57

11%
22%
32%
35%

Party Affiliation
Democrat
Republican
Independent

57
57
57

39%
28%
33%

Age Group
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75–84

57
57
57
57
57
57

6%
28%
26%
33%
5%
2%

Ethnic Origin
Asian
African American
White
Other

55
55
55
55

16%
2%
78%
4%

Gender
Female
Male

56
56

30%
70%

70

IA.D

Additional Analyses

Energy
Materials
Industrials
Consumer Discretionary
Consumer Staples
Health Care
Financials
Information Technology
Telecommunication Services
Utilities
Real Estate
0

.005

.01

.015

.02

.025

Figure IA.2: Coefficient Estimates after Excluding Each GICS Sector and by Initial Rating Category. The figure plots the coefficient estimate on ideological mismatch
from the regression specification in Table 2, column (3) in the main paper, after excluding
one GICS sector at a time.

71

.04
.03
.02
.01
0

A- or above

BBB

BB

B+ or below

Figure IA.3: Coefficient Estimates by Initial Rating Category. The figure plots
the coefficient estimate on the interaction term between ideological mismatch and four
different rating categories. The regression specification is otherwise the same as in Table
2, column (1). Rating categories refer to the credit rating at the end of the quarter prior
to the ratings change. We also plot the corresponding 95% confidence intervals, based on
standard errors that are double-clustered at the firm and analyst level.

72

Table IA.3: Predicting Registered Voter Status with Firm Characteristics
This table regresses an indicator for analysts who are registered voters on characteristics of the
rated firm. Registered Voter is an indicator equal to 1 for analysts who can be matched to a voter
registration record, and 0 otherwise. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean
of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard
errors that allow for double-clustering at the analyst and firm level.

Registered Voter
Size
Investment
Leverage
Tobin’s Q
Cash
Cash flow
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Median lagged rating × Quarter FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

(2)

0.0288
(2.12)
-0.0021
(-0.27)
0.0113
(0.78)
0.0159
(1.48)
-0.0115
(-1.37)
0.0095
(1.51)
0.0653
(3.24)
-0.0399
(-1.28)

0.0150
(1.10)
-0.0014
(-0.18)
0.0055
(0.40)
0.0171
(1.63)
-0.0119
(-1.43)
0.0075
(1.25)
0.0845
(3.85)
-0.0481
(-1.47)

113,624
0.128
Yes
No

113,624
0.143
Yes
Yes

73

Table IA.4: Predicting Registered Voter Status and Party Affiliation with Analyst Characteristics
This table regresses indicators for registered voters (Panel A) and Democratic analysts (Panel B)
on analyst characteristics. Registered Voter is an indicator equal to 1 for analysts who can be
matched to a voter registration record, and 0 otherwise. Democrat is an indicator equal to 1 for
analysts who are are registered with the Democratic Party, and 0 for analysts who are registered
with the Republican Party. Prob. Hispanic, Prob. Black and Prob. Asian are the probabilities
that the analyst’s race/ethnicity is Hispanic or Latino, black or African American, and Asian or
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, respectively. The probability is inferred based on the
analyst’s first and last names using the API name-prism.com. Female is an indicator equal to
1 if the analyst is female, and 0 otherwise. Gender is inferred based on the analyst’s first name,
using the API api.genderize.io, as well as from manual online searches. t-statistics, reported
in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for double-clustering at the analyst and
firm level.
Panel A: Registered Voters vs. Non-registered Voters

Prob. Hispanic
Prob. Black
Prob. Asian
Female
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

Registered Voter
(2)

(3)

-0.4129
(-2.82)
0.0376
(0.14)
-0.0968
(-1.35)
-0.0266
(-0.66)
0.0780
(4.03)
-0.0463
(-2.18)

-0.4498
(-2.83)
0.0458
(0.17)
-0.1160
(-1.66)
-0.0365
(-0.91)
0.0777
(4.02)
-0.0498
(-2.46)

-0.4084
(-2.78)
0.0324
(0.12)
-0.0925
(-1.31)
-0.0287
(-0.71)
0.0844
(4.25)
-0.0467
(-2.16)

178,985
0.425
Yes
Yes
No
No

178,890
0.437
Yes
No
Yes
No

178,985
0.430
Yes
No
No
Yes
Continued on next page

74

Panel B: Democratic vs. Republican Analysts

Prob. Hispanic
Prob. Black
Prob. Asian
Female
Age
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

Democrat
(2)

(3)

-0.4290
(-1.61)
1.2008
(8.57)
0.1516
(2.03)
0.3954
(7.29)
0.0037
(1.15)
-0.0460
(-1.51)
-0.0582
(-1.50)

-0.3651
(-1.36)
1.1777
(7.91)
0.1231
(1.66)
0.3567
(6.42)
0.0036
(1.13)
-0.0548
(-1.74)
-0.0737
(-2.08)

-0.4242
(-1.57)
1.1935
(8.75)
0.1492
(1.99)
0.3918
(7.28)
0.0034
(1.06)
-0.0476
(-1.52)
-0.0580
(-1.44)

30,569
0.627
Yes
Yes
No
No

30,569
0.656
Yes
No
Yes
No

30,569
0.635
Yes
No
No
Yes

75

Table IA.5: Baseline Result: Democratic vs. Republican vs. Unaffiliated Analysts
This table repeats the analysis from Table 2 after replacing ideological mismatch with indicators
for the analyst’s party affiliation and an indicator for Democratic presidents. Panel A estimates
the regression on the subsample of Democratic and Republican analysts only. We regress quarterly
rating changes on Democrat, an indicator equal to 1 for analysts who are affiliated with the
Democratic Party, and 0 for Republican analysts, as well as on an interaction with an indicator
for Democratic presidents (DemPresident). Panel B repeats the analysis, but adds unaffiliated
analysts, defined as all analysts who are classified as unaffiliated in the voter records. The
coefficients on Democrat and Republican in Panel B capture the difference relative to the base
group of unaffiliated analysts. At the bottom of the table, we report the results from an F -test
that assesses whether the difference between Republican and Democratic analysts is statistically
significant under Democratic and Republican presidents, respectively. t-statistics, reported in
parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for double-clustering at the analyst and firm
level.
Panel A: Democratic vs. Republican Analysts

Democrat
Democrat × DemPresident
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
DemPresident F -stat
DemPresident p-value
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

Rating Change
(2)

(3)

0.0313
(3.88)
-0.0365
(-3.85)
0.0060
(1.58)
0.0001
(0.04)

0.0285
(3.59)
-0.0346
(-3.62)
0.0056
(1.51)
0.0001
(0.09)

0.0268
(3.79)
-0.0299
(-3.60)
0.0058
(1.59)
-0.0002
(-0.12)

29,348
0.798
1.48
0.225
Yes
Yes
No
No

29,348
0.799
2.05
0.154
Yes
No
Yes
No

29,346
0.803
0.58
0.447
Yes
No
No
Yes
Continued on next page

76

Panel B: Democratic and Republican vs. Unaffiliated Analysts

Republican
Republican × DemPresident
Democrat
Democrat × DemPresident
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
RepPresident F -stat
RepPresident p-value
DemPresident F -stat
DemPresident p-value
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

Rating Change
(2)

(3)

-0.0162
(-2.88)
0.0228
(3.32)
0.0117
(1.84)
-0.0103
(-1.39)
0.0005
(0.21)
-0.0003
(-0.25)

-0.0157
(-2.73)
0.0222
(3.18)
0.0089
(1.43)
-0.0111
(-1.54)
-0.0001
(-0.03)
-0.0002
(-0.14)

-0.0138
(-2.52)
0.0200
(3.00)
0.0089
(1.49)
-0.0066
(-0.94)
0.0001
(0.02)
-0.0002
(-0.16)

49,316
0.806
16.38
0.000
2.01
0.157
Yes
Yes
No
No

49,316
0.806
13.37
0.000
5.79
0.017
Yes
No
Yes
No

49,314
0.810
13.71
0.000
1.30
0.254
Yes
No
No
Yes

77

Table IA.6: Baseline Result: Additional Controls
This table regresses rating changes on ideological mismatch, after adding additional analyst-level
controls, as well as their interaction with an indicator for Democratic presidents (DemPresident).
The coefficients on the non-interacted analyst controls are suppressed for brevity. t-statistics,
reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for double-clustering at the
analyst and firm level.

Ideological mismatch
Tenure × DemPresident
No. of firms covered × DemPresident
Prob. Hispanic × DemPresident
Prob. Black × DemPresident
Prob. Asian × DemPresident
Female × DemPresident
Age × DemPresident
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE
Analyst controls

(1)

Rating Change
(2)

(3)

0.0145
(3.49)
-0.0130
(-2.22)
0.0029
(0.76)
0.0057
(0.16)
-0.0408
(-1.20)
-0.0018
(-0.13)
-0.0094
(-1.17)
0.0008
(2.38)

0.0148
(3.58)
-0.0133
(-2.28)
0.0038
(1.02)
0.0057
(0.17)
-0.0432
(-1.21)
-0.0018
(-0.13)
-0.0074
(-0.95)
0.0009
(2.44)

0.0124
(3.23)
-0.0115
(-2.02)
0.0019
(0.55)
0.0096
(0.30)
-0.0388
(-1.18)
0.0051
(0.39)
-0.0045
(-0.60)
0.0007
(2.09)

49,232
0.801
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

49,232
0.801
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

49,230
0.805
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

78

Table IA.7: Baseline Result: Democratic vs. Republican Analysts Using Rating
Levels
This table repeats the analysis in Table IA.5, after replacing the rating change with the rating
level as the dependent variable. Panel A shows the baseline result and Panel B drops quarters
0 and +1 around all presidential elections which lead to a change in the party of the president. At the bottom of the table we report the results from an F -test that assesses whether the
difference between Republican and Democratic analysts is statistically significant under Democratic presidents. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow
for double-clustering at the analyst and firm level.
Panel A: Baseline Regression

Democrat
Democrat × DemPresident
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
DemPresident F -stat
DemPresident p-value
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

Rating Level
(2)

(3)

0.0629
(1.03)
-0.1607
(-2.45)
-0.0241
(-0.91)
0.0178
(1.05)

0.0273
(0.56)
-0.1016
(-1.72)
-0.0088
(-0.40)
0.0108
(0.72)

0.0394
(0.74)
-0.1366
(-2.30)
-0.0285
(-1.15)
0.0120
(0.78)

29,932
0.985
4.47
0.035
Yes
Yes
No
No

29,932
0.986
4.14
0.043
Yes
No
Yes
No

29,932
0.986
4.52
0.034
Yes
No
No
Yes
Continued on next page

79

Panel B: Dropping Quarters (0,+1) around Presidential Elections

Democrat
Democrat × DemPresident
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
DemPresident F -stat
DemPresident p-value
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

Rating Level
(2)

(3)

0.1129
(1.58)
-0.2069
(-2.65)
-0.0133
(-0.50)
0.0140
(0.80)

0.0662
(1.11)
-0.1384
(-1.94)
-0.0010
(-0.05)
0.0077
(0.50)

0.0891
(1.44)
-0.1840
(-2.60)
-0.0173
(-0.68)
0.0077
(0.48)

27,434
0.985
4.02
0.046
Yes
Yes
No
No

27,434
0.986
3.74
0.054
Yes
No
Yes
No

27,434
0.986
4.16
0.042
Yes
No
No
Yes

80

Table IA.8: Robustness to Using Unwinsorized Rating Changes
This table repeats the analysis in Table 2, after replacing the winsorized rating change with the
unwinsorized rating change as the dependent variable. Panel A shows the baseline result; Panel
B removes firms that are in default either at the end of quarter t or at the end of the previous
quarter; and Panel C removes rating changes which are larger than the 99th or smaller than the
1st percentile of the rating change distribution. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based
on standard errors that allow for double-clustering at the analyst and firm level.
Panel A: Baseline Regression

Ideological mismatch
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE

(1)

Unwinsorized Rating Change
(2)

(3)

0.0161
(2.98)
0.0010
(0.36)
-0.0009
(-0.58)

0.0159
(2.88)
0.0002
(0.08)
-0.0002
(-0.10)

0.0117
(2.21)
0.0001
(0.02)
-0.0003
(-0.21)

49,792
0.816
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

49,792
0.816
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

49,790
0.820
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

(1)

Unwinsorized Rating Change
(2)

(3)

0.0162
(3.37)
0.0007
(0.26)
0.0002
(0.15)

0.0166
(3.56)
-0.0001
(-0.03)
0.0006
(0.44)

0.0127
(2.85)
-0.0001
(-0.03)
0.0003
(0.23)

49,609
0.818
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

49,609
0.818
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

49,607
0.822
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Removing Defaults

Ideological mismatch
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE

Continued on next page

81

Panel C: Removing Extreme Rating Changes

Ideological mismatch
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE

(1)

Unwinsorized Rating Change
(2)

(3)

0.0153
(3.81)
-0.0013
(-0.49)
0.0007
(0.57)

0.0153
(3.95)
-0.0019
(-0.73)
0.0007
(0.60)

0.0137
(3.92)
-0.0010
(-0.38)
0.0004
(0.29)

49,039
0.788
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

49,039
0.788
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

49,037
0.792
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

82

Table IA.9: Baseline Result: Include Unregistered Analysts
This table repeats the analysis from Table IA.5, Panel B, after adding unregistered analysts and
treating them as unaffiliated. The coefficients on Democrat and Republican capture the difference
relative to the base group of unaffiliated and unregistered analysts. At the bottom of the table,
we report the results from an F -test that assesses whether the difference between Republican
and Democratic analysts is statistically significant under Democratic and Republican presidents,
respectively. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for
double-clustering at the analyst and firm level.

Republican
Republican × DemPresident
Democrat
Democrat × DemPresident
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
RepPresident F -stat
RepPresident p-value
DemPresident F -stat
DemPresident p-value
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

Rating Change
(2)

(3)

-0.0096
(-3.16)
0.0138
(3.24)
0.0030
(0.94)
-0.0036
(-0.89)
0.0002
(0.11)
-0.0002
(-0.32)

-0.0088
(-2.81)
0.0130
(3.06)
0.0003
(0.10)
-0.0028
(-0.70)
0.0004
(0.28)
-0.0004
(-0.60)

-0.0076
(-2.71)
0.0113
(2.86)
0.0033
(1.08)
-0.0027
(-0.69)
0.0000
(0.02)
-0.0002
(-0.35)

167,161
0.793
8.52
0.004
2.96
0.086
Yes
Yes
No
No

167,084
0.793
4.42
0.036
6.49
0.011
Yes
No
Yes
No

167,159
0.795
7.45
0.007
1.34
0.247
Yes
No
No
Yes

83

Table IA.10: Mismatch with Congress
This table regresses quarterly rating changes on Mismatch with Senate, an indicator equal to 1
for analysts whose party affiliation does not match the party majority in the U.S. Senate, and 0
otherwise; Mismatch with House, an indicator equal to 1 for analysts whose party affiliation does
not match the party majority in the U.S. House of Representatives, and 0 otherwise; and Mismatch
with President, our baseline definition of ideology mismatch based on the party affiliation of the
president. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for doubleclustering at the analyst and firm level.
Rating Change
(2)
(3)

(1)
Mismatch with Senate

0.0071
(2.55)

Mismatch with House

0.0031
(0.90)

Mismatch with President
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE

(4)

0.0000
(0.01)

-0.0004
(-0.14)
0.0001
(0.05)

-0.0003
(-0.13)
0.0001
(0.09)

0.0134
(3.14)
-0.0004
(-0.15)
-0.0000
(-0.02)

49,790
0.808
Yes
Yes
Yes

49,790
0.808
Yes
Yes
Yes

49,790
0.808
Yes
Yes
Yes

84

0.0014
(0.39)
0.0132
(3.71)
-0.0004
(-0.14)
-0.0000
(-0.01)
49,790
0.808
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table IA.11: Event Study around the 2016 Presidential Election
This table regresses quarterly rating changes on Democrat, an indicator equal to 1 for analysts
who are affiliated with the Democratic Party, and zero for Republican analysts, as well as its
interaction with Post Trump, an indicator equal to 1 for all quarters after and including the
presidential election quarter (2016Q4), and 0 otherwise. The sample is restricted to Democratic
and Republican analysts, as well as to the time period from 2015Q1 to 2018Q1. t-statistics,
reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for double-clustering at the
analyst and firm level.

Democrat
Democratic × Post Trump
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE

(1)

Rating Change
(2)

(3)

-0.0040
(-0.58)
0.0323
(2.12)
0.0013
(0.21)
0.0031
(1.10)

-0.0092
(-1.32)
0.0328
(2.22)
0.0011
(0.20)
0.0003
(0.11)

-0.0003
(-0.04)
0.0245
(1.99)
0.0013
(0.23)
0.0033
(1.15)

7,916
0.813
Yes
Yes
No
No

7,916
0.815
Yes
No
Yes
No

7,916
0.819
Yes
No
No
Yes

85

Table IA.12: Abnormal Stock Returns around Rating Actions
This table regresses cumulative abnormal stock returns around downgrades (Panels A and B) and
upgrades (Panels C and D) on ideological mismatch. Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) are
measured in percent and calculated using the Fama and French (1993) and Carhart (1997) model
estimated over trading days (-300,-50) and are measured over an event window of (-1,+1) (Panels
A and C) and (-3,+3) (Panels B and D), respectively. In columns (3) and (4), we exclude rating
changes where a corporate earnings announcement or M&A announcement falls inside the event
window. In all regressions, we control for the log of the firm’s total book assets, leverage, Tobin’s
Q, and cash holdings, as well as for the analysts’ party affiliations. All variables are defined in
Appendix A.1. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for
clustering at the calendar-date level.
Panel A: CAR(–1,+1) around Downgrades
CAR(–1,+1)
Ideological mismatch
Rating change
Observations
R2
Month FE
Agency FE
Agency × Month FE
Excluding corporate events
Control variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.8422
(1.47)
-1.0200
(-2.54)

0.7225
(1.07)
-1.0317
(-2.28)

0.7969
(1.36)
-1.0097
(-2.41)

0.6869
(0.96)
-1.0932
(-2.33)

1,870
0.141
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

1,740
0.256
No
No
Yes
No
Yes

1,692
0.162
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

1,560
0.270
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Panel B: CAR(–3,+3) around Downgrades
CAR(–3,+3)
Ideological mismatch
Rating change
Observations
R2
Month FE
Agency FE
Agency × Month FE
Excluding corporate events
Control variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.1300
(-0.16)
-1.7819
(-3.12)

-0.2108
(-0.21)
-1.6730
(-2.50)

-0.6989
(-0.79)
-2.1545
(-3.38)

-0.9453
(-0.85)
-1.9289
(-2.56)

1,870
0.155
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

1,740
0.236
No
No
Yes
No
Yes

1,542
0.167
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

1,411
0.245
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Continued on next page

86

Panel C: CAR(–1,+1) around Upgrades
CAR(–1,+1)
Ideological mismatch
Rating change
Observations
R2
Month FE
Agency FE
Agency × Month FE
Excluding corporate events
Control variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.1238
(0.46)
0.1976
(0.54)

0.0335
(0.10)
-0.1975
(-0.48)

0.1410
(0.53)
0.1313
(0.37)

-0.0096
(-0.03)
-0.1513
(-0.37)

1,436
0.182
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

1,324
0.270
No
No
Yes
No
Yes

1,361
0.173
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

1,246
0.266
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Panel D: CAR(–3,+3) around Upgrades
CAR(–3,+3)
Ideological mismatch
Rating change
Observations
R2
Month FE
Agency FE
Agency × Month FE
Excluding corporate events
Control variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.2368
(0.54)
-0.2384
(-0.47)

0.0744
(0.14)
-0.5766
(-0.89)

0.5384
(1.17)
-0.3031
(-0.56)

0.3240
(0.57)
-0.3800
(-0.55)

1,436
0.165
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

1,324
0.245
No
No
Yes
No
Yes

1,264
0.168
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

1,142
0.245
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

87

Table IA.13: Yield Spread Changes around Rating Actions
This table regresses yield spread changes around downgrades (Panel A) and upgrades (Panel
B) on ideological mismatch. Yield spread changes are computed as the difference in the yield
spread between the first day on which the bond is traded after the announcement and the last
day the bond is traded before the announcement, respectively, measured in basis points. In
columns (3) and (4), we exclude rating changes where a corporate earnings announcement or
M&A announcement falls inside the event window. We control for the log of the firm’s total book
assets, leverage, Tobin’s Q, cash holdings, and the analysts’ party affiliations. All variables are
defined in Appendix A.1. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that
allow for double-clustering at the firm and calendar-date level.
Panel A: Changes in Yield Spreads for Downgrades
∆ Yield Spread
(2)
(3)

(1)
Ideological mismatch
Rating change
Observations
R2
Month FE
Agency FE
Agency × Month FE
Excluding corporate events
Control variables

(4)

4.4910
(0.77)
18.0479
(3.10)

4.2090
(0.50)
19.7653
(2.66)

5.6751
(0.90)
18.7856
(2.90)

3.1907
(0.37)
21.8284
(2.72)

765
0.210
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

611
0.315
No
No
Yes
No
Yes

714
0.218
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

551
0.324
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Changes in Yield Spreads for Upgrades
∆ Yield Spread
(2)
(3)

(1)
Ideological mismatch
Rating change
Observations
R2
Month FE
Agency FE
Agency × Month FE
Excluding corporate events
Control variables

(4)

-2.1086
(-0.47)
12.5119
(2.05)

-5.2249
(-0.73)
10.2122
(1.60)

-1.1760
(-0.25)
13.7761
(2.10)

-4.4083
(-0.61)
11.5444
(1.63)

569
0.339
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

452
0.435
No
No
Yes
No
Yes

551
0.346
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

432
0.437
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

88

Table IA.14: Yield Spreads at Issuance
This table regresses the average yield spread on the firm’s newly issued bonds in a given quarter
on an indicator equal to 1 if the fraction of misaligned analysts covering the firm exceeds 50%,
and 0 otherwise. Yield spreads at issuance are obtained from Mergent FISD. In column (1),
we compute the equal-weighted yield spread across all bonds issued in a given firm-quarter. In
column (2), we compute the weighted average yield spread, where weights are proportional to the
offering amount. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for
clustering at the firm level.
Yield Spread
Ideological mismatch
Size
Investment
Leverage
Tobin’s Q
Cash
Cashflow
Observations
R2
Median lagged rating × Quarter FE

(1)

(2)

11.8865
(2.12)
-14.3991
(-3.18)
19.4941
(0.64)
90.0697
(3.43)
-33.4753
(-6.09)
80.6050
(3.09)
-334.4361
(-1.45)

11.8884
(2.12)
-14.0214
(-3.09)
20.5498
(0.67)
89.6481
(3.40)
-32.9816
(-5.94)
82.7209
(3.16)
-330.6942
(-1.43)

1,350
0.865
Yes

1,350
0.864
Yes

89

Table IA.15: Firm Investment
This table regresses the logarithm of the firm’s quarterly capital expenditures around presidential
elections on the share of misaligned analysts rating the firm as well as on an interaction with
a post-election indicator. In column (1), we use the continuous share of misaligned analysts; in
column (2) we sort firms into terciles based on their share of misaligned analysts; and in column
(3) we sort firms into quartiles. In all columns, the sample is restricted to quarters that fall
inside the (–4,+4) event window around presidential elections that lead to a change in the party
of the president. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for
clustering at the firm level.
Log Capex
(2)

(1)
Mismatch Share
Mismatch Share × Post

0.1351
(2.09)
-0.1024
(-2.20)

Mismatch Tercile

0.0327
(1.21)
-0.0451
(-2.33)

Mismatch Tercile × Post
Mismatch Quartile

0.0336
(1.62)
-0.0364
(-2.52)

Mismatch Quartile × Post
Observations
R2
Firm FE
Quarter FE

(3)

11,133
0.917
Yes
Yes

11,133
0.917
Yes
Yes

90

11,133
0.917
Yes
Yes

Table IA.16: Interaction with Polarization of Economic Views: Alternative Measure
This table repeats the analysis presented in Table 8 using an alternative measure of political
polarization in the views of economic conditions. Econ. polarization Michigan refers to the
difference in economic views between Democrats and Republicans based on the Current Economic
Conditions Index from the Michigan Survey. The index is standardized to have a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation of 1. Section IA.B provides more details on the survey questions. t-statistics,
reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors that allow for double-clustering at the
analyst and firm level.

Ideological mismatch
Mismatch × Econ. polarization Michigan
Tenure
No. of firms covered
Observations
R2
Firm × Quarter FE
Agency FE
Agency × Sector FE
Agency × Quarter FE
Party affiliation FE

(1)

Rating Change
(2)

(3)

0.0115
(2.20)
0.0087
(2.08)
0.0010
(0.31)
-0.0013
(-0.56)

0.0121
(2.41)
0.0086
(2.03)
0.0005
(0.16)
-0.0011
(-0.59)

0.0105
(2.24)
0.0058
(1.38)
0.0015
(0.45)
-0.0010
(-0.44)

24,724
0.815
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

24,724
0.816
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

24,724
0.818
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

91

