NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAKING TIME USE SERIOUSLY:
INCOME, WAGES AND PRICE DISCRIMINATION
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Jeff Biddle
Working Paper 25308
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25308

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We thank the University of Minnesota Population Center for providing the ATUS-X extracts,
Centre Maurice Halbwachs for providing the French data, and the IZA for the German data.
Zareh Asatryan, Joan Costa-Font, Michael Geruso, Steve Woodbury, and participants at seminars
at numerous universities and institutes provided helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Daniel S. Hamermesh and Jeff Biddle. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Taking Time Use Seriously: Income, Wages And Price Discrimination
Daniel S. Hamermesh and Jeff Biddle
NBER Working Paper No. 25308
November 2018
JEL No. J15,J22
ABSTRACT
The American Time Use Survey 2003-15, the French Enquête Emploi du Temps, 2009-10, and
the German Zeitverwendungserhebung, 2012-13, have sufficient observations to allow examining
the theory of household production in much more detail than ever before. We identify income
effects on time use by non-workers, showing that relatively time-intensive commodities—sleep
and TV-watching—are inferior. For workers we identify income and substitution effects
separately, with both in the same direction on these commodities as the income effects among
non-workers. We rationalize the results by generalizing Becker’s (1965) “commodity production”
model, allowing both substitution between time and goods in household production and
substitution among commodities in utility functions. We then use the evidence of price
discrimination in product markets against minorities in the U.S. and immigrants in France to
motivate an extension of the model that predicts how household production differs between
members of these groups and the majority. We find the predicted results—minorities engage in
more time-intensive activities, sleep and TV-watching, than otherwise identical majority-group
members.

Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
Barnard College
3009 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu
Jeff Biddle
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
biddle@msu.edu

I.

Introduction—Economic Variables in Time Use
The literature on time use is immense; but due to the paucity of available data allowing

identification of income and price effects, few attempts have been made to take Becker’s (1965)
“commodity production” model seriously as a guide to empirical work, in the sense of deriving and testing
the implications of an explicitly specified model (Kooreman and Kapteyn, 1987; Biddle and Hamermesh,
1990; and recently Blundell et al., 2018). With the recent accumulation in several countries of very large
collections of time diaries, this problem can now be vitiated. These data reveal strong empirical regularities
in the relationship between household income and quantitatively important categories of time use. We show
that a straightforward generalization of Becker’s model provides a simple rationalization of these
regularities.
The data also allow testing an implication of the theory of time use about how behavior is affected
by discrimination. Literatures measuring the extent of discrimination along such dimensions as race,
ethnicity and gender are immense; and there are burgeoning literatures measuring the amount of
discrimination by sexual orientation, disability status, appearance and other characteristics.1 With the
exception of the fairly large literature on racial differences in consumption/saving behavior, consideration
of how discrimination affects the behavior of the agents who are discriminated against is rare. 2 Even the
few studies that examine these effects concentrate only on how agents’ behavior in market(s) where they
are discriminated against is altered by the discrimination that they face in those markets. Missing
completely is any research on how discrimination in one market affects the behavior of disadvantaged
agents in a different market or area of activity— how discrimination spills over across markets. Within the
context of the theory of household production we examine one spillover, namely how racial/ethnic
differences in the allocation of time are affected by racially discriminatory pricing in product markets.

1

On race, see, e.g., Charles and Guryan (2008); on ethnicity Leal and Trejo (2011); on gender, Blau and Kahn (2017);
on sexual orientation Valfort (2017); on disability Beegle and Stock (2003); on appearance Hamermesh (2011).
2

Among the few studies that make this at least part of their analyses is Parsons et al. (2011).

1

We begin by discussing the sets of time diaries used in this study, those for the U.S., France and
Germany. With these data we present broad-based evidence of a negative relationship between income and
two quantitatively important uses of time: sleep and television watching, both of which are “time-intensive”
commodities. One obvious explanation for this relationship was provided by Becker (1965): rising worker
productivity would increase the opportunity cost of time, thus raising the relative prices of time- to goodsintensive commodities, inducing substitution away from the former and towards the latter. In most models
using this framework, however, all time uses except market work are “normal”, so that there is an income
effect that works against this substitution effect, even for time-intensive commodities. Also, the explanation
does not account for the possible existence of this pattern among non-workers, for whom income
differences cannot result from wage differences.
In Section III we use samples of workers to estimate separately the income and substitution effects
on time spent sleeping and television watching, along with effects on two activities that are likely to be
goods-intensive—eating away from home, and attending museums, sporting events and concerts. In Section
IV we explain the empirical results by developing a model that allows substitution between goods and time
in the production of commodities and between commodities in agents’ utility functions. The model
identifies a broad range of circumstances under which non-workers will respond to higher incomes, and
workers to higher wages, by substituting more goods-intensive commodities for more time-intensive
commodities in consumption and using more goods-intensive technologies of household production, in
keeping with the empirical results presented in Sections II and III. The model also suggests a hypothesis
regarding racial/ethnic differences in time use, and Section V develops and tests this hypothesis using the
American and French data.
II.

Data Sets and Estimates of Income Effects
With the creation of the ongoing American Time Use Survey (ATUS) in 2003, we now have over

170,000 one-day diaries of people’s short-term recollections of how they spend their time. 3 With a sampling

3

See Hamermesh et al. (2005) for a discussion of the characteristics of this data set.

2

frame based on previous respondents to the Current Population Survey, the ATUS also provides information
on a wide array of demographic characteristics and on family incomes. Minorities account for around 25
percent of the U.S. population. Thus this sample is also sufficiently large to allow the examination of
racial/ethnic differences in time use. For that purpose, we divide the sample into the following three
mutually exclusive groups: African-Americans, white Hispanics, and white non-Hispanics. 4
In 2009-10 France fielded its fourth roughly decennial national time-diary study, the Enquête
Emploi du Temps 2009-2010 (INSÉÉ, 2014). This survey collected nearly 28,000 diaries containing large
amounts of demographic and other information on people ages 10 or over throughout France, located in
roughly 12,000 households. Unlike the ATUS each person in the Enquête was asked to complete two oneday diaries, filling each out for 10-minute intervals from Midnight through 11:59PM on the previous day. 5
There is no information on race/ethnicity in this data set; but respondents are categorized by immigrant
status, and nearly 8 percent were immigrants. We analogize this demographic characteristic to race/ethnicity
in the U.S.
In its third roughly decennial time-diary study the German Statistical Office fielded the
Zeitverwendungserhebung over five quarters in 2012 and 2013. The survey asked respondents to complete
diaries on three separate days, with slightly heavier sampling of weekends than weekdays. As with the
French survey, respondents were asked to provide their activities in fixed intervals of time, and nearly
25,000 time diaries were collected (Statistiches Bundesamt, 2015). We present detailed descriptions of the
construction of the aggregates of time use in this and the other two data sets in the Data Appendix. 6

4

African-American is defined as anyone who reports being of a single race, African-American, or who lists two races,
with African-American being one of them. White Hispanic is anyone who is not African-American and who lists
his/her ethnicity as Hispanic. White non-Hispanic is any else who lists his/her sole racial affiliation as white. We
exclude Asian-Americans and the other very small racial groups.
5

This contrasts with the ATUS, in which respondents were asked to note the exact time that they began each new
activity and to describe its nature so that it could be coded into one of the over 400 categories describing time use.

6

This data set and the ATUS present daily totals of time spent in each individual activity. The Enquête presents the
activity undertaken in each ten-minute interval of the day, which we then aggregate across the diary day.

3

Our focus is on the economic measures in these surveys, wages and incomes, so we need to be clear
about how these are measured. In the ATUS, as in the CPS currently, household income is listed in 16
brackets. We assign mid-points to the closed intervals and assign 1.5 times the top-coded amount to the
highest, open interval. We compute the hourly wage rate (available only for those currently employed) as
usual weekly earnings divided by usual weekly hours and exclude workers with computed hourly wages
below $5 or above $150. The French income data are continuous measures with no top-coding, and can
thus be used as presented. We compute the hourly wage as monthly earnings divided by 4.33 times weekly
hours, using the same disqualifiers (in euros) as with the U.S. data. The German data set presents household
incomes and monthly earnings in only five brackets, creating a very high positive correlation between them
across individuals. For that reason, and also because its sample of immigrants is small, we only include the
German data in the examination of income effects among non-workers. In each data set, when we examine
workers’ behavior, we include the hourly wage measure and define non-labor income as the household’s
income less the worker’s earnings.
A frequent division of time use is into four categories: Paid work, home production, personal time
and leisure. Sleep predominates in personal care, and television-watching is the predominant leisure
activity. Sleep and television watching are both relatively time-intensive (Gronau and Hamermesh, 2007),
so that their responses to income and price differences may make them non-aggregable with other personal
and leisure activities. Thus, in each of the three data sets we divide personal care into sleep and other
personal care, and leisure into TV-watching and other leisure activities.
Table 1 lists statistics describing the six categories of time use for each of two samples in each of
the three data sets: All diaries for which the respondent reported no usual hours of work, no work on the
diary day and no usual earnings (non-workers); and all diaries for which the respondent reported usually
working and working on the day of the diary (workers). The statistics and estimates throughout are
calculated using the sampling weights. The means in Table 1 accord with what is generally known about
time use and its differences across countries. On workdays work time (of workers) and sleep time are about
equal in all three countries. Workers sleep less on workdays than do non-workers, and watch much less
4

television. In all categories Americans watch more television than the Europeans, especially among nonworkers. Averaging across all households in the samples, household incomes track the national averages
quite closely.
For each of the three samples of non-workers we estimate equations describing the responses of
each of the five non-work aggregates of time use to changes in household income. Large vectors of
demographic controls are included in each equation. While they necessarily differ across the three samples
because of differences in the available information, in all cases they include indicators of gender and marital
(coupled) status and their interaction, a quadratic in age, indicators of the numbers and ages of young
children, and vectors of indicators of educational attainment, and the year, month and day of the week for
which the diary was kept. They also include state in the U.S., and region in France.
Table 2 presents estimates of the impact of a $10,000 (€10,000) increase in annual income, far less
than one standard deviation in each case, on the minutes of time spent in each activity on a representative
day. These are pure income effects, since the samples are restricted to respondents who report no usual
work hours, do not work on the diary day and have no earnings. Because of the adding-up requirement, for
each country the five estimated income effects sum to zero.
While there are some variations across the three countries, there are remarkable similarities: 1)
Sleep and television-watching are uniformly inferior; and in each data set TV-watching is the most
relatively inferior commodity. The impacts of income on sleep are very close in the three data sets; 2) Other
leisure activities are uniformly superior and constitute the most relatively superior aggregate in each
sample; 3) The estimated impacts of increased income on the other two aggregates, home production and
other personal activities, are not uniformly positive or negative.
If we re-estimate these equations excluding any variable that might possibly be considered
endogenous, leaving only the respondent’s age and the year, month and day of the diary, in the U.S. all the
estimated income effects become larger in absolute value; most are also larger in the French data, but in the
German data the changes are mixed. Another alternative is to estimate this model separately for married

5

individuals, including their spouse’s age and education (the same coding as for the respondent’s
demographic characteristics). This re-specification hardly changes the estimates. 7
One might be concerned that non-workers’ choices are constrained by the activities of other family
members’ working and perhaps even by the time allocations of non-family members (Goux et al., 2017).
Because of the size of the ATUS sample, we can get some insight into this potential problem by examining
time allocation on public holidays by both non-workers and workers who do not work on the holiday (even
in the U.S., most workers). The second part of the upper panel in Table 2 presents the same equations as
before, but estimated over the reduced sample of 2,050 people who are not working on the holiday for
which they recorded a time diary. The estimates are remarkably similar to those for the entire sample of
non-workers; and they differ little if we restrict the sample still further to include only those of non-workers
who kept diaries on holidays.
In much of the following we focus on the two activities, sleeping and TV-watching. These are
hardly ever considered in the economics literature, no doubt because information on them is only available
in time-diary surveys. Yet, at least in the three countries examined here, they are the primary activities that
are the first and third-most important among the hundreds of ways that the data sets classify time use; and
together the average person in each country spends over ten hours per day engaged in these two activities.
We simulate income effects on these two uniformly inferior activities by calculating changes in
time spent in response to increases in family incomes from one standard deviation below the mean to one
standard deviation above. In the U.S. this increase would reduce the non-worker’s sleep time by 20 minutes
per night (4 percent), and his/her TV-watching time by 28 minutes (12 percent). In France it would reduce

7

Another possible concern is that some of the respondents may be more willing and available to complete a diary and
may do so differently from others. We do not have information on the difficulty of obtaining an ATUS respondent’s
diary; but we do know how difficult it was to contact them in their eighth month in the CPS. Dividing the sample by
this measure and re-estimating the equations for the U.S. in Table 2 yielded no significant differences among the three
sub-samples. Yet another concern might be that, despite restricting the samples to respondents who stated that their
usual work hours are zero and that they did no work on the diary day, perhaps they are still attached to the labor force.
To circumvent this potential difficulty, we re-estimate the equations for sleep and TV-watching on those non-workers
who are at least at the age of eligibility for a public pension. In all three countries the parameter estimates remain
statistically significant and negative, with the main change being that the difference in the impact of additional
unearned income in the U.S. on sleep time becomes even smaller relative to that on TV-watching.

6

non-workers’ sleeping by 12 minutes (2 percent) and TV-watching by 28 minutes (17 percent). In Germany
the analogous decreases are 12 minutes (2 percent) of sleeping and 20 minutes (12 percent) of TV-watching.
While both commodities are inferior, in all three data sets TV-watching is markedly more income elastic
than sleep. Physical limitations make it difficult to switch away from sleeping when incomes rise, although
some switching is apparently possible. No such limitations exist to choosing to watch less television when
more goods can be purchased; and people do substitute strongly against this activity in response to pure
increases in income.
III. Wage and Income Effects on Workers’ Time Use
To estimate income and wage effects for workers, we re-specify the equations estimated in Table
2, adding the hourly wage rate and replacing household income by household income minus the worker’s
earnings. 8 Because of the long history of focus in the labor-supply literature on women’s labor supply, we
estimate the models of time use separately by gender. Other than that, the control variables are the same as
those included in the equations underlying Table 2. The sample consists of all days reported by workers
who indicate that they engaged in some market work in the week preceding the diary day and in some work
on the diary day. We restrict the estimation to married (in France, coupled) to avoid including workers
whose income is nearly entirely their own earnings.
The upper panel of Table 3 shows estimates of the impacts of increases in other household income
(again in $10,000 units) and the worker’s hourly earnings (in $10 units, slightly less than one standard
deviation) on time spent in the two time-intensive activities, sleep and TV-watching, in the ATUS. 9 Both
activities respond negatively to increases in the price of the worker’s time. In these specifications the pure

8

We treat all other income the same rather than separating out partners’ earnings from unearned income. Because the
ATUS only collects one diary per household, we cannot examine cross-wage effects on time use within partnered
couples, so that a further disaggregation of household incomes would not be fruitful.
9

Estimates of the effects of these variables on time spent in the other four major uses of time are presented in the
Appendix for the U.S. and France. For purposes of comparison to other studies, the implied elasticities of labor supply
(at the intensive margin) are +0.02 for men, +0.06 for women.

7

income effects are much below those for non-workers in Table 2, and, except for women’s TV-watching,
not significantly nonzero. 10
A large literature has demonstrated the inelasticity of men’s labor supply and the decreasing
elasticity of women’s in the U.S. as well (Heim, 2007). While paid work time is obviously endogenous,
treating it as fixed in estimating these equations is not a large departure given its relative wage inelasticity,
especially in the literature examining the intensive margin. The bottom panel of Table 3 thus estimates the
demand equations for sleep and TV-watching holding work time constant. Except for women’s sleep time
the estimated effects of increases in hourly earnings change little from the upper panel. All the income
effects, however, become negative, with three of them becoming statistically significant; but their
magnitudes are still quite small, especially compared to the wage effects.
The estimates include all workers, of whom slightly more than half are paid hourly, and thus have
a specified hourly wage, and of whom the other half are salaried and whose hourly wage we calculated as
the ratio of usual weekly earnings to usual weekly hours. Excluding salaried workers from the estimates
might increase the reliability of the results (at the expense of cutting the sample in half) by removing
possible division-bias in the wage variable. Re-estimating the models summarized in Table 3 without
salaried workers, however, produces only minor changes in the parameter estimates.
We present estimates of the same equations for France in Table 4, again for all those who report
some paid work during the week and who work on the diary day. With sub-samples less than one-sixth the
sizes of the American sub-samples, we cannot expect the same significance of the parameter estimates.
Nonetheless, whether we hold paid work time constant or not, we do find substantial negative income
effects among workers, especially on time spent watching television. None of the wage effects is
statistically significant, but the largest are positive. The estimated wage effects contrast with those for the
U.S., which tended to be significant. A general conclusion from these tables is that pure income effects on
workers’ time spent sleeping and TV-watching are negative.

10

Some indirect corroborative evidence on these effects is provided by Aguiar et al. (2013), who use the implied cuts
in wages and incomes during the Great Recession to examine time spent in sleep and TV-watching.

8

As with the results for non-workers in Table 2, here too we re-estimate the models first with only
age and the year, month and day indicators, and with the two monetary measures included. The changes are
similar to those when we re-specified the models estimated in Table 2: The absolute values of the effects,
of both wages and incomes, generally become larger. Also, as in Table 2, when we include the spouse’s
demographic characteristics, the essential results change only slightly.
We know that health is correlated with income, so that income or earnings may proxy for poor
health. And people in worse health may find the production of some commodities more difficult than others.
The ATUS has a measure of self-rated health for six of the years in our sample, and the Enquête has a
similar measure, with both on a 5 to 1 scale, from excellent in the ATUS (very good in the Enquête) to poor
(very bad). Those in worse self-rated health do spend more time both sleeping and eating in both samples.
Adding these indicators to the estimated equations does reduce the absolute values of the income effects in
the U.S. equations in Table 2, and of the wage and income effects in Table 3, but never by more than 25
percent. In the French data in Table 2, and in the results in Table 4, there are almost no changes.
With the impacts on what we believe are the relatively time-intensive activities, sleep and TVwatching, being generally negative, estimating similar equations describing variations in activities that we
might believe are relatively goods-intensive should give the opposite results. To examine this possibility,
we define the two activities, time spent eating away from home, and time spent attending sporting events,
museums, concerts, etc. (the latter only for the U.S., as the French data have very few observations with
positive amounts of time spent in such activities). Because neither of these activities is undertaken by more
than half the samples’ respondents, we estimate both a probit describing the incidence of the activity on the
diary day(s) and a conditional regression describing its intensity among those who spend any time on it.
Table 5 presents the estimates of income effects in these equations, specified to include the same
controls as in Tables 2, 3 and 4. Income has a positive effect on the likelihood that an individual engages
in both these activities in the U.S., and in eating out in France. Income also has a positive effect on time
spent eating out for those who do report eating out in the U.S. The other two estimated effects of income
on the intensity of the activity are tiny, negative and statistically insignificant
9

IV. Income and Substitution Effects in Household Production
A. Background
In this section we explore the extent to which the empirical regularities that we have demonstrated
for the time-intensive commodities of sleep and TV-watching are consistent with the Becker (1965) model.
A primary consideration is the nature of the income and substitution effects on various categories of time
use in such a model. From Becker (1965) to Gronau’s (1980) study and his survey (Gronau, 1986), one
finds occasional analyses of the impact of changes in wages and in non-labor income on various uses of
time; but the discussions are characterized by a lack of shared definitions and take place in the context of
models that assume fixed proportions for combining goods and time in household production. With fixedcoefficient commodity production functions the effect of an increase in non-labor income on all the time
uses will generally be positive, while a compensated wage increase leads to a shift away from earningsintensive commodities and toward goods-intensive ones, where earnings intensity is measured by the share
of the total cost of a commodity represented by foregone earnings.
There are a number of other relevant results in the literature, but none applies to non-workers.
Gronau (1986) asserts that for non-workers, or when work time is exogenous, “time scarcity depends upon
the individual’s income and his non-labor time. The higher his income and the smaller his non-labor time,
the greater the time scarcity and the shadow price of time. An increase in the shadow price of time should
raise the relative price of time-intensive commodities (i.e., commodities where ti/xi is high) and result in a
substitution of goods for time”, with ti/xi being the ratio of the marginal input requirements of time and
goods for commodity i. 11
The negative effect of the wage on both sleep and TV-watching found here is consistent with
Becker’s result concerning the negative substitution effects on time-intensive commodities, and the

11
A final relevant result is due to Deardorff and Stafford (1976), who show that with a homothetic utility function
defined over two commodities and linearly homogenous commodity production functions, the wage elasticity of labor
supply will be an increasing function of a weighted average of the elasticities of substitution of the production
functions and the utility function. If this weighted average is greater than one, the wage elasticity of labor supply will
be positive. Versions of this result have appeared in more recent papers proposing explanations of aggregate trends in
time use, including Kopecky (2011) and Aguiar and Hurst (2007).

10

negative effect of income on these activities for non-workers supports Gronau’s conjecture. In the absence
of an ad hoc assumption about the utility of sleep versus TV-watching, however, the model with fixed
coefficients cannot explain the finding that both the income and wage elasticities are larger in absolute
value for TV-watching than for sleep, as both activities are similarly time-intensive. For this reason, we
introduce, as a possible means of explaining the results, a generalization that allows for substitution between
goods and time in the production of commodities—abandoning fixed-coefficients production.
B. Model
As in Becker (1965) ours is a one-period model in which individuals maximize utility defined over
m commodities Z1 ,..., Zm. Each commodity is produced by combining time and goods according to a
production function Zi = fi(Xi, Ti), where Xi is the expenditure on goods (and/or the service flow from
durable goods) used in the production of Zi, and Ti is time spent in producing Zi. For simplicity we assume
that “goods” is a Hicksian composite with price fixed at one and the same for all consumers, although we
relax this assumption in Section V below. We rule out joint production. Individuals can also devote time to
market work, receiving a wage rate w per unit of time. Market work does not directly affect utility or
contribute to the production of any of the commodities.
In order to concentrate on the relationship between patterns of time allocation and the
characteristics of the commodity production functions, we specify a simple utility function:
U = ∑ (Zi/γ)γ , γ < 1.
Each commodity is produced according to a commodity-specific CES production function Zi = [δiXiρ(i) +
(1-δi)Tiρ(i) ]1/ρ(i), where σi = 1/(1- ρi) is the elasticity of substitution between time and goods in the production
of commodity i. This set-up embodies three intuitively appealing properties: 1) Diminishing marginal
productivity and utility of money expenditure on each commodity; 2) Diminishing marginal productivity
and utility of time spent in each commodity; and 3) Decreasing returns to scale in utility for each
commodity.
The assumption of no joint production leads to the standard budget constraint:
I + w(T* - ∑Ti) = ∑Xi,
11

with I being non-labor income, T* total time available, and (T* - ∑Ti) time devoted to market work. The
first-order conditions for the individual’s maximization problem take the form:
γδiρiXiρ(i)-1[δiXiρ(i) + (1-δi)Tiρ(i)]((γ-ρ(i))/γ) = λ for all i;

(1a)

γ(1-δi)ρiTiρ(i)-1[δiXiρ(i) + (1-δi)Tiρ(i)]((γ-ρ(i))/γ) ≥ λw for all i,

(1b)

where λ is the Lagrangian multiplier on the goods budget constraint. Note that we assume that (1a) always
holds with equality, but that it is possible for the marginal utility of time to be greater than the marginal
utility of the wage rate, so that the individual chooses not to engage in market work. In that case, the problem
takes a different form, with maximization subject to two separate constraints: (T* - ∑Ti) = 0 and I = ∑Xi.
The first-order conditions become:
γδiρiXiρ(i)-1[δiXiρ(i) + (1-δi)Tiρ(i)]((γ-ρ(i))/γ) =
γδkρkXkρ(k)-1[δkXkρ(k) + (1-δk)Tkρ(k)]((γ-ρ(k))/γ) for all i and k;

(2a)

γ(1-δi)ρiTiρ(i)-1[δiXiρ(i) + (1-δi)Tiρ(i)]((γ-ρ(i))/γ) =
γ(1-δk)ρkTkρ(k)-1[δkXkρ(k) + (1-δk)Tkρ(k)]((γ-ρ(k))/γ) for all i and k.

(2b)

C. Wage and Income Effects on the Time Allocation of Workers
Conditions (1a) and (1b) place restrictions on the expenditure per unit of time on each commodity:
(δi/(1-δi))(Xi/Ti)ρ(i)-1 = (1/w)

(3)

Equating the left-hand side of (1b) for commodity i to its counterpart for an arbitrarily chosen commodity
k, then using (3) to substitute for Xi and Xk in that expression, provides an equation in Ti and Tk:
(1-δi)Ti(γ-1)[δi (δi/(1-δi))ρ(i)/(1-ρ(i))w ρ(i)/(ρ(i)-1) + (1-δi)](γ-ρ(i))/ρ(i) =
(1-δk)Tk(γ-1)[δk (δk/(1-δk))ρ(k)/(1-ρ(k))w ρ(k)/(ρ(k)-1) + (1-δk)](γ-ρ(k))/ρ(k)

(4)

Logarithmically differentiating (4) we obtain an expression that shows the relationship between the wage
and income elasticities of the time inputs into any pair of commodities i and k:
dlnTi = dlnTk + Qki*dlnw, where:
Qki = [ai(σu – σi) – ak(σu – σk)] = [(ai – ak)σu – aiσi +akσk] ,

(5)

where ai = Xi/(Xi + wTi) is the share of money expenditures on commodity i in the total (opportunity) cost
of commodity i, and σu is the elasticity of substitution between commodities in the utility function. An
12

immediate implication of (5) is that all uses of time have the same elasticity with respect to non-labor
income (i.e., (dlnTi/dlnI) = (dlnTk/dlnI). Whether the wage elasticity of one commodity is more or less
positive than that of another depends on the sign of Q, the determinants of which we discuss below.
To obtain an expression for the wage elasticity of time spent on a commodity, logarithmically
differentiate the budget constraint, after using (3) to substitute out the Xi terms, then use (5) to replace the
dlnTi terms. This leads to
dlnTk/dlnI = θI/(1+ (1-θI)Tw);

(6a)

dlnTk/dlnw = {(1-θI) - ∑[si + (1-θI)ri]Qki - ∑siσi}/(1+ (1-θI)Tw),

(6b)

where θI is the share of non-labor income in total money income, si is the share of expenditure on commodity
i in total expenditures, and ri = (Ti/Tw) is the ratio of time spent on commodity i to time in market work.
Equation (6a) shows the elasticity of time allocated to a commodity with respect to non-labor
income, which is positive and identical for all time uses. Equation (6b) is the wage elasticity. The first term
in its numerator is due to the income effect. The final term is a weighted average of the elasticities of
substitution for the various commodities and exerts the same negative influence on the wage elasticity for
all time uses. The middle term is different for each commodity, as it involves Qki which may be positive or
negative.
Inspection of (5) and (6b) reveals four useful results:
(1) If σu > σk (substitution away from commodity k in consumption is easy relative to
substitution away from time in its production), dlnTk/dlnw is more positive for more goodsintensive commodities (those with higher ak values), and more negative for time-intensive
commodities. 12
(2) If σu < σk, dlnTk/dlnw is more negative for more-time intensive commodities, and more
positive for goods-intensive commodities.

12
In Becker’s (1965) model σk = 0, so this result is consistent with Becker’s result that that a compensated wage
increase will lead to a substitution of goods-intensive for time-intensive commodities. The value of ak is proportional
to the elasticity of output of Zk with respect to Xk, so that one could also describe the phenomenon as substituting
toward activities in which the marginal productivity of goods expenditure is higher.

13

(3) Higher values of σu (easier substitution in consumption), make dlnTk/dlnw more negative
for relatively time-intensive commodities, and more positive for relatively goods-intensive
commodities
(4) Higher values of σk (easier time-goods substitution in the production of commodity k)
make dlnTk/dlnw more negative.
A crucial distinction in the model is that between substitution in the production of the Z’s and
substitution in their consumption, which ultimately depends on how the commodities are defined. In
empirical work, however, the definitions adopted by researchers are often arbitrarily determined by the
nature of the available data. As time use and expenditure data grow in quantity and quality, it will
increasingly be possible and worthwhile to maintain the distinction between substitution within and
substitution across commodities, and to think in terms of the relative values of σu and the σi and their
differing impacts on time allocation. 13

D. Income Effects on the Time Allocation of Non-Workers
The optimal allocations of time and expenditure to commodities by non-workers, and by those who
cannot vary their hours of work, are described by (2a) and (2b). For the former group, changes in the market
wage are not relevant to the time-allocation decision, provided that these changes are not sufficiently large
to induce entry into the labor force. For the latter group the elasticity of time spent on a commodity with
respect to a change in the wage is proportional to the elasticity with respect to a change in non-labor income.
Unlike the case for workers analyzed above, it is not possible for the income effect on time use to be positive
for all commodities. Unless the income elasticities of all uses of time are zero, there must be both positive
and negative elasticities.
Deriving the elasticity of time use with respect to income from (2a) and (2b) leads to a complicated
expression from which little insight can be gleaned. In a two-commodity version of the model, however,

13

For example, in an analysis of changes over time in how Americans have fed themselves, we could define an activity
“eating”, and discuss changing possibilities for substituting money for time within that activity by eating less at home
and more at fast-service restaurants.

14

the sign of the income elasticity of time use in commodity 1 is the sign of [a1(σu – σ1) – a2(σu – σ2)]. 14 This
expression is similar to Qki in the expression describing the time elasticities for workers, indicating that the
effect of a pure income change on the time allocation of non-workers resembles the substitution effect of a
wage change for workers. The reason for the resemblance is that a change in income for non-workers causes
a change in the relative opportunity costs of the activities, as is readily apparent in a version of the model
with fixed-coefficient production. 15 The same argument applies, mutatis mutandis, when the production
functions are CES. If the elasticity of substitution between commodities is greater than the elasticity of
substitution within commodities, a higher goods-intensity contributes to a more positive income elasticity.
If both commodities are equally goods-intensive, rising incomes will lead to a fall in time devoted to the
commodity with a higher elasticity of substitution in production.16
E. Explaining the Results on Sleep and TV-Watching
The preceding analysis suggests explanations of the results for sleep and TV-watching reported in
Tables 2-4. Consider a three-commodity version of the model, with sleep, TV-watching and a composite
commodity. The first two are very time-intensive (low values of ai relative to the composite commodity),
which leads to more negative income effects for non-workers, and more negative wage effects for workers.
A high elasticity of substitution between commodities would amplify this effect, and these two factors
would explain the consistently negative and significant income effects for non-workers in Table 2 for both
sleep and TV-watching, as well as the predominance of negative wage effects for these activities for
American workers in Table 3. A plausible explanation for fact that the negative elasticities associated with

14

The derivation is available from the second author.

15

Letting bi represent the required goods input for a unit of Zi, and ti the required time input, the (utility) cost to the
non-worker of a unit of Zi relative to a unit of Zk is (λbi + μti)/(λbk + μtk). An increase in income lowers λ, which
lowers the relative cost of Zi if bi/ti > bk/tk, that is, if Zi is more goods intensive than Zk. In contrast, the relative prices
of the activities for workers (bi + wti)/(bk + wtk) are determined in the market and are thus unaffected by changes in
non-labor income.
16

Simulations of the three-commodity version of the model confirm the indications of the two-commodity version. In
particular, with two very time-intensive commodities (say sleep and TV-watching), one commodity evenly balanced
between time and goods, and σi values that are small relative to σu and nearly equal to each other, rising incomes lead
to substitution away from the two time-intensive commodities and toward the goods-intensive commodity.

15

TV-watching are larger in absolute value than those associated with sleep is that the elasticity of substitution
in the production of TV-watching, that is, the ability to enhance the utility of the activity by increasing
expenditure per unit of time, is greater for TV-watching than for sleep.
An additional assumption is required to rationalize the coefficients on non-labor income in Tables
3 and 4, as they are predominantly negative and occasionally significant, and no configuration of parameters
in our model leads to negative income effects for workers. If we assume, however, that an appreciable
number of the workers are temporarily or permanently constrained in their choices of work hours, then
negative income effects on workers become possible (and are consistent with the results in the bottom
panels of the two tables). The responses of workers who are hours-constrained, at least in the short-run, will
be the same as the responses predicted by the model for non-workers to increases in income: If substitution
between activities is easy, higher wages and higher incomes will cause hours-constrained workers to
decrease the time spent in time-intensive activities like TV-watching and sleep. Finally, the positive income
effects on eating out in Table 5 would follow from the relative goods intensity of the commodity and the
likely high elasticity of substitution between eating out and eating at home.
F. Additional Evidence on the Model
In both production and consumption, the responses to changes in income will diminish in absolute
value as income rises, due to the shapes of the utility and household production functions, so long as the
latter are not characterized by fixed coefficients. To examine this, we add quadratic terms in income to the
equations estimated for the U.S. and France for which Table 2 presented the results. In both countries, and
for both sleep and TV-watching, the quadratic terms in income are positive and statistically significant, as
implied by the assumptions underlying the model.
The alternating signs of the derivatives in the arguments of the utility and production functions also
suggest that the impacts of marginal changes in incomes or wages will be greater if the amounts
consumed/produced are less. Some evidence that these responses are reflected in the data is provided by
comparing income elasticities in the estimates in Table 2 for the U.S. and France, distinguishing between
women and men. In the data for these non-workers, men slept slightly more than women (9 minutes per
16

day in the U.S. 3 minutes in France), and the income elasticities differed little by gender. American men
however, watched over 1 hour more TV per day than women, French men 10 minutes more per day. In both
countries TV-watching is significantly less income elastic among non-working men than among nonworking women.
The model implicitly assumes that the supply of different amenities (television shows, restaurants,
sporting activities and museums, etc.) is the same for all individuals, so that the prices of these goods are
identical for all decision makers. Similarly, we assume preferences are independent of other people’s
choices about how to spend time. We can examine whether these assumptions are correct, but not
distinguish between them, by including in the equations for the U.S. the average amount of time spent in
the activity in the metropolitan area where the respondent lives. We do this for all the U.S. estimates in
Tables 2, 4 and 5, using all individuals in whose metropolitan area at least 100 other individuals were ATUS
respondents. 17
In no case did these considerations produce any but the tiniest changes in the estimated impacts of
an individual’s income or earnings on the outcomes. In all cases except sleep, however, the time that an
individual spent in the activity was positively related to the average time spent in that activity in his/her
metropolitan area. The data do not allow us to infer the cause(s) of this relationship; but in no way does it
alter our conclusions about the effects of income and prices on individuals’ use of time.
V. Racial/Ethnic Discrimination in Goods Markets, and Its Spillovers
A. Product Market Discrimination and Majority/Minority Differences in Time Use
Assume that a group is discriminated against in the product market, so that while the price faced
by members of the majority group for goods inputs is p, the price facing minorities is p[1 + d] with d being
the discriminatory goods price premium. The impact of this discrimination on the time-allocation decisions
of workers is seen by noting that the left-hand side of (3) becomes p/w for members of the majority group,
and p[1 + d]/w for minorities. Logarithmically differentiating the minorities’ version of (4) at d=0 leads to

17

This restriction to individuals living in larger consolidated metropolitan areas (46 in this sample) reduced sample
sizes by around 2/3.

17

dlnTi/dln(1+d) = dlnTk/dln(1+d) - Qki, so that price discrimination in a product market affects time
allocation the same way as a lower wage.
The case for non-workers is similar. If minorities face a product-market discrimination coefficient
d, the budget constraint becomes I/[p(1 + d)] - ∑Xi = 0, and d affects time allocation only thorough its
impact on real income I/[p(1 + d)]. Increasing discrimination in a product market acts on time allocation in
the same way as a decrease in I, raising the relative price of goods-intensive activities. Under the
circumstances posited above to explain the results in Tables 2-4 (substitution between commodities
relatively easier than substitution within commodities) price discrimination will lead minorities to spend
more time in time-intensive activities than otherwise similar (including same incomes) members of the
majority group. This will be the case for both workers and non-workers.
Several studies have attempted to measure the extent to which minorities pay more than majority
citizens for equal-quality goods and services. Many of these are audit studies (with Ayres and Siegelman,
1995, apparently the first in this literature), in which racially different but otherwise identical individuals
seek price quotes on some well-defined product or service. Munnell et al. (1996) examined discrimination
in the treatment of applications for mortgage loans, showing higher denial rates to otherwise identical
minority applicants. More recent work in this vein is exemplified by Zussman (2013). Another still smaller
vein of the literature is exemplified by field studies such as List (2004).
Some of the more recent literature (e.g., Antecol and Cobb-Clark, 2008; Brewster, 2012) has used
respondents’ subjective views of their treatment in various retail contexts to analyze differences in
outcomes by race. Myers (2004) used data from the American Housing Survey to examine racial differences
in purchase and rental prices of housing with narrow geographic clusters; Bayer et al. (2017) looked at the
same question using detailed data on housing sales. Related to this, Edelman et al. (2017) demonstrate that
minority applicants for rentals with AirBnB are less likely than majority applicants to have their bids
accepted, other things equal. All these studies suggest the existence of price discrimination against minority
purchasers. It is nearly impossible to use this literature to answer how much more the average minority

18

purchaser pays for a typical market basket of goods and services than a majority purchaser. The literature
is, however, sufficiently conclusive to allow us to assume that d > 0 in the United States.
This line of research has spread to other countries, with most of the recent research also relying on
audit studies and focusing on housing markets. Thus Acolin et al. (2016) examined how a variety of
immigrant groups were treated when they responded to advertisements for rental housing in France.
Drydakis (2011) did a similar study in Greece, focusing on the treatment of Albanian immigrants. The
results are similar to those for racial minorities in the U.S.
This literature implies that the goods prices faced by minorities will exceed those facing majority
consumers. All else equal, including incomes and wages, discrimination in goods markets will raise the
relative prices of commodities that are relatively goods-intensive. Thus, we expect to observe minorities
spending less time producing/consuming goods-intensive commodities and more in time-intensive
commodities than members of the majority. With sleep and TV-watching being particularly time-intensive
commodities, we should expect minorities to be more heavily engaged in these activities than otherwise
identical majority-group members.
B. Evidence on the Impacts of Product-Market Discrimination on Time Use
Using both the American and French samples, we examine majority-minority differences in sleep
and TV-watching, the two clearly inferior activities, with minorities designated as explained in Section II.
While we have identified TV-watching as more inferior than sleeping, there is a language problem in testing
the model of spillovers of consumer discrimination to TV-watching: Majority-minority differences in time
spent watching television are likely to be confounded by language issues in the cases of white Hispanics in
the U.S. and immigrants in France. The only American groups whose television-watching we therefore
consider are white Non-Hispanics and African-Americans.
The upper panel of Table 6 lists the estimates of the impacts of race or ethnicity on time spent
sleeping in the U.S., and in TV-watching. Each equation includes all the controls that underlay the estimates
presented in Tables 2 and 3. The sample includes both workers and non-workers; because of that the only

19

monetary measure that we include is the household’s total income. 18 African-American women and men
sleep more than otherwise identical white non-Hispanics; they also watch more television. 19 As with the
pure income effects, the differences are larger for TV-watching than for sleep, suggesting that the
discriminatory price effects on consumer goods are working along the same margin of choice in these timeintensive activities as the results in Tables 2 and 3 implied about the effects of decreases in household
incomes. White Hispanics also sleep more than otherwise identical white non-Hispanics, a difference that
on average is about the same as among African-Americans. 20
The bottom panel of Table 6 presents the estimates of the same equations as in Tables 2 and 4, but
with workers and non-workers pooled, and including household income as the only economic variable.
These results for France are weaker than those in the U.S.; with sub-sample sizes that are only one-sixth as
large, their relative weakness is not surprising. The impact on the sleep time of immigrants in France
compared to that of similar natives, however, is about the same as the difference between African-American
and white non-Hispanic males. That between female immigrants and natives in France is positive, but much
smaller than in the U.S. Overall the French results corroborate the more secure findings in Table 6 based
on the larger U.S. samples. 21
We have argued that these racial/ethnic differences in time use arise because the measured incomes
of minorities overstate their true incomes due to discrimination in product markets. Assuming that d≤0.25,

18

Separate estimates for samples of non-workers and workers in each country, using the same control variables as in
Tables 2-4, yield essentially similar results: Greater sleep time among otherwise identical minorities, whether or not
they are workers.
19
One might be concerned that annual incomes understate the difference in annual spending ability between whites
and African-Americans because the latter may expect fewer and smaller inheritances. Perhaps so, although most
inheritances are fairly small (Hurd and Smith, 2001). More important, with the average African-American in our
sample expecting to live four fewer years than the average white, if anything annual incomes overstate racial
differences in annual spending ability, so that our results understate the racial difference in sleep time arising from
discrimination in incentives to purchase goods.
20
These effects are not due to differences in the concentration of minorities in particular inner cities. Interacting the
indicators of state of residence with those of metropolitan status barely alters the parameter estimates describing the
racial/ethnic differences in sleep and TV-watching.
21

Except for the estimate for black males in describing sleep, the parameter estimates change only slightly when the
respondent’s time spent working on the diary day is added to the specification.

20

and using the estimated income effects reported in Table 2, we can adjust incomes to reflect the price
differences and simulate the impacts on time use of the implicit reduction in real incomes, thus placing an
upper bound on the racial/ethnic differences attributable to product-market discrimination.
Among African-Americans this simulation suggests that, if the excess sleep arose solely from
responses to discrimination in product-pricing, we would observe differences in sleep time equaling 1/7 to
1/3 of those measured in Table 6, and in TV-watching time of 1/3 of those listed in the table. Among
Hispanics the explanation can account for only ¼ of their extra sleep, while among French immigrants the
simulation explains 1/6 to ½ of the extra sleep that we observe. Minorities do devote more time to these
time-intensive activities than majority citizens; but at least half of this extra time cannot be explained by a
model relying on spillovers from discrimination in product markets. Numerous explanations for the
discrepancy are possible, including racial/ethnic differences in access to transportation, minority fears of
non-price discriminatory responses while shopping or attending events outside the home, and no doubt
others. We leave distinguishing among these possibilities to future research.
VI. Conclusion
We have documented a significant negative relationship between household income and time spent
in two time-intensive activities, sleep and television-watching, which together with market work are two of
the three activities that account for nearly two-thirds of time spent in Western economies. The relationship
exists among non-workers in time-dairy data from the United States, France, and Germany, and among
workers in the former two countries. Among workers, it results mainly from a negative wage effect,
although there is also evidence for a smaller negative effect of non-labor income in the French sample. For
both the U.S. and France we demonstrate a significant minority/majority difference in time use: Minorities
engage in more time-intensive activities than otherwise similar members of the majority group.
These results can be rationalized by a generalized model of time allocation, which allows both
substitution between time and goods in the production of commodities and substitution between
commodities in a representative individual’s utility function. The analysis demonstrates that the effect of a
change in income on non-workers’ time use will generally resemble the substitution effect of a wage change
21

on workers’ time allocations. It produces the observed negative relation between income and time spent in
time-intensive activities, provided that the elasticity of substitution between commodities is sufficiently
large relative to the average elasticity of substitution between goods and time in the production of each
commodity. This combination of circumstances also leads to the observed minority/majority differences in
time use if, as other evidence shows, minorities experience discrimination in goods markets. This extension
of the theory and its demonstrated use in explaining the novel findings suggest that it might usefully be
applied to policy propositions that affect how people spend time.
While we have not focused on responses of work time to prices and incomes, the results here and
the expanded household production model are relevant for studying labor supply. The implicit nonaggregability of various components of non-market time suggests that treating the labor-supply decision as
a choice between working or not is incorrect: Changes in economic incentives affect different non-work
uses of time differently, so that the failure to account for the changing mix of non-market time use as wages
or other incomes change will bias estimates of labor supply responses to these parameters.
These theoretical and empirical results have at least two implications for future research. First, the
results on minority/majority differences in time use are examples of how discrimination in one market can
affect behavior outside the market where discrimination is practiced. There are undoubtedly many other
examples of this kind of spillover that could be investigated. Second, the rising quantity and quality of timediary data available from several nations should lead to a wide array of interesting empirical results. Our
generalized model of time allocation can be used both to help make sense of the patterns observed in such
data and to suggest what patterns of time use to look for.

22

REFERENCES
Arthur Acolin, Raphael Bostic and Gary Painter, “A Field study of Rental Market discrimination across
Origins in France,” Journal of Urban Economics, 95 (2016): 49-63.
Mark Aguiar, Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis, “Time Use During the Great Recession,” American
Economic Review, 103 (Aug. 2013): 1664-96.
Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst. “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five Decades,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (Aug. 2007): 969-1006.
Heather Antecol and Deborah Cobb-Clark, “Racial and Ethnic Discrimination in Local Consumer Markets:
Exploiting the Army’s Procedures for Matching Personnel to Duty Locations,” Journal of Urban
Economics, 64 (Sept. 2008): 4960509.
Ian Ayres and Peter Siegelman, “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for a New Car,” American
Economic Review, 85 (June 1995): 304-21.
Patrick Bayer, Marcus Casey, Fernando Ferreira and Robert McMillan, “Racial and Ethnic Price
Differences in the Housing Market,” Journal of Urban Economics, 102 (Nov. 2017): 91-105.
Gary Becker, “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75 (Sept. 1965): 493-517.
Kathleen Beegle and Wendy Stock, “The Labor Market Effects of Disability Discrimination Laws,” Journal
of Human Resources, 38 (Fall 2003): 806-59.
Jeff Biddle and Daniel Hamermesh, “Sleep and the Allocation of Time,” Journal of Political Economy, 98
(October 1990): 922-43.
Francine Blau and Lawrence Kahn, “The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations,” Journal
of Economic Literature, 55 (Sept. 2017): 789-865.
Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri and Itay Saporta-Eksten, “Children, Time Allocation, and Consumption
Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 126 (October 2018): S73-115.
Zachary Brewster, “Racialized Customer Service in Restaurants: A Quantitative Assessment of the
Statistical Discrimination Explanatory Framework,” Sociological Inquiry, 82 (Feb. 2012): 3-28.
Kerwin Charles and Jonathan Guryan, “Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of Becker's The
Economics of Discrimination,” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (Oct. 2008): 773-809.
Alan Deardorff and Frank Stafford. “Compensation of Cooperative Factors,” Econometrica, 44 (July 1976):
671-684
Nick Drydakis, “Ethnic Discrimination in the Greek Housing Market,” Journal of Population Economics,
24 (2011): 1235-55.
Benjamin Edelman, Michael Luca and Dan Svirsky, “Racial Discrimination in the Sharing Economy:
Evidence from a Field Experiment” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9 (April
2017): 1-22.
Dominique Goux, Simon George-Kot and Eric Maurin, “Following the Crowd: Leisure Complementarities
Beyond the Household,” Journal of Labor Economics, 35 (October 2017): 1061-88.

23

Reuben Gronau, “Leisure, Home Production, and Work--the Theory of the Allocation of Time Revisited,”
Journal of Political Economy, 85 (Dec. 1977): 1099-1123.
-------------------, “Home Production—A Forgotten Industry,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 62 (Aug.
1980): 408-16.
------------------- and Daniel Hamermesh, “Time vs. Goods: The Value of Measuring Household Production
Technologies,” Review of Income and Wealth,” 52 (March 2006): 1-16.
Daniel Hamermesh, Beauty Pays. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2011.
-----------------------, Harley Frazis and Jay Stewart, “Data Watch: The American Time Use Survey,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19 (Winter 2005): 221-32.
Bradley Heim, “The Incredible Shrinking Elasticities: Married Female Labor Supply, 1978-2002,” Journal
of Human Resources (Fall 2007): 881-918.
Michael Hurd and James Smith, “Anticipated and Actual Bequests,” in David Wise, ed., Themes in the
Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques, Enquête Emploi du Temps, 2009-2010. Paris:
Inséé, 2014. https://www.insee.fr/fr/metadonnees/source/s1224#caracteristique-technique
Peter Kooreman and Arie Kapteyn, “A Disaggregated Analysis of the Allocation of Time within the
Household,” Journal of Political Economy, 95 (April 1987): 223-49.
Karen Kopecky, “The Trend in Retirement,” International Economic Review, 52 (May 2011): 287–316.
David Leal and Stephen Trejo, Latinos and the Economy. New York: Springer, 2011.
John List, “The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence from the Field,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (Feb. 2004): 49-89.
Alicia Munnell, Geoffrey Tootell, Lynn Brown and James McEneany, “Mortgage Lending in Boston:
Interpreting HMDA Data,” American Economic Review 86 (March 1996): 25-53.
Caitlin Knowles Myers, “Discrimination and Neighborhood Effects: Understanding Racial Differentials in
US Housing Prices,” Journal of Urban Economics, 56 (2004): 279-302.
Christopher Parsons, Johan Suleyman, Michael Yates and Daniel Hamermesh, “Strike Three:
Discrimination, Incentives and Evaluation,” American Economic Review, 101 (June 2011): 141035.
Statistiches Bundesamt, Datenbeschreibung: Erhebung zur Zeitverwending. Wiesbaden: Statistiches
Bundesamt, 2015.
Marie-Anne Valfort, “LGBTI in OECD Countries: A Review,” Social, Employment and Migration
Working Papers, No. 198, 2017.
Asaf Zussman, “Ethnic Discrimination: Lessons from the Israeli Online Market for Used Cars,” Economic
Journal, 133 (Nov. 2013): F433-68.

24

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics, Time Use in the U.S., 2003-15; France, 2009-10; Germany, 2012-13
Work

Home
Production

Sleep

Other
TVPersonal watching

Other
Leisure

ATUS:
-----

Non-workers
(N = 51,997)
Family Income:
(annual)
Workers
(N = 52,383)
Family Income:
(annual)

249

557

124

(0.90)

(0.62)

(0.44)

124

473

115

(0.56)

(0.48)

(0.28)

Earnings
(hourly)

$20.59

257

532

210

(2.26)

(1.50)

(1.39)

236

274

(0.89)

(0.95)

104

127

(0.45)

(0.60)

167

274

(1.73)

(2.26)

$49,383
(210)

497
(0.85)

$61,434
(301)

(0.08)

Enquête:
Non-workers
(N = 5,854)

------

Family Income:
(annual)

€28,005

Workers
(N = 4,287)
Family Income:
(annual)

(259)

119

458

170

(2.58)

499

(1.72)

(1.45)

(1.19)

€39,972

Earnings
(hourly)

€11.71

265

526

183

(3.51)

(2.00)

(1.68)

(369)

86

109

(1.24)

(1.70)

164

302

(2.65)

(3.85)

(0.15)

Zeitverwendungserhebung:
Non-workers

------

(N = 1,993)

Family Income:
(annual)

€28,683
(397)

Workers

476

(N = 8,173)

(2.06)

Family Income:
(annual)

€41,892

127

455

130

(1.31)

(1.06)

(0.62)

(223)

*Standard errors of means in parentheses.

25

94

158

(0.92)

(1.51)

Table 2. Income Effects on Time Use (Minutes/Day in Response to +10,000 ($ or €) Annual
Income): Non-workers U.S., 2003-15; France, 2009-10; Germany, 2012-13*
Home
Production

Sleep

Other
Personal

TVwatching

Other
Leisure

ATUS:**
All Nonworkers
(N = 51,997)

Adj. R2

2.19

-2.05

1.10

-2.95

1.71

(0.18)

(0.14)

(0.10)

(0.20)

(0.22)

0.260

0.078

0.035

0.121

0.065

1.96

-2.07

1.00

-2.05

1.16

(0.83)

(0.62)

(0.45)

(0.92)

(1.06)

0.260

0.079

0.031

0.104

0.087

-0.63

-3.00

3.19

-7.07

7.52

(1.74)

(1.22)

(1.53)

(1.49)

(2.03)

0.324

0.122

0.068

0.101

0.208

0.82

-3.35

-4.10

-5.68

12.31

(2.18)

(1.49)

(1.19)

(1.81)

(2.70)

0.068

0.053

0.080

0.102

Not working on
holidays
(N = 2,050)

Adj. R2

Enquête:***
(N = 5,439)

Adj. R2

Zeitverwendungserhebung:****
(N = 1,993)

Adj. R2

0.221

*Standard errors in parentheses below the parameter estimates. Those in the French and German equations are clustered on the
individuals.
**The equations also include a quadratic in age; indicators and numbers of children in several age groups; gender, marital status
and their interaction; a vector of indicators of educational attainment; and vectors of indicators of state of residence, metropolitan
status, year, month and diary day.
***The equations also include a quadratic in age; a vector of indicators of educational attainment; indicators and numbers of
children in several age groups; gender, coupled status and their interaction; and vectors of indicators of the month, diary day and
region.
****The equations also include a quadratic in age; indicators of number of children under age 10; gender, marital status and their
interaction; and, vectors of indicators of quarter, diary day, educational attainment and East Germany.

26

Table 3. Parameter Estimates, Sleep and TV-watching (Minutes/Day in Response to +$10 Hourly
Earnings, +$10,000 Other Annual Income): Married Workers, ATUS 2003-15*
Sleep
Male

TV-watching
Female

Male

Female

Ind. Var.:
Annual Other
Income
Hourly Earnings

Adj. R2

0.061

-0.205

-0.229

-0743

(0.220)

(0.162)

(0.263)

(0.183)

-1.153

-0.711

-2.212

-3.305

(0.558)

(0.651)

(0.668)

(0.687)

0.122

0.117

0.113

0.073

Ind. Var.:
Annual Other
Income

-0.238

-0.567

-0.507

-1.008

(0.202)

(0.162)

(0.250)

(0.177)

Hourly Earnings

-1.064

0.207

-2.130

-2.633

(0.512)

(0.608)

(0.635)

(0.666)

-0.186

-0.170

-0.173

-0.124

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.003)

Adj. R2

0.260

0.232

0.198

0.131

N=

18,122

19,526

18,122

19,526

Work Time

*All equations also include a quadratic in age; indicators and numbers of children in several age groups; a vector of indicators of
educational attainment; and vectors of indicators of state of residence, metropolitan status, year, month and diary day.

27

Table 4. Parameter Estimates, Sleep and TV-watching (Minutes/Day in Response to +€10 Hourly
Earnings, +€10,000 Other Annual Income: Partnered Workers, Enquête Emploi du Temps, 200910*
Sleep (minutes/day)
Male

TV-watching (minutes/day)

Female

Male

Female

Ind. Var.:
Annual Other
Income
Hourly Earnings

Adj. R2

-0.07

-0.08

-0.38

-0.32

(0.202)

(0.17)

(0.15)

(0.10)

2.08

1.32

-3.44

7.65

(3.00)

(5.60)

(2.35)

(5.87)

0.111

0.156

0.090

0.098

Ind. Var.:
Annual Other)
Income
Hourly Earnings

Work Time

-0.091

-0.09

-0.39

-0.397

(0.195)

(0.11)

(0.15)

(0.114)

3.16

-1.08

-2.83

6.39

(2.47)

(4.49)

(0.252)

(5.21)

-0.17

-0.14

-0.10

-0.08

(0.02)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

Adj. R2

0.216

0.250

0.131

0.137

N=

2,775

2,635

2,775

2,635

*Standard errors below the parameter estimates, clustered on individuals. The regressions also include a quadratic in age; a vector
of indicators of educational attainment; indicators and numbers of children in several age groups and vectors of indicators of the
month, diary day and region.

28

Table 5. Income Effects on Time Use (Minutes/Day in Response to +10,000 ($ or €) Other Annual
Income): Non-workers U.S., 2003-15; France, 2009-10*
U.S.**
Eating Out
Determinants of:

Prob. Cond. Mean

France***
Sports/Arts

Prob.

Cond. Mean

Eating Out
Prob.

Cond. Mean

0.028

0.462

0.028

-0.556

0.058

-16.71

(0.002)

(0.091)

(0.002)

(0.423)

(0.017)

(18.78)

Pseudo-R2 or Adj. R2 0.037

0.026

0.071

0.026

0.094

0.168

N=

8,834

51,997

2,408

5,407

1,154

51,997

*Standard errors in parentheses below the parameter estimates. Those in the French equations are clustered on the individuals.
**The equations also include a quadratic in age; indicators and numbers of children in several age groups; gender, marital status
and their interaction; a vector of indicators of educational attainment; and vectors of indicators of state of residence, metropolitan
status, year, month and diary day.
***The equations also include a quadratic in age; a vector of indicators of educational attainment; indicators and numbers of
children in several age groups; gender, coupled status and their interaction; and vectors of indicators of the month, diary day and
region.

29

Table 6. Effect of Minority Status on Minutes of Sleep and TV-watching (Minutes/Day): U.S.
Minorities/Immigrants, 2003-15; French Immigrants, 2009-10*
Sleep

TV-watching
U.S.

Ind. Var.:
African-American

White Hispanic

Male

Female

Male

Female

7.22

14.88

37.56

25.21

(1.72)

(1.42)

(2.23)

(1.68)

10.69

11.54

------

------

(1.67)

(1.48)

0.099

0.091

0.154

0.126

64,766

83,229

55,640

72,112

.

Adj. R2
N

France
Immigrant

Adj. R2
N

12.23

4.78

(6.17)

(6.53)

0.141

0.110

10,517

12,169

*Each equation includes the variables listed and all the variables included for each country in the estimates presented in Tables 3
and 4. The French estimates are clustered on the individual respondents.

30

DATA APPENDIX: Definitions of Time-Use Aggregates
ATUS:
Work—bls_work (+ bls_educ if age<=25)
Home production—bls_carehh + bls_hhact_+ bls_purch
Sleep—bls_pcare_sleep
Other personal care—bls-pcare + bls_food – sleep
TV-watching—bls_leis_tv
Other leisure—bls_comm + bls_social + bls_carenhh + bls_leis – bls_leis_tv (+ bls_educ if age>25)
Eating out—bls_food (not at home or workplace)
Sports and arts—bls_leis_arts + bls_leis_atts
Enquête Emploi du Temps:
Work— Σi[acti>210 and acti<252 or acti=811] + (Σi[acti>260 and acti<300] if age<=25), i = 1,…,144
Home production— Σi[acti>299 and acti<435] + Σi[acti=813], i = 1,…,144
Sleep— Σi[acti=111], i = 1,…,144
Other personal care— Σi[acti>111 and acti<200], i = 1,…,144
TV-watching— Σi[acti>633 and acti<637], i = 1,…,144
Other leisure— Σi[acti>434 and acti<700] + Σi[acti=810 or =812 or =819] – tvwatching (+ Σi[acti>260
and acti<300] if age>25), i = 1,…,144
Eating out—Σi[acti=143 or acti=146], i = 1,…,144
Zeitverwendungserhebung:
Work— hainklweg_2 + (hainklweg_3 if age<=25)
Home production—hainklweg_4
Sleep—ha_11
Other personal care—hainklweg_1 – sleep
TV-watching—ha_82
Other leisure— hainklweg_5+hainklweg_6+hainklweg_7+hainklweg_8 - tvwatching + (hainklweg_3 if
age>25)

31

Appendix Table 1. Effects on Work Time, Household Production, Non-Sleep Personal Time, and
Non-TV Leisure Time (Minutes/Day in Response to +$10 $ or € Hourly Earnings, +10,000 $ or €
Other Annual Income): U.S. 2003-15; France 2009-10*
A. U.S., 2003-15
Male
Ind. Var.
Annual Other
Income
Hourly Earnings

Adj. R2

Female

Male

Paid Work

Female

Home Production

-2.91

-3.36

1.40

2.33

(0.83.)

(0.55)

(0.55)

(0.42)

3.59

11.72

7.82

-3.88

(2.96)

(2.83)

(1.94)

(2.15)

0.303

0.260

0.086

0.130

Non-Sleep Personal

Non-TV Leisure

Annual Other
Income

0.25

0.66

0.08

0.80

(0.15)

(0.13)

(0.33)

(0.26)

Hourly Earnings

1.55

1.49

0.40

-1.44

(0.37)

(0.48)

(0.84)

(0.99)

0.018

0.021

0.116

0.117

Adj. R2

32

B. France, 2009-10
Male
Ind. Var.:

Female

Male

Paid Work

Female

Home Production

Annual Other
Income

-0.23

-1.07

-3.39

1.95

(3.51)

(3.94)

(3.70)

(2.71)

Hourly Earnings

6.36

-16.47

-5.28

-1.00

(5.46)

(10.48)

(2.69)

(4.66)

0.412

0.287

0.143

0.151

Adj. R2

Non-Sleep Personal

Non-TV Leisure

Annual Other
Income

-1.15

2.09

1.64

1.88

(1.29)

(1.27)

(2.45)

(2.76)

Hourly Earnings

-0.10

1.17

-1.52

7.33

(2.43)

(2.16)

(3.58)

(4.06)

0.092

0.107

0.257

0.218

Adj. R2

*The equations include the same other regressors as in Tables 3 and 4, and the same numbers of observations.`

33

