NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOW INFLATION: HIGH DEFAULT RISK AND HIGH EQUITY VALUATIONS
Harjoat S. Bhamra
Christian Dorion
Alexandre Jeanneret
Michael Weber
Working Paper 25317
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25317

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018
We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Hui Chen, Pierre Collin-Dufresne
(discussant), Jens Hilscher, Erica Li (discussant), Philippe Mueller (discussant), Francisco
Palomino (discussant), Monika Piazzesi, Carolin Pflueger (discussant), Andrea Tamoni
(discussant), Lukas Schmid (discussant), Gustavo Schwenkler (discussant), Min Wei (discussant),
and participants at the 2017 Adam Smith Asset Pricing, 2017 HEC-McGill Winter Finance
Workshop, 2017 BoCFRBSF-SFU Conference, 2017 SAFE Asset Pricing Workshop, 2017
Conference on Corporate Policies and Asset Prices, 2017 Society for Economic Dynamics, 2018
Cavalcade, 2018 WFA, 2018 EFA, 2018 NFA, BIS, ESSEC, Federal Reserve Board, HEC
Lausanne, HEC Montréal, McGill, University of Lugano, University of Neuchâtel, University of
Maryland, and University of Paris-Dauphine. A previous version of this paper circulated under
the title Deflation, Sticky Leverage and Asset Prices. We thank Xiao Yin for excellent research
assistance. The authors acknowledge the financial support from Imperial College, HEC Montréal
and the HEC Montréal Foundation, Chicago Booth, and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC). All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Christian Dorion and Alexandre Jeanneret acknowledge financial support from SSHRC and the
HEC Foundation.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Harjoat S. Bhamra, Christian Dorion, Alexandre Jeanneret, and Michael Weber. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Low Inflation: High Default Risk AND High Equity Valuations
Harjoat S. Bhamra, Christian Dorion, Alexandre Jeanneret, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 25317
November 2018
JEL No. E44,G12,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
We develop an asset-pricing model with endogenous corporate policies that explains how
inflation jointly impacts real asset prices and corporate default risk. Our model includes two
empirically grounded nominal frictions: fixed nominal coupons and sticky profitability. Taken
together, these two frictions result in higher real equity prices and credit spreads when inflation
falls. An increase in inflation has opposite effects, but with smaller magnitudes. In the cross
section, the model predicts the negative impact of inflation on real equity values is stronger for
low leverage firms. We find empirical support for the model predictions.

Harjoat S. Bhamra
Imperial College London
United Kingdom
and CEPR
h.bhamra@imperial.ac.uk
Christian Dorion
HEC Montreal
3000 Cote-Sainte-Catherine
Department of finance
Montreal, Canada H3T 2A7
christian.dorion@hec.ca

Alexandre Jeanneret
HEC Montreal
3000, ch de la Cote-Ste-Catherine
Montreal H3T 2A7
Canada
alexandre.jeanneret@hec.ca
Michael Weber
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

Corporate defaults spike during times of low expected inflation. But so do firms’ equity valuations,
despite increased default risk. Figure 1 documents these two stylized facts for the U.S. over the period
1970Q2–2016Q4. Panel A illustrates the strong negative relation between expected inflation and the
number of quarterly defaults in the U.S., whereas Panel B shows a similar negative relation between
expected inflation and price-dividend ratios.
The existing literature has overlooked the connection between these two empirical facts and examined them separately. One branch of the literature focuses on the link between expected inflation and
credit spreads. See, for example, Bhamra, Fisher, and Kuehn (2011), Kang and Pflueger (2015), or
Gomes, Jermann, and Schmid (2016), in which lower expected inflation reduces the nominal risk-free
rate, thereby increasing firms’ indebtedness, and nominal expected growth rates – both effects increase
default risk. A second branch of the literature investigates the link between expected inflation and
equity values. See, for example, Modigliani and Cohn (1979), Feldstein et al. (1980), Ritter and Warr
(2002), Sharpe (2002), and Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004).1 A common explanation for the link
between inflation and equity prices is money illusion: Investors discount real cash flows with nominal
discount rates.2 In contrast to the literature, we propose a unified treatment of the empirical facts.
We do so by asking how shareholders can rationally value stocks more favorably during periods of low
expected inflation, despite facing greater bankruptcy risk.
We construct a dynamic asset-pricing model with endogenous corporate financing decisions to
explain these puzzling observations. We model firms that issue nominal debt and equity. Our framework provides asset-pricing predictions from a corporate finance perspective, whereby firms’ financing
and default policies are endogenous. We consider a representative agent with Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences.3 The economy switches randomly between expansion or recession, creating intertemporal
macroeconomic risk. A two-state Markov regime-switching model with parameter estimates based on
quarterly U.S. consumption data over the period 1970Q2-2016Q4 determines the switches between
real states. We also introduce three expected inflation states (low, moderate, and high) via a second, independent Markov regime-switching process that matches the one-year mean inflation forecast
from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. We refer to fluctuations in the expected inflation rate as
nominal risk, which is distinct from real macroeconomic risk.
1
See also Lintner (1975), Bodie (1976), Fama and Schwert (1977), Miller, Jeffrey, and Mandelker (1976), Nelson
(1976), Fama (1981), Schwert (1981), Geske and Roll (1983), Gultekin (1983), Solnik (1983), Pindyck et al. (1984), Kaul
(1987), Pearce and Roley (1988), Kaul and Seyhun (1990), Boudoukh and Richardson (1993), and Bekaert and Wang
(2010).
2
Alternative explanations are the non-neutrality of inflation and the existence of an inflation risk premium. We
describe the relevant literature in more detail below.
3
Our work builds on Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010a,b) and Chen (2010), who analyze firms’ capital-structure
and default decisions, as well as levered asset prices, in a consumption-based model with changing macroeconomic
conditions.

1

100

50

80

Price-dividend ratio

Number of defaults per quarter

60

40
30
20

60

40

20

10
0

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

0

Expected inflation

2

4

6

8

10

Expected inflation

Figure 1: Defaults, stock valuation, and inflation in the U.S.
This figure illustrates the relation between expected inflation, default risk, and stock valuation. Panel A reports
the number of quarterly defaults of firms domiciled in the U.S. with debt rated by Moody’s. Panel B displays
the price-dividend ratio, computed as the value-weighted CRSP price index in the last month of the quarter
divided by the sum of dividends paid in the last 12 months. Defaults are obtained from Moody’s Default and
Recovery Database. Expected inflation is the one-year-ahead inflation forecast from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters. The sample spans the period 1970Q2-2016Q4.

Our model contains two key frictions, both of which act as nominal rigidities. First, firms keep
their nominal debt coupons fixed. This stickiness of leverage means changes in inflation impact real
asset prices via shifts in the real values of debt coupons. Second, price stickiness implies nominal
cash flow growth is sticky in the short run, and so expected nominal cash-flow growth changes less
than one-for-one with changes in expected inflation. In the model, nominal cash-flow growth equals
expected real cash-flow growth plus a multiple smaller than one of expected inflation. We denote this
friction as sticky cash flows and find strong empirical support for this nominal rigidity in U.S. data.4
We show these two empirically motivated nominal frictions are sufficient to explain the stylized facts
in Figure 1, but we do not aim to micro found the existence of these frictions in the current paper.
The two frictions we introduce imply changes in expected inflation impact both real corporate debt
and equity prices. Our model is able to rationalize both high credit spreads and equity values during
periods of low expected inflation. The model makes additional cross-sectional implications, which the
data support.
In the model, a fall in expected inflation affects credit spreads through distinct channels. First,
a lower nominal cash-flow growth rate increases a firm’s risk-neutral default probability, which raises
4
We provide direct evidence on the stickiness of profits below. Nominal price rigidities are the leading explanation
of the real effects of monetary policy. For example, menu-cost models generate a band of inaction, rationalizing price
non-adjustment to shocks (see, e.g., Mankiw (1985) and Ball and Mankiw (1994)). On the empirical side, ample evidence
confirms the stickiness of output prices (see, e.g., Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) and Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016)).

2

a firm’s credit spread. Second, lower expected inflation decreases the nominal risk-free rate, which
increases a firm’s leverage ratio and thus its credit spread. Both effects induce greater credit risk as
expected inflation falls. Similarly, a fall in expected inflation affects equity values through distinct
channels. The nominal risk-free rate falls with expected inflation, but this effect is not perfectly offset
by a fall in nominal expected cash flows, because of their stickiness. This effect leads to an increase
in the value of unlevered equity, but also in the present value of coupons paid to debtholders. The
former effect dominates the latter, so a decrease in expected inflation increases the value of levered
equity. The increase in equity valuation becomes smaller for firms with more debt outstanding. The
model thus implies that, in the cross section of firms, the increase in equity prices during times of low
expected inflation is less pronounced for high-leverage firms.
We test the model predictions at the firm level. We use CRSP-Compustat merged data from April
1972 to December 2016 and exploit two measures of equity valuation: the firm’s market-to-book (M/B)
ratio and the price-dividend ratio.5 We measure default risk as a firm’s financial-distress risk, following
Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008). We find that at the portfolio level, default risk and equity
valuation decrease with the level of expected inflation. Our results continue to hold when we condition
on firms that remain in our sample throughout the period, which ensures a firm-selection effect does
not explain our findings. The conclusions remain identical when we run firm-level regressions with
a rich set of macroeconomic and firm-level controls, and when we consider conditional double sorts.
We also find evidence that the level of debt reduces, rather than exacerbates, the sensitivity of stock
prices to changes in nominal conditions. The validation of these cross-sectional predictions provides
further support for our model.
The model also generates the asymmetry Figure 1 suggests: Low expected inflation is not merely
the mirror image of high expected inflation, because the relation between equity valuation and inflation
is non-linear. Low expected inflation increases the expected future value of fixed nominal coupons,
thereby increasing the real value of debt. Hence, the assumption that an increase in expected inflation
of the same size will result in an equal-sized decrease of real debt values appears natural. But such
an analysis is incomplete, because it ignores how shifts in the nominal risk-free rate impact levered
equity values non-linearly via a nominal discounting channel. We obtain this prediction even though
default probabilities are convex in the distance-to-default. The convexity implies an increase in default
risk depresses the value of equity more than a decrease in default risk of the same size. But we show
this effect is not sufficient to offset the asymmetry arising from the nominal-discount-rate channel.
This asymmetric effect of expected inflation on asset prices is important in light of the extremely low
inflation levels we have observed during and after the Great Recession.
5

The availability of forecasts for inflation determines the starting point of the sample.

3

A related implication of the model is that nominal risk has a positive–and not a negative–effect on
real asset values. Because lower expected inflation increases stock prices more than higher expected
inflation depresses them, fluctuations in expected inflation increase equity prices on average.6 The
presence of fluctuations in expected inflation also increases debt values on average. Our paper thus
contributes to understanding the impact of inflation fluctuations on investors and in showing that
nominal fluctuations can be economically beneficial.
Our paper makes several contributions. First, we build an asset-pricing model of multiple firms
that can issue debt and equity with the option to default, where inflation risk impacts firms’ asset
prices. We explain the negative relation between stock valuation and expected inflation without any
inflation risk premium or behavioral dimension. Second, our model generates the negative impact of
expected inflation on default risk through variations in real leverage. Third, we show that a decrease
in expected inflation has a greater impact on equity prices than the risk of higher expected inflation,
which suggests a fundamental asymmetry in the asset-pricing implications of inflation risk. Fourth, we
find the risk of expected inflation is stronger for less levered firms. Finally, we empirically validate all
these predictions at the firm level. Hence, our paper allows us to shed light on the role of fluctuating
expected inflation for asset prices and to identify the firm characteristics and economic conditions
that make equity prices more sensitive to changes in expected inflation. We are thereby able to better
understand both the cross-sectional and time-series asset-pricing implications of inflation risk.
Existing studies going back to Fama (1981) provide explanations for the negative relation between
stock valuations and inflation, based on the idea that expected inflation is non-neutral because it has
a negative effect on real growth. Agents demand a positive inflation risk premium, which reduces
stock prices (e.g., Eraker, Shaliastovich, and Wang (2015)). However, these models typically ignore
default risk. We are able to generate the negative relation in the data without requiring an inflation
risk premium. In fact, we intentionally have a real stochastic discount factor, which is completely
independent of the nominal state, in line with the view that periods of low/ high inflation can be
associated with either good or bad economic conditions.7 Our model shows that sticky leverage
combined with sticky cash flows is sufficient to generate relations between inflation, equity valuation,
and default risk we observe in the data.
This paper also contributes to the literature exploring theoretically the interaction between inflation
and stock returns. These studies include Day (1984), Stulz (1986), Wachter (2006), Gabaix (2008),
Hess and Lee (1999), Chen (2010), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013), and Gomes et al. (2016). Chen,
6
To reach this conclusion, we compare the model’s prediction with that of an hypothetical economy with expected
inflation set at its unconditional mean.
7
There is no consensus that agents should like higher or lower inflation. For example, Piazzesi and Schneider (2006)
show inflation predicts consumption growth negatively, whereas Boons, Duarte, de Roon, and Szymanowska (2016)
suggest the relation is time-varying. This finding is consistent with the evidence inflation periods do not always reflect
a bad state of the economy. See, for example, Bekaert and Wang (2010), Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2017), and
David and Veronesi (2013).

4

Roll, and Ross (1986) and Ang, Briere, and Signori (2012) find inflation risk is priced in the cross
section of U.S. stock returns, whereas Boons et al. (2016) show the inflation risk premium varies
over time conditional on the relation between inflation and the real economy. We depart from this
literature by explaining the relation between inflation and equity valuation without linking inflation
to consumption. Our work is closely related to Weber (2015) who shows how inflation risk impacts
equity returns via a sticky-price channel. We combine the idea of sticky cash flows with sticky leverage.
Finally, Kang and Pflueger (2015), which studies how inflation risk impacts corporate bond prices
is another closely related paper. Our paper complements this study by jointly studying expected
inflation, default risk, and equity prices in a unified framework. Furthermore, we provide empirical
evidence and a theoretical explanation for the asymmetric relation between asset prices and expected
inflation.
Section 2 presents a simple model to clarify the qualitative relations between equity valuation,
credit risk, and expected inflation, whereas Section 3 describes the fully fledged consumption-based
asset-pricing model with inflation risk. Section 4 derives asset prices together with optimal default
and capital-structure decisions. Section 5 shows how we calibrate the model. Section 6 discusses the
model’s theoretical predictions, which we test empirically in Section 7. Section 8 concludes.

2

Intuition from a Simple Model

In this section, we develop a simple, static capital-structure model with exogenous financing and
default policies to develop intuition for the negative relationships between equity valuation and credit
risk with expected inflation. We also discuss why equity prices and credit risk are more sensitive to a
decrease in expected inflation than to an increase in expected inflation, that is, why the relations are
asymmetric.

2.1

Economy

The date-t price index is denoted by Pt , where
dPt
= µP dt,
Pt

(1)

and µP is expected inflation, which is constant. We also assume the price index is locally risk-free.
Consider a firm with time-t nominal cash flow Xt , the evolution of which under the risk-neutral
probability measure Q is given by
dXt
bX dt + σY dWtQ ,
=µ
Xt

5

(2)

where W Q is a standard Brownian motion under Q, risk-neutral expected nominal cash-flow growth,
bX = µ
bY + ϕµP , is the sum of risk-neutral real expected cash-flow growth µ
bY and a multiple ϕ of
µ

expected inflation µP . Note that ϕ measures the sensitivity of nominal cash-flow growth to expected
inflation. Because the price index is locally risk free, nominal cash-flow growth volatility σY equals
real cash-flow growth volatility.
Cash-flow growth is sticky when ϕ < 1, which reflects an incomplete inflation passthrough. The
data strongly supports the assumption that ϕ < 1. In Table 1, we regress the consensus forecast for
the growth rates of corporate profits over the next 12 months on the median forecast for inflation over
the same period and additional macroeconomic controls using expectations data from the Survey of
Professional Forecasters. In the data, the estimate of interest, ϕ̂, is 0.415 in the full specification in
column (4). The standard error is 0.167, which suggests the estimate ϕ̂ is significantly lower than 1
(t-stat of 3.5). Hence, cash flows are sticky with respect to changes in nominal conditions. Consistent
with this evidence, we hereafter assume ϕ = 0.5, which is in the confidence interval of our estimate.
Table 1 [about here]
The firm has to service perpetual debt with a fixed nominal flow coupon of c. The capital structure
is constant, that is, leverage is sticky. Coupons and cash flows are discounted with the nominal riskfree rate, which is given by r$ = r + µP . It is equal to the real interest rate r plus expected inflation
µP . Default occurs when Xt falls to an exogenously-specified default threshold XD . The firm has
no residual value when default occurs. For now, we ignore taxes and set the parameter values to
bY = 2%, σY = 15%, XD = 0.5, X0 = c = 1, and r = 4%.
µ

2.2

Negative relation and inflation asymmetry

To examine how asset prices depend on expected inflation, we consider three scenarios. The economy
can be in a state of low (µP = 0%), moderate (µP = 3%), or high expected inflation (µP = 6%). Figure
2 shows the asset-pricing predictions for each of these cases. Equity valuations and credit spreads are
both negatively related to expected inflation. Hence, the firm displays higher equity prices and, at the
same time, faces a higher risk of default when expected inflation decreases. Furthermore, a change
from moderate to low expected inflation has a greater impact than a change to high expected inflation,
although we consider symmetric variations in expected inflation. Hence, low expected inflation is not
the mirror image of high expected inflation. We call this effect inflation asymmetry.
Figure 2 [about here]
We now turn to the explanation of these predictions. First, the nominal value of equity S $ equals
the nominal value of the firm’s assets V $ minus the nominal value of debt B $ , under no arbitrage.
6

The total nominal value of the firm assets depends on expected inflation as follows
$
Xt − XD qD,t

Vt$ =

(3)

bX
r$ − µ
$
Xt − XD qD,t

=

bY + (1 − ϕ)µP
r−µ

,

(4)

$
where qD,t
is the Arrow-Debreu price of default, that is, the date t price of the security that pays out

one unit of the numeraire (one dollar) at the time of default.8 The total asset value decreases (nonlinearly) with expected inflation in the case of sticky cash flows (ϕ < 1). We refer to this mechanism
as the discounting channel.
By contrast, the nominal value of debt is given by
c
$
).
(1 − qD,t
r + µP

Bt$ =

(5)

Lower inflation µP reduces the nominal risk-free rate, r$ = r + µP , which increases the value of debt
B $ . When lower expected inflation increases the total asset value more than it increases the value of
debt, the value of equity increases. Hence, the negative and asymmetric relation between equity prices
and expected inflation occurs, as illustrated in Figure 2 (Panel A).
A complementary default-risk channel explains the negative relation between expected inflation
and credit risk. Nominal cash flows slow down as expected inflation decreases, which increases the
$
likelihood of reaching the default threshold. The default probability, qD
, varies negatively with the

level of expected inflation, as in Bhamra et al. (2011) and Kang and Pflueger (2015); that is,

$
∂qD
∂µP

< 0.

To grasp the importance of the default-risk channel, recall the credit spread for perpetual debt is given
by
c
− r$
Bt$

st =

= r$
8

h

$
From Karatzas and Shreve (1991), qD,t
= EQ e−r

where ω =

1
2

µY +ϕµP
−b
−
σ2
Y

r

1
2

µY +ϕµP
−b
σ2
Y

2

+

2r $
2
σY

$

τD

i

=

< 0.

7

(6)

$
qD,t
$
1 − qD,t
Xt
XD

ω

.

(7)

if default occurs at time τD = inf{t ≥ 0 | Xt ≤ XD },

$
The credit spread increases as expected inflation decreases through higher qD
. The functional form

is also non-linear, thereby generating an asymmetric relation between the credit spread and expected
inflation.
This default-risk effect is distinct from the discounting channel, because it occurs for any ϕ > 0.
The negative relation between credit risk and expected inflation is thus not related to the sticky-cashflow channel. Rather, it originates from the stickiness of the firm’s nominal coupons, which are not
adjusted with inflation. As in Bhamra et al. (2011) and Gomes et al. (2016), sticky leverage plays
a critical role in our analysis. Note that credit risk increases although financial leverage actually
decreases, as illustrated in Figure 2 (Panel D). The mechanism that we highlight thus differs from the
argument in Fisher (1933), which implies lower inflation translates into higher credit risk because of
a higher debt valuation.
The default-risk channel attenuates the negative relation between equity prices and expected inflation that originates from the discounting channel. However, this default-risk channel is not strong
enough to reverse the sign, consistent with the data. Figure 1 shows lower expected inflation leads to
higher equity valuations.
Overall, this analysis demonstrates how firms can have higher levered equity valuations and higher
default risk when expected inflation decreases. This simple model assumes no arbitrage and does not
make specific assumptions about preferences. The two critical features driving our results are sticky
cash flows, for which we find strong support in the data, and sticky leverage.
Based on these insights, we now develop a richer model and explore quantitatively the negative
and asymmetric impact of expected inflation for asset prices and corporate financial decisions.

3

Model

This section presents a dynamic asset-pricing model with real and nominal risk, and endogenous
corporate financing decisions. We first define aggregate consumption and inflation and derive the real
and nominal stochastic discount factors, using an Epstein-Zin-Weil representative agent. We then
derive the asset values of firms, which issue nominal debt and equity, and describe their optimal
policies.

3.1

Aggregate economic variables

Aggregate consumption at date-t is denoted by Ct and its dynamics are given exogenously by
dCt
= µC,t dt + σC,t dZt ,
Ct

8

(8)

where Zt is a standard Brownian motion under the physical probability measure P. The conditional
first and second moments of aggregate consumption growth, µC,t and σC,t , respectively, can take
different values, depending on the current state of the real economy, denoted by νt . The real economy
is risky and transitions between a recession state, νt = R, and an expansion state, νt = E, according
to a two-state Markov chain. The probability under the physical probability measure of moving from
the expansion state to the recession state within an instant dt is λreal
ER . Similarly, the probability under
the physical measure of moving from the recession state to the expansion state within an instant dt
is λreal
RE dt. We have µC,R < µC,E and σC,R > σC,E to ensure the mean and volatility of consumption
growth are procyclical and countercyclical, respectively.
Inflation dynamics are specified exogenously. The date-t level of the price index is denoted by Pt
and satisfies
dPt
= µP,t dt,
Pt

(9)

where we neglect inflation volatility stemming from small Brownian shocks, and assume that date-t
conditional expected inflation, µP,t , depends on the nominal state t . We assume three nominal states:
a low expected inflation state, t = L; a moderate expected inflation state, t = M ; and a state of
high expected inflation, t = H. From the definition of the nominal state, µP,L < µP,M < µP,H . The
physical probability of moving from the nominal state l to k, within the instant dt, is λ$lk dt, and the
probability of moving back within a later instant is λ$kl dt, where k, l ∈ {L, M, H} and l 6= k.
For ease of notation, we combine the real and nominal states into six distinct states, where the
current combined state is denoted by st = (νt , t ). In summary, the different states are
st

(νt , t )

gt

σC,t

µP,t

Recession & Low Expected Inflation (RL)

1

(R, L)

µC,R σC,R

µP,L

Recession & Moderate Expected Inflation (RM)

2

(R, M ) µC,R σC,R µP,M

Recession & High Expected Inflation (RH)

3

(R, H)

µC,R σC,R

µP,H

Expansion & Low Expected Inflation (EL)

4

(E, L)

µC,E σC,E

µP,L

Expansion & Moderate Expected Inflation (EM)

5

(E, M ) µC,E σC,E µP,M

Expansion & High Expected Inflation (EH)

6

(E, H) µC,E σC,E

(10)

µP,H

The transitions between combined real and nominal states are given exogenously by a six-state Markov
chain. Real and nominal regimes switch independently over period dt, and so the physical probability
of the combined state switching from st− = (νt− , t− ) to st = (νt , t ), where st 6= st− within a time
interval of length dt is given by
$
λst− ,st dt = λreal
νt− ,νt λt− ,t dt,

9

(11)

$
where λreal
νt− ,νt = 1 if νt− = νt (i.e. the real state does not change) and λt− ,t = 1 if t− = t . (i.e. the

nominal state does not change).

3.2

Representative agent and stochastic discount factors

The representative agent has the continuous-time analog of Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences.9 The real
stochastic discount factor (SDF) at time-t, πt , depends on the state of the real economy and is given
by (see Appendix OA.B for the derivation)
1



πt = βe−βt

 1−γ1
1−

ψ



Rt

Ct−γ pC,t e

p−1 du
0 C,u

− γ− ψ
1− 1
ψ

,

(12)

where β is the rate of time preference, γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion (RRA), and ψ is
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution under certainty (EIS). The date-t value of the claim to
aggregate consumption per unit of time is denoted by pC,t . This price-consumption ratio depends only
on the real state of the economy, denoted by ν:

pC,t


 p
C,R
=
 p
C,E

, if νt = R
, if νt = E.

(13)

When ψ > 1, pC,t is procyclical and the real SDF increases in the recession state, R.10
The real stochastic discount factor at date-t, πt , evolves as follows
dπt
πt

νt− =i,νt =j

P
= −ri dt − γσC,i dZt + (ωij − 1)dNij,t
, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i,

(14)

where ri is the equilibrium real risk-free interest rate in state i ∈ {R, E}, given by

 r , i = R,
R
ri =
 r , i = E,
E

(15)

with rE > rR so that the real interest rate is procyclical with respect to the real economy. The real
interest rates are identical to those of Bhamra et al. (2010a) and Bhamra et al. (2010b), and given
in the Online Appendix. Two types of risk are priced. The increment in the standard Brownian
9
The continuous-time version of the recursive preferences introduced by Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1989) is
known as stochastic differential utility, and is derived in Duffie and Epstein (1992). Schroder and Skiadas (1999) provide
a proof of existence and uniqueness for the finite-horizon case.
10
The price-consumption ratios for each real state are derived from a coupled system of nonlinear algebraic equations
given in (OA.20) of the Online Appendix.

10

motion dZt represents small high-frequency changes in unexpected consumption growth, and γσC,i is
the associated price of risk. The compensated Poisson process NνPt− ,νt ,t is given by
NνPt− ,νt ,t = dNνt− ,νt ,t − λreal
νt− ,νt dt, νt− , νt ∈ {R, E}, νt 6= νt−

(16)

where Nνt− ,νt ,t is a Poisson process that jumps up by 1 when the real state of the economy switches;
that is, Nνt− ,νt ,t = 1 if νt 6= νt− . The increment in the compensated Poisson process, dNνPt− ,νt ,t , is
a martingale (under the physical measure P) that represents the risk the real state of the economy
changing with price of risk ωij . The representative agent only prices real risks. If the real state of the
economy moves from expansion to recession, that is, if νt− = E and νt = R, then ωER = ω, where
−

ω = (pC,R /pC,E )

γ− 1
ψ
1− 1
ψ

. Similarly, if the real state of the economy moves from recession to expansion,

that is, νt− = R and νt = E, then ωRE = ω −1 . Intuitively, a negative shock to the economy results in
an increase in the real SDF, and so ω > 1.
The pricing of securities is based on the risk-neutral switching probabilities per unit of time (i.e.,
transition intensities), λ̂st− ,st , which are related to the physical switching probabilities, λst− ,st , via
$
λ̂st− ,st = ωνt− ,νt λreal
νt− ,νt λt− ,t , st− 6= st ,

(17)

where ωνt− ,νt = 1 if νt− = νt (i.e. the real state does not change). Hence, under Epstein-Zin-Weil
−1
acts as a distortion factor, distorting physical transition intensities. The
preferences, ωER = ω = ωRE

representative agent cares about future consumption growth and prefers early resolution of intertemporal risk (γ > 1/ψ), and so ω > 1, which implies the risk-neutral probability per unit of time of
switching from expansion to recession is higher than the physical probability. The agent prices only
real risks, so the risk-neutral and the physical transition intensities coincide when only the nominal
state changes (ωνt− ,νt = 1 when νt− = νt ).
Financial securities have nominal prices, which requires us to consider a nominal stochastic discount
factor for asset pricing. The date-t nominal SDF, denoted by πt$ , is defined as
πt$ =

πt
,
Pt

(18)

whose dynamics satisfy
dπt$
πt$

= −ri$ dt − γσC,i dZt +

X

P
(ωij − 1)dNij,t
.

j6=i

st− =i,st =j

11

(19)

ri$ is the nominal interest rate in state i, given by
ri$ = ri + µP,i .

(20)

The nominal interest rate depends on both real and nominal states and can thus takes six different
values; it changes when the conditional moments of consumption growth change and also when expected inflation changes. The nominal risk-free rate is lowest during the recession/low-inflation state
and highest during the expansion/high-inflation state.

3.3

Firm cash flows

The date-t level of the real cash flow of an individual firm is denoted by Yt and evolves under the
physical probability measure P according to the process
dYt
= µY,t dt + σY,t dWt .
Yt

(21)

Real cash flows have a conditional expected growth rate µY,t and a conditional volatility σY,t . Both
moments are identical across firms. Increments in the standard Brownian motion (under P) W represent small but frequent shocks to the firm’s cash-flow growth. We assume cash-flow shocks are
independent across firms and from shocks to consumption growth.11 Consequently, systematic risk
in real cash flows is exclusively associated with low-frequency changes in economic conditions. The
expected growth rate is higher in expansions than in recessions, whereas the conditional volatility is
lower in expansions than in recessions. In sum, for all firms, we have µY,t = µY,R , σY,t = σY,R in
recessions and µY,t = µY,E , σY,t = σY,E in expansions, where µY,R < µY,E and σY,R > σY,E .
Because firms issue nominal securities and pay nominal taxes, investors care about the dynamics
of nominal cash flows. The firm’s nominal date-t cash-flow level is then given by Xt , where
Xt ≡ Yt Ptϕ ,

(22)

dXt
= µX,t dt + σX,t dWt ,
Xt

(23)

which satisfies

with µX,t = µY,t + ϕµP,t . Because we ignore instantaneous Brownian shocks to the price index, the
volatility of the nominal cash flows is given by σX,t = σY,t . The sticky-cash-flow parameter, ϕ, captures
the extent to which changes in inflation expectations are reflected in the firm’s cash-flow growth rate.
11

We ignore a non-zero correlation between real cash flows and consumption, because the asset-pricing literature
shows the associated risk premium is negligible. Similarly, we ignore any correlation in cash-flow growth, because the
asset-pricing and corporate financing implications are negligible. See, for example, Bhamra et al. (2010a, 2010b).

12

Overall, firms exhibit heterogeneity in their cash flows due to firm-specific shocks but, at the same
time, all firms have identical conditional moments for the expected growth rate.

4

Asset Prices and Corporate Financing Decisions

In this section, we derive asset prices together with optimal default and capital-structure decisions.

4.1

Nominal debt and leverage stickiness

Firms pay taxes on nominal cash flows Xt and issue debt to shield profits from taxes. Each firm has
a debt contract that is characterized by a constant and perpetual nominal debt coupon c. Leverage is
sticky because the coupon is fixed in nominal terms. Hence, when the nominal state changes, the real
coupon changes, which affects valuations. Consequently, sticky leverage acts as a nominal rigidity. In
other words, firms cannot adjust the nominal quantity of debt to news about the inflation state.

4.2

Liquidation value

When a firm’s nominal cash-flows reach a state-dependent boundary XD,i , which is selected by equityholders to maximize equity value, the firm is liquidated. Debtholders recover a fraction of the
after-tax unlevered asset value of the firm, whereas the remaining fraction is lost due to bankruptcy
costs.
The nominal asset value at the time of liquidation, denoted by A$i,t in state i ∈ {1, ..., 6}, corresponds to the present value of the after-tax nominal unlevered cash flows. Unlevered cash flows
equal
A$i,t = (1 − η)Xt

where η is the corporate tax rate and
1
rA,i

1
rA,i

1
,
rA,i

(24)

is defined by
"Z

= Et
t

∞

#

πu$ Xu
du st = i .
πt$ Xt

(25)

−1
The value of rA,i = vA,i
is given by the reciprocal of the i’th element of the vector VA = [vA,1 , . . . , vA,6 ]>

where
b −1 1
VA = (RA − Λ)
6×1 ,

13

(26)

where 16×1 is a 6 × 1 vector of ones, RA is the following 6 × 6 diagonal matrix
RA = diag(r1$ − µX,1 , . . . , r6$ − µX,6 ),

(27)

b is the 6 × 6 risk-neutral generator matrix of the Markov chain characterizing the real and
and Λ

nominal states of the economy, defined by
b =λ
b ij , i, j ∈ {1, . . . , 6}, j 6= i,
[Λ]
ij
b =−
[Λ]
ii

X

(28)

b ij , i, j ∈ {1, . . . , 6}, j 6= i.
λ

(29)

j6=i

We can interpret rA,i as the discount rate for a perpetuity with stochastic expected growth rate
µX,t , which is currently equal to µX,i . If the economy stays in state i forever, the discount rate reduces
to the standard expression rA,i = ri$ − µX,i . In general, however, the economy can change states, and
so the discount rate depends on the risk-neutral generator matrix of the Markov chain governing the
economy’s transitions. The presence of the risk-neutral generator matrix as opposed to the physical
generator matrix incorporates the pricing of risk. However, as previously discussed, our SDF does not
give risk to an inflation risk premium.

4.3

Arrow-Debreu default claims

Default risk is central to firm valuation. We now express the value of a firm’s asset as a function of a
set of Arrow-Debreu default claims. We define an Arrow-Debreu default claim as an asset that pays
out $1 if default occurs in state j and the current state is i. We denote the nominal price of such a
$
security by qD,ij,t
, which satisfies (see Appendix OA.F)

"
$
qD,ij,t
= Et

πτ$D
πt$

#

I{sτD =j} st = i ,

(30)

where τD is the date at which default occurs and I{sτD =j} is an the indicator function that equals 1,
if default occurs in state j, and zero otherwise.
When valuing assets that depend on the level of cash flows at time of default, XτD , we have to
consider additional Arrow-Debreu securities, because our economy features “deep defaults.” These
defaults can occur when the state of the economy jumps from its current state to a worse state.
Default boundaries are countercyclical and can suddenly move upward when the economy deteriorates,
for example, when a low expected inflation period starts. In such a situation, a fraction of firms may
immediately default upon a change in state. Consider a firm that has a nominal cash-flow level of $10

14

while the default boundary is $8. If the economy suddenly deteriorates by moving into a new state
where the default boundary is $11, the firm will immediately default. All firms with a nominal cashflow level below $11 would immediately default, thereby creating a default cluster. More formally, we
can consider a firm with a nominal cash-flow level XτD − , at time τD −, which is the time just before
default, where XτD − is below the new state’s default boundary, XD,j . This firm will default as soon
as the economy enters the new state, and so XτD − = XτD < XD,j (XτD − = XτD because X is a
continuous process). Hence, it not necessarily the case that at default, a firm’s cash-flow level is at
the default boundary. Consequently, to value securities that depend on a firm’s cash flows, we need a
modified set of Arrow-Debreu default claims. We derive them in Appendix OA.G.
This second type of Arrow-Debreu default claims pay out

XτD
XD,j

at default if default occurs in state

$
j and the current state is i. The date-t nominal price of this security is denoted by q̃D,ij,t
, where

"
$
q̃D,ij,t

= Et

#

πτ$D XτD
I{sτD =j} st = i .
πt$ XD,j

(31)

Overall, thirty six Arrow-Debreu default prices exist for each type, because six states characterize the
aggregate economy.

4.4

Corporate bond value

A firm that issues debt promises to pay the nominal coupon c per unit time. If the firm defaults,
debtholders receive a fraction of the firm’s liquidation value, the constant recovery rate α. Hence, the
date-t nominal value of corporate debt, conditional on the current state being i, is given by
$
Bi,t

"Z

τD

= cEt
t

#

#

"

πτ$D $
πu$
du
+
αE
Asτ (XτD )du .
t
D
πt$
πt$

(32)

The above expression is simply the present value of future coupon flows up until some random default
time, τD , plus the present value of the unlevered firm assets net of bankruptcy costs. We can rewrite
the above expression as

$
Bi,t
= c

1
$
rP,i

−

6
X
j=1



$
qD,ij,t

6
1  X
$
+
αA$j (XD,j )q̃D,ij,t
,

$
rP,j

15

j=1

(33)

$
where rP,i
is the nominal discount rate for a perpetuity paying a flow of $1, conditional on the current

state being i. Observe that
"Z

1
$
rP,i

∞

= Et
t

#

πu$
du|st = i .
πt$

(34)

To gain intuition for corporate bond price (33), note c r$1 is the present value in nominal terms of a
P,i

default-free bond paying a coupon flow of c dollars in perpetuity. The expression c

P6

1
$
j=1 qD,1,ij r$

is

P,j

the present value of coupons lost because of the possibility of default, and

P6

$
$
j=1 αAj (XD,j )q̃D,ij,t

is

the present value of the assets recovered.
−1
$
$
The nominal discount rate for a constant nominal perpetuity, rP,i
, is given by rP,i
= vB,i
, where

vB,i is the i-th element of the vector VB = [vB,1 , ..., vB,6 ]0 , given by
b −1 1
VB = (R$ − Λ)
6×1 ,

(35)

$
$
and R$ represents the 6 × 6 diagonal matrix such that Rii
= ri$ . Therefore, rP,i
accounts for the

possibility that the nominal risk-free rate takes different future values as macroeconomic fundamentals
and expected inflation fluctuate over time.

4.5

Equity value

Shareholders are entitled to the firm’s cash flows net of taxes and debt servicing as long as the firm
does not default. When the firm is in default, which occurs at some random time τD , shareholders
recover nothing and lose their rights to any future cash flows. The nominal value of equity at date-t,
conditional on the current state i, is then given by
$
Si,t

= (1 − η)Et

"Z
t

τD

#

πu$
(Xu − c)du st = i .
πt$

(36)

We can rewrite (36) as

$
Si,t

=

A$i (Xt )

− (1 − η)

c
$
rP,i

−

6
X

$
A$j (XD,j )q̃D,ij,t

j=1

− (1 −

c
$
η)qD,ij,t
$
rP,j

!

.

(37)

The first two terms represent the present value of cash flows net of coupon payments in the absence of
default, whereas the summation term captures the present value of the net cash flows that shareholders
lose in the case of default.

16

4.6

Default and capital structure decisions

Shareholders maximize the value of their default option by choosing when to default. The statecontingent endogenous default boundary XD,st depends on the current real and nominal state of the
economy, that is, st ∈ {1, ..., 6}. Expected inflation matters for default decisions because a change in
the nominal cash flow growth is not offset by a change in the nominal coupon rate; that is, leverage is
sticky. Hence, equityholders are entitled to smaller expected future cash flows when expected inflation
is low than when expected inflation is high.
The default boundaries satisfy the following six standard smooth-pasting conditions
∂Ss$t (X)
∂X

= 0, st ∈ {1, ..., 6}.

(38)

X=XD,st

Shareholders also choose the optimal nominal coupon to maximize firm value at date 0 by balancing
marginal tax benefits from debt against marginal expected distress costs. Two important features are
noteworthy. First, as is standard in the capital-structure literature (Leland, 1994), by maximizing firm
value, shareholders internalize debtholders’ value at date 0. However, in choosing default times, they
ignore the considerations of debtholders. This feature creates the usual conflict of interest between
equity- and debtholders. Second, the optimal coupon depends on the state of the economy at date
0. We denote the date-0 coupon by cs0 , where, to emphasize this dependence, s0 is the date-0 state
of the economy. Shareholders choose the coupon to maximize date-0 firm value, Fs$0 ,0 = Bs$0 ,0 + Ss$0 ,0 ;
that is,
cs0 = arg max Fs$0 ,0 (c).
c

(39)

We obtain the optimal default and capital-structure decisions numerically by maximizing equation
(39) subject to the conditions stated in equation (38). As a result, the optimal default boundaries
depend on the debt policy, which is determined by the initial financing state. Hence, if the economy
is in state i, the default boundary for nominal earnings is given by XD,i (cs0 ), where i denotes the
dependence on the current state and cs0 .

5

Calibration

We calibrate the model to the U.S. economy over the period 1970Q1-2016Q4. The real states are
characterized by the conditional moments of aggregate consumption growth. We obtain the transition probabilities λreal
ν − νt by estimating a two-state Markov regime-switching model on quarterly U.S.
t

consumption, jointly with real aggregate earnings data.

17

We proxy for aggregate consumption with real non-durable goods plus service-consumption expenditures from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. To determine real cash flows, we first obtain aggregate,
nominal earnings from S&P provided by Robert J. Shiller’s website and then use the personal consumption expenditure chain-type price index as the deflator. The conditional moments of real consumption
and cash-flow growth rates are reported in Table 2.12 The estimates of the physical probabilities of
being in a recession and expansion are fR = f1 + f2 + f3 = 18.2% and fE = f4 + f5 + f6 = 81.8%,
respectively.
Table 2 [about here]
We determine the nominal states based on quarterly expected inflation data. We use the mean,
one-year-ahead inflation forecasts from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, as reported by the
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.13 We estimate a three-state Markov regime-switching model
and set expected inflation to the unconditional mean in the medium nominal state. We discipline
the chain such that the stationary probabilities of being in low-, moderate- or high-expected inflation
regimes are fL = f1 + f4 = 25%, fM = f2 + f5 = 50%, and fH = f3 + f6 = 25%, respectively. This
calibration ensures symmetry in the probabilities of being in the L or H expected-inflation regimes.
Regarding the firm parameters, the corporate tax rate is set to η = 15% and the liquidation value
in default is α = 50%. We normalize the initial value of the cash flow to X0 = 1. Preferences involve
a risk aversion of γ = 10, an elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) of ψ = 2, and a subjective
discount factor of β = 0.03. Finally, the sensitivity of nominal cash-flow growth to expected inflation
is set to ϕ = 0.5, following the empirical evidence on cash-flow stickiness we discuss in section 2.
Based on this calibration, the expected inflation rate is 1.96% in the low-inflation state, 3.54%
in moderate inflation, and 5.13% during times of high inflation. The nominal growth rate of cash
flows ranges between -9.91% in the recession/low-inflation state to 7.50% in the expansion/highinflation state. The nominal risk-free rate varies between 4.79% in recession/low inflation and 9.12%
in expansion/high inflation.

6

Theoretical Predictions

This section discusses the model predictions focusing on the role of expected inflation for corporate
asset prices and default risk.
12

Following Bhamra et al. (2010a,b), we account for an additional 22.58% of firm-specific volatility. The total cash-flow
volatility is thus approximately 25% for our benchmark firm, which is the average volatility of firms with outstanding
rated corporate debt.
13
The availability of the data determines our start date.

18

6.1

Characteristics of the economy

Table 3 first reports the characteristics of the economy. Unconditionally, the representative firm
services a debt coupon that is equal to 80.22% of the initial cash flow and defaults optimally when the
firm’s cash flows fall to a boundary that is approximately equal to 26% of the initial level. With such
policies, financial leverage is 44.89%, the credit spread is 156 bps, and the value of equity is 11.39.
We can interpret equity value as the price-earning ratio, given that nominal cash flows (earnings) are
normalized to unity. Our predictions thus reflect the impact of nominal conditions on real equity
valuation. We now investigate how default risk and asset prices vary with expected inflation.
Table 3 [about here]

6.2

Implications for default risk

Our model features two channels through which a change in expected inflation affects a firm’s default
risk. First, nominal cash flows grow less rapidly in times of low expected inflation, which increases
the probability of reaching the default boundary. This channel increases a firm’s default risk, as
$
captured by the higher prices of Arrow-Debreu default claims, qD,ij,t
. Second, the nominal risk-free

rate decreases as expected inflation decreases, which increases the present value of debt payments.
Firms have a greater debt burden, thereby further increasing default risk. Table 3 shows default risk
is indeed highest in a low-expected-inflation environment. The credit spread increases from 139 bps
to 151 bps from state EH to EL even though the level of cash flows is identical.
These effects occur because a firm’s capital structure is fixed and cannot be adjusted in the short
term to a change in nominal conditions. As the economy moves into lower expected inflation, firms
would benefit from a decrease in their debt level (e.g., through debt buyback) to attenuate the increase
in credit risk, but are stuck with their existing debt issues. Leverage stickiness is thus key to understanding why default risk varies with fluctuating nominal prices, in line with Bhamra et al. (2011),
Kang and Pflueger (2015), and Gomes et al. (2016).
A change in expected inflation has two opposing effects on debt value. Lower expected inflation
reduces the nominal risk-free rate, thereby increasing the present value of the coupons and thus the
market value of debt. However, firms face a higher default probability, which reduces the value of the
debt claim because of bankruptcy costs. Overall, the first effect dominates (see Table 3). Our model
thus indicates that periods of low expected inflation are jointly associated with greater debt value and
higher credit risk.

19

6.3

Implications for equity valuation

Because low expected inflation results in higher default risk, one might expect lower equity valuations
in low expected inflation states. And indeed, a higher likelihood of default reduces the present value
of the cash flows to shareholders. However, another mechanism works in the opposite direction and
generates an increase in equity prices when expected inflation decreases: The nominal risk-free rate is
more sensitive than the cash flows to changes in expected inflation. This channel, which we label the
”discounting effect,” arises from the stickiness of cash flows. Overall, the model predicts that equity
prices are higher during times of low expected inflation than in periods of high expected inflation (see
Table 3).
Our model thus explains why increases in expected inflation are negative for shareholders, whereas
a decrease in expected inflation is good news. We highlight two central mechanisms of nominal
risk: an increase in default risk and a decrease in the nominal discount rate during times of low
expected inflation. The second effect dominates, and disinflation has a positive real effect on financial
asset prices. The model thus helps explain the forces driving the beneficial impact of lower expected
inflation for equity investors.

6.4

Low versus high inflation: Asymmetry

We now separately analyze the risk of low and high expected inflation to highlight an asymmetry: Low
expected inflation is not the mere mirror image of high expected inflation for a representative firm.
Low and high expected inflation impact equity prices in opposite directions. Table 3 indicates the
equity valuation increases by 9.6% (from 11.77 to 12.90) when the economy switches from moderate
expected inflation to low expected inflation. By contrast, the equity valuation decreases by only 3.1%
(from 11.77 to 11.41) when expected inflation switches to the high state.14 Hence, the quantitative
predictions are not of equal size. Figure 3 illustrates this non-linear effect for equity valuation and the
credit spread. The impact of low expected inflation on equity prices is stronger than the impact of
high expected inflation, although both states are equally likely. The reason is that a shift in nominal
risk-free rates impacts equity prices non-linearly via the discounting effect. The same asymmetric
effect applies to the value of debt (i.e., financial leverage) and thus to credit risk.
Figure 3 [about here]
Our theory predicts that the presence of nominal risk increases equity values, as a direct consequence of the asymmetry. Given the convex relation between equity valuation and expected inflation,
the average equity value across the low and high expected inflation states are higher than the equity
14
We consider being in the expansion state, but the message is qualitatively similar when considering the recession
state.

20

value during the average expected inflation state. Following the same reasoning, nominal risk also
increases debt valuation on average.
To quantify the role of nominal risk, we compare the results of the full model (see Table 3) with the
case in which we switch off variations in the nominal state (Table 4). In this latter specification, the
expected inflation rate is set at its unconditional mean, which corresponds to the “moderate inflation”
regime. Table 5 indicates the risk of fluctuating nominal prices on average increases asset valuations
adding up to 0.66% of firm value. This increase in firm value translates, using a simple back-of-theenvelope calculation, into an increase in firm value of approximately US$425 billion, given a market
capitalization of listed companies at the NYSE of US$19.3 trillion (as of June 2016) and an average
leverage ratio of 0.3. The impact of nominal risk for investors is thus economically important.
Tables 4 and 5 [about here]

6.5

Cross-sectional predictions

In the cross section, equity prices of firms with higher leverage should be less sensitive to variations
in expected inflation, because of two offsetting effects. On the one hand, with sticky cash flows, lower
expected inflation increases the present value of cash flows and thus firm value. On the other hand,
the value of debt also increases. The sticky leverage channel drives the second channel, which is
naturally stronger for high-leverage firms. Hence, for such firms, equity valuation (determined by firm
value minus debt value) becomes less sensitive to changes in expected inflation. Consequently, the
presence of debt reduces, rather than exacerbates, the sensitivity of stock prices to changes in nominal
conditions. By contrast, no such opposing forces drive the relation between credit risk and expected
inflation conditional on leverage, which implies the cross-sectional implications are likely much weaker
for credit spreads than for equity prices.
Table 6 compares the predictions for firms with low versus high leverage. Nominal fluctuations have
greater asset-pricing implications for firms that are less levered. In comparison, the difference in the
relation between credit risk and expected inflation for high- versus low-leverage firms is negligible.15
Table 6 [about here]

6.6

Discussion

Our model shows higher expected inflation negatively affects equity prices, although nominal risk is
unpriced. In fact, we intentionally use a model in which nominal risk is not priced in the real stochastic
discount factor. This approach ensures an inflation risk premium does not drive any of our predictions.
15
The difference is slightly positive due to a convexity effect: The sensitivity of credit spreads to news increases with
the level of credit risk (David, 2008).

21

Only the impact of inflation on the quantity of risk drives our predictions for equity valuation and
credit risk. Hence, nominal conditions have no effect on the representative agent’s pricing kernel, but
nonetheless have a non-trivial influence on asset prices. Furthermore, the agent is fully rational in our
economy and thus does not suffer from any type of money illusion.
The key channel for the relation between default risk and inflation is the presence of sticky leverage,
whereas the stickiness in cash flows determines the negative sensitivity of equity prices to expected
inflation.16 As illustrated in Figure 4, the absence of cash flow stickiness reverts the relation between
equity prices and inflation but not the relation with credit risk. To sum up, both the sticky-cash-flow
and the sticky-leverage channels are necessary ingredients to understand the joint relations between
inflation, equity valuation, and default risk.
Figure 4 [about here]

7

Empirical Validation

In this section, we test the predictions of the model. We examine whether a decrease in expected
inflation results in both greater default risk and higher equity valuation, for the same set of firms.
We also explore the cross-sectional implication that the relation between equity prices and expected
inflation are weaker for more levered firms and investigate whether these relations are asymmetric.

7.1

Data

Our empirical analysis is based on the following data. Expected inflation is the year-on-year expected
GDP-deflator inflation from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s Survey of Professional Forecasters. We consider two measures of equity valuation: the firm’s market-to-book (M/B) equity ratio
and the price-dividend ratio. Default risk is measured by a firm’s financial-distress risk, following
Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008), which we convert into the next quarter’s default probability.
Appendix A provides details on the computation of these measures. Accounting variables are from
Compustat Fundamental Quarterly data, whereas stock price variables are from CRSP. The dataset
spans from April 1972 to December 2016. Table 7 displays the summary statistics.
Table 7 [about here]

7.2

Relations between equity valuation, default risk, and expected inflation

We first analyze the relations between equity valuations and default risk with expected inflation. Figure 5 displays the results for the price-dividend ratio (top panels), the market-to-book ratio (middle
16
A model in which a monetary authority sets short-term nominal interest rates endogeneously and in which the Taylor
principle is satisfied delivers similar predictions without relying on the sticky cash flow channel.

22

panels), and the bankruptcy probability (bottom panels). The panels plot the (value-weighted) averages of the firm characteristics against the level of expected inflation observed in the corresponding
quarter. We disentangle the relations by level of financial leverage, which we define as long-term debt
and debt in current liabilities over the sum of the numerator and stockholders’ equity. The left panels report portfolios of firms with below-median leverage, whereas the right panels report firms with
above-median leverage. Each panel displays the fit of a quadratic regression.
Figure 5 [about here]
This graphical analysis suggests the price-dividend ratio, the market-to-book ratio, and the bankruptcy
probability are all negatively related to the level of expected inflation. Importantly, each portfolio contains the same set of firms, thereby indicating a decrease in expected inflation simultaneously increases
both a firm’s equity valuation and its default risk. Furthermore, as our model predicts, the relations
based on equity valuation appear to be stronger for low-leverage firms.

7.3

Portfolio sorts

As a formal test of these relations, we now exploit double sorts. We first sort all firms into two
portfolios based on their financial leverage. We then create three equal-sized portfolios depending on
the level of expected inflation.
Table 8 reports the results. Panel A shows for conditional double sorts that both equity valuation and default risk decrease in expected inflation. The high expected inflation-minus-low expected
inflation estimates are all negative and statistically significant within each leverage sort. In terms of
magnitude, for low- (high-) leverage firms, the price-dividend ratio is on average 102.8 (66.4) when
expected inflation is low and 47.0 (25.4) when expected inflation is high. The market-to-book ratios
are 4.24 (2.25) and 1.95 (0.98), respectively. These differences are economically large. Further, the
double difference by leverage ratios (i.e., the difference between estimates of the high expected inflation
minus low expected inflation estimates across high- and low-leverage firms) are also highly statistically
significant.17 This test confirms the relation between equity valuation and expected inflation is negative and is stronger for firms with lower levels of financial leverage. The conditional double sorts also
confirm that the sensitivity of the default probability to expected inflation is stronger for high-leverage
firms (H-L=3.59-4.98=-1.39) than for low-leverage firms (H-L=2.15-3.22=-1.07). Both the sign and
the (low) magnitude of this difference are consistent with our theory.
Table 8 [about here]
17

We bootstap the double difference to calculate standard errors.

23

We report several alternative tests to provide robustness of these empirical findings. First, Panel
B of Table 8 shows the results remain similar when we perform unconditional double sorts. Second,
we consider a measure of expected inflation that is independent of the business cycle, because in the
model, real and nominal states are independent. That is, we first orthogonalize the level of expected
inflation with respect to an NBER recession indicator and reproduce Table 8 with this orthogonalized
measure. Table 9 displays the results and confirms our baseline analyses. Third, Table 10 focuses
on the 1972Q2–2007Q4 period to ensure the recent Great Recession does not exclusively drive the
asymmetry in the relation between expected inflation with valuations and default risk. The relations
between equity valuation, default risk, and expected inflation continue to hold with the same economic
magnitude and statistical significance.
Tables 9 and 10 [about here]

7.4

Firm-level regression analysis

As a second test, we examine how the valuation ratios and default risk at the firm level vary with
expected inflation when we keep constant other firm characteristics and aggregate economic conditions.
Equity valuations and default probabilities vary with firm characteristics; therefore, accounting
for such drivers is critical. Following Fama and French (2015), we consider the level of investment,
profitability, and firm size as firm-level controls (see Appendix A for details of the variable definitions).
We also include the year-on-year growth rate of U.S. industrial production, a recession indicator based
on the NBER business-cycle dates, the trailing one-year return of the S&P 500 index, and the slope of
the yield curve measured by the yield spread between the 10-year Treasury note and the three-month
Treasury bill, because these factors predict U.S. defaults.18 We also control for the recent period of
unconventional monetary policies by including a dummy variable that is equal to 1 over the 2008Q1–
2016Q4 period, and zero otherwise. These data are from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Table 11 reports the regression results. We cluster standard errors at the quarter level to allow for
correlations in error terms of unknown form across firms in a given quarter.
Table 11 [about here]
We see in columns (1)–(3) that expected inflation is a strong driver of the price-dividend ratio,
the market-to-book ratio, and the level of distress risk beyond the information contained in firm
fundamentals and economic/financial conditions. A one-standard-deviation decrease in the expected
18

See, for example, Das, Duffie, Kapadia, and Saita (2007), Duffie, Saita, and Wang (2007), Campbell et al. (2008),
Duffie, Eckner, Horel, and Saita (2009), Giesecke, Longstaff, Schaefer, and Strebulaev (2011), and Azizpour, Giesecke,
and Schwenkler (2018).

24

inflation rate increases the price-dividend ratio by 16.7, which is economically sizable. Columns (4)–
(6) repeat the analysis for the 1972Q2–2007Q4 period. The empirical results are robust to this sample
variation.

7.5

Asymmetric relations

We now turn to another central prediction of the model: A decrease in expected inflation has a
stronger impact on equity valuation and default risk than an increase in expected inflation. The
following analysis tests for such asymmetry in the data.
To investigate a potential non-linearity in the relation between the valuation ratios (or default
risk) and expected inflation, we interact expected inflation with a dummy variable, DL,M , that takes
the value of 1 when expected inflation is below the 75th percentile. This choice follows from our
calibration, in which high expected inflation corresponds to the top quartile.
Table 12 (columns (1)–(3)) shows the relation between equity valuations and expected inflation
is stronger when expected inflation is lower. The difference in the sensitivity to expected inflation is
economically and statistically significant. The same result holds for distress risk. Notably, ignoring
the recent period (2008Q1–2016Q4) yields similar results (columns (4)–(6)). The data thus support
the asymmetry the model predicts.
We consider alternative samples to verify the robustness of our results. First, we compare the
findings with and without financial firms and utilities in Table 13, because they operate in regulated
markets or have special capital structures. Second, Table 14 excludes all tech firms, which tend
to display relatively high equity valuations, and, third, we exclude the pre-1980 period, which is
characterized by particularly high expected inflation. The results remain similar in all of these cases.
Tables 12, 14, and 13 [about here]
Overall, our empirical analysis validates the model mechanism, which suggests default risk and
equity valuation decrease with the level of expected inflation, and that these relations are asymmetric.
That is, a decrease in expected inflation has a stronger impact on default risk and valuation ratios
when expected inflation is low than when it is high. The increase in expected inflation is therefore not
the mirror image of a decrease in expected inflation.

8

Conclusion

Defaults increase in times of low expected inflation but so do equity valuations. We develop a model
which jointly rationalizes these two stylized patterns in the data. In the model, nominal risk impacts
real asset prices via a sticky-cash-flow and a sticky-leverage channels. There are two key mechanisms at

25

play. First, long-term nominal debt coupons are fixed, but expected inflation varies. This assumption
makes expected future real debt coupons dependent on future expected inflation, ensuring that nominal
risk impacts real corporate bond values and hence default risk. Second, cash-flow growth is less
sensitive to variations in expected inflation than the nominal risk-free rate, which induces stickiness
in firm profitability. This feature makes equity prices convex in the nominal risk-free rate and hence
expected inflation.
Our model thus implies that lower expected inflation simultaneously increases real asset values
and default risk. The effect on equity prices is stronger for firms with less leverage. Hence, leverage
dampens rather than exacerbates the sensitivity of equity valuation to inflation expectations. Importantly, a decrease in expected inflation from moderate to low increases real equity values by more
than a decrease from high to moderate expected inflation of equal size. We find support for the model
predictions in the data, lending credence to the idea that the sticky-leverage and cash-flow channels
are important for understanding the economics behind how expected inflation risk impacts real asset
values and corporate default risk.
In our framework, the stochastic discount factor is exogenous. As such, understanding how default
clusters caused by lower expected inflation impact aggregate consumption and hence the stochastic
discount factor, which will in turn impact default decisions, is beyond the scope of this paper. Understanding the general equilibrium implications for how inflation risk can amplify default risk and its
impact on real asset values is an interesting topic for future research.

26

References
Ang, A. A., M. Briere, and O. Signori (2012). Inflation and individual equities. Financial Analysts
Journal 68 (4), 36–55.
Azizpour, S., K. Giesecke, and G. Schwenkler (2018). Exploring the sources of default clustering.
Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Ball, L. and N. G. Mankiw (1994). Asymmetric price adjustment and economic fluctuations. The
Economic Journal 104, 247–261.
Bansal, R. and I. Shaliastovich (2013). A long-run risks explanation of predictability puzzles in bond
and currency markets. Review of Financial Studies 26 (1), 1–33.
Beeler, J. and J. Y. Campbell (2012). The long-run risks model and aggregate asset prices: An
empirical assessment. Critical Finance Review 1 (1), 141–182.
Bekaert, G. and X. Wang (2010). Inflation risk and the inflation risk premium. Economic Policy 25 (64), 755–806.
Bhamra, H. S., A. J. Fisher, and L.-A. Kuehn (2011). Monetary policy and corporate default. Journal
of Monetary Economics 58 (5), 480–494.
Bhamra, H. S., L.-A. Kuehn, and I. A. Strebulaev (2010a). The aggregate dynamics of capital structure
and macroeconomic risk. Review of Financial Studies 23 (12), 4187–4241.
Bhamra, H. S., L.-A. Kuehn, and I. A. Strebulaev (2010b). The levered equity risk premium and
credit spreads: A unified framework. Review of Financial Studies 23 (2), 645–703.
Bodie, Z. (1976). Common stocks as a hedge against inflation. The Journal of Finance 31 (2), 459–470.
Boons, M., F. Duarte, F. de Roon, and M. Szymanowska (2016). Time-varying inflation risk and the
cross section of stock returns. Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York..
Boudoukh, J. and M. Richardson (1993). Stock returns and inflation: A long-horizon perspective. The
American Economic Review 83 (5), 1346–1355.
Campbell, J. Y., J. Hilscher, and J. Szilagyi (2008). In search of distress risk. The Journal of
Finance 63 (6), 2899–2939.
Campbell, J. Y., A. Sunderam, and L. M. Viceira (2017). Inflation bets or deflation hedges? the
changing risks of nominal bonds. Critical Finance Review 6 (2), 263–301.
Campbell, J. Y. and T. Vuolteenaho (2004). Inflation illusion and stock prices. American Economic
Review 94 (2), 19–23.
Chen, H. (2010). Macroeconomic conditions and the puzzles of credit spreads and capital structure.
The Journal of Finance 65 (6), 2171–2212.

27

Chen, N.-F., R. Roll, and S. A. Ross (1986). Economic forces and the stock market. Journal of
Business, 383–403.
Das, S. R., D. Duffie, N. Kapadia, and L. Saita (2007). Common failings: How corporate defaults are
correlated. The Journal of Finance 62 (1), 93–117.
David, A. (2008). Inflation uncertainty, asset valuations, and the credit spreads puzzle. The Review
of Financial Studies 21 (6), 2487–2534.
David, A. and P. Veronesi (2013). What ties return volatilities to price valuations and fundamentals?
Journal of Political Economy 121 (4), 682–746.
Day, T. E. (1984). Real stock returns and inflation. The Journal of Finance 39 (2), 493–502.
Duffie, D., A. Eckner, G. Horel, and L. Saita (2009). Frailty correlated default. The Journal of
Finance 64 (5), 2089–2123.
Duffie, D. and L. G. Epstein (1992). Asset pricing with stochastic differential utility. Review of
Financial Studies 5 (3), 411–436.
Duffie, D., L. Saita, and K. Wang (2007). Multi-period corporate default prediction with stochastic
covariates. Journal of Financial Economics 83 (3), 635–665.
Duffie, D. and C. Skiadas (1994). Continuous-time security pricing: A utility gradient approach.
Journal of Mathematical Economics 23 (2), 107–131.
Elliott, R. J. (1982). Stochastic calculus and applications, Volume 2. Springer.
Epstein, L. G. and S. E. Zin (1989). Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 57 (4), 937–969.
Eraker, B., I. Shaliastovich, and W. Wang (2015). Durable goods, inflation risk, and equilibrium asset
prices. The Review of Financial Studies 29 (1), 193–231.
Fama, E. F. (1981). Stock returns, real activity, inflation, and money. American Economic Review 71 (4), 545–565.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2015). A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics 116 (1), 1–22.
Fama, E. F. and G. W. Schwert (1977). Asset returns and inflation. Journal of Financial Economics 5 (2), 115–146.
Feldstein, M. et al. (1980). Inflation and the stock market. American Economic Review 70 (5), 839–47.
Fisher, I. (1933). The debt-deflation theory of great depressions. Econometrica 1 (4), 337–57.
Gabaix, X. (2008). Variable rare disasters: A tractable theory of ten puzzles in macro-finance. American Economic Review 98 (2), 64–67.
Geske, R. and R. Roll (1983). The fiscal and monetary linkage between stock returns and inflation.
The Journal of Finance 38 (1), 1–33.

28

Giesecke, K., F. A. Longstaff, S. Schaefer, and I. Strebulaev (2011). Corporate bond default risk: A
150-year perspective. Journal of Financial Economics 102 (2), 233–250.
Gomes, J. F., U. J. Jermann, and L. Schmid (2016). Sticky leverage. The American Economic
Review 106 (12), 3800–3828.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016). Are sticky prices costly? evidence from the stock market.
American Economic Review 106 (1), 165–99.
Gultekin, N. B. (1983). Stock market returns and inflation forecasts. The Journal of Finance 38 (3),
663–673.
Hess, P. J. and B.-S. Lee (1999). Stock returns and inflation with supply and demand disturbances.
Review of Financial Studies 12 (5), 1203–1218.
Jobert, A. and L. C. Rogers (2006). Option pricing with markov-modulated dynamics. SIAM Journal
on Control and Optimization 44 (6), 2063–2078.
Kang, J. and C. E. Pflueger (2015). Inflation risk in corporate bonds. The Journal of Finance 70 (1),
115–162.
Karatzas, I. and S. E. Shreve (1991). Brownian motion and stochastic calculus. Springer-Verlag, New
York.
Kaul, G. (1987). Stock returns and inflation: The role of the monetary sector. Journal of Financial
Economics 18 (2), 253–276.
Kaul, G. and H. N. Seyhun (1990). Relative price variability, real shocks, and the stock market. The
Journal of Finance 45 (2), 479–496.
Leland, H. E. (1994). Corporate debt value, bond covenants, and optimal capital structure. Journal
of Finance 49 (4), 1213–1252.
Lintner, J. (1975). Inflation and security returns. The Journal of Finance 30 (2), 259–280.
Mankiw, N. G. (1985). Small menu costs and large business cycles: A macroeconomic model of
monopoly. Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (2), 529–538.
Miller, K. D., F. J. Jeffrey, and G. Mandelker (1976). The “fisher effect” for risky assets: An empirical
investigation. The Journal of Finance 31 (2), 447–458.
Modigliani, F. and R. A. Cohn (1979). Inflation, rational valuation and the market. Financial Analysts
Journal 35 (2), 24–44.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008). Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of menu cost models.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4), 1415–1464.
Nelson, C. R. (1976). Inflation and rates of return on common stocks. The Journal of Finance 31 (2),
471–483.

29

Pearce, D. K. and V. V. Roley (1988). Firm characteristics, unanticipated inflation, and stock returns.
The Journal of Finance 43 (4), 965–981.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2006). Equilibrium yield curves. NBER macroeconomics Annual 21,
389–472.
Pindyck, R. S. et al. (1984). Risk, inflation, and the stock market. American Economic Review 74 (3),
335–351.
Ritter, J. R. and R. S. Warr (2002). The decline of inflation and the bull market of 1982–1999. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37 (1), 29–61.
Schroder, M. and C. Skiadas (1999). Optimal consumption and portfolio selection with stochastic
differential utility. Journal of Economic Theory 89 (1), 68–126.
Schwert, G. W. (1981). The adjustment of stock prices to information about inflation. The Journal
of Finance 36 (1), 15–29.
Sharpe, S. A. (2002). Reexamining stock valuation and inflation: The implications of analysts’ earnings
forecasts. The Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (4), 632–648.
Solnik, B. (1983). The relation between stock prices and inflationary expectations: The international
evidence. The Journal of Finance 38 (1), 35–48.
Stulz, R. M. (1986). Asset pricing and expected inflation. The Journal of Finance 41 (1), 209–223.
Wachter, J. A. (2006). A consumption-based model of the term structure of interest rates. Journal of
Financial Economics 79 (2), 365–399.
Weber, M. (2015). Nominal rigidities and asset pricing. Chicago Booth, Working paper.
Weil, P. (1989). The equity premium puzzle and the risk-free rate puzzle. Journal of Monetary
Economics 24 (3), 401–421.

30

Table 1: Empirical evidence on cash flow stickiness
This table reports the sensitivity of cash flow growth to expected inflation. Cash flow growth is measured as
the mean forecast for the one-year-ahead corporate profit growth rate, and expected inflation is measured as
the mean forecast for one-year-ahead inflation. All growth rates are annualized. We report standard errors
corrected for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels is denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively. Forecast data are obtained from the Survey of
Professional Forecasters provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. The control variables are
retrieved from the Federal Reserve of St-Louis. The sample period is 1970Q2–2016Q4.

Dependent variable: Expected cash flow growth
(1)
Expected
Economic Growth

(2)
Consumption
Growth

(3)
Economic
Growth

(4)
Business
Cycle Indicator

Expected inflationt

0.382**
(0.180)

0.397**
(0.176)

0.425**
(0.174)

0.415**
(0.168)

Expected GDP growtht

3.773***
(0.285)

4.068***
(0.327)

4.265***
(0.318)

4.278***
(0.317)

-0.259
(0.167)

-0.024
(0.171)

-0.014
(0.182)

-0.196***
(0.061)

-0.189***
(0.064)

Cons. growtht−1

Ind. prod. growtht−1

NBER recessiont

Constant

Nobs
R2

0.377
(1.227)
-4.280***
(1.011)

-4.349***
(0.999)

-5.278***
(0.982)

-5.376***
(1.055)

186
0.575

185
0.581

185
0.605

185
0.605

31

32

1.76
0.75
3.54
3.79
7.33
7.18
4.32

2.06
3.83
0.50
26.14
50.00
15.00

Panel A: Economic Environment
Stationary Probability
Consumption Growth Rate
Consumption Growth Volatility
Expected Inflation
Real Interest Rate
Nominal Interest Rate
Risk-Free Discount Rate
Cash Flow Discount Rate

Panel B: Firm Characteristics
Real Cash Flow Growth Rate
Nominal Cash Flow Growth Rate
Inflation Passthrough
Real Cash Flow Volatility
Liquidation Value
Tax Rate

Unconditional

-10.89
-9.91
0.50
35.78
50.00
15.00

4.54
0.00
0.88
1.96
2.83
4.79
6.12
4.55

State 1
R&L

-10.89
-9.12
0.50
35.78
50.00
15.00

9.09
0.00
0.88
3.54
2.83
6.37
7.23
5.08

State 2
R&M

-10.89
-8.33
0.50
35.78
50.00
15.00

4.54
0.00
0.88
5.13
2.83
7.96
7.81
5.32

State 3
R&H

4.93
5.91
0.50
24.00
50.00
15.00

20.46
2.15
0.72
1.96
4.00
5.96
6.21
3.78

State 4
E&L

Conditional

4.93
6.70
0.50
24.00
50.00
15.00

40.91
2.15
0.72
3.54
4.00
7.54
7.34
4.23

State 5
E&M

4.93
7.50
0.50
24.00
50.00
15.00

20.46
2.15
0.72
5.13
4.00
9.12
7.92
4.43

State 6
E&H

This table presents the parameter values of the model. Panel A reports the conditional moments of the economic environment. Panel B reports
the conditional firm characteristics. We calibrate the model to the aggregate U.S. economy using real consumption data (non-durable goods
plus service consumption expenditures) and the expected inflation rates from the Surveys of Professional Forecasters (SPF). The moments of
cash flows are estimated using Robert J. Shiller’s aggregate earnings data. The personal consumption expenditure chain-type price index is used
to deflate nominal cash flows. We retrieve the consumption data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the SPF data from the website
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. All estimates are in percentage points and annualized when applicable. The sample period is
1970Q2-2016Q4. The calibration is detailed in Section 5.

Table 2: Model calibration

Table 3: Asset prices with nominal risk
This table presents the predictions of the model with fluctuating nominal conditions. Panel A reports the coupon
and the conditional default boundaries. The capital structure is chosen optimally in the state of expansion with
moderate inflation. Panel B reports the conditional asset pricing quantities for the economy. Each column
displays the predictions for a specific state of the economy: the expected inflation rate can be low (L), moderate
(M), or high (H), whereas the real economy can be in recession (R) or in expansion (E). We also report the
unconditional predictions for a weighted average of these states. Market leverage is the ratio of the market value
of debt to the sum of the market values of debt and equity. The parameter values of the model are reported in
Table 2 and discussed in Section 5.
Unconditional
State 1
R&L
0.0454

State 2
R&M
0.0909

State 3
R&H
0.0454

State 4
E&L
0.2046

State 5
E&M
0.4091

State 6
E&H
0.2046

0.2655

0.2689

0.2679

0.2598

0.2625

0.2611

11.39
9.22

9.45
9.66

8.65
8.58

8.41
8.10

12.90
10.40

11.77
9.16

11.41
8.61

44.89
156.01

50.54
219.14

49.78
212.26

49.06
210.06

44.63
150.76

43.76
141.58

43.02
139.08

Stationary Probability
Panel A: Corporate Policies
Default Boundaries (Coupon: 0.8022)
Panel B: Asset Pricing Quantities
Equity Value
Debt Value
Market Leverage (%)
Credit Spreads (bps)

Conditional

Table 4: Firm policies and asset prices without nominal risk
This table presents the predictions of the model without fluctuating nominal conditions. Panel A reports
the coupon and the conditional default boundaries. The capital structure is chosen optimally in the state
of expansion. In absence of nominal risk, the inflation rate is set to its unconditional mean over the sample
period, which corresponds to the “moderate inflation” state (M). Panel B reports the conditional asset pricing
quantities for the economy. Each column displays the predictions for a specific state of the economy, which can
be in recession (R) or in expansion (E). We also report the unconditional predictions for a weighted average of
these states. Market leverage is the ratio of the market value of debt to the sum of the market values of debt
and equity. The parameter values of the model are reported in Table 2 and discussed in Section 5.
Unconditional

State 2
R&M
0.1817

State 5
E&M
0.8183

0.2659

0.2596

11.38
9.09

8.80
8.61

11.96
9.20

44.58
152.52

49.48
209.42

43.49
139.88

Stationary Probability
Panel A: Corporate Policies
Default Boundaries (Coupon: 0.7952)
Panel B: Asset Pricing Quantities
Equity Value
Debt Value
Market Leverage (%)
Credit Spreads (bps)

Conditional

Table 5: Asset pricing implications of nominal risk
This table presents the impact of nominal risk on asset prices. We report the differences in asset pricing
predictions with and without nominal risk. In the latter case, the expected inflation rate is constant and set to
its unconditional mean (i.e. moderate inflation state), and the model predictions are those of Table 4. We use
the default and capital structure decisions of Table 3 in the case of endogenous policies. In the case of exogenous
policies, the default and capital structure decisions are those of Table 4. The differences in asset values are in
relative terms (%). The differences in leverage are in percentage points, while the difference in credit spreads
are in basis points. Each column reports model predictions for a different current state of the economy. The
expected inflation rate can be low (L), moderate (M), or high (H), whereas the real economy can be in recession
(R) or in expansion (E). The parameter values of the model are reported in Table 2 and discussed in Section 5.
Unconditional

Stationary Probability

Conditional
State 1
R&L
0.0454

State 2
R&M
0.0909

State 3
R&H
0.0454

State 4
E&L
0.2046

State 5
E&M
0.4091

State 6
E&H
0.2046

Equity Value
Debt Value
Firm Value

0.05
1.43
0.66

7.46
12.11
9.76

-1.63
-0.43
-1.04

-4.41
-5.99
-5.20

7.88
13.00
10.11

-1.51
-0.41
-1.03

-4.57
-6.37
-5.35

Market Leverage (%)
Credit Spreads (bps)

0.31
3.49

1.06
9.72

0.30
2.83

-0.42
0.64

1.14
10.88

0.27
1.70

-0.47
-0.80

Table 6: Cross-sectional impact of nominal risk
This table presents the asset pricing impact of nominal risk for firms with different leverage ratios. All firms
initially choose identical corporate policies (cf. Table 3). We consider different levels of cash flow to generate
cross-sectional differences in market leverage. Lower (higher) cash flow induces higher (lower) market leverage.
Panel A reports the predictions for low-leverage firm (X=1.25), whereas Panel B reports the predictions for
high-leverage firm (X=0.75). Panel C presents cross-sectional differences in equity valuation and credit spreads.
Expected Inflation
Low

Moderate

High

Panel A: Low Leverage
Equity Value
Credit Spreads (bps)

17.44
126.77

15.88
118.34

15.34
116.19

-2.10
-10.58

Panel B: High Leverage
Equity Value
Credit Spreads (bps)

7.28
231.19

6.68
222.88

6.51
220.04

-0.77
-11.15

Panel C: High Leverage − Low Leverage
Equity Value
Credit Spreads (bps)

-10.16
104.42

-9.20
104.55

-8.83
103.85

1.33
-0.56

34

High−Low

Table 7: Descriptive statistics
This table reports the summary statistics of the main variables. Financial variables at the firm level are
value-weighted. Expected inflation is from the Survey of Professional Forecasters from the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia. Distress risk is computed as in Campbell et al. (2008). Section 7.1 provides details
on the computation of the firm variables. N is the number of observations. The sample period is 1972Q2–2016Q4.

Price-Dividend Ratio
Market-Book Ratio
Financial Risk
Implied Default Probability (bps)
Expected Inflation
Market Leverage
Net Income to Total Assets (%)
Excess Return (%)
Return Volatility (%)
Size to Market
Short Term Assets to Total
Log Share Price
Change in Total Assets (%)
Profitability
Size
IP Growth (%)
S&P500 (%)
Slope
N

Mean

SD

25% Perc

Median

75% Perc

75.816
3.173
-7.867
3.831
3.773
0.233
0.612
4.061
33.153
-8.963
0.063
0.579
2.496
0.099
6.140
1.709
9.253
1.450
743,536

61.153
2.076
1.013
0.008
1.896
0.242
2.116
47.223
31.795
2.593
0.100
2.370
8.001
9.496
2.048
4.218
16.436
1.421
743,536

23.827
0.955
-8.151
2.883
2.292
0.041
-0.230
-30.277
28.508
-12.595
0.018
0.257
-1.870
-0.020
4.613
0.585
1.165
0.270
743,536

39.634
1.554
-7.641
4.800
3.308
0.209
0.532
-2.068
42.815
-10.837
0.050
0.797
1.307
0.040
6.067
2.742
10.926
1.430
743,536

70.625
2.673
-7.009
9.028
4.765
0.458
1.209
24.405
66.603
-8.376
0.114
2.476
5.430
0.080
7.572
5.149
22.163
2.270
743,536

35

36

172

169

169

L

2

H

169

H

Double
Difference

13.07
(0.04)

−35.75
(0.96)

−47.31
(2.25)

169

2

H-L

64.34
(1.58)
53.59
(1.34)
28.59
(0.57)

98.74
(1.91)
94.75
(2.69)
51.43
(0.85)

172

L

−41.00
(0.93)

66.39
(1.55)
54.94
(1.35)
25.39
(0.50)

16.26
(0.04)

−55.83
(2.37)

102.80
(2.05)
97.13
(2.82)
46.97
(0.77)

Double
Difference

H-L

Nobs

E(π)

P/D Ratio
Low Leverage High Leverage
(1)
(2)

1.14
(0.00)

−1.27
(0.03)

2.25
(0.05)
1.98
(0.04)
0.98
(0.02)
−0.40
(0.02)

−1.86
(0.07)

4.05
(0.05)
3.92
(0.11)
2.18
(0.04)

0.96
(0.00)

−1.02
(0.03)

2.12
(0.04)
1.92
(0.03)
1.11
(0.02)

−0.50
(0.02)

−8.02
(0.02)
−8.05
(0.02)
−8.52
(0.01)

1.99

3.20

3.29

2.15

3.17

0.03
(0.00)

−0.48
(0.03)

−7.55
(0.04)
−7.61
(0.02)
−8.03
(0.02)

0.08
(0.00)

−0.33
(0.03)

3.25

4.93

5.26

3.59

4.82

4.98

−7.61
(0.04)
−7.64
(0.02)
−7.93
(0.02)

−8.04
(0.02)
−8.06
(0.02)
−8.45
(0.01)

3.22

Distress
Implied
Risk
Prob(bps)
High Leverage
(6)

Distress
Implied
Risk
Prob (bps)
Low Leverage
(5)

Panel B. Unconditional Double Sorts

−2.29
(0.07)

4.24
(0.06)
4.03
(0.11)
1.95
(0.03)

M/B Ratio
Low Leverage High Leverage
(3)
(4)

Panel A. Conditional Double Sorts

This table reports double sorts of price-dividend ratios in columns (1)–(2), market-to-book ratios in columns (3)–(4) and default risk in columns (5)–(6) by firm market
leverage and level of expected inflation. Panel A reports conditional double sorts, while Panel B reports unconditional double sorts. We value-weight variables at the
portfolio level. Expected inflation is from the Survey of Professional Forecasters from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Reported measures of default risk
correspond to the level of distress risk and implied bankruptcy probability computed as in Campbell et al. (2008). We bootstrap standard errors for the double differences.
Section 7.1 provides additional details on the data. The sample period is 1972Q2–2016Q4.

Table 8: Equity valuation and default risk by expected inflation and leverage

37

172

169

169

L

2

H

169

H

Double
Difference

6.28
(0.04)

−35.26
(0.97)

−46.66
(2.25)

169

2

H-L

64.00
(1.59)
53.78
(1.46)
28.75
(0.63)

98.25
(2.16)
95.12
(2.57)
51.59
(0.82)

172

L

−40.35
(0.93)

−54.83
(2.38)
8.31
(0.03)

65.98
(1.56)
55.31
(1.50)
25.63
(0.55)

101.98
(2.34)
97.67
(2.69)
47.14
(0.73)

Double
Difference

H-L

Nobs

E(π)

P/D Ratio
Low Leverage High Leverage
(1)
(2)

0.88
(0.00)

−1.24
(0.03)

2.23
(0.04)
2.00
(0.04)
0.99
(0.02)
−0.41
(0.02)

−1.84
(0.07)

4.02
(0.05)
3.95
(0.10)
2.18
(0.04)

0.70
(0.00)

−0.99
(0.03)

2.10
(0.04)
1.94
(0.04)
1.11
(0.02)

−0.50
(0.02)

−8.01
(0.02)
−8.06
(0.02)
−8.52
(0.02)

2.00

3.16

3.31

2.16

3.12

0.07
(0.00)

−0.49
(0.03)

−7.54
(0.04)
−7.62
(0.02)
−8.03
(0.02)

0.00
(0.00)

−0.34
(0.03)

3.25

4.89

5.30

3.58

4.77

5.03

−7.59
(0.04)
−7.65
(0.02)
−7.93
(0.02)

−8.03
(0.02)
−8.07
(0.02)
−8.44
(0.02)

3.25

Distress
Implied
Risk
Prob(bps)
High Leverage
(6)

Distress
Implied
Risk
Prob (bps)
Low Leverage
(5)

Panel B. Unconditional Double Sorts

−2.24
(0.07)

4.20
(0.06)
4.07
(0.11)
1.96
(0.03)

M/B Ratio
Low Leverage High Leverage
(3)
(4)

Panel A. Conditional Double Sorts

This table reproduces Table 8 when the level of expected inflation is orthogonalized with respect to NBER recessions. We present double sorts of price-dividend ratios in
columns (1)–(2), market-to-book ratios in columns (3)–(4) and default risk in columns (5)–(6) by firm market leverage and level of expected inflation. Panel A reports
conditional double sorts, while Panel B reports unconditional double sorts. We value-weight variables at the portfolio level. Expected inflation is from the Survey of
Professional Forecasters from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and orthogonolized with respect to NBER recessions. Reported measures of default risk correspond
to the level of distress risk and implied bankruptcy probability computed as in Campbell et al. (2008). We bootstrap standard errors for the double differences. Section
7.1 provides additional details on the data. The sample period is 1972Q2–2016Q4.

Table 9: Equity valuation and default risk by orthogonolized expected inflation

38

138

135

138

L

2

H

138

H

Double
Differece

27.27
(0.03)

−42.06
(0.76)

−73.31
(1.68)

135

2

H-L

68.83
(1.02)
41.02
(0.91)
26.77
(0.64)

121.99
(1.43)
72.38
(1.13)
48.68
(0.93)

138

L

−49.54
(0.71)

72.69
(0.96)
41.25
(0.93)
23.15
(0.55)

31.73
(0.03)

−86.07
(1.82)

130.15
(1.58)
72.62
(1.14)
44.08
(0.86)

Double
Difference

H-L

Nobs

E(π)

P/D Ratio
Low Leverage High Leverage
(1)
(2)

1.26
(0.00)

−1.45
(0.03)

2.35
(0.04)
1.59
(0.03)
0.90
(0.02)
−0.55
(0.03)

−2.37
(0.10)

4.40
(0.08)
3.19
(0.04)
2.02
(0.04)

1.07
(0.00)

−1.18
(0.03)

2.21
(0.03)
1.58
(0.03)
1.03
(0.02)

−0.66
(0.03)

−7.90
(0.02)
−8.21
(0.02)
−8.56
(0.02)

1.92

2.72

3.72

2.10

2.71

0.02
(0.00)

−0.57
(0.02)

−7.50
(0.03)
−7.73
(0.02)
−8.07
(0.02)

0.09
(0.00)

−0.40
(0.03)

3.13

4.40

5.55

3.49

4.39

5.22

−7.56
(0.03)
−7.73
(0.02)
−7.96
(0.02)

−7.91
(0.02)
−8.21
(0.02)
−8.47
(0.02)

3.65

Distress
Implied
Risk
Prob(bps)
High Leverage
(6)

Distress
Implied
Risk
Prob (bps)
Low Leverage
(5)

Panel B. Unconditional Double Sorts

−2.87
(0.10)

4.66
(0.08)
3.21
(0.05)
1.79
(0.03)

M/B Ratio
Low Leverage High Leverage
(3)
(4)

Panel A. Conditional Double Sorts

This table reports double sorts of price-dividend ratios in columns (1)–(2), market-to-book ratios in columns (3)–(4) and default risk in columns (5)–(6) by firm market
leverage and level of expected inflation. Panel A reports conditional double sorts, while Panel B reports unconditional double sorts. We value-weight variables at the
portfolio level. Expected inflation is from the Survey of Professional Forecasters from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Reported measures of default risk
correspond to the level of distress risk and implied bankruptcy probability computed as in Campbell et al. (2008). We bootstrap standard errors for the double differences.
Section 7.1 provides additional details on the data. The sample period is 1972Q2–2007Q4.

Table 10: Equity valuation and default risk by expected inflation and leverage (1970–2007)

Table 11: Regressions on expected inflation
This table reports regressions of price-dividend ratios, market-to-book ratios and default risk on expected
inflation, firm characteristics, and macro aggregates. Expected inflation is from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Default risk corresponds to the level of distress
risk computed as in Campbell et al. (2008). Section 7.1 provides additional details on the data. The sample
period is 1972Q2–2016Q4 in columns (1)–(3) and 1972Q2–2007Q4 in columns (4)–(6). We report standard
errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level and all specifications include industry
fixed effects at the Fama & French 17 industry classification.

P/D Ratio
(1)

M/B Ratio
(2)

E(π)

−8.81
(0.30)

−0.15
(0.00)

Investment

104.24
(2.69)

Profitability

P/D Ratio
(4)

M/B Ratio
(5)

−0.19
(0.01)

−9.90
(0.51)

−0.14
(0.00)

−0.18
(0.01)

1.64
(0.05)

−0.80
(0.05)

107.26
(3.21)

1.69
(0.05)

−0.62
(0.05)

−0.01
(0.01)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

−0.01
(0.01)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

log Size

3.56
(0.18)

0.24
(0.00)

−0.05
(0.00)

3.67
(0.22)

0.23
(0.01)

−0.04
(0.00)

IP Growth

31.63
(8.55)

−0.02
(0.15)

−0.90
(0.23)

8.85
(10.53)

0.16
(0.16)

−0.51
(0.24)

S&P return

15.89
(2.86)

0.39
(0.05)

−0.02
(0.06)

12.18
(3.18)

0.42
(0.05)

0.07
(0.06)

Yield Curve

−1.61
(0.29)

−0.06
(0.00)

−0.07
(0.01)

−2.03
(0.30)

−0.05
(0.00)

−0.07
(0.01)

−33.77
(0.74)

−1.83
(0.02)

1.56
(0.02)

−35.55
(0.83)

−1.80
(0.02)

1.50
(0.01)

1.57
(1.77)

0.02
(0.03)

0.20
(0.04)

1.18
(2.23)

0.05
(0.03)

0.13
(0.04)

−15.63
(1.02)

−0.23
(0.02)

0.02
(0.02)
X
592,966
19.78%

X
592,966
35.95%

X
592,966
46.50%

Leverage
Recession
Dummypost

2008

Industry FE
Nobs
R2

X
743,536
17.22%

X
743,536
33.65%

Default Risk
(3)

X
743,536
49.21%

39

Default Risk
(6)

Table 12: Regressions on expected inflation – Convexity
This table reports regressions of price-dividend ratios, market-to-book ratios and default risk on expected
inflation, firm characteristics, and macro aggregates. Expected inflation is from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. DL,M denotes a dummy variable that equals
1 when expected inflation is below the third quartile. Default risk corresponds to the level of distress risk
computed as in Campbell et al. (2008). Section 7.1 provides additional details on the data. The sample period
is 1972Q2–2016Q4 in columns (1)–(3) and 1972Q2–2007Q4 in columns (4)–(6). We report standard errors in
parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level and all specifications include industry fixed
effects at the Fama & French 17 industry classification.

P/D Ratio
(1)

M/B Ratio
(2)

P/D Ratio
(4)

M/B Ratio
(5)

−3.95
(0.38)

−0.09
(0.01)

−0.01
(0.02)

−4.18
(0.38)

−0.09
(0.01)

−0.01
(0.02)

E(π) × DL,M

−12.65
(0.69)

−0.10
(0.01)

−0.14
(0.01)

−12.74
(0.91)

−0.13
(0.02)

−0.13
(0.01)

Investment

103.19
(2.66)

1.64
(0.05)

−0.80
(0.05)

106.92
(3.08)

1.70
(0.04)

−0.62
(0.05)

Profitability

0.14
(0.02)

0.01
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

0.19
(0.02)

0.01
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

log Size

3.35
(0.17)

0.24
(0.00)

−0.06
(0.00)

3.38
(0.22)

0.23
(0.01)

−0.04
(0.00)

IP Growth

48.21
(6.00)

0.17
(0.13)

−0.72
(0.23)

26.45
(6.37)

0.41
(0.13)

−0.24
(0.23)

S&P return

18.03
(1.96)

0.40
(0.04)

−0.05
(0.06)

15.78
(2.17)

0.46
(0.05)

0.04
(0.06)

Yield Curve

−0.34
(0.21)

−0.04
(0.00)

−0.06
(0.01)

−0.50
(0.21)

−0.03
(0.00)

−0.06
(0.01)

−33.88
(0.75)

−1.82
(0.02)

1.57
(0.02)

−35.44
(0.84)

−1.79
(0.02)

1.51
(0.01)

1.91
(1.24)

0.03
(0.02)

0.20
(0.03)

0.03
(0.02)

0.05
(0.02)

0.14
(0.04)

−23.37
(0.95)

−0.29
(0.02)

0.03
(0.03)
X
592,966
20.62%

X
592,966
36.08%

X
592,966
47.04%

E(π)

Leverage
Recession
Dummypost

2008

Industry FE
Nobs
R2

X
743,536
17.87%

X
743,536
33.70%

Default Risk
(3)

X
743,536
49.53%

40

Default Risk
(6)

Table 13: Regressions on expected inflation – Convexity: excl Finance and Utilities
This table reports regressions of price-dividend ratios, market-to-book ratios and default risk on expected
inflation, firm characteristics, and macro aggregates. Expected inflation is from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. DL,M denotes a dummy variable that equals
1 when expected inflation is below the third quartile. Default risk corresponds to the level of distress risk
computed as in Campbell et al. (2008). Section 7.1 provides additional details on the data. The sample period
is 1972Q2–2016Q4 in columns (1)–(3) and 1972Q2–2007Q4 in columns (4)–(6). We report standard errors in
parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level and all specifications include industry fixed
effects at the Fama & French 17 industry classification.

P/D Ratio
(1)

M/B Ratio
(2)

P/D Ratio
(4)

M/B Ratio
(5)

−5.23
(0.47)

−0.04
(0.02)

−0.02
(0.02)

−5.25
(0.48)

−0.10
(0.01)

−0.01
(0.02)

E(π) × DL,M

−16.68
(0.94)

−0.10
(0.01)

−0.15
(0.01)

−18.62
(0.87)

−0.08
(0.02)

−0.14
(0.01)

Investment

122.30
(3.49)

1.71
(0.05)

−0.86
(0.05)

122.42
(3.89)

1.81
(0.05)

−0.67
(0.05)

Profitability

0.13
(0.02)

0.01
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

0.16
(0.01)

0.01
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

log Size

3.24
(0.21)

0.30
(0.01)

−0.05
(0.00)

2.93
(0.25)

0.28
(0.01)

−0.03
(0.00)

IP Growth

47.42
(7.09)

0.33
(0.16)

−0.73
(0.22)

27.31
(7.74)

0.64
(0.15)

−0.47
(0.24)

S&P return

21.87
(2.46)

0.52
(0.06)

−0.08
(0.06)

20.52
(2.75)

0.58
(0.06)

0.00
(0.06)

Yield Curve

−0.55
(0.27)

−0.05
(0.01)

−0.06
(0.01)

−0.58
(0.28)

−0.04
(0.01)

−0.06
(0.01)

−32.64
(0.95)

−2.33
(0.04)

2.11
(0.02)

−34.90
(1.02)

−2.32
(0.04)

2.09
(0.01)

3.04
(1.61)

0.00
(0.03)

0.23
(0.03)

−0.34
(1.43)

0.08
(0.02)

0.17
(0.03)

−33.63
(1.38)

−0.16
(0.04)

−0.04
(0.03)
X
356,938
38.40%

X
356,938
48.31%

E(π)

Leverage
Recession
Dummypost

2008

Industry FE
Nobs
R2

X
437,012
16.37%

X
437,012
35.50%

Default Risk
(3)

X
437,012
48.31%

41

X
356,938
19.01%

Default Risk
(6)

Table 14: Regressions on expected inflation – Convexity: no Tech or pre-1980
This table reports regressions of price-dividend ratios, market-to-book ratios and default risk on expected
inflation, firm characteristics, and macro aggregates. Expected inflation is from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. DL,M denotes a dummy variable that equals
1 when expected inflation is below the third quartile. Default risk corresponds to the level of distress risk
computed as in Campbell et al. (2008). Section 7.1 provides additional details on the data. The sample period
is 1972Q2–2016Q4 in columns (1)–(3) but excludes all tech firms and 1980Q1–2016Q4 in columns (4)–(6). We
report standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level and all specifications
include industry fixed effects at the Fama & French 17 industry classification.

P/D Ratio
(1)

M/B Ratio
(2)

P/D Ratio
(4)

M/B Ratio
(5)

−3.95
(0.38)

−0.09
(0.01)

−0.01
(0.02)

−2.55
(0.29)

−0.08
(0.01)

−0.03
(0.02)

E(π) × DL,M

−12.58
(0.69)

−0.10
(0.01)

−0.14
(0.01)

−13.95
(0.65)

−0.11
(0.02)

−0.12
(0.01)

Investment

102.68
(2.67)

1.63
(0.04)

−0.80
(0.05)

115.65
(2.30)

1.79
(0.04)

−0.87
(0.04)

Profitability

0.11
(0.09)

0.03
(0.01)

0.00
(0.00)

0.13
(0.02)

0.01
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

log Size

3.30
(0.17)

0.24
(0.00)

−0.06
(0.00)

3.45
(0.19)

0.25
(0.00)

−0.06
(0.00)

IP Growth

48.06
(6.00)

0.15
(0.13)

−0.72
(0.23)

69.22
(7.46)

0.25
(0.17)

−0.20
(0.27)

S&P return

17.82
(1.95)

0.39
(0.04)

−0.05
(0.06)

14.41
(1.84)

0.37
(0.05)

−0.16
(0.06)

Yield Curve

−0.34
(0.21)

−0.04
(0.00)

−0.06
(0.01)

0.16
(0.20)

−0.04
(0.00)

−0.06
(0.01)

−33.46
(0.75)

−1.82
(0.02)

1.57
(0.02)

−36.85
(0.76)

−1.94
(0.02)

1.59
(0.02)

1.82
(1.22)

0.03
(0.02)

0.20
(0.03)

1.73
(1.27)

0.03
(0.02)

0.19
(0.03)

−22.89
(0.94)

−0.30
(0.02)

0.03
(0.03)

−23.30
(0.95)

−0.30
(0.02)

0.04
(0.03)

E(π)

Leverage
Recession
Dummypost

2008

Industry FE
Nobs
R2

X
733,532
17.89%

X
733,532
33.82%

Default Risk
(3)

X
733,532
49.68%

42

X
656,631
15.79%

X
656,631
31.68%

Default Risk
(6)

X
656,631
47.96%

Figure 2: Negative and asymmetric impact of expected inflation on asset prices – Simple model
The figure illustrates the impact of inflation on equity value (upper-left panel), credit spread (upper-right
panel), debt value (lower-left panel), and market leverage (lower-right panel). The expected inflation rate is
either low (µP = 0%), moderate (µP = 3%), or high (µP = 6%). Predictions are obtained with the static
corporate finance model with exogenous capital structure and default policies discussed in Section 2.

120
25
100
20

80

15

60
40

10
20
Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

50
20

49

18

48

16
47

14
12

46

10

45

8

44
Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

43

Figure 3: Negative and asymmetric impact of expected inflation on asset prices – Full model
The figure illustrates the impact of expected inflation on equity value (upper-left panel), credit spread
(upper-right panel), debt value (lower-left panel), and market leverage (lower-right panel). Each panel reports
the value of the asset pricing quantities for different nominal conditions (on the x-axis): low, moderate, and
high expected inflation. Firms have the corporate policies presented in Table 3. The parameter values of the
model are reported in Table 2 and discussed in Section 5.

170
13
165
12
160
11

155
150

10
Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

47

11

46
10
45
9
44
8

43
Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

44

Figure 4: Asset prices and sticky cash flows
This figure illustrates the asset pricing impact of cash flow stickiness. Panels in the left (right) column report
equity (credit spread) values for different nominal conditions (on the x-axis): low, moderate, and high expected
inflation. Each row reports predictions for a given degree of inflation passthrough.

164

12.5

162
12

160
158

11.5
156
154

11

152
10.5

150
Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

16

Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

175

15
160
14
145
13

12

130
Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

20

180
170

19
160
18

150
140

17
130
16

120
Low Inflation

Moderate

High Inflation

45

Figure 5: Equity valuation, default risk, and expected inflation

200

200

150

150

100

100

50

50

0

0

Market-to-Book

0

2

4

6

8

10

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

0
0

Implied Bankruptcy Probability

Price-Dividend Ratio

This figure plots the relations between expected inflation and the price-dividend ratios (top panels), the
market-to-book ratios (middle panels), and default risk (bottom panels). We report the relations by levels
of market leverage. The left panels show portfolios of firms with below-median leverage, whereas the right
panels report firms with above-median leverage. Each observation represents the value-weighted average of
the valuation metric across firms for a given level of expected inflation. Expected inflation is from the Survey
of Professional Forecasters from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Default risk corresponds to the
implied bankruptcy probability computed as in Campbell et al. (2008). Section 7.1 provides additional details
on the data. The sample period is 1972Q2–2016Q4.

2

4

6

8

10

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1
0

2

4

6

8

10

Expected Inflation (%)

Expected Inflation (%)

46

APPENDIX
A

Data description

This section describes the data used in our empirical analysis (section 7).

A.1

Valuation ratios

Market-to-book ratio (M B) is computed as M E/BE. Book equity (BE) is shareholders’ equity
(SEQQ + CEQQ + P ST KQ or AT Q - LT Q), plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment
tax credit (T XDIT CQ) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock (P ST KQ). Market
capitalization (M E) is the product of quarter-end price (P RC) and share outstanding (Shrout).
The price-dividend ratio is computed as the share price divided by the sum of dividend payments
over the last 12 months. We construct dividend payments using cum-dividend return and ex-dividend
returns, as in Beeler and Campbell (2012).

A.2

Default risk

We follow Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) to calculate financial distress risk (F R) as the
logit transformed bankruptcy probability, while excluding leverage in the measurement. F R is then
calculated as
F R = − 9.16 − 20.26 ∗ N IM T AV G − 7.13 ∗ EXRET AV G + 1.41 ∗ SIGM A
− 0.045 ∗ RSIZE − 2.13 ∗ CASHM T A + 0.075 ∗ M B − 0.058 ∗ P RICE,
where
N IM T AV Gt =

3
X
1 − φ3
i=0

EXRET AV Gt =

1 − φ12

11
X
1−φ
i=0

1 − φ12

(φ3(i−1) N IT M At−3i )
(φi−1 EXRETt−i )

N IM T A and EXRET are net income over total assets (N IQ/AT Q) and the log of gross excess returns
over the value-weighted S&P500 returns, respectively. SIGM A is the square root of the annualized
sum of squared stock returns over a 3-month period. RSIZE is the log of firm’s market equity over
the total valuation of all firms in the S&P500. CASHM T A is cash and short-term investments over
total assets (CHEQ/AT Q). M B is the market-to-book value of equity. P RICE is the log of price

47

per share. The associated 1-quarter bankruptcy probability for firm i at time t is then
Pt−1 (Yi,t = 1) =

A.3

1
.
1 + exp(−F Ri,t−1 )

Leverage, investment and profitability

Market leverage is the sum of long term debt and debt in current liabilities over the sum of of debt
and market capitalization ((DLCQ + DLT T Q)/(DLCQ + DLT T Q + M E)).
Investment and profitability are calculated following Fama and French (2015) as revenues minus
cost of goods sold, minus selling, general, and administrative expenses, minus interest expense all
divided by book equity (IBQ − COGSQ − XSGAQ − XIN T Q)/BE and the percentage change in
total asset.

48

ONLINE APPENDIX

OA.A

Toy Model

Under the physical probability measure P, real cashflow growth is given by
dYt
= µY dt + σY dWt ,
Yt

(OA.1)

where W is a standard Brownian motion under P. The date t nominal cashflow is given by Xt = Yt Ptϕ ,
and so nominal cashflow growth is given by
dXt
= (µY + ϕµP )dt + σY dWt .
Xt

(OA.2)

dπt
= −rdt − ΘdZt ,
πt

(OA.3)

The real SDF is given by

where Z is a standard Brownian motion under P such that dZt dWt = ρdt. In this section, there
is no risk premium associated with sudden shifts in the state of the economy. In contrast with the
main model, we therefore assume ρ > 0 to ensure that the risk premium is not zero. Consequently,
conditional on date t information, the risk-neutral probability of event A occuring at date T is given
by
EtQ [1A ] = Et



MT
1A ,
Mt


(OA.4)

where M is an exponential martingale under P, defined by
dMt
= −ΘdZt , M0 = 1.
Mt

(OA.5)

The exogenous price index is given by
Pt = P0 eµP t ,

(OA.6)

where µP is the constant inflation rate.
The nominal SDF is given by πt$ = πt /Pt , and so
dπt$
= −r$ dt − ΘdZt ,
πt$

(OA.7)

r $ = r + µP .

(OA.8)

where

The price-index is not stochastic, so there is no inflation risk premium. We can therefore price
risk under the risk-neutral measure Q with no additional adjustment for an inflation risk premium. If
OA-1

there were a risk premium, we would have to define a different probability measure in order to discount
nominal cashflows with the nominal interest rate. Using Girsanov’s Theorem, we obtain the evolution
of X under Q:
dXt
bX + ϕµP )dt + σX dWtQ .
= (µ
Xt

(OA.9)

bX = µX − ρσX Θ is
where W Q is a standard Brownian motion under the risk-neutral measure Q and µ
the risk-neutral expected nominal cash flow growth rate.
The date-t nominal after-tax abandonment value of the firm is given by

A$t

= (1 − η)Xt Et

"Z

∞

t



= (1 − η)Xt EtQ e−r

πu$ Xu
πt$ Xt
$ (u−t)

#

(OA.10)

Xu
.
Xt


(OA.11)

The date-t nominal price of the corporate bond is given by
Bt$ = cEt

"Z
t

τD

#

"

#

πτ$D
πu$
du
+
αE
A(XτD )du
t
πt$
πt$

(OA.12)

From Karatzas and Shreve (1991), we know the price of the Arrow-Debreu default claim defined
in footnote 8 is given by
$
= eω(xt −xD ) = e−|ω|(xt −xD ) ,
qD,t

(OA.13)

where xt = ln Xt , xD = ln XD , ω < 0 and is defined in footnote 8. Now
$
∂ ln qD,t

∂µP
We can show that

∂|ω|
∂µP

= −(xt − xD )

∂|ω|
∂(xt − xD )
− |ω|
.
∂µP
∂µP

(OA.14)

< 0, that is, holding the distance to default, xt − xD , fixed, the price of the

Arrow-Debreu default claim increases with inflation. With an endogenous default policy, the distance
to default is impacted by inflation. A priori, it is possible that equity holders will choose to default
later when when inflation is higher, that is the distance to default will increase. However, for the
calibration we have chosen, equityholders default earlier when inflation is higher, because the present
value of the coupons they have to pay to bondholders is increased. Even if this were not the case,
is much larger than
of

∂(xt −xD )
,
∂µP

∂|ω|
∂µP

so any increase in distance to default would not change the overall sign

$
∂ ln qD,t
∂µP .

OA-2

OA.B

The Economy

First, we introduce some notation related to jumps in the state of the economy. Suppose that during
the small time-interval [t − ∆t, t) the economy is in state i and that at time t the state changes, so
that during the next small time interval [t, t + ∆t) the economy is in state j 6= i. We then define the
left-limit of s at time t as
st− = lim st−∆t ,
(OA.15)
∆t→0

and the right-limit as
st = lim st+∆t .

(OA.16)

∆t→0

Therefore st− = i, whereas st = j, so the left- and right limits are not equal. If some function E
depends on the current state of the economy i.e. Et = E(st ), then E is a jump process which is right
continuous with left limits, i.e. RCLL. If a jump from state i to j 6= i occurs at date t, then we abuse
notation slightly and denote the left limit of E at time t by Ei , where i is the index for the state. i.e.
Et− = lims↑t Es = Ei . Similarly Et = lims↓t Es = Ej . We shall use the same notation for all processes
that jump, because of their dependence on the state of the economy.
Using simple algebra we can write the normalized Kreps-Porteus aggregator in the following compact form:


f (c, v) = β h−1 (v)

1−γ





u c/h−1 (v) ,

(OA.17)

where
u (x) =

x

1
1− ψ

1−

−1
1
ψ

x1−γ
1−γ ,

(

h (x) =

, ψ > 0,
γ ≥ 0, γ 6= 1.
γ = 1.

ln x,

The representative agent’s value function is given by
∞

Z

Jt = Et

f (Ct , Jt ) dt.

(OA.18)

t

Proposition OA.1 The SDF of a representative agent with the continuous-time version of EpsteinZin-Weil preferences is given by

πt =




 




1

βe−βt
−β

βe

 1−γ1
1−

Rt

ψ

Ct−γ



Rt

pC,t e

1+(γ−1) ln(Vs−1 )
0

[

p−1 ds
0 C,s

− γ− ψ
1− 1
ψ

]ds C −γ V −(γ−1) ,

OA-3

t

t

, ψ 6= 1 .
ψ=1

(OA.19)

When ψ 6= 1, the price-consumption ratio in state i, pC,i , satisfies the nonlinear equation system:
1−γ
1− 1
ψ




2
p−1
C,i = r i + γσC,i − µC,i − 1 −

1
 (pC,j /pC,i )
λij 
ψ
1−γ




− 1

 , i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i.

(OA.20)

where
1
1
1
2
σC,i
, i ∈ {R, E}.
ri = β + µC,i − γ 1 +
ψ
2
ψ

(OA.21)

J = ln(CV ).

(OA.22)





When ψ = 1, define Vi via
Then Vi satisfies the nonlinear equation system:
β ln Vi = µC,i −

OA.C

γ 2
(Vj /Vi )1−γ − 1
σC,i + λi
i ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i.
2
1−γ

(OA.23)

Derivation of the real SDF

In this section, we derive the real SDF shown in Proposition OA.1. When we refer to states of the
economy within this proof we mean only the real states, L, H.
Duffie and Skiadas (1994) show that the SDF for a general normalized aggregator f is given by
Rt

πt = e

0

fv (Cs ,Js )dt

fc (Ct , Jt ) ,

(OA.24)

where fc (·, ·) and fv (·, ·) are the partial derivatives of f with respect to its first and second arguments,
respectively, and J is the value function given in (OA.18). The Feynman-Kac Theorem implies
f (Ct , Jt− )|νt− =i dt + Et [ dJt | νt− = i] = 0, i ∈ {R, E}.
Using Ito’s Lemma we rewrite the above equation as
1
2
0 = f (C, Ji ) + CJi,C µC,i + C 2 Ji,CC σC,i
+ λi (Jj − Ji ) ,
2

(OA.25)

for i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i. We guess and verify that J = h(CV ), where Vi satisfies the nonlinear equation
system
0 = βu



Vi−1



1 2
+ µC,i − γσC,i
+ λi
2

(Vj /Vi )1−γ − 1
, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i.
1−γ
!

OA-4

(OA.26)

Substituting (OA.17) into (OA.24) and simplifying gives
−β

πt = βe

R t
0

1
1+ γ− ψ
u(Vs−1 ) dt





1
− γ− ψ
Ct−γ Vt



.

(OA.27)

When ψ = 1, the above equation gives the second expression in (OA.19). We rewrite (OA.26) as


1
1
u Vi−1 = ri − γ −
λi
β 1+ γ−
ψ
ψ












(Vj /Vi )1−γ − 1
1
2
, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i,
− γµC,i − γ (1 + γ) σC,i
1−γ
2
! 



(OA.28)
where ri is given in (OA.21). Setting ψ = 1 in (OA.28) gives (OA.23). To derive the first expression
in (OA.19) from (OA.27) we prove that
Vi = (βpC,i )

1
1− 1
ψ

, ψ 6= 1.

(OA.29)

We proceed by considering the optimization problem for the representative agent. She chooses her
optimal consumption, C ∗ , and risky asset portfolio, ϕ, to maximize her expected utility
Jt∗

Z

= sup Et
C ∗ ,ϕ

t

∞

f (Ct∗ , Jt∗ ) dt.

Observe that J ∗ depends on optimal consumption-portfolio choice, whereas the J defined previously
in (OA.22) depends on exogenous aggregate consumption. The optimization is carried out subject to
the dynamic budget constraint, which we now describe. If the agent consumes at the rate, C ∗ , invests
a proportion, ϕ, of her remaining financial wealth in the claim on aggregate consumption (the risky
asset), and puts the remainder in the locally risk-free asset, then her financial wealth, W , evolves
according to the dynamic budget constraint:
C∗
dWt
= ϕt− (dRC,t − rt− dt) + rt− dt − t− dt,
Wt−
Wt−
where dRC,t is the cumulative return on the claim to aggregate consumption. We define Ni,t as the
Poisson process which jumps upward by one whenever the real state of the economy switches from i
to j 6= i. The compensated version of this process is the Poisson martingale
P
Ni,t
= Ni,t − λi t, i ∈ {R, E}

It follows from applying Ito’s Lemma to P = pC C that the cumulative return on the claim to aggregate
consumption is
dPt + Ct dt
P
dRC,t =
= µRC ,t− dt + σC,t− dBC,t + σR
dNνPt− ,t ,
C ,t−
Pt−

OA-5

where
µRC ,t− |νt− =i = µRC ,i

1 2
= µC,i + σC,i
+ λi
2

!

1
pC,j
−1 +
,
pC,i
pC,i

σC,t− |νt− =i = σC,i ,
P
σR
C ,t−

νt− =i

P
= σR
=
C ,i

pC,j
− 1,
pC,i

for i ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i. The total volatility of the return to holding the consumption claim, when the
current state is i, is given by
r



2 + λ σP
σC,i
i
RC ,i

σRC ,i =

2

.

Note that C ∗ is the consumption to be chosen by the agent, i.e. it is a control, and at this stage we
cannot rule out the possibility that it jumps with the state of the economy. In contrast, C is aggregate
consumption, and since it is continuous, its left and right limits are equal, i.e. Ct− = Ct .
The system of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman partial differential equations for the agent’s optimization
problem is
∗
∗ 
sup f Ct−
, Jt−
dt + Et [ dJt∗ | νt− = i] = 0, i ∈ {R, E}.
νt− =i
C ∗ ,ϕ

Applying Ito’s Lemma to Jt∗ = J ∗ (Wt , νt ) allows us to write the above equation as
0 =

sup f

Ci∗ ,ϕi

(Ci∗ , Ji∗ )



+

∗
Wi Ji,W

C∗
ϕi (µRC ,i − ri ) + ri − i
Wi





1
∗
2 2
+ Wi2 Ji,W
W ϕi σRC ,i +
2



+λi Jj∗ − Ji∗ , i ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i.
We guess and verify that Jt∗ = h (Wt Ft ), where Fi satisfies the nonlinear equation system
Ci∗
C∗
1
2
0 = sup βu
+ ϕi (µRC ,i − ri ) + ri − i − γϕ2i σR
+λi
C ,i
∗
W
F
W
2
i i
i
Ci ,ϕi


 



(Fj /Fi )1−γ − 1
, i ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i.
1−γ
!

From the first order conditions of the above equations, we obtain the optimal consumption and portfolio
policies:
−(ψ−1)

Ci∗ = β ψ Fi
ϕi =

Wi , i ∈ {R, E},

1 µRC ,i − ri
, i ∈ {R, E}.
2
γ σR
C ,i

The market for the consumption good must clear, so ϕi = 1, Wi = Pi , Ci∗ = C (and thus J = J ∗ ).
Note that this forces the optimal portfolio proportion to be one and the optimal consumption policy

OA-6

to be continuous. Hence
2
µRC ,i − ri = γσR
,
C ,i

and
pC,i = β −ψ Fi1−ψ .

(OA.30)

The above equation implies that for ψ = 1, pC,i = 1/β. The equality, J = J ∗ , implies that CVi = W Fi .
Hence, Fi = p−1
C,i Vi . Using this equation to eliminate Fi from (OA.30) gives (OA.29). Substituting
(OA.29) into (OA.27) and (OA.28) gives the expression in (OA.19) for ψ 6= 1 and (OA.20).

OA.D

The evolution of the real SDF

In this section we derive the evolution of the real SDF, as given in (14).
We define Nνt− ,νt ,t as the Poisson process which jumps upward by one whenever the real state of
the economy switches from νt− to νt 6= νt− . The compensated version of this process is the Poisson
martingale (under the physical probability measure P), NνPt− ,νt ,t = Nνt− ,νt ,t − λνt− ,νt t. We start by
proving that the real SDF satisfies the stochastic differential equation
dπt
πt−

= −ri dt +
νt− =i

dMt
Mt−

,

(OA.31)

νt− =i

where M is a martingale under P such that
dMt
Mt−

P
P
= −ΘB
i dZt + Θij dNij,t , j ∈ {E, R}, j 6= i,

(OA.32)

νt− =i

ri is the risk-free rate in state i given by

!
#
"
1
− γ−11


γ− ψ

γ−
real
−1

ψ − 1
− ω −1
, i = R;

 r R + λRE γ−1 ω
"
!
#
ri =
γ−1
1

γ− ψ

γ− 1
real

 r E + λER γ−1 ω ψ − 1 − (ω − 1)
, i = E,


(OA.33)

where ω is the solution of
G (ω) = 0,

(OA.34)

and

G (x) =





1− 1

ψ

−


γ− 1

ψ −
 x










1− 1
ψ
2
rR +γσC,E
−gE +λreal
ER γ−1
1− 1
ψ
2
rR +γσC,R
−gR +λreal
ER γ−1
1

ln x γ−1 −

γ−1
γ− 1
ψ
x

−

x

−1

γ−1
γ− 1
ψ

2
µC,E − 12 γσC,E
+λ2 (x−1)
2
−1 −1)
µC,R − 12 γσC,R
+λreal
ER (x

OA-7

!

,

! , ψ 6= 1;
−1

ψ = 1.

(OA.35)

ΘB
i is the market price of risk due to Brownian shocks in real state i, given by
ΘB
i = γσC,i , i ∈ {R, E},

(OA.36)

and ΘPi is the market price of risk due to Poisson shocks when the economy switches out of state i:
ΘPij = ωij − 1, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i.

(OA.37)

We begin the proof by noting that if we define
ωij =

πt
πt−

, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i,

(OA.38)

νt− =i,νt =j

then (OA.19) implies that
ωij =


γ− 1
ψ


  pC,j − 1− ψ1
p

, ψ 6= 1;

 C,i


 Vj −(γ−1) ,
Vi

(OA.39)

ψ = 1.

−1
−1
The above equation implies that ωER = ωRE
, so we can set ωER = ωRE
= ω.

We now show how to determine ω. Using (OA.39) we rewrite (OA.20) and (OA.23) as
1

pC,i =

1

ri +

2
γσC,i

− µC,i +

1− ψ
λreal
ij γ−1



γ−1
γ−1/ψ

ωij

 , i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i,

(OA.40)

−1

and
1 2
ωij − 1
β ln Vi = µC,i − γσC,i
+ λreal
, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i,
ij
2
1−γ

(OA.41)

respectively. Therefore, from (OA.39) and the above two equations it follows that ω is the solution of
Equation (OA.34).
We now derive expressions for the risk-free rate and risk prices. Ito’s Lemma implies that the
state-price density evolves according to
dπt
πt−

=

1 ∂πt−
1
∂πt− dCt 1 1 2 ∂ 2 πt−
dt +
Ct
+
C
πt− ∂t
πt−
∂Ct Ct
2 πt− t ∂Ct2
+λreal
νt− ,νt

∆πt
∆πt
dt +
dNνPt− ,νt ,t ,
πt−
πt−

where ∆πt = πt − πt− . The definition (OA.38) implies
∆πt
= ωνt− ,νt − 1.
πt−

OA-8



dCt
Ct

2

(OA.42)

Together with some standard algebra that allows us to rewrite (OA.42) as


1
dπt
2
= − κνt− + γµC,νt− − γ (1 + γ) σC,ν
+ λreal
dt−γσC,νt− dZt + ωνt− ,νt − 1 dNνPt− ,νt ,t .
νt− ,νt 1 − ωνt− ,νt
t−
πt−
2




Comparing the above equation with (OA.31), which is standard in an economy with jumps, gives
(OA.36) and (OA.37), in addition to
1
2
ri = κi + γµC,i − γ (1 + γ) σC,i
+ λreal
ij (1 − ωij ) , i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i,
2
where
 


 β 1+ γ−
κi =
h



1
ψ



−1

(βpC,i )

−1



, ψ 6= 1, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i;

1

β 1 + (γ − 1) ln

1− ψ i

Vi−1

(OA.43)

ψ = 1, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i,

,

We use Equations (OA.40) and (OA.41) to eliminate pC,i and Vi from (OA.43) to obtain

κi =










ri − γ −






1
ψ




λreal
ij

γ−1
γ−1/ψ
ωij


−1

1−γ

h
i
 − γµC,i − 1 γ (1 + γ) σ 2 , ψ 6= 1, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i;
C,i
2

h

i

1
2
ri + λreal
ij (ωij − 1) − γµC,i − 2 γ (1 + γ) σC,i ,

ψ = 1, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i,
(OA.44)

so

ri =









ri − γ −

1
ψ




λreal
ij

γ−1
γ−1/ψ

ωij


−1

1−γ





 + λreal (1 − ωij ) , ψ 6= 1, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i, ;
ij

(OA.45)

ψ = 1, i ∈ {R, E}.

ri ,

Taking the limit of the upper expression in the above equation gives the lower expression, so (OA.33)
follows. The total market price of consumption risk in real state i accounts for both Brownian and
Poisson shocks, and is thus given by
q

Θi =

ΘB
i

2

+ λij ΘPi

2

, i, j ∈ {R, E}, j 6= i.

(OA.46)

Because the Poisson and Brownian shocks in (OA.32) are independent and their respective prices of
risk are bounded, M is a martingale under the actual measure P. Thus, M defines the Radon-Nikodym
derivative

dQ
dP

via Mt = Et

h

dQ
dP

i

. It is a standard result (see Elliott (1982)) that the risk-neutral

switching probabilities per unit time are given by
b real = λreal Et
λ
ij
ij



Mt
νt− = i, νt = j , j 6= i.
Mt−


OA-9

The jump component in dπ comes purely from dM . Thus, using (OA.38), we can simplify the above
b real = λreal ωij , from which we can derive (17).
expression to obtain λ
ij
ij

We deduce the properties of the risk distortion factor, ω, from the properties of the function G
defined in (OA.35). We restrict the domain of G to x > 0. First we consider the case where ψ 6= 1.
We assume that the price-consumption ratios, pC,i , i ∈ {R, E}, are strictly positive. Therefore, G
is continuous. We observe that if G is monotonic, then by continuity, G(1) and G0 (1) are the same
(opposite) in sign iff ω < 1 (ω > 1). Clearly, in both cases, ω is unique. To establish monotonicity
note that

0

G (x)

=

−

1
1− ψ
1
γ− ψ

+







1
1− 1
ψ

2
r 1 + γσC,R
− µC,R + λ1 γ−1

1−

2

r 2 + γσC,E − µC,E + λ2

1
ψ

γ−1

γ−1
γ− 1
ψ
ω

!!2

γ−1
−
γ− 1
ψ
x

− µC,R + λRE

1
1− ψ

γ−1

−

x

γ−1
γ− 1
ψ

!
−1

1/ψ−1

λER x γ−1/ψ

−1

!!
−1

r1 +

2
γσC,R

λ1

1/ψ−1
−2
−
x γ−1/ψ

!

−

+x

1− 1
ψ
−1
γ− 1
ψ




The above equation implies that for x > 0, if pC,R and pC,E are strictly positive, then G0 (x) does not
change sign. Therefore, G must be monotonic. Now we use the following expressions:
G(1) = 1 −

2
rE + γσC,E
− µC,E
,
2
rR + γσC,R − µC,R

and
0

G (1) = −

1−
γ−

1
ψ
1
ψ

"

2
2
real
− µC,R )λreal
(rR + γσC,R
RE + (r E + γσC,E − µC,E )λER
1+
,
2
(rR + γσC,R
− µC,R )2

#

to relate the signs of G(1) and G0 (1) to the properties of the agent’s preferences. Note that G0 (1) < 0,
(G0 (1) > 0) iff

1
1− ψ
1
γ− ψ



> 0,

1
1− ψ
1
γ− ψ



2 −µ
< 0 . We assume that ri + γσC,i
C,i > 0 for i ∈ {R, E}, which

is equivalent to assuming that if the economy were always in real state i, then the price-consumption
2 −µ
ratio would be positive. Simple algebra tells us that ri + γσC,i
C,i = β +



1
ψ



−1



2
.
µC,i − 12 γσC,i

2
2 . Therefore G(1) < 0, (G(1) > 0) iff ψ > 1, (ψ < 1).
We know that µC,R − 12 γσC,R
< µC,R − 12 γσC,E

Consequently, G(1) and G0 (1) are the same (opposite) in sign iff γ < 1/ψ (γ > 1/ψ). It then follows
that ω > 1 (ω < 1) iff γ > 1/ψ (γ < 1/ψ), assuming that ψ 6= 1.
Similarly, when ψ = 1, if we assume that Vi > 0 for i ∈ {R, E}, then we can prove that: ω > 1
2 , i ∈ {R, E} are of the same (opposite) sign. Now, if γ < 1, then
if γ > 1 (γ < 1) and gi − 21 γσC,i
2
2
2 , i ∈ {R, E} cannot be
rR + γσC,R
− µC,R > 0 implies µC,R − 21 γσC,R
> 0, which means µC,i − 12 γσC,i

of opposite sign. Therefore, ω > 1 iff γ > 1.
So, for ψ > 0, ω > 1 (ω < 1) iff γ > 1/ψ (γ < 1/ψ). It follows that ω = 1 iff γ = 1/ψ.
OA-10

OA.E

Liquidation Value

The abandonment or liquidation value of a firm is just its unlevered value, i.e. the present value
of future cashflows, ignoring coupon payments to debtholders and default risk. Small, but frequent
shocks to a firm’s real cashflow growth are modelled by changes in the standard Brownian motion Wt .
Small, but frequent shocks to the real SDF are modelled by changes in the standard Brownian motion
Zt . The assumption that dZt dWt = 0 means that small, but frequent shocks to cashflow growth are
not priced. However, changes in the expected real cashflow growth rate are driven by the same Markov
chain as those driving jumps in the SDF. Hence, changes in unlevered firm value driven by changes in
the expected real cashflow growth rate will be priced.
Suppose the economy is currently in state i. Then, the risk-neutral probability of the economy
b ij ∆t and the riskswitching into a different state j 6= i during a small time interval of length ∆t is λ
b ij ∆t. We can therefore write the unlevered nominal firm
neutral probability of not switching is 1 − λ
value in state i as

A$i,t





X
$
b ij ∆t A$ +
b ij ∆tA$  , i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }, j 6= i, (OA.47)
= (1−η)Xt ∆t+e−(ri −µX,i )∆t  1 − λ
λ
i
j
j6=i

where N = 6 is the number of states in the economy.
The first term in (OA.47) is the after-tax cash flow received in the next instant and the second
term is the discounted continuation value. The discount rate is just the standard discount rate for
a perpetuity. Observe that the volatility of cashflow growth does not appear in the discount rate,
because dZt dWt = 0. The continuation value is the average of A$i,t and A$j,t , weighted by the riskneutral probabilities of being in states i and j 6= i a small instant ∆t from now. For example, with
b ij ∆t the economy will be in state j 6= i and the unlevered nominal firm value
risk-neutral probability λ

will be value will be A$j . The continuation value is discounted back at a rate reflecting the nominal
interest rate rate ri$ and the expected nominal earnings growth rate over that instant which is µX,i
– observe that there is no difference between the physical and risk-neutral nominal earnings growth
rates, because dZt dWt = 0.
We take the limit of (OA.47) as ∆t → 0, to obtain
0 = (1 − η) X − (ri$ − µX,i )A$i +

X





b ij A$ − A$ , i ∈ {1, . . . , N }, j 6= i.
λ
j
i

j6=i

To obtain the solution of the above linear equation system, we define
vA,i =

1 A$i
,
(1 − η) X

OA-11

the before-tax nominal price-earnings ratio in state i. Therefore
vA,1
 .. 
b
− Λ  .  = 1N ×1 ,
vA,N








$
diag r1$ − µX,1 , . . . , rN
− µX,N







$
where 1N ×1 is a 6 × 1 vector of ones, diag r1$ − µX,1 , . . . , rN
− µX,N



(OA.48)

is a N × N diagonal matrix,

$
b defined by [Λ]
b =λ
b ij , i, j ∈
with the quantities r1$ − µX,1 , . . . , rN
− µX,N along the diagonal and Λ,
ij

{1, . . . , N }, where
b ij = ωij λij , j 6= i
λ
b ii = −
λ

X

(OA.49)

ωij λij , j 6= i

(OA.50)

j6=i

is the generator matrix of the Markov chain for the combined state of the economy under the risk







$
b 6= 0.
neutral measure. Solving (OA.48) gives (26), if det diag r1$ − µX,1 , . . . , rN
− µX,N − Λ

Similarly, we can show that the before-tax value of the claim to the real earnings stream Y , when
Y = p Y , where
the current state is i is given by Pi,t
i t

b −1 1
(p1 , . . . , pN )> = (diag (r1 − µY,1 , . . . , rN − µY,N ) − Λ)
6×1

Hence, from the basic asset pricing equation
"

Et

#

"

#

dPtY + Y dt
dπt dPtY
−
r
dt
ν
=
i
=
−E
νt− = i ,
ν
t−
t
t−
πt PtY
PtY

we obtain the unlevered risk premium:
"

Et

#

 p
X
dPtY + Yt dt
j
b ij − λij
−
r
dt
ν
=
i
=
−
λ
− 1 dt, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , M },
ν
t−
t−
Y
P
pi
j6=i




where M = 2 is the number of real states in the economy. Applying Ito’s Lemma,
X
dPi,t
= pi dXt +

X

λij (pj − pi ) dt +

j6=i

X

P
(pj − pi ) dNij,t
, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , M },

j6=i

Thus, the volatility of returns on unlevered equity in state i is given by

σR,i

v

2
uX
u
pj
t
− 1 , i, j ∈ {1, . . . , M }.
=
λij
j6=i

pi

OA-12

(OA.51)

OA.F

Arrow-Debreu Securities – Default

The Arrow-Debreu default claim denoted by qD,ij is the value of a unit of consumption paid if default
occurs in state j and the current state is i. In a static capital structure model, these are the only
Arrow-Debreu claims needed. Given the initial state (in which the firm selected its capital structure,
there are N 2 such claims: {qD,ij }i,j∈{1,...,N } . We assume, without loss of generality, that the regimes
are labelled so that the default boundaries respect a monotonic ordering XD,1 > . . . > XD,N .
We say that a firm’s earnings are in the default region Dk , k = 0, . . . , N − 1, when they fall in the
interval (XD,k+1 , XD,k ], assuming that XD,0 → ∞. Region DN is (−∞, XD,N ].
Proposition OA.2 Let Ak be
Ak =

0N −k×N −k
−IN −k×N −k
−1 b
−1
2Sx,k (Λk − Rk ) 2Sx,k
Mx,k

!

,

where 0n×m ∈ Rn×m denotes a matrix of zeros, In×n ∈ Rn×n denotes the n-dimensional identity
b , R , M , and S
matrix, Λ
k
k
x,k
x,k are the N − k by N − k matrices obtained by removing the first k rows
b
and columns of Λ,

R = diag(r1 , . . . , rN ),

Mx = diag(µx,1 , . . . , µx,N ),

and

2
2
Sx = diag(σx,1
, . . . , σx,N
),

2
bx,i = µ
bX,i − 21 σX,i
and σx,i = σX,i the drift and diffusion coefficient of x = log X under the
with µ

risk-neutral measure.
Given the integration constants hi,j (ω), the default Arrow-Debreu in region Dk are given by
Region D 0 :
qD,ij (x) =

N
X

hij (ω0,l )e−ω0,l x ,

l=1

(OA.52)
where ω0,1 > . . . > ω0,N > 0 are the N positive eigenvalues of A0 .
Region D k , k ∈ {1, . . . , N − 1}:
i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, j ∈ {1, . . . , N },

qD,ij (x) = δij ,
2(N −k)

qD,i,j (x) =

X

hij (ωl )e−ωl x − [A−1
k Bk ]i−k,j ,

i ∈ {k + 1, . . . , N }, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.

l=1

(OA.53)

OA-13

where ωk,l are the 2(N − k) eigenvalues of Ak and


 2

Bk =

0N −k×k 0N −k×N −k
Bkø
0N −k×N −k

!

,

b
λk+1,1
2
σk+1

 b
 λk+2,1
 2 σ2
ø
k+2
Bk = 

..

.


b
λN,1

2

2

b
λk+1,2

2

b
λk+2,2

···

..
.

···

b
λN,2

···

2
σk+1

2

2
σN

2
σk+2

2
σN

··· 2

b
λk+1,k



2
σk+1



b
λk+2,k 
2 σ2

.
k+2

..

.


b

2

λN,k
2
σN

Region D N :
qD,k,ij (x) = δij ,

∀i, j.
(OA.54)

In each default region, for each ω, the integration constants hk+1,• (ω) ≡ [hk+1,j (ω)]j=1,...,N ∈ R1×N ,
are identified by the boundary conditions (Section OA.F.3), and the remaining integration constants
hk+2,1 (ω) · · · hk+2,N (ω)


..
..
Hk (ω) = 

.
···
.
hN,1 (ω) · · · hN,N (ω)

(OA.55)

Hk (ω) = Gk−1 (ω) gk+•,1 (ω) hk+1,• (ω)

(OA.56)





are given by

where gk+•,k+1 (ω) ≡ [gi,k+1 (ω)]i=k+2,...,N ∈ R(N −k−1)×1 comprises the last N − k − 1 elements of the
first column of
b − R) − ω(2S −1 M − ωI
G(ω) = 2Sx−1 (Λ
x
N ×N ).
x

(OA.57)

and Gk (ω) is the N − k − 1 by N − k − 1 matrix obtained by removing the first k + 1 rows and columns
of G(ω).
The next two subsections outline the proof of Proposition OA.2.

OA.F.1

Region D0 : Xt > XD,1

We start by analyzing the case where earnings at the current date t are above the highest default
boundary, i.e. Xt > XD,1 . Hence, if earnings hit the boundary XD,j from above for the first time in
state j, {qD,ij }i,j∈{1,...,N } will pay one unit of consumption; otherwise, the security expires worthless.
Since each Arrow-Debreu default claim is effectively a perpetual digital put, their values can be derived
by solving a system of ordinary differential equations, derived from the standard equations
EtQ [dqD,ij − ri qD,ij dt] = 0, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.
OA-14

(OA.58)

Using Ito’s Lemma, the above equation can be rewritten as the following second-order ordinary
differential-equation system:19
dqD,ij X b
1 2 d2 qD,ij
b
µ
+
σx,i
+
λik (qD,kj − qD,ij ) = ri qD,ij , i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N },
x,i
2
dx2
dx
k6=i

(OA.59)

2 and σ
bx,i = µ
bX,i − 21 σX,i
where µ
x,i = σX,i are the drift and diffusion coefficient of x = log X under the

risk-adjusted measure.
In order to solve this system of ODEs, define
zij
zN +i,j

= qD,ij , i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }
=

dqD,ij
, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.
dx

(OA.60)
(OA.61)

Then, we obtain the following first order linear system
dzij
− zN +i,j
dx

= 0, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N },

b
X 2λ
bx,i
dzN +i,j
2µ
2ri
ik
+ 2 zN +i,j +
2 (zkj − zij ) − σ 2 zij
dx
σx,i
σ
x,i
k6=i x,i

= 0, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.

(OA.62)

Expressing the above equation system in matrix form gives
Z 0 + A0 Z = 02N ×N ,

(OA.63)

where the ij’th element of the 2N by N matrix, Z, is
[Z]ij = zij , i ∈ {1, . . . , 2N }, j ∈ {1, . . . , N },
and Z 0 =

(OA.64)

dZ
dx .

To solve eq. (OA.63), one first finds the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of A0 . Their defining equation
is
A0 ei = ωi ei , i ∈ {1, . . . , 2N },

(OA.65)

where ωi is the i’th eigenvalue and ei is the corresponding eigenvector. Note that A0 has N positive
and N negative eigenvalues (Jobert and Rogers (2006)).
It follows from (OA.65) that the eigenvalues of A0 are the roots of its characteristic polynomial;
that is, any eigenvalue ω is a solution to the following 2N ’th-order polynomial:
det(A0 − ωI) = 0,
19

Note that since the puts are perpetual,

∂q
∂t

= 0. Hence, q is solely a function of the stochastic process x = log X.

OA-15

To simplify the above expression for the characteristic polynomial, we then use the following identity
from Silvester: If F =

F11 F12
F21 F22

!

, where Fij , i, j ∈ {1, 2} are N by N matrices, any two of which

commute with each other, then
det F = det(F11 F22 − F12 F21 ).

(OA.66)

Since
A0 − ωI =

−ωI
−I
b − R) 2S −1 M − ωI
2Sx−1 (Λ
x
x

!

and diagonal matrices commute with all other matrices of the same size, any pair of the N submatrices
in A0 commute. Therefore, one can apply (OA.66) and
b − R)).
0 = det(A0 − ωI) = det(ω(ωI − 2Sx−1 Mx ) − 2Sx−1 (Λ

(OA.67)

When N ≤ 2 the above polynomial is of order 4 or less and can be solved exactly in closed-form. When
N ≥ 3, it must be solved numerically. Once the eigenvalues have been obtained, the eigenvectors are
obtained by solving (OA.65). We then define the 2N by 2N matrix of eigenvectors, E, by stacking
the eigenvectors as follows
E = (e1 , . . . , e2N ).
Hence, the ij’th component of E is the i’th element of the j’th eigenvector, i.e.
Eij = (ej )i .
Given the E matrix, we can define the 2N by N matrix W via
EW = Z.

(OA.68)

We can then rewrite eq. (OA.63) as
EW 0 + A0 EW = 02N ×N ,

(OA.69)

⇔ E −1 (EW 0 + A0 EW ) = W 0 + E −1 A0 EW = 02N ×N ,

(OA.70)

⇔ W 0 + DW = 02N ×N ,

(OA.71)

where
D = E −1 A0 E = diag(ω1 , . . . , ω2N ).

(OA.72)

The first order differential equation system of eq. (OA.71) is similar to that of eq. (OA.63), with the
notable difference that D is a diagonal matrix while A0 isn’t. Making use of this, we premultiply both
sides of eq. (OA.71) by the integrating factor eDx , which yields
eDx W 0 + eDx DW = (eDx W )0 = 02N ×N .
OA-16

Integrating the above equation gives
eDx W = K,
where K is a 2N by N matrix of constants of integration. Therefore, the general solution of eq. (OA.71)
is
W = e−Dx K,
which, given eq. (OA.68), implies
Z = Ee−Dx K = e−Dx EK,

(OA.73)

given that D is 2N × 2N and diagonal, and that E is 2N × 2N .
Thus,
qD,ij (x) =

2N
X

hij (ωl )e−ωl x ,

(OA.74)

l=1

where the hij (ωl ) are constants of integration that depend on the eigenvalues.
Note that, for any eigenvalue ω of A0 , the particular solution qD,ij = hij (ω)e−ωx , with hij (ωl ) =
0, ∀ωl 6= ω, solves (OA.74). Indeed, we then have
"

Z=

H(ω)
−ωH(ω)

#

e

−ωx

,

where H(ω) =

h1,• (ω)
H0 (ω)

!

,

and
Z 0 = −ωZ.
Hence, (OA.63) implies that
(−ωI2N ×2N + A0 )Z = 02N ×N ,
or, equivalently,
−ωIN ×N
−IN ×N
−1
−1
b
2Sx (Λ − R) 2Sx Mx − ωIN ×N

!"

H(ω)
−ωH(ω)

#

= 02N ×N .

(OA.75)

This particular solution is important since it allows us to express N (N − 1) of the N 2 integation
constants in terms of the first N ones. Indeed, simplifying (OA.75) gives
−ωIN ×N H(ω) + IN ×N ωH(ω) = 0N ×N ,
b − R) − ω(2S −1 M − ωI
(2Sx−1 (Λ
x
N ×N ))H(ω) = 0N ×N ,
x

where the first equation is trivial. To solve the second equation, we first consider
G(ω) (h1j (ω), . . . , hN j (ω))T = 0N ×1 ,

OA-17

(OA.76)

where
b − R) − ω(2S −1 M − ωI
G(ω) = 2Sx−1 (Λ
x
N ×N ).
x

We denote the ij’th element of G(ω) by gij (ω). We know from (OA.67) that det G(ω) = 0. Thus, the
equations
N
X

gik (ω)hkj (ω), i ∈ {1, . . . , N }

(OA.77)

k=1

are linearly dependent. However, the system
N
X

gik (ω)hkj (ω), i ∈ {2, . . . , N }

(OA.78)

k=1

is linearly independent, allowing us to solve for hkj (ω), k ∈ {2, . . . , N } in terms of h1j (ω), for j ∈
{1, . . . , N }, that is
Hk (ω) = Gk−1 (ω) gk+•,1 (ω) hk+1,• (ω) .
Solving the above linear equation system gives us hij (ω), i ∈ {2, . . . , N }, j ∈ {1, . . . , N } in terms
of h1j (ω), j ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Hence, for each eigenvalue ω of A0 , this leaves us with N free integration
constants. Then, to ensure the finiteness of the Arrow-Debreu prices as x → ∞, focus on the N
positive eigenvalues of A0 . That is, we obtain qD,ij , the Arrow-Debreu prices in region D0 , where
X > XD,1 :
qD,ij (x) =

N
X

hij (ω0,l )e−ω0,l x ,

(OA.79)

l=1

where, without loss of generality, ω0,1 > . . . > ω0,N > 0 are the N positive eigenvalues of A0 . Note
that (OA.79) contains N 2 free integrations constants h1j (ω0,l ), which will be identified by the value
and smooth pasting conditions (Section OA.F.3).

OA.F.2

Region Dk : XD,k+1 < X ≤ XD,k

We now turn to the analysis of Arrow-Debreu securities in region Dk , i.e. when current earnings are
above default boundary k + 1, but below default boundary k. Note that the above analysis in default
region k = 0 can be seen as a special case of the analysis below, with XD,0 → ∞.
First, note that qD,ij = δij , ∀i ≤ k.
Indeed, if earnings are currently lower than
XD,k < XD,k−1 < . . ., and if the current state is i ≤ k, then the firm is in default and the present
value of a dollar when the firm defaults in state j is 1 if i = j, and 0 otherwise. In particular, this
means that, in region DN , where X ≤ XD,N , we have
qD,ij = δij .

OA-18

Applying (OA.58) to the unknown qD,ij , i > k, yields the following system of ODEs
dzk+1,j
− zN +k+1,j = 0,
dx
dzk+2,j
− zN +k+2,j = 0,
dx
..
.
dzN,j
− z2N,j = 0,
dx
k
b
X
bx,k+1
2µ
2λ
dzN +k+1,j
k+1,l
+ 2
zN +k+1,j +
(δlj − zk+1,j )
2
dx
σx,k+1
σ
x,k+1
l=1

+

N
b
X
2λ
k+1,l

σ2
l=k+2 x,k+1

(zlj − zk+1,j ) −

2rk+1
zk+1,j
2
σx,k+1

= 0,

k
b
X
bx,k+2
dzN +k+2,j
2λ
2µ
k+2,l
zN +k+2,j +
(δl,j − zk+2,j )
+ 2
2
dx
σx,k+2
σ
l=1 x,k+2

+

N
X

b
2λ
2rk+2
k+2,l
(zl,j − zk+2,j ) − 2
zk+2,j
2
σ
σx,k+2
l=k+1,l6=k+2 x,k+2

= 0

..
.
k
N
−1
b
b
X
X
bx,N
2λ
2λ
dz2N,j
2µ
2rN
N,l
N,l
+ 2 z2N,j +
(δ
−
z
)
+
(zl,j − zN,j ) − 2 zN,j
N,j
l,j
2
2
dx
σx,N
σ
σ
σ
x,N
l=1 x,N
l=k+1 x,N

= 0,

for j = {1, . . . , N }. Rewriting the above equation system in matrix form, we obtain
Zk0 + Ak Zk + Bk = Zk0 + Ak Zk + A−1
k Bk



= Zek0 + Ak Zek = 0,

(OA.80)


where Zek = Zk + A−1
k Bk , Zk is the following 2(N − k) by N matrix


zk+1,1
zk+2,1
..
.








zN,1
Zk = 
 z
 N +k+1,1

 zN +k+2,1

..

.


z2N,1

zk+1,2
zk+2,2
..
.
zN,2
zN +k+1,2
zN +k+2,2
..
.
z2N,2

···
···

zk+1,N
zk+2,N
..
.

···
···
zN,N
· · · zN +k+1,N
· · · zN +k+2,N
..
···
.
···

z2N,N









.








Note that the Bk matrix of constants arises from the δlj ’s appearing in the above differential equations:

OA-19

(i) These appear only in the last N − k equations. Hence, the first N − k rows of the Bk matrix
will comprise of zeros.
(ii) Since the sum in which the δlj ’s appear are from 1 to k, δlj will be zero for all l whenever j > k.
Hence, the last N − k columns of the Bk matrix will comprise of zeros.
Thereafter, the development made, in region D0 , between equations (OA.65) and (OA.73) can be
applied to Zek in (OA.80) to yield
Zek = e−Dk x Ek Kk ,

(OA.81)

Zk = e−Dk x Ek Kk − A−1
k Bk .

(OA.82)

or, equivalently,

Therefore,
qD,ij (x) = δij , i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }
2(N −k)

qD,i,j (x) =

hij (ωl )e−ωl x − [A−1
k Bk ]i−k,j , i ∈ {k + 1, . . . , N }, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.

X
l=1

Note that the −k offset on the rows of the 2(N − k) × N matrix A−1
k Bk simply accounts for the fact
the first row of this matrix corresponds to the (k + 1)th Arrow-Debreu security. Once more, for each
eigenvalue ω of Ak , the particular solution
Zk =

Hk (ω)
−ωHk (ω)

!

e

−ωy

−

A−1
k Bk ,

where Hk (ω) =

hk+1,• (ω)
H k (ω)

!

,

can be used to express the constants in all lines of Hk but the first, as functions of the hk+1,1 , . . . , hk+1,N
constants. This leaves us with N free constants for each of the 2(N − k) eigenvalues.

OA.F.3

Boundary Conditions for Arrow-Debreu Default Claims

Given the above development, we are left with N 2 free integration constants in region D0 , and 2(N −
k)N free constants in region Dk , k ∈ {1, . . . , N − 1}. Hence, we still have to solve for the N 3 constants,
2

N +

N
−1
X

2

2(N − k)N = N + 2N

k=1

N
−1
X

(N − k) = N 3 ,

(OA.83)

k=1

that satisfy the N 3 boundary conditions (value matching & smooth pasting) of the problem at hand.
For each default boundary XD,k , k ∈ {1, . . . , N }, we have that:

OA-20

(VM) The value of the N + (N − k)N Arrow-Debreu securities with i ≥ k, must be the same on both
sides of the default boundary, i.e.
qDk−1 ,ij (xD,k ) = qDk ,ij (xD,k ), where , i ∈ {k, . . . , N }, j ∈ {1, . . . , N };

(OA.84)

(SP) The dynamics of the (N − k)N Arrow-Debreu securities with i > k, must be the same on both
side of the default boundary, i.e.
dqDk−1 ,ij
dx

=
xD,k

dqDk ,ij
dx

, where , i ∈ {k + 1, . . . , N }, j ∈ {1, . . . , N };

(OA.85)

xD,k

where the qDk notation highlights that the Arrow-Debreu claim is computed int the Dk region.

OA.G

Modified Arrow-Debreu Default Claims

Arrow-Debreu securities provide the expected value of a 1$ cash flow conditional on the state of the
world in which they occur. In particular, in region Dk at time t, Arrow-Debreu prices


qD,ij,t (x) = Et

πτD
1ν =j νt = i
π t τD

h



i

(OA.87)



(OA.88)

= EtQ 1ντD =j νt = i


(OA.86)

= Q ντD = j νt = i ,

can be interpreted risk-adjusted probability that default, occurring at unknown time τD , will occur
in state j conditional on the current state of the economy, νt , being i. For cash flows that do not
depend on the level of earnings when the firm defaults, XτD = exτD , these Arrow-Debreu securities
yield a straightforward approach to derive the cash flows’ expected values. If a cash flow does depend
on XτD , the Arrow-Debreu securities may not be as useful.
In a continuous model, the earnings always approach the default boundary from above and default
occur when XτD = XD ; that is, there is no uncertainty with respect to the level of earnings upon
default and Arrow-Debreu securities can readily be used to compute expected cash flows. In our
economy, however, “deep defaults” can occur when the state of the economy jumps from its current
state to a worse state.
Recall that we ordered the default boundaries such that XD,1 > . . . > XD,N ; hence, state N is
the best state of the economy, state 1 is the worst. When the state of the economy jumps toward a
better state, the default boundary decreases as growth opportunities improve; hence, if the firm was
not in default, it is even further away from default after the jump. However, if the level of earnings
is XD,j+1 < Xτ − ≤ XD,j prior to a jump to state j at time τD , the firm automatically defaults. The
D

level of earnings XτD is then only a fraction of the default boundary XD,j , and the firm will thus be
able to honor its obligations to the debtholders, for instance, only partially.

OA-21

We thus introduce “modified” Arrow-Debreu securities
"

q̃D,ij,t (x) = Et


= Et

#

πτD XτD
1ν =j νt = i
πt XD,j τD

(OA.89)

πτD xτ −xD,j
1ντD =j νt = i
e D
πt



(OA.90)

i

h

= EtQ exτD −xD,j 1ντD =j νt = i ,

(OA.91)

to account for the uncertainty surrounding the recovery rate. Note that, as long as shareholders have
no bargaining power, they shouldn’t care about the depth of deep defaults.
Technically, the (standard) Arrow-Debreu securities are special cases of their modified counterparts,
with

xτ D
xD,j

= 1. Moreover, when in region D0 , deep defaults are not a direct concern as the firm would

survive even to a jump to the worse state, state 1. Hence, the general solution in (OA.79) holds.
However, in region Dk , k > 0, applying (OA.58) to the unknown q̃D,ij , i > k, accounting for deep
defaults, yields the following system of ODEs
dzi,j
− zN +i,j
dx

= 0,

b
2λ
2ri
i,l
(zl,j − zi,j ) − 2 zi,j
2
σ
σx,i
l=k+1,l6=i x,i

= 0,

k
b
X

bx,i
2λ
dzN +i,j
2µ
i,l
ex−xD,j δlj − zi,j
+ 2 zN +i,j +
2
dx
σx,i
σ
l=1 x,i

+

N
X

with i ∈ {k + 1, . . . , N } and j ∈ {1, . . . , N }. This can be written equivalently in matrix form as
ek = 0,
Zk0 + Ak Zk + B

(OA.92)

where
ek =
B

0N −k×k 0N −k×N −k
eø
B
0N −k×N −k
k

ex−xD,1

2

b
λk+1,2

2

b
λk+2,2

!

,

and


 2

b
λk+1,1
σ2

 b k+1
 λk+2,1 x−xD,1
 2 2 e
e ø =  σk+2
B

k
..

.


b
λN,1 x−xD,1

2

2
σN

e

b
λk+1,k

ex−xD,k 

ex−xD,2
..
.

··· 2

b
λk+2,k

ex−xD,k
..
.

ex−xD,2

···

2
σk+1

2

2
σk+2

b
λN,2
2
σN



··· 2

ex−xD,2

OA-22

2
σk+1
2
σk+2

···
2

b
λN,k
2
σN

ex−xD,k




.





ek is not constant with respect to x anymore, but B
e0 = B
ek . Hence, letting Z
ek = Zk + (Ak +
Now, B
k
ek , we have Z
e 0 = Z 0 + (Ak + I)−1 B
ek
I)−1 B
k
k
ek + Ak Zk + Ak (Ak + I)−1 B
ek
Zek0 + Ak Zek = Zk0 + (Ak + I)−1 B
ek = 0.
= Zk0 + Ak Zk + B

(OA.93)
(OA.94)

Once more, the development made between equations (OA.65) and (OA.73) can be applied to Zek in
(OA.94) to yield
Zek = e−Dk x Ek Kk ,

(OA.95)

ek .
Zk = e−Dk x Ek Kk − (Ak + I)−1 B

(OA.96)

or, equivalently,

Therefore,
q̃D,ij (x) = δij ex−xDj = δij

X
,
XDi

i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, j ∈ {1, . . . , N },

2(N −k)

q̃D,i,j (x) =

X

ek ]i−k,j ,
hij (ωl )e−ωl x − [(Ak + I)−1 B

i ∈ {k + 1, . . . , N }, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.

l=1

For 1 ≤ i ≤ k, if the earnings at current time t are Xt < XD,i while the current state is i, it must be
that the state just jumped to state i at time t− and the firm is now in (deep) default, hence the first
equation in the above system.

OA.H

Bond Prices

In this proof it is not necessary to distinguish between the state of the economy at dates t− and t.
The central part of our proof consists of proving that
"Z

τD

Et
t

$

N q
X
πs$
1
D,ij
−
,
ds
s
=
i
=
t
$
$
πt$
rP,i
r
j=1 P,j

#

(OA.97)

$
where rP,i
, the discount rate for a fixed nominal perpetuity, when the economy is in state i, is given

by
$
rP,i

"Z

=

Et
t

∞

#!−1

πs$
ds st = i
πt$

OA-23

,

(OA.98)

and
"

Et

#

πτ$D

αA$τD
πt$

(XτD ) st = i

=

N
X

$
αA$j (XD,j ) q̃D,ij
.

(OA.99)

j=1

To prove (OA.97), we note that
"Z

τD

Et
t

#

πs$
ds st = i = Et
πt$

"Z

∞

t

#

"

πτ$D
πs$
ν
=
i
−
E
ds
t
t
πt$
πt$

Z

∞

τD

#

πs$
ds st = i ,
πτ$D

and conditioning on the event {ντD = j}, we obtain
"

Et

πτ$D

Z

πt$

∞

τD

N
X
πτ$D
πs$
Et Pr ( ντD = j| st = i) $
ds st = i =
πτ$D
πt
j=1

#

"

Z

∞

τD

#

πs$
ds st = i .
πτ$D

Since consumption is Markovian, so is the state-price density, which implies that
"

πτ$D

Et Pr ( sτD = j| st = i)

Z

πt$

"

= Et Pr ( sτD = j| st = i)

∞

τD

πs$
ds st = i
πτ$D
#

πτ$D

"Z

∞

st = i Et

πt$

τD

#

#

πs$
ds sτD = j .
πτ$D

Therefore
"Z

Et
t

τD

#

πs$
ds st = i
πt$

"Z

∞

= Et
t

−

N
X

#

πs$
ds st = i
πt$
"

Et Pr ( ντD = j| νt = i)

j=1

(OA.100)
πτ$D
πt$

#

"Z

∞

νt = i Et
τD

#

πs$
ds sτD = j .
πτ$D

Conditional on being in state i, the value of a claim which pays one risk-free unit of consumption in


perpetuity is Et

R∞
t

πs$
ds
πt$



$
, is given by (OA.98).
st = i , so the discount rate for this perpetuity, rP,i

Consequently, (OA.100) implies

"Z

Et
t

τD

#

N
X

πs$
1
ds st = i = $ −
$
πt
rP,i j=1

Et Pr ( st = i| sτD = j)
$
rP,j

OA-24

πτ$

D
πt$



st = i
.

(OA.101)

To obtain (OA.97) from the above expression, we note that
"
$
qD,ij,t

= Et Pr ( sτD = j| sτt = i)

#

πτ$D

st = i, .

πt$

(OA.102)

To prove (OA.99), we condition on the event {sτD = j} to obtain
"

αEt

πτ$D

#

A$τD
πt$

(XτD ) st = i = α

N
X

"

A$j (XD,j ) Et

j=1

#

πτ$
XτD
Pr ( sτD = sj | st = i) $D st = i .
XD,j
πt

Using (OA.102) to simplify the above expression we obtain (33).

OA.I

Equity risk premium and equity volatility

$
Applying Ito’s Lemma to Si,t
gives
$
dSi,t
+ (Xt − c)dt
$
Si,t

=

$
$
$
Si,t
∂Si,t
dXt 1 Xt2 ∂ 2 Si,t
+
Xt ∂Xt Xt
2 Si,t ∂Xt2



dXt
Xt

2

+

N S$ − S$
X
j,t
i,t
$
Si,t

j6=i

dNij,t +

(Xt − c)dt
, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.
$
Si,t
(OA.103)

Observe that
$

N
X
∂ q̃D,ij,t
∂Si,t
1
∂qD,ij,t c
A$j (XD,j )
= (1 − η) $ −
− (1 − η)
$
∂Xt
∂X
∂Xt rP,j
rA,i j=1
t
$
N
X
∂ 2 q̃D,ij,t
∂ 2 Si,t
∂ 2 qD,ij,t c
$
=
−
A
(X
)
−
(1
−
η)
D,j
j
$
∂Xt2
∂Xt2
∂Xt2 rP,j
j=1

!

(OA.104)

!

, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.

(OA.105)

Define the date-t conditional nominal expected return
dSs$t− ,t + (Xt − c)dt
1
= Et
st− = i , i ∈ {1, . . . , N },
dt
Ss$t− ,t
"

µ$R,i,t

#

(OA.106)

and the date-t conditional real expected return
"

µR,i,t

#

dSst− ,t + (Yt − c/Pt )dt
1
= Et
st− = i , i ∈ {1, . . . , N }.
dt
Sst− ,t

(OA.107)

Observe that µR,i,t depends on both real and nominal states, because of sticky leverage and sticky
cash flows.

OA-25

The basic asset pricing equation is
$
1
dπt$ dSst− ,t
st− = i , i ∈ {1, . . . , N }.
= − Et
dt
πt$ Ss$t− ,t

#

"

µ$R,i,t

−

$
ri,t

(OA.108)

Hence
$
µ$R,i,t − ri,t
=

X

Sj$ − Si$

j6=i

Si$

(1 − ωij )

λij , i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.

(OA.109)

Observe that because
µ$R,i,t = µR,i,t + µP,i , i ∈ {1, . . . , N },

(OA.110)

$
ri,t
= ri,t + µP,i , i ∈ {1, . . . , N },

(OA.111)

$
µR,i,t − ri,t = µ$R,i,t − ri,t
, i ∈ {1, . . . , N }.

(OA.112)

and

we have

The unexpected stock return in state i is given by
X

P
P
σR,ij
dNij,t
, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N },

(OA.113)

Sj
− 1, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.
Si

(OA.114)

j6=i

where
P
σR,ij
=

Now the risk premium in state i is
µR,i − ri =

X

P
(ωij − 1)σR,ij
λij , i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.

(OA.115)

j6=i

First, note that if log S = log f (X) and x ≡ log X, then
∂ log S
∂f (ex )
1
X
=
=
f 0 (ex )ex = f 0 (X).
x
∂ log X
∂x
f (e )
S

OA-26

(OA.116)

Second, recall that
$
Si,t
= A$i (Xt ) − (1 − η)vB,i c −

N 
X



$
$
A$j (XD,j )q̃D,ij,t
(Xt ) − (1 − η)qD,ij,t
(Xt )vB,i c

(OA.117)

j=1

= (1 − η)Xt vA,i − (1 − η)vB,i c −

N 
X



$
$
A$j (XD,j )q̃D,ij,t
(Xt ) − (1 − η)qD,ij,t
(Xt )vB,i c , (OA.118)

j=1
$
where we made explicit that the Arrow-Debreu prices, qD,·,ij,t
, depend on the current value of Xt .

Hence,


$

$

!

N
∂ q̃D,ij,t
∂qD,ij,t
∂ log Si,t
Xt  A$i (Xt ) X
=
−
A$j (XD,j )
− (1 − η)
vB,i c  .
∂ log Xt
Si,t
Xt
∂Xt
∂Xt
j=1

OA-27

(OA.119)

