                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ELITE SCHOOLS AND OPTING IN:
    EFFECTS OF COLLEGE SELECTIVITY ON CAREER AND FAMILY OUTCOMES

                                              Suqin Ge
                                             Elliott Isaac
                                            Amalia Miller

                                        Working Paper 25315
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25315


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2018




We are grateful to Lisa Bonifacic at the Mellon Foundation for assistance in accessing the College
and Beyond and College Board data and to Joshua Angrist, Jonathan Colmer, Stacy Dale, Leora Friedberg,
Sarah Turner, John Pencavel and various seminar and conference participants for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Suqin Ge, Elliott Isaac, and Amalia Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Elite Schools and Opting In: Effects of College Selectivity on Career and Family Outcomes
Suqin Ge, Elliott Isaac, and Amalia Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 25315
November 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. I23,I26,J12,J16,J22,J23

                                             ABSTRACT

Using College and Beyond data and a variant on Dale and Krueger’s (2002) matched-applicant approach,
this paper revisits the question of how attending an elite college affects later-life outcomes. We expand
the scope along two dimensions: we examine new outcomes related to labor force participation, human
capital, and family formation and we do not restrict the sample to full-time full-year workers. For men,
our findings echo those in Dale and Krueger (2002): controlling for selection eliminates the positive
relationship between college selectivity and earnings. We also find no significant effects on men’s
educational or family outcomes. The results are quite different for women: we find effects on both
career and family outcomes. Attending a school with a 100-point higher average SAT score increases
women’s probability of advanced degree attainment by 5 percentage points and earnings by 14 percent,
while reducing their likelihood of marriage by 4 percentage points. The effect of college selectivity
on own earnings is significantly larger for married than for single women. Among married women,
selective college attendance significantly increases spousal education.


Suqin Ge                                            Amalia Miller
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Virginia Tech                                       University of Virginia
3036 Pamplin Hall                                   P. O. Box 400182
Blacksburg, VA 24061                                Charlottesville, VA 22904
ges@vt.edu                                          and NBER
                                                    armiller@virginia.edu
Elliott Isaac
Tulane University
Department of Economics
Tilton Memorial Hall, Room 203
6823 Saint Charles Avenue
New Orleans, LA 70118
eisaac@tulane.edu
1     Introduction

Although attending an elite college is strongly associated with higher earnings, Dale and Krueger (2002, henceforth

DK) demonstrates that this association is eliminated after controlling for the non-random selection of individuals

into such colleges. Using data from the Mellon Foundation’s College and Beyond survey, which is unique in its

broad coverage of students at highly-selective and selective US institutions of higher education, DK finds no effect of

college selectivity on later-life earnings in models that account for students’ high school characteristics and college

applications and acceptances. Yet competition for admission to the nation’s elite universities remains intense, and

several schools now boast acceptance rates in the single digits. The perceived importance to students of attending

particular selective schools is also reflected in the 2019 college admissions scandal and the 2018 lawsuit brought

by Students for Fair Admissions against Harvard University, as well as the various Supreme Court cases involving

affirmative action in college admissions: Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978), Gratz v. Bollinger

(2003), Grutter v. Bollinger (2003), and the two Fisher v. University of Texas cases (2013, 2016).1

    There are several ways to reconcile the high value that students (and their parents) place on attending an elite

school with the negligible labor market effects in DK. One is that people may persist in the belief that the labor market

benefits are sizable. They may be mistaken: unaware of the DK study and incorrectly drawing inference from the raw

correlations. Or they may hesitate to rely on the DK results because of limitations inherent in the methodology or

because of evidence from less selective institutions in the US that tends to show significant career benefits to attending

a higher quality college for marginal students. Or they may accept the DK results overall, but focus on the benefits

found for subpopulations such as minority and economically disadvantaged students (DK, Dale and Krueger 2014). A

second path to reconciliation is possible if the benefits to students from attending an elite college are not concentrated in

the labor market, but in the marriage market instead. Economists have measured marriage market returns to schooling

and the impact of college attendance on marital outcomes, but the focus has been on quantity (years of schooling)

rather than quality (e.g., Chiappori, Iyigun, and Weiss 2009; Ge 2011; Attanasio and Kaufmann 2017; Chiappori,

Salanié, and Weiss 2017; Chiappori, Dias, and Meghir 2018).2 Because the value of increased schooling could easily

extend to the quality margin, it is possible that attending an elite US college affects family outcomes, even without any

career benefits. A third possibility is that the prestige associated with elite schooling can induce parents or children

to value it as a status indicator that is difficult (and expensive) to obtain. In that case, demand for admissions may be

high even for students who are unlikely to experience any improvements in their career or family prospects.

    Motivated by this ambiguity, we re-examine the impact of attending an elite college by drawing on the same

remarkable College and Beyond data source and matched-applicant identification approach developed in DK and then
  1. Extensive coverage of the scandal can be found, e.g., at <www.nytimes.com/news-event/college-admissions-scandal>.
  2. The related literature on assortative mating by education has similarly focused on quantity rather than quality (e.g., Mare 1991; Pencavel
1998).




                                                                      1
significantly expanding the scope of inquiry.3 Our primary contribution is the examination of novel outcomes related

to labor force participation, education, and family formation. To study these outcomes, we naturally remove the

restriction limiting the DK sample to full-time full-year workers. This increases the sample size for our matched-

applicant model by 41.9% overall and our sample of women by 88.7% (going from Column 3 to Column 1 in Table

4). This enables us to estimate heterogenous effects by gender. Because our analysis is based on an enlarged sample

that includes part-time workers and non-workers, we begin by first re-estimating the effects of elite college attendance

on log-earnings. We find statistically significant returns to college selectivity for women but not for men.4

    For our novel outcomes, we find a positive effect of school selectivity on women’s labor force participation, though

not on the full-time full-year margin, as well as positive effects on their educational attainment, and a negative effect

on their marriage rates.5 School selectivity also affects matching within the marriage market, conditional on marriage,

as it increases women’s likelihood of having a more educated spouse. Because we also find an increase in women’s

own schooling, it is possible that part of the marriage market effect is from additional years of schooling, which has

been previously shown to affect marriage rates and spousal quality (Lefgren and McIntyre 2006; Ge 2011; Lafortune

2013; Bruze 2015).6 We find no significant effects on any of these novel outcomes for men.

    We empirically explore the interplay between family and career outcomes for women and find patterns in the data

suggestive of two mechanisms by which family formation contributes to the overall earnings effect. First, the lower

rates of family formation for women who attend more selective schools are directly associated with higher earnings

levels. Second, conditional on starting a family, having attended a selective school appears to mitigate the career

penalty from family formation; elite schooling increases earnings more for married than for unmarried women.

    In addition to these new results, we also provide new evidence in support of the DK identification approach on

our expanded sample. The idea behind the identification approach – that students’ application choices and colleges’

acceptance and rejection decisions absorb the major omitted variables that could relate college selectivity to later-life

outcomes – is reasonable. Variations on it have been applied elsewhere (e.g., Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Hotz 2016)

and it was highlighted in a popular econometrics textbook (Angrist and Pischke 2014). Angrist and Pischke (2017)

presents the paper as an illustration of the modern econometric paradigm, arguing that, although conditioning on

student observable characteristics, as well as information about college applications and acceptances, “does not turn
   3. In DK, the main “matched applicant” model matches and compares individuals to others in their cohort who applied to, were accepted at, and
were rejected from similar colleges, but who attended colleges that were more or less selective. DK also reports estimates from a “self-revelation”
model that controls for applications but not for offers of admission. Dale and Krueger (2014) confirms the main findings from the self-revelation
model using linked administrative data on career earnings from the Social Security Administration. For robustness, we also report estimates from
“self-revelation” models in this paper.
   4. Autor et al. (2016) also find gender differences in the returns to school quality in K12 education. Footnote 12 of DK describes their female
sample of full-time full-year workers as being “too small to draw precise estimates from.”
   5. In this paper, “marriage” includes both legal marriage as well as “marriage-like relationships,” such as same-sex cohabiting couples who were
unable to marry legally in the US during the sample period. The survey questions do not distinguish between these two types of relationships and
refer to partner or spouse rather than husband or wife.
   6. Lafortune (2013) and Ge (2011) also consider the natural implication of these effects in analyzing how marriage market conditions and
expectations, respectively, affect educational investment.




                                                                        2
college attendance into a randomized trial, it provides a compelling source of control for the major forces confounding

causal inference” (Angrist and Pischke 2017, p. 131).

   Nevertheless, because the variation is not based on experimental assignment, but is instead based on the decisions

of human actors, it is conceivable that college selectivity, conditional on applications and acceptances, is still related

to unobserved factors that affect later-life outcomes. In particular, it has been argued that students who attend less

selective colleges within their choice set are making an “odd choice” (Hoxby 2009, p. 115), which suggests they differ

along other unmeasured dimensions as well. We explore this concern empirically in our data in Section 4.2 and find

some reassurance: about 30% of students in our matched applicant sample elected to attend a university that is less

selective than the most selective school at which they were admitted.

   DK discusses these concerns as well and presents evidence that any bias coming from non-random college choice

in the matching models is likely to cause an overstatement of the value of college selectivity and would therefore

leave the conclusions of the analysis unchanged. However, our main results differ from those in DK in that we find

positive effects for women, and particularly for those who are less strongly attached to the labor force. This context

raises new concerns about omitted variables related to career ambition and family goals that may be related to both

college choice and to later outcomes. For example, young women’s rising expectations of future employment have

likely contributed to their increasing rates of college attendance (Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko 2006). We find some

initial reassurance from the evidence in Section 4.2 that shows similar selection into college selectivity, conditional

on acceptances, between men and women and also between women with different eventual levels of labor force

participation. We find further reassurance in Section 5.2, where we consider maternal employment as a proxy for

female career orientation. We show that, while maternal employment is strongly related to female earnings, it is not

predictive of college selectivity itself for women in our sample. As a result, controlling for maternal employment

leaves our main estimates unchanged. For men, maternal employment is related to neither earnings nor school choice.

Though not definitive, these results provide support for the value of applying the DK approach on our extended sample.

   Because our sample is limited to individuals who attended selective and highly-selective US schools, with school-

average SAT scores in 1978 ranging from 1020 to 1370, it provides a rare view of a subpopulation of particular

interest that is hard to capture using other sources (Goldin 2006). The results in this paper may therefore not translate

to the general population of college students in 1976. This may be particularly true for the women in our sample and

the novel outcomes we consider. Female graduates of elite private universities in the US have lower average labor

force participation than those from other institutions (Hersch 2013) and there are strong negative associations between

family formation and subsequent labor supply and earnings for those women (Goldin 2006; Goldin and Katz 2008;

Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz 2010; Herr and Wolfram 2012; Hersch 2013). These patterns indicate a lower baseline

level of labor force attachment in the group of women on the margin of attending elite schools, possibly because of

greater parental or spousal resources. This implies that the women in our sample have more capacity than average to


                                                            3
increase their labor supply, particularly after family formation.

    By extending the scope of analysis of how elite US colleges affect later-life outcomes for high-achieving students,

we contribute to the broader economics literature on the impact of college quality on later-life outcomes. That liter-

ature generally studies less selective colleges and lower-achieving students and tends to find positive earnings effects

employing a variety of estimation approaches, including OLS, matching and quasi-experiments (e.g., Loury and Gar-

man 1995; Brewer, Eide, and Ehrenberg 1999; Chevalier and Conlon 2003; Black and Smith 2004, 2006; Long 2008,

2010; Andrews, Li, and Lovenheim 2016; Walker and Zhu 2018).7 In particular, several recent studies have employed

regression discontinuity (RD) designs to compare outcomes for students who were narrowly accepted at, or rejected

from, more selective institutions or degree programs. These include Hoekstra (2009), Hastings, Neilson, and Zimmer-

man (2013), S. Zimmerman (2014), Kirkeboen, Leuven, and Mogstad (2016), Goodman, Hurwitz, and Smith (2017),

S. Zimmerman (2019), Jia and Li (2019), and Sekhri (forthcoming). Cohodes and Goodman (2014) exploits an RD in

financial aid eligibility and Canaan and Mouganie (2018) does the same for passing a high school exit examination.

    The RD studies of US colleges are limited to public schools and typically focus on a single state (e.g., Florida,

Georgia, Massachusetts; Hoekstra 2009; S. Zimmerman 2014; Cohodes and Goodman 2014; Goodman, Hurwitz,

and Smith 2017). These schools are generally less selective than the schools in our sample because the RD approach

exploits the use of admissions thresholds based on applicant GPA or test scores. Elite US schools instead use “holistic”

assessment, which is “the consideration of many student characteristics, including ones that can only be measured

very subjectively, in a fashion that cannot be readily summarized by a formula” (Hoxby 2009, p. 115). In addition

to focusing on less selective institutions, the RD studies estimate a local average treatment effect on students who

are marginally accepted to the more selective program, and therefore focus on the lowest-ability students at the more

selective schools. By contrast, individuals in our sample had average SAT scores of 1144 in 1976 and over 40% of

them were ranked in the top 10% of their high school classes.

    Although much of the literature following DK is focused on wage effects, and limits the analysis to male workers

(e.g., Black and Smith 2006; Hoekstra 2009) or full-time workers (e.g., Long 2008; Dale and Krueger 2014), a few

studies of college quality have used broader samples to study educational attainment (Goodman, Hurwitz, and Smith

2017) or family outcomes, such as marriage and fertility (Long 2010; Clark and Del Bono 2016) and spousal quality

(Kaufmann, Messner, and Solis 2013). Our focus is on higher education, but our results closely relate to the literature

on school quality that is concerned with effects in K12 education (e.g., Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt 2006; Jackson 2010;

Hanushek and Woessmann 2012; Pop-Eleches and Urquiola 2013; Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak 2014; Deming

et al. 2014; Clark and Del Bono 2016). Our findings also relate to the literature on the effects of education quantity,

which tends to find significant benefits to additional years of schooling (Mincer 1974; Angrist and Krueger 1991;
   7. Chetty et al. (2017)’s comprehensive analysis of inter-generational income mobility for students at different colleges includes the most selective
institutions, but the paper is explicitly not aiming to estimate the treatment effect of different colleges on students, net of endogenous selection.




                                                                           4
Card 1993, 1999; Ashenfelter and Krueger 1994; Kane and Rouse 1995; Duflo 2001; Oreopoulos 2006; Heckman,

Humphries, and Veramendi 2018) and college graduation (for a recent review, see Barrow and Malamud 2015).

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines our theoretical framework, Section 3 details

our empirical strategy, and Section 4 discusses the data. Section 5 presents our results. Section 6 concludes.



2    Theoretical Effects of College Selectivity

Before turning to estimation, it is useful to outline the ways in which attending a more selective college can affect

a person’s post-collegiate career and family prospects. This section presents four channels for the effects and then

discusses how interactions between career and family can complicate the analysis.

    The first channel is that a person attending a more selective college may accrue more human capital there than

they would have accrued at a less selective institution. The pace of learning may be faster, leading to more skill

accumulation by graduation. This could be because selectivity is predictive of instructional quality, because classes

at more selective schools are aimed at more academically capable students, and therefore cover more challenging

material, or because students in selective schools have access to more stimulating extra-curricular activities and to more

accomplished and renowned faculty members. These advantages can improve labor market outcomes immediately

upon graduation, and they may also improve graduate school admissions prospects, leading to additional human capital

accumulation through more years of schooling. Second, regardless of what students learn in college, the fact of

having attended a more selective school is a signal that conveys favorable information to potential employers and

spouses (Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo 2010; Lang and Siniver 2011; MacLeod and Urquiola 2015; MacLeod et

al. 2017). Third, the type of college a young person attends can shape his or her ambitions and expectations about

the future. Fourth, attending a more selective college places a student in a social and professional network that is,

on average, drawn from peers with higher test scores than those at less selective schools. These higher-ability peers

may also contribute to the first three channels: improving educational outcomes for other students (Sacerdote 2001;

D. Zimmerman 2003), raising the signal value attached to attending a particular school, and establishing higher norms

and expectations for academic and career achievement.

    If students do in fact acquire more human capital in more selective colleges, that should increase their productivity

in the labor market, which should lead to higher wage offers. The lack of any earnings benefit from attending a

more selective college on full-time workers in DK suggests a limited role for positive peer effects in human capital

formation, but leaves open the possibility of beneficial effects elsewhere. Attending a more selective college could

increase individuals’ productivity in household production (such as child-rearing or household management), which

would improve the quality of their marriage offers. The signaling effect operates similarly. If the signal is positive, it

will lead to better offers, and to worse offers if negative. The difference between the first and second effects is that the


                                                             5
first relates to the changes in the individual students themselves, while the second is about others’ expectations and

beliefs about them.

    The social network effect of having higher-achieving peers is perhaps more ambiguous. Conditional on actual

human capital and school prestige, having better peers translates into lower access costs to an improved professional

network and marriage pool. The higher quality of this pool is evident, for example, in the strong positive correlation

between school selectivity and wages, without controlling for selection. This access would tend to improve the distri-

butions of offers of both types. But having a better peer group also means that the set of closest competitors in those

social and professional markets is also of a higher caliber. This less favorable relative comparison could eliminate

the benefit of greater access to the stronger pool. Membership in the more elite group could also increase the cost

of accessing weaker pools. It is therefore possible for the network aspect on its own to have a negative effect on the

distributions of offers, particularly for lower-ability students who are marginally accepted at more selective schools.8

    After considering the separate effects on marital and career outcomes, it is important to emphasize the potential

interactions between the two. Higher male wages are generally thought to improve their marriage prospects, but the

effect is less clear for women. A woman who finds work that is remunerative and more personally satisfying may want

to maintain her participation in the labor market after marriage. This increases the household’s budget and some of that

can be transferred to the spouse. Offsetting this improvement is the fact that the woman who is attached to her career

may be less willing to specialize in domestic production within marriage and to sacrifice her own career progression

to help her partner advance.9 Men and women might also want to conform to traditional gender norms within their

relationships in which the dominant earner (or at least majority earner, Bertrand, Kamenica, and Pan 2015) is male.

For whatever reason, high career ambition may be perceived as an unattractive trait in a potential wife (Bursztyn,

Fujiwara, and Pallais 2017). Preference estimates from an online dating platform indicate that, while men and women

both value income positively, women place twice as much weight on it than men do (Hitsch, Hortaçsu, and Ariely

2010).

    Finally, in addition to shifting the distribution of wage and marriage offers, college selectivity can also affect the

thresholds that individuals apply in accepting or rejecting such offers. This can play out through interactions between

the two markets, where a better offer distribution in one market raises the threshold for accepting an offer in the

other one. For example, a woman who anticipates substantially higher wage offers will have a higher utility outside

a marriage and may subsequently set a higher threshold for utility that she requires within marriage to accept an

offer. Conversely, a woman who gains access to more unearned (spousal) income through marriage may set a higher

wage threshold to accept a job offer. Moving these participation thresholds can shift average outcomes among market
   8. Some of these marginal students may be “overmatched” and derive far less educational value than the average matriculant does from attending
a high quality institution (Dillon and Smith 2017, 2018).
   9. For example, they may be less willing to act as a “trailing” spouse who relocates for her spouse’s new job or who passes up job opportunities
to stay near her partner’s work (Burke and Miller 2018).




                                                                        6
participants (workers or married people), even if the offer distributions are unchanged.



3    Empirical Strategy

Our empirical analysis is based on the “matched applicant” model developed in DK. The model applies a “selection

on observables” approach to address the non-random assignment of individuals to colleges.

    Formally, we model outcomes after college using the DK notation:


                                         Yi = β0 + β1 SAT j + β2 X1i + β3 X2i + εi ,
                                                                       | {z }
                                                                            ui


where Yi is the outcome of interest for individual i, who attended school j, which has an average SAT score of

SAT j . SAT j is our explanatory variable of interest; it is meant to capture school selectivity. We include observable

characteristics of the individual in the vector X1i , but we are not able to observe everything that affects outcomes. In

particular, we model the error term ui as a sum of two components that are not observed in the data: X2i , which is

information known to the student and to the admissions officers at colleges at the time of college applications and εi ,

which is a random shock that is uncorrelated with SAT j , X1i , and X2i .

    The variables included in X2i include personal traits such as ambition, confidence and drive, as well as other skills,

talents and life experiences that are not reflected in test scores and grades. The problem with estimating the model

without data on the variables in X2i is that those variables are likely to be correlated with college applications as well as

admissions decisions. They may therefore plausibly be correlated with school characteristics such as selectivity, which

would bias the estimate of β1 . If, for example, the unmeasured factors that predict higher earnings are also positively

correlated with admission to an elite university, then we should expect the estimated effect of school selectivity to

be biased upward. A similar logic applies to our other outcomes of interest, but the direction of the bias is less

clear. If women who are more career-oriented are more likely to attend selective schools, then the estimated effects

of selectivity in the model above that does not account for selection would be biased upward for labor supply and

earnings, but could be biased downward for marriage and children. Because students can anticipate these admission

decisions when they decide where to submit their applications, information about their ability (and perceived chances

of admission) as well as (unconstrained) preferences will be incorporated into their application choices.

    The innovation in DK is to match students who applied to, were accepted to, and were rejected from similar

colleges. The regression model can then account for variation in elements of X2i that drive selection concerns by using

a set of indicator variables representing each of the groups of students. This approach does not explicitly model the

application and admission decisions; nor does it attempt to identify or parameterize effects of the different components

of X2i . Instead, it accounts for the application and admissions decisions in a highly flexible way that uses information


                                                             7
about the selectivity level of each of the colleges that students applied to and were accepted at or rejected from. The

critical assumption is therefore that, conditional on applications and acceptances, students’ enrollment decisions are

uncorrelated with X2i or εi .

    This assumption will be violated if the choice to attend a more or less selective school, within the set of admission

offers, is correlated with unmeasured student characteristics that themselves are predictive of our outcomes of interest.

We control for parental income, but are not able to directly account for differences in financial aid offers. These issues

are discussed at length in DK, who argue that the bias from omitted variables related to college choice is more likely

to cause them to overstate than to understate the impact of college selectivity on earnings and would therefore leave

the conclusions of their analysis unchanged.

    While this may be true for their sample, it is worthwhile to reconsider the issue of bias in light of the expanded

scope of the present analysis. This is particularly important because we include in our sample individuals who are

less strongly attached to the labor market, and because we are interested in labor force participation as well as family-

related outcomes. These considerations present another dimension of potential bias that was less relevant for the

DK analysis. Specifically, women who attend less selective schools from within their choice set may do so because

they expect academic and labor market outcomes to be less important to them later in life, possibly because they

value family formation and investments more. Clearly, controlling for SAT scores and class rank, as well as college

applications and admissions, goes some distance in addressing that concern. In Section 5.2, we test for remaining

bias by using information on maternal employment when the individual was in high school as an observable proxy for

career orientation.

    In addition to the matching model, DK also presents estimates from a related “self-revelation” model that relies

on the notion that students have a good understanding of their own ability levels, which they reveal through their

college application destinations. For example, it is possible that students with higher academic ability (conditional

on SAT scores and high school GPA, which we can observe in our data) apply to colleges with higher average SAT

scores. This can be addressed in the regression model by controlling for the average SAT score of the colleges to

which the student applied. One limitation of this approach relative to the matching model is that it ignores information

coming from colleges about acceptances and rejections. These decisions clearly affect which schools students attend,

and they may be correlated with later-life outcomes, even after conditioning on application decisions. The second

major difference between the two models is that information about applications is accounted for more flexibly in the

matched-applicant model with fixed effects for groups of students whose applications were all to similar schools; this

incorporates information about the full distribution of reported applications, rather than just the mean across schools.

We therefore focus on the matching model in this paper, but we also report estimates from variations on the self-

revelation model on the sample of matched-applicants.10
 10. It is possible to estimate the self-revelation model on a larger sample that includes unmatched applicants, but we prefer to maintain the sample



                                                                         8
4      College and Beyond Data

Our main data source is the College and Beyond survey, which has been previously described and analyzed in DK, as

well as Bowen and Bok (1998), Goldin (2006), Small and Winship (2007), and Groen and White (2004). The dataset

combines rich self-reported survey information on students who attended one of 34 US colleges and universities in

1951, 1976, and 1989 with administrative student records from those schools and supplemental information from

the Higher Education Research Institute and the College Entrance Examination Board. The included schools are

all selective or highly-selective institutions that award bachelor’s degrees, with school-average SAT scores in 1978

ranging from 1020 to 1370.11 The institutional administrative data includes SAT scores and GPA and was collected

for every matriculant at the 30 private colleges and a subsample of the entering cohorts at the four public universities.12

Data from the College Entrance Examination Board include information from the Student Descriptive Questionnaire,

such as high school class rank and parental income, and supplementary data on parental occupation and parental

education are obtained from a questionnaire of college freshmen administered by the Higher Education Research

Institute and the Cooperative Institutional Research Program.


4.1     Sample Restrictions

Because we are interested in middle-career outcomes, we focus on the 1976 college entering cohort, who were in their

late 30s in 1996–1997 at the time of their survey. Members of the 1951 cohort were in their mid-60s and 1989 cohort

members were only in their mid-20s when surveyed. In historical context, the women of this cohort are at the forefront

of the fifth cohort of twentieth century American female college graduates described in Goldin (2004); this cohort was

the first to aspire to achieving “career and family” at the same time. Following DK, we exclude individuals who

attended four historically black colleges and universities, individuals with missing college application information,

and individuals with missing income information.13 These restrictions leave us with 9,917 women and 9,738 men in

what we call our full sample.

      The College and Beyond survey collected data on, among other things, annual earnings in 1995, occupation,

demographics, education, some spousal characteristics, and satisfaction measures. Respondent and household earnings

are reported in ten intervals.14 Following DK, we assign log earnings for respondents and households equal to the log
definition for better comparability of results and greater similarity in the college application and admissions profiles of individuals in the sample.
The matched and unmatched applicants do not appear to differ substantially, but unmatched applicants are more likely to have submitted only a
single college application and to attend a public university.
  11. The two schools with the lowest school average SAT in the sample are Dennison University (1020) and Pennsylvania State University (1038).
The full list of schools is presented in Appendix Table 1 in DK.
  12. At public universities, data were collected for all minority students, all varsity letter winners, all students with a combined SAT score of 1350
or higher, and a random sample of other students. We follow the literature and account for the non-random sampling procedure by using weights in
our descriptive statistics and regression models.
  13. Missing income information is rare (about 2%) in the data, but we nevertheless confirmed that it was not related to school selectivity in the
matched applicant models estimated on male, female or combined samples that were expanded to include people with missing income.
  14. They are: less than $1,000; $1,000–$9,999; $10,000–$19,999; $20,000–$29,999; $30,000–$49,999; $50,000–$74,999; $75,000–$99,999;
$100,000–$149,999; $150,000–$199,999; and more than $200,000.



                                                                          9
of the relevant interval midpoint and use the 1990 Census to calculate average log earnings for 36–38 year old college

graduates who earn more than $200,000 for earnings in the highest category.15

    This process means that respondents and households cannot have $0 in earnings, and we therefore consider indi-

viduals with earnings above $1,000 (i.e., in the second earnings interval or higher) to be labor force participants. We

define spousal earnings as the difference between household earnings and respondent earnings, meaning that spousal

earnings can equal $0.

    The survey also collected information on other schools that individuals applied to, along with self-reported accep-

tances or rejections from those schools. Following DK, we use this information, together with data on school average

SAT scores, to match students with others who applied to, were accepted at, and were rejected from similar schools.

Because matching based on the exact set of schools is too demanding of the data, in practice, we treat schools as com-

parable if their average SAT score is in the same fixed 25 point interval.16 Table A1 in our Appendix is reproduced

from DK to illustrate the matching process for a hypothetical group of students. Students who apply to only one school

or whose school set does not coincide with others’ school sets are excluded from the matched sample.

    Our matching procedure diverges from the one in DK along one key dimension: we impose the additional restric-

tion that individuals must be matched to others of their same gender. This additional restriction does not alter our

results, as we demonstrate below, but it is necessary for the analyses that follow in which we estimate our models sep-

arately on male and female students. Although this restriction reduces the sample size for estimation, it also increases

the similarity within groups of matched applicants. Our matched sample includes 40.8% of individuals from the full

sample (40.8% of women and 40.7% of men).

    Our second major shift from DK is that we remove the requirement of working full-time and full-year at the time

of the survey. Our reasons for removing the restriction are that: (1) we examine novel outcomes other than earnings,

such as education, marriage, and spousal characteristics, for which there is no clear reason to restrict the sample based

on labor force participation, (2) we study males and females separately, and (3) we estimate earnings models that

include effects driven by changes in labor force participation and work hours. In Table 1, we report summary statistics

for our estimation sample of matched applicants, along with the respective values for the same variables published

in DK for their sample of full-time full-year workers for comparison. It is perhaps not surprising that our sample is

more female (50.8% compared to 38.5%), and has lower reported log-earnings (10.5 versus 11.1) than the DK sample;

it also has slightly lower SAT scores and fewer college applications. Like DK’s, our sample is primarily white and

non-Hispanic.17 Within our sample, women had, on average, lower earnings and labor force participation in their late
  15. In an unreported robustness check, we confirmed that our earnings estimates are unchanged if we account for top coding in the 1990 Census
differently. As DK note, income data from the 1990 Census are top coded, meaning that our assigned highest earnings value may still be too low.
We therefore multiplied the top coded components of income in the CPS by 1.5 and re-calculated the average value for our highest bin using college
graduates who earn more than $200,000. We then re-estimated our log earnings models using this alternative variable and found the same results,
suggesting little influence of the Census top coding process on our main findings.
  16. Results are similar if we use Barron’s College Selectivity groups to form matched-applicant groups instead.
  17. Our main estimates are qualitatively unchanged, but larger in magnitude, if we restrict our sample to white non-Hispanic individuals.



                                                                       10
30s. They also had slightly lower SAT scores and were less likely to be college athletes. For completeness, we also

report summary statistics on the full sample in Appendix Table A2.


4.2      College Choice in the Matched Applicant Sample

Having defined the matched applicant sample, we now examine the variation within it regarding college attendance

decisions, conditional on admissions offers, that underlies our estimation approach.

      We first examine the frequency with which individuals decide to attend a less selective school over a more selective

option. These choices are a necessary source of variation for our empirical approach. Furthermore, if they occur only

very rarely in the data, such choices could signal something else unusual about the students who make them (Hoxby

2009). That is not what we find: 29.3% of men and women in the sample (27.8% of women and 30.9% of men)

attended a college other than the most selective one to which they were admitted (see Table 2). The similarity in rates

between men and women further indicates that the selection into less selective schools within the matched set is not

being driven by something particular to one gender.

      Furthermore, the share of students who chose to attend a less selective school exceeds the share that was forced to

attend one, by being rejected from the most selective college to which they applied. The share of students rejected from

their most selective school is only 20.2% overall (but significantly higher for men, at 23.9% than for women, at 16.6%,

possibly indicating greater risk taking or confidence on the part of male students). Table 2 provides some indication

of the idiosyncratic nature of college admissions decisions (coming from student-college match specific values) in the

fact that nearly 6% of students were rejected at a school with a lower average SAT score than a school that accepted

them. As a result, the share of students rejected from any school is somewhat larger than the share rejected from their

most selective school.

      The fact that a significant share of the sample includes people who attended a less selective school within their

choice set indicates that, just as students are not being admitted to schools based on test scores alone, they are also

not deciding on schools based on selectivity alone. This is consistent with the framework in Hoxby (2018) that

distinguishes between “vertical” and “horizontal” dimensions of product differentiation among colleges.18 To the

extent that school selectivity is a proxy for quality that is valued favorably by all students, it should be considered a

vertical component, and we should expect that students will opt for more selective schools, when all else is equal. But

all else is rarely equal, and the idiosyncratic horizontal dimensions can offset the vertical differences at times. There

is evidence of this phenomenon in the self-reported preference ordering of colleges from students in our sample. As

shown in Table 2, only 61% of students listed as their top choice the most selective school to which they applied.

      Because the horizontal component is more likely to dominate when the gap in the vertical dimension (the difference
 18. Horizontal dimensions can include, e.g., amenities related to physical facilities and available activities (Jacob, McCall, and Stange 2018;
Hoxby 2018) or to sports culture or success (Pope and Pope 2009).



                                                                      11
in average SAT scores between the two schools being compared) is smaller, we next examine the extent of the drops

in school selectivity that students are choosing and confirm that smaller drops are more frequent. In Figure 1, we plot

histograms for the difference in school average SAT score between the most selective school to which the student was

admitted and the school at which the student enrolled, separately for men and women and overall. To better display

the range of scores among students who drop down in selectivity, we also show figures without the mass point at

0 for students who attend their most selective school. The figures are generally similar for men and women, with

the frequencies tending to decline for larger score differences and few students dropping more than 200 points. The

average SAT score range across schools accepted at is 111.8 points, with a standard deviation of 88 points, for students

in our matched sample. Appendix Figure A1 shows similar figures for women with different levels of labor force

participation later in life, suggesting that the choice to drop down in selectivity is not related to future employment

expectations. Appendix Figure A2 shows the distributions relative to the SAT score at the most selective application,

rather than acceptance.



5     Estimated Effects of College Selectivity

This section presents results from our estimation of the effects of college selectivity on career and family outcomes

at ages 38–39 for men and women in the 1976 college-entering cohort of the College and Beyond survey. We start

with annual earnings and proceed to consider labor force participation and then educational, occupational and family

outcomes. We also explore heterogeneous effects of selectivity based on educational attainment and family status.


5.1     Earnings and Labor Force Participation

The starting point for our analysis of the relationship between school selectivity and log-earnings is the basic regression

model used in DK, which includes controls for the individual characteristics of sex, race, ethnicity, SAT score, high

school class rank, (predicted log of) parental income and an indicator for being an athlete in college. Our explanatory

variable of interest is the average SAT score at the college the individual attended; higher average scores indicate more

selective institutions.19 We report coefficient estimates for this variable in Table 3, with Panel A showing results for

the pooled sample of men and women, Panel B showing women only and Panel C showing men only. The full set of

estimates from each of these samples are in Appendix Tables A3, A4, and A5, respectively.20 As noted previously, all

regressions include weights to adjust for the sampling procedure used for students at the four public universities.
  19. In addition to our main analysis of school selectivity (based on test scores), we also followed DK and separately explored the effects of
colleges’ net tuition cost on our range of outcomes. Like DK, we find a positive log-earnings effects. The 9% estimate for women is not statistically
significant, but the smaller 6% estimate for men is more precisely estimated and statistically significant at the 10% level. The effects of net tuition
on our other outcomes, explored in this section and in Sections 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5 mirror those of school average SAT score more closely: we find
significant increases in women’s advanced degree attainment and spousal education and a significant decrease in their chances of marrying, but no
effects on these outcomes for men.
  20. There is no Female estimate in the matching models because the variable is collinear with the group fixed effects.



                                                                         12
   Estimates from the basic regression model (Column 1) show a significant return to attending a more selective

college across the panels. The coefficients associate 100-point increases in school average SAT scores with 13.4%

higher earnings in the pooled sample, 18.9% higher earnings for women, and 7.8% for men. However, controlling

for selection using only the self-revelation model (Column 2) reduces the coefficients on earnings to 4.7% overall,

8.4% for women and 0.9% for men; the estimate for men is not significantly different from zero. Employing the full

matching model (Column 3) yields estimates of 7.1% overall and 13.9% for women and a statistically insignificant

1.1% increase for men. The smaller point estimates in the self-revelation model appear to be the result of the less

flexible control for applications, rather than the omission of information about acceptances and rejections. This is

shown in the results from an alternative version of the matched-applicant model that groups students based only

on their applications. In that model, the estimated effect of a 100-point increase in school-average SAT score is

associated with a 15% increase in log-earnings (Column 1, Appendix Table A6). The point estimates in this column

from the alternative matching model are larger than those from the main model for each sub-group; this suggests that

applications to selective colleges are more likely to be accepted from students with higher future earnings.

   Our larger estimates for women than for men, together with the divergence between our estimates and those in DK

for full-time full-year workers, suggest that labor force engagement (participation or work hours) is a key part of the

explanation for the increased earnings we observe. We therefore consider two measures of engagement as outcomes

in the next two columns of Table 3.

   First we consider the extensive margin using an indicator equal to one if the individual reports positive earnings.

Because the lowest earnings bin available in the College and Beyond data is up to $1,000, this effectively means

that we apply an income threshold of $1,000 to define labor force participation. On the participation margin, we

find significant effects of selectivity for women, but not for men or in the pooled sample (Column 4). For women,

attending a school with a 100-point higher average SAT score increases the probability of working by 2.3 percentage

points (2.8%). This increase in participation may come from either increased labor supply or labor demand. An

example of the demand effect would be if graduates of elite schools have better access to work options that they find

personally meaningful or that offer more appealing schedules.

   We next consider a more demanding measure of labor market engagement that is an indicator for responding “yes”

to the survey question: “Were you working full-time for pay or profit during all of 1995?” This is the question that

DK use to restrict their sample to full-time full-year workers. We treat it as an outcome variable in Column 5 using

the sample that includes part-time workers as well as non-workers. The point estimates for this outcome are small

(< 0.005) and statistically insignificant across the panels, suggesting that elite college attendance is more important for

shifting women into part-time work from non-employment than for shifting them from part-time to full-time work. The

matched-applicant model estimates indicate that the increase in women’s labor force attachment is coming from the

more weakly attached workers. The self-revelation model estimates for these two labor force participation outcomes


                                                            13
(reported in Columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table A7) are smaller for women; they are both positive (0.014 and 0.012),

but not significantly different from zero. The alternative matching model that flexibly accounts for applications (but

not acceptances) in Appendix Table A6 is closer to the main model, with a 2.5% increase in participation for women

that is significant at the 10% level.

      These estimates suggest that increases in labor force participation contribute to the overall effects on earnings,

but do not rule out further effects on earnings conditional on participation. We examine this in Table 4 by limiting

the sample in Column 2 to individuals with positive earnings and in Column 3 to those working full-time and full-

year. Column 1 repeats the matching model estimates from Column 3 of Table 3 for comparison. For the overall

sample, as well as for female workers, the consistent pattern is that these sample restrictions reduce the magnitude of

the estimated effects of school selectivity on earnings. Although the point estimates remain positive, they are much

smaller (going from 0.139 to 0.006 for women) and not statistically significant on the restricted samples. They may,

however, be biased downward, particularly in Column 2, because of changing sample selection. If marginal women

induced to participate in the labor force by attending a more selective college had lower than average offered wages

for their institution, their participation would lower average earnings for that group.

      Though not definitive proof against an effect on hourly wage rates, these results are certainly consistent with the

finding in DK that school selectivity does not significantly improve earnings for full-time full-year workers, either

male or female. But the comparison to DK is not complete. Although the sample restriction in Column 3 matches

that in DK, the matching method differs in that we restrict matches to people with the same gender. This affects both

the composition of the groups and the total sample size, because individuals who only have opposite-sex matches are

dropped in our scheme. To assess the practical importance of our alternative matching approach, we report an estimate

in Column 4 of Table 4 that uses the DK sample restrictions and matching method on the pooled sample. The point

estimate is essentially unchanged between the two columns that differ only in the matching method: 0.018 (standard

error of 0.028) in Column 3 and 0.018 (standard error of 0.020) in Column 4.

      Taken together, the estimates in Tables 3 and 4 suggest that attending a more selective school has a significant

impact on earnings for women, possibly by inducing them to increase their labor force participation.


5.2      College Choice and Labor Force Attachment

In this section, we consider whether our estimates for female career outcomes in particular may be biased under the DK

matching approach. The concern is that the college choice decision differs fundamentally between male and female

students, because all men plan to participate fully in the labor force as adults but not all women do. Because one of the

major private benefits from college attendance is the improvement in expected earnings, the possibility that women

vary in their expected participation rates (in terms of expected hours or years of work) complicates the calculation for



                                                            14
them. It could be that women who are more career oriented are the ones that value college selectivity more, because

of the perceived investment value, and therefore attend the more selective schools within their choice sets. If those

adolescent expectations also map to work decisions for women in their late-30s, then the estimates from the matching

model for the effects of school selectivity on earnings and labor force participation would both be biased upward for

women, but not for men.

   The main conceptual weakness with this challenge is that it ignores the fact that the matching model (and even

the self-revelation model) is based on comparisons among women who applied to the same schools. If young people

applying to colleges only considered the potential impact on their own earnings as the benefit, then it is unclear why

women who are not planning to work would even consider, and make the investment of applying to, elite schools in

the first place. Rather, it is more likely that there are other benefits associated with school selectivity, even among

women who are less career-oriented. Those could be related to personal growth and development or to marriage

market considerations, which we consider in Section 5.4.

   We nevertheless consider it worthwhile to examine the empirical importance of the concern that women with

greater anticipated labor force participation are the ones who systematically choose more selective schools from among

their offers of admission. We do this by using data on maternal employment during the individual’s senior year of high

school as a proxy for the individual’s own anticipated labor force attachment after college. The results in Table 5

provide some reassurance (full results from the model are in Appendix Table A8). They confirm that, as expected,

maternal employment is a significant predictor of earnings for women (Column 1) but not for men (Column 3). But,

it is not a significant predictor of school selectivity in our matched-applicant model for women (Column 2) or men

(Column 4). As a result, including that variable as an additional control in the earnings model has a minimal impact

on our main coefficient of interest, β1 , which goes from 0.139 (Table 3, Column 3) to 0.135 (Table 5, Column 1) with

no change in significance.

   A second reason for concern about non-random college choice for women in particular is the prominence of single-

sex colleges for women in the sample, attended by 17.2% of the female matched sample. Because the decision to attend

an all-female college may be correlated with social or career preferences and also with school selectivity, we conduct

a robustness check on our log-earnings model that adds an indicator for attending one of the four all-female schools

in the sample. The estimated effect of school-average SAT score is unchanged in magnitude (0.139) and significance

(p < 0.10).

   The results in this section provide a stronger empirical foundation for our application of the matched-applicant

model to study men and women separately and, in the following sections, to examine outcomes related to schooling,

family formation and spousal quality.




                                                           15
5.3      Educational and Occupational Outcomes

Table 6 reports estimated effects of school selectivity on educational attainment, for women (Panel A) and for men

(Panel B). Within the sample of selective and highly selective institutions included in the College and Beyond survey,

we find no significant effects of school quality on the likelihood of earning a bachelor’s degree: the point estimates are

small and negative (Column 1). This result may not apply across the full spectrum of 4-year college quality, where on-

time graduation rates vary from under 10% to over 85% (Hoxby and Turner 2015) and differing norms about on-time

graduation may affect student behavior (Bowen, Chingos, and McPherson 2009). For the students in our sample, the

more meaningful margin appears to be advanced degree attainment. For this outcome, we find sizable and significant

positive effects for women but not for men. A 100-point increase in school average SAT scores increases women’s

probability of earning an advanced degree by 4.8 percentage points (or 9.4%; Column 2). This finding is also present

in the self-revelation model (Appendix Table A7, Column 3) and the alternative matching model (Appendix Table A6;

Column 3).

      In the remaining columns of Table 6, we explore how the estimated effects of school selectivity on earnings are

mediated by changes in educational attainment. We do this by adding variables to our basic matching model: an

indicator for educational attainment (either college or advanced degree) and an interaction term between that indicator

variable and the school-average SAT score. A caveat is in order regarding these additional regressions, which is that

the educational variables are themselves the result of choices made after college enrollment. As such, our identification

of the effects of schooling in these models is much weaker than the matched-applicant model’s identification of the

effect of school selectivity. They should therefore be interpreted cautiously, in the spirit of exploring heterogeneous

effects and not as resulting from a fully-specified model of years of schooling.

      With that caveat in mind, we can consider the estimates. The estimated earnings effects of graduating from college

are negative and statistically insignificant, while the interaction terms between graduation and school selectivity are

positive and insignificant (Column 3). Column 4 similarly shows no significant level effects or interactions from

higher degree attainment, but for women, the signs are reversed from Column 3. Column 5 of the table includes both

education variables and interaction terms in the same model and also finds no effects. The absence of significant

interaction terms means that the effects of selectivity on those with higher and lower levels of educational attainment

are not statistically distinguishable from one another. Nevertheless, the interactions do show varying significance

of selectivity across education groups. For women, the models show that selectivity significantly increases earnings

for women who graduate from college but do not earn an advanced degree (p < 0.05 in Column 3 and p < 0.10 in

Column 5). There are no significant effects of college selectivity on men, irrespective of education, or on female

college dropouts or advanced degree holders.

      Taken together, the results in Table 6 provide only limited support for educational attainment serving as a major



                                                           16
channel for the earnings effects we observe. We do find increases in graduate degree attainment for women, but

the relationship between that greater level of attainment and earnings is not precisely estimated in our data. The

interaction effects suggest, if anything, that earning an advanced degree is a substitute for attending a less prestigious

undergraduate institution.

    Although the higher rates of advanced degree attainment do not directly account for the increased earnings expe-

rienced by women who attend more selective schools, they hint at other differences in the nature of undergraduate

education, possibly related to field of study or occupational training.

    We examine this possibility empirically using our matched applicant model to estimate the effects of college se-

lectivity on undergraduate major field of study and occupational field. The estimates are reported in Table 7, with

each entry reporting the estimated impact of school average SAT score in a separate regression. The first two columns

examine college major choice. We consider three categories of majors that were offered at all of the schools in the

College and Beyond sample – STEM (science, technology, engineering or mathematics), social science, and humani-

ties – as well as undergraduate business majors, which were not offered at all schools, and all other majors. The next

sets of columns examine field of advanced degree study (including those without any degree in the sample), and then

occupational field. These columns include additional categories for legal and health professions. Summary statistics

for these outcome variables are reported in Appendix Table A9.

    The estimates in Table 7 indicate some shifts in field of concentration for both male and female students. For

undergraduate major, both men and women are more likely to major in the social sciences at more selective schools.

Men are less likely to concentrate in STEM fields at the undergraduate or graduate level and men and women are both

about 3.5% less likely to work in STEM occupations. Women are significantly more likely to work in health and legal

occupations and to obtain advanced degrees in the law or humanities. The estimates for men are negative for health

and positive for law, but neither is significant at conventional levels.

    Table 8 considers if these changes in field of study or work can account for the increases in advanced degree

attainment or log-earnings that we find for women. This could happen if careers in health and law were relatively

high-paying alternatives for women. The estimates in Table 7 could also potentially contribute to the lack of an

earnings benefit for men if STEM fields were more lucrative for them than other fields of study or work. Before

estimating models with additional controls for field of study or occupation, we first examined average salaries within

our sample for men and women in different fields in Figure A3. It turns out that STEM fields were not higher-paying

for men, either as an undergraduate major or as an occupation, but law and health were indeed among the highest-

paying occupations for women in our sample. Nevertheless, adding these controls to the models for advanced degree

attainment (columns 1 and 2 of Table 8) or log-earnings (columns 3-6 of the table), leave the main effects of school

selectivity intact.




                                                             17
5.4     Marriage and Children

This section examines two key dimensions of family status: marriage and children. The results are presented in Table

9 using a structure that mirrors that of Table 6.

      We first treat the family status indicators as outcomes in regression models. For marriage (and marriage-like

relationships), we find a striking effect for women: attending a college with a 100-point higher school-average SAT

score reduces the chances of being married in their late 30s by 3.9 percentage points (Column 1). The marriage rate

among women in our sample is 0.742 (Table 1), which means that the estimated effect is equivalent to a 5.3% decrease

in the share married or to a 15.1% increase in the share unmarried. A similar 4.2 percentage point decline (p < 0.01)

is estimated in the self-revelation model (Appendix Table A7, Column 4) while a smaller 3.0 percentage point decline

(p < 0.10) is found in the alternative matching model (Appendix Table A6, Coumn 4). For men, the point estimate

is positive and not statistically significant. The coefficient estimates in Column 2 for having any children point in the

same direction – a lower likelihood of being a mother and a higher one of being a father – but they are not statistically

significant.

      This finding that elite school attendance lowers marriage (and possibly motherhood) rates for women in particular

strongly indicates that family factors are an important part of the story for why earnings increase with school selectivity.

The importance of family factors is also suggested by the fact that the earnings effects are related to variation in labor

force participation and that the impact is only felt for women, who traditionally bear the career costs of marriage and

children (Loughran and Zissimopoulos 2009; Miller 2011; Kleven, Landais, and Søgaard, forthcoming).

      We explore this channel more directly in the next columns of Table 9, by adding indicators for being married

(Columns 3 and 5) and having children (Columns 4 and 5) to the log-earnings model. These coefficients are consis-

tently large, negative and statistically significant, which confirms the general pattern of a negative relationship between

family formation and earnings for women is also present in our sample. That result is useful for supporting the hy-

pothesized mechanism, though the estimates should not be interpreted as identifying the causal effect of marriage or

fertility. This is because those are clearly choices that can be related to labor market expectations and realizations, for

example, if women with better careers decide to forgo marriage and children.

      The last columns of the table also explore heterogeneous effects of school selectivity on log-earnings based on

family status, by including interaction terms between the family status indicator variables and the measure of school

selectivity. Here we find significant interaction terms that show significantly greater earnings benefits from school

selectivity on married women (Columns 3 and 5) and women with children (Column 4). In fact, the estimated effects

of selectivity on earnings of women in the omitted group, who are unmarried (Column 3), childless (Column 4) or both

(Column 5) are either very small (0.009) or negative and not statistically significant. The lack of an effect for single

women can be interpreted as consistent with the results for men, for full-time full-year workers, and in the original



                                                            18
DK paper. By contrast, the effects are all significantly different from zero (p < 0.05) for married women in Column

3 (the sum of the baseline effect and the married interaction term), women with children in Column 4 (baseline effect

and children interaction) and for married women with children in Column 5 (baseline plus married interaction plus

children interaction).

      These results support the importance of changes in family status as a key driver for the earnings gains experienced

by elite college women, but they also likely understate its importance. The reason is that our measures are point-in-

time snapshots of status; as such, they fail to capture timing effects. If women at elite schools are also more likely to

delay marriage and motherhood, for example from their early twenties to their mid-twenties or even to their thirties,

the delay itself could have lasting effects on labor force participation, work hours, and earnings in later years (Miller

2011; Bailey, Hershbein, and Miller 2012; Miller 2013). The higher rate of advanced degree attainment found in

Section 5.3 certainly suggests the possibility of delayed family formation.

      Our finding in this section that attending a more selective school lowers marriage rates for women but not for

men, in addition to contributing to our understanding of the correlates of the earnings effects, is also independently

interesting for showing marriage market responses to college selectivity. As discussed in Section 2, the interpretation

of the effect on marriage rates is complicated by the fact that attending a more selective school can affect the set of

marriage offers available to a woman (a demand for wives effect) or the minimum quality threshold that she sets for

accepting an offer (a supply of wives effect). The decline in total marriages could be consistent with lower demand, for

example, if attending an elite schools makes a woman less appealing to prospective spouses. It could also be consistent

with women’s greater utility outside of marriage lowering supply. We are not able to observe marriage offers or their

acceptances or rejections. Nevertheless, we can use information on realized matches to infer something about whether

supply or demand effects predominate. We do this in the next section where we examine spousal characteristics as our

outcomes of interest.


5.5      Spousal Characteristics

In this section, we focus on married individuals and test whether attending a more selective college affects charac-

teristics of their spouses. We consider three measures related to spousal quality: a human capital measure of having

an advanced degree, a labor force participation measure of having positive earnings, and a composite measure of

log-earnings. We observe information on spousal education directly in the survey. We calculate the latter two mea-

sures using a working definition of spousal earnings as the difference between household earnings and own earnings

reported in the survey. We measure effects separately for women and men.

      The results of our analysis for women are in Columns 1 to 3 of Table 10. A 100-point increase in school-average

SAT scores increases the likelihood that a woman’s spouse has an advanced degree by 8.0 percentage points (or 13.4%



                                                            19
of the sample mean; Column 1), but has no significant effects on their spousal labor market participation (Column 2)

or earnings (Column 3). The significant improvement in spousal education (also present in the self-revelation model

in Column 5, Appendix Table A7, and the alternative matching model in Column 5, Appendix Table A6) and positive

point estimates for the other outcomes indicate an improvement in spousal quality among married women for those

who attend elite colleges. This implies that the declining marriage rate for those women is more likely due to them

setting higher bar for potential spouses rather than to their experiencing a worsening of marriage prospects.

   The point estimate on spousal earnings is 0.043, with a standard error of 0.031, so we are not able to rule out

moderately-sized effects in either direction. If present, changes in spousal earnings could also contribute to the effects

on women’s own earnings and labor force participation that we report in Table 3. In particular, drops in spousal

earnings could increase women’s labor supply because of income effects (if leisure is normal). It is possible that for

some couples, increases in spousal earnings would increase women’s earnings as well, for example, if women were

intentionally suppressing their earnings to avoid surpassing their spouses (Bertrand, Kamenica, and Pan 2015), but this

would apply to very few couples in our sample. Instead, we conclude that the lack of any significant negative effect on

spousal earnings suggests that changes in unearned income within marriage are not the driving force behind married

women’s increased earnings (Table 10).

   Although the earnings impact is only present for women (Table 3), there are at least a couple of reasons to imagine

that men might also experience marriage market benefits from elite college attendance. First, potential spouses might

value elite education as a trait in a husband, for its signal value of earnings potential or because of prestige or other

direct benefits unrelated to earnings. This could apply to potential spouses, irrespective of their own educational

background. Second, the social network effects described in Section 2 could make it more likely that men who attend

elite colleges marry others who do as well. Those individuals have significantly higher earnings than do other college

graduates, on average, and the unconditional difference is what is relevant here; it does not matter to the man if his

spouses’ earnings are higher because of innate ability, ambition, or human capital acquired in college. At the same

time, the fact that women’s earnings and labor force participation are significantly lower than men’s implies that the

marriage market effects on spousal earnings will be more important for women than for men.

   Results for men are reported in the remaining columns of Table 10. We find no support for the hypothesis that elite

college attendance improves spousal quality for men. The point estimates are negative and statistically insignificant. In

sum, our analysis finds no meaningful effects of attending a more selective school on men’s career or family outcomes.

By contrast, we find significant effects on women’s career and family outcomes.




                                                           20
6    Conclusions

Using data from the 1976 college-entering cohort of the College and Beyond survey and an extension of the matched-

applicant model in the influential DK study, we examine the effects of college selectivity on a range of previously

unexplored career and family outcomes. We start with the same log-earnings outcome as DK, using an expanded

sample that includes part-time and partial-year workers as well as non-workers. This increases the sample size suffi-

ciently to be able to estimate separate models for men and women. We find important earnings effects of attending

a more selective school for women, but not for men. We then examine several novel outcomes related to labor force

participation, human capital accumulation, and family status; on these dimensions, as well, we find significant effects

for women but not for men.

    The pattern of estimates for women indicates that elite college attendance increased women’s labor force participa-

tion and earnings in their late thirties. Attending a more selective college also lowered women’s marriage rates while

improving their spousal characteristics, possibly because it made them set higher thresholds for accepting marriage

offers. These results argue against applying a causal interpretation to the popular descriptions of women with elite

educations “opting out” of the paid labor force to devote more time to their families (e.g., Belkin 2003). Women who

attend highly selective schools do not all persist in the labor market after marriage and childbearing, but these depar-

tures are not induced by their choice of college. In fact, married women with children are the group whose earnings

were improved the most by attending a more selective college.

    At the same time that we find this range of new effects on women’s career and family outcomes, we also confirm

and support the original result of DK of no earnings effect of college selectivity on full-time full-year workers. Also

consistent with DK, we find no earnings effects for men, none for women after conditioning on their work hours, and

none for single or childless women. These differences highlight the importance of gender and family status as sources

of heterogeneous effects of college choice among high-achieving students who started college in the mid-1970s. For

female students in that cohort, the choice of which college to attend affected a wide range of later-life outcomes.

    The finding in this paper of no educational or family status effects for male students, together with the lack of any

career benefit, suggests that the value of elite college attendance for them is either limited to certain subpopulations

or related to other outcomes not measured here. Although we do find significant effects for women, and these may

explain some of the value of elite schooling to them, even those effects appear to entail trade-offs (higher earnings

but less leisure, less marriage but higher spousal education) and are not as unambiguously beneficial as higher wage

rates would have been alone. This suggests the possibility that students or their parents may value elite colleges partly

because of a desire for prestige and status. We are unable to explore the conspicuous consumption motive directly in

this paper, and believe it is a promising avenue for future research.




                                                           21
References
Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua Angrist, and Parag Pathak. 2014. “The elite illusion: Achievement effects at Boston and
    New York exam schools.” Econometrica 82 (1): 137–196.

Andrews, Rodney J., Jing Li, and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. “Quantile treatment effects of college quality on
    earnings.” Journal of Human Resources 51 (1): 200–238.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger. 1991. “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and Earn-
    ings?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (4): 979–1014.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2014. Mastering ’Metrics: The Path from Cause to Effect. Princeton
    University Press.

       . 2017. “Undergraduate Econometrics Instruction: Through Our Classes, Darkly.” Journal of Economic Per-
     spectives 31 (2): 125–44.

Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban M. Aucejo, and V. Joseph Hotz. 2016. “University Differences in the Graduation of
    Minorities in STEM Fields: Evidence from California.” American Economic Review 106 (3): 525–62.

Arcidiacono, Peter, Patrick Bayer, and Aurel Hizmo. 2010. “Beyond signaling and human capital: Education and the
    revelation of ability.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (4): 76–104.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Alan Krueger. 1994. “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling from a New Sample of
    Twins.” American Economic Review 84 (5): 1157–1173.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Katja M. Kaufmann. 2017. “Education choices and returns on the labor and marriage markets:
     Evidence from data on subjective expectations.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 140:35–55.

Autor, David, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie Wasserman. 2016. “School Quality and
    the Gender Gap in Educational Achievement.” American Economic Review 106 (5): 289–95.

Bailey, Martha J., Brad Hershbein, and Amalia R. Miller. 2012. “The Opt-In Revolution? Contraception and the
     Gender Gap in Wages.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (3): 225–54.

Barrow, Lisa, and Ofer Malamud. 2015. “Is college a worthwhile investment?” Annual Review of Economics 7 (1):
    519–555.

Belkin, Lisa. 2003. “The Opt-Out Revolution.” The New York Times Magazine. Accessed March 16, 2018. http:
    //www.nytimes.com/2003/10/26/magazine/the-opt-out-revolution.html.

Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010. “Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Profes-
     sionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (3): 228–
     55.

Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan. 2015. “Gender identity and relative income within households.”
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2): 571–614.

Black, Dan A., and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2004. “How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of College Quality? Evidence
    from Matching.” Journal of Econometrics 121 (1-2): 99–124.

       . 2006. “Estimating the Returns to College Quality with Multiple Proxies for Quality.” Journal of Labor Eco-
     nomics 24 (3): 701–728.

Bowen, William G., and Derek Bok. 1998. The Shape of the River. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                                         22
Bowen, William G., Matthew M. Chingos, and Michael S. McPherson. 2009. Crossing the finish line: Completing
   college at America’s public universities. Vol. 52. Princeton University Press.

Brewer, Dominic J., Eric R. Eide, and Ronald G. Ehrenberg. 1999. “Does it Pay to Attend an Elite Private College?
    Cross-Cohort Evidence on the Effects of College Type on Earnings.” Journal of Human Resources: 104–123.

Bruze, Gustaf. 2015. “Male and Female Marriage Returns to Schooling.” International Economic Review 56 (1): 207–
    234.

Burke, Jeremy, and Amalia R. Miller. 2018. “The Effects of Job Relocation on Spousal Careers: Evidence from
    Military Change of Station Moves.” Economic Inquiry 56 (2): 1261–1277.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais. 2017. “‘Acting Wife’: Marriage Market Incentives and
    Labor Market Investments.” American Economic Review 107 (11): 3288–3319.

Canaan, Serena, and Pierre Mouganie. 2018. “Returns to Education Quality for Low-Skilled Students: Evidence from
    a Discontinuity.” Journal of Labor Economics 36 (2): 395–436.

Card, David. 1993. “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return to Schooling.” NBER
    Working Paper No. 4483.

       . 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings.” Handbook of Labor Economics 3:1801–1863.

Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan. 2017. “Mobility Report Cards: The
    Role of Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility.” NBER Working Paper No. 23618.

Chevalier, Arnaud, and Gavan Conlon. 2003. “Does It Pay to Attend a Prestigious University?” IZA Discussion Paper
    No. 848.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, Monica Costa Dias, and Costas Meghir. 2018. “The Marriage Market, Labor Supply, and
    Education Choice.” Journal of Political Economy 126 (S1): S26–S72.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, Murat Iyigun, and Yoram Weiss. 2009. “Investment in schooling and the marriage market.”
    American Economic Review 99 (5): 1689–1713.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, Bernard Salanié, and Yoram Weiss. 2017. “Partner Choice, Investment in Children, and the
    Marital College Premium.” American Economic Review 107 (8): 2109–67.

Clark, Damon, and Emilia Del Bono. 2016. “The Long-Run Effects of Attending an Elite School: Evidence from the
     United Kingdom.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (1): 150–76.

Cohodes, Sarah R., and Joshua S. Goodman. 2014. “Merit Aid, College Quality, and College Completion: Mas-
    sachusetts’ Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (4):
    251–285.

Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian A. Jacob, and Steven Levitt. 2006. “The effect of school choice on participants: Evidence
     from randomized lotteries.” Econometrica 74 (5): 1191–1230.

Dale, Stacy Berg, and Alan B. Krueger. 2002. “Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective College: An
    Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4):
    1491–1527.

      . 2014. “Estimating the Effects of College Characteristics Over the Career Using Administrative Earnings
    Data.” Journal of Human Resources 49 (2): 323–358.

Deming, David J., Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2014. “School Choice, School Quality,
   and Postsecondary Attainment.” American Economic Review 104 (3): 991–1013.


                                                        23
Dillon, Eleanor Wiske, and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2017. “Determinants of the Match between Student Ability and College
     Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics 35 (1): 45–66.

       . 2018. “The Consequences of Academic Match between Students and Colleges.” NBER Working Paper No.
     25069.

Duflo, Esther. 2001. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in Indonesia: Evidence from
    an Unusual Policy Experiment.” American Economic Review 91 (4): 795–813.

Ge, Suqin. 2011. “Women’s College Decisions: How Much Does Marriage Matter?” Journal of Labor Economics 29
     (4): 773–818.

Goldin, Claudia. 2004. “The long road to the fast track: Career and family.” The Annals of the American Academy of
    Political and Social Science 596 (1): 20–35.

       . 2006. “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment, Education, and Family.” American
     Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings (Richard T. Ely Lecture) 96 (2): 1–21.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. “Transitions: Career and Family Life Cycles of the Educational Elite.”
    American Economic Review 98 (2): 363–69.

Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F. Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. “The Homecoming of American College Women:
    The Reversal of the College Gender Gap.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (4): 133–156.

Goodman, Joshua, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith. 2017. “Access to 4-Year Public Colleges and Degree Com-
    pletion.” Journal of Labor Economics 35 (3): 829–867.

Groen, Jeffrey A., and Michelle J. White. 2004. “In-state versus out-of-state students: the divergence of interest be-
    tween public universities and state governments.” Journal of Public Economics 88 (9): 1793–1814.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2012. “Do better schools lead to more growth? Cognitive skills, economic
    outcomes, and causation.” Journal of Economic Growth 17 (4): 267–321.

Hastings, Justine S., Christopher A. Neilson, and Seth Zimmerman. 2013. “Are Some Degrees Worth More than
     Others? Evidence from college admission cutoffs in Chile.” NBER Working Paper No. 19241.

Heckman, James J., John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi. 2018. “Returns to Education: The Causal Effects
    of Education on Earnings, Health, and Smoking.” Journal of Political Economy 126 (S1): S197–S246.

Herr, Jane Leber, and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2012. “Work Environment and Opt-Out Rates at Motherhood Across
     High-Education Career Paths.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 65 (4): 928–950.

Hersch, Joni. 2013. “Opting out among women with elite education.” Review of Economics of the Household 11 (4):
    469–506.

Hitsch, Gunter J., Ali Hortaçsu, and Dan Ariely. 2010. “Matching and Sorting in Online Dating.” American Economic
     Review 100 (1): 130–63.

Hoekstra, Mark. 2009. “The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings: A Discontinuity-Based
    Approach.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4): 717–724.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 2009. “The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23
    (4): 95–118.

       . 2018. “The productivity of us postsecondary institutions.” In Productivity in Higher Education. University of
     Chicago Press.



                                                         24
Hoxby, Caroline M., and Sarah Turner. 2015. “What High-achieving Low-Income Students Know About College.”
    American Economic Review 105 (5): 514–17.

Jackson, C. Kirabo. 2010. “Do students benefit from attending better schools? Evidence from rule-based student
     assignments in Trinidad and Tobago.” The Economic Journal 120 (549): 1399–1429.

Jacob, Brian, Brian McCall, and Kevin Stange. 2018. “College as Country Club: Do Colleges Cater to Students’
    Preferences for Consumption?” Journal of Labor Economics 36 (2): 309–348.

Jia, Ruixue, and Hongbin Li. 2019. “The Value of Elite Universities in China.” https://www.ruixuejia.com/
     working-papers.html.

Kane, Thomas J., and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 1995. “Labor-Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year College.” American
    Economic Review 85 (3): 600–614.

Kaufmann, Katja Maria, Matthias Messner, and Alex Solis. 2013. “Returns to Elite Higher Education in the Marriage
    Market: Evidence from Chile.” Working Paper.

Kirkeboen, Lars J., Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad. 2016. “Field of Study, Earnings, and Self-Selection.” The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3): 1057–1111.

Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard. Forthcoming. “Children and Gender Inequality: Evidence
    from Denmark.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Lafortune, Jeanne. 2013. “Making Yourself Attractive: Pre-Marital Investments and the Returns to Education in the
    Marriage Market.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (2): 151–78.

Lang, Kevin, and Erez Siniver. 2011. “Why is an elite undergraduate education valuable? Evidence from Israel.”
    Labour Economics 18:767–777.

Lefgren, Lars, and Frank McIntyre. 2006. “The Relationship Between Women’s Education and Marriage Outcomes.”
    Journal of Labor Economics 24 (4): 787–830.

Long, Mark C. 2008. “College Quality and Early Adult Outcomes.” Economics of Education Review 27 (5): 588–602.

      . 2010. “Changes in the Returns to Education and College Quality.” Economics of Education Review 29 (3):
    338–347.

Loughran, David S., and Julie M. Zissimopoulos. 2009. “Why Wait? The Effect of Marriage and Childbearing on the
    Wages of Men and Women.” Journal of Human Resources 44 (2): 326–349.

Loury, Linda Datcher, and David Garman. 1995. “College Selectivity and Earnings.” Journal of Labor Economics 13
    (2): 289–308.

MacLeod, W Bentley, Evan Riehl, Juan E Saavedra, and Miguel Urquiola. 2017. “The big sort: College reputation and
   labor market outcomes.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9 (3): 223–61.

MacLeod, W. Bentley, and Miguel Urquiola. 2015. “Reputation and School Competition.” American Economic Review
   105, no. 11 (November): 3471–88.

Mare, Robert D. 1991. “Five Decades of Educational Assortative Mating.” American Sociological Review 56 (1): 15.

Miller, Amalia R. 2011. “The Effects of Motherhood Timing on Career Path.” Journal of Population Economics 24
     (3): 1071–1100.

     . 2013. “Lifecycle Events and Their Consequences: Job Loss, Family Change, and Declines in Health.” In
    Marriage timing, motherhood timing and women’s wellbeing in retirement, 109–132. Stanford University Press.


                                                       25
Mincer, Jacob. 1974. “Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. Human Behavior & Social Institutions No. 2.”

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2006. “Estimating Average and Local Average Treatment Effects of Education When Compulsory
    Schooling Laws Really Matter.” American Economic Review 96 (1): 152–175.

Pencavel, John. 1998. “Assortative Mating by Schooling and the Work Behavior of Wives and Husbands.” The Amer-
    ican Economic Review 88 (2): 326–329.

Pop-Eleches, Cristian, and Miguel Urquiola. 2013. “Going to a Better School: Effects and Behavioral Responses.”
    American Economic Review 103 (4): 1289–1324.

Pope, Devin G, and Jaren C Pope. 2009. “The impact of college sports success on the quantity and quality of student
    applications.” Southern Economic Journal: 750–780.

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. “Peer effects with random assignment: Results for Dartmouth roommates.” The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 116 (2): 681–704.

Sekhri, Sheetal. Forthcoming. “Prestige Matters: Value of Connections Formed in Elite Colleges.” American Economic
    Journal: Applied Economics.

Small, Mario L., and Christopher Winship. 2007. “Black students’ graduation from elite colleges: Institutional char-
    acteristics and between-institution differences.” Social Science Research 36 (3): 1257–1275.

Walker, Ian, and Yu Zhu. 2018. “University selectivity and the relative returns to higher education: Evidence from the
    UK.” Labour Economics 53:230–249.

Zimmerman, David. 2003. “Peer effects in academic outcomes: Evidence from a natural experiment.” Review of Eco-
   nomics and Statistics 85 (1): 9–23.

Zimmerman, Seth. 2014. “The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal Students.” Journal of Labor
   Economics 32 (4): 711–754.

        . 2019. “Elite Colleges and Upward Mobility to Top Jobs and Top Incomes.” American Economic Review 109
     (1): 1–47.




                                                         26
                    Figure 1: SAT Difference of Chosen School Relative to Most Selective Acceptance




                              (a) Men                                                      (b) Men (Excluding Zero)




                             (c) Women                                                    (d) Women (Excluding Zero)




                       (e) Men and Women                                             (f) Men and Women (Excluding Zero)


Notes: The data come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. The figure plots the difference between the
school-average SAT score at the most selective school the student was accepted to minus the school-average SAT score at the school the student
chose. The difference in SAT scores are grouped into 20-point intervals.




                                                                     27
Table 1: Summary Statistics of the College and Beyond Survey: 1976 College Entering Cohort


                                            Panel A: 1976 Characteristics
                                           DK
                                        statistics    All      Women      Men
           Female                        0.385        0.508     1.000     0.000
                                        (0.487)      (0.500)   (0.000)   (0.000)

           Black                         0.050        0.042     0.050     0.035
                                        (0.219)      (0.201)   (0.217)   (0.183)

           Hispanic                      0.014        0.012     0.012     0.012
                                        (0.117)      (0.107)   (0.107)   (0.107)

           Asian                         0.027        0.022     0.022     0.022
                                        (0.163)      (0.147)   (0.145)   (0.148)

           Other race                    0.003        0.003     0.003     0.002
                                        (0.057)      (0.052)   (0.054)   (0.050)

           Predicted log(parental        9.997        9.928     9.941     9.915
                income)                 (0.349)      (0.298)   (0.299)   (0.296)

           Own SAT/100                  11.875       11.439    11.170    11.717
                                        (1.632)      (2.649)   (2.717)   (2.547)

           School average SAT/100       11.812       11.784    11.762    11.807
                                        (0.943)      (0.938)   (0.942)   (0.932)

           High school top 10 percent    0.427        0.405     0.392     0.419
                                        (0.495)      (0.491)   (0.488)   (0.493)

           High school rank missing      0.355        0.380     0.403     0.355
                                        (0.478)      (0.485)   (0.491)   (0.479)

           College athlete               0.085        0.083     0.060     0.107
                                        (0.279)      (0.276)   (0.238)   (0.309)

           Average SAT/100 of           11.601       11.545    11.466    11.626
               schools applied to       (0.991)      (1.001)   (0.998)   (0.998)

           One additional application    0.490        0.566     0.576     0.556
                                        (0.500)      (0.496)   (0.494)   (0.497)

           Two additional                0.366        0.337     0.342     0.331
               applications             (0.482)      (0.473)   (0.475)   (0.471)

           Three additional              0.134        0.092     0.080     0.104
               applications             (0.340)      (0.289)   (0.272)   (0.306)

           Four additional               0.011        0.005     0.001     0.008
                applications            (0.104)      (0.069)   (0.038)   (0.090)

           N                             6,335       8,012     4,049     3,963

                                            28
          Continued: Summary Statistics of the College and Beyond Survey: 1976 College Entering Cohort


                                                                Panel B: 1995 Characteristics
                                                              DK
                                                           statistics      All      Women        Men
                          Log(annual earnings)              11.148      10.504       9.836      11.192
                                                            (0.737)     (1.593)     (1.834)     (0.866)

                          Full-time, full-year worker                    0.750       0.579       0.927
                                                                        (0.433)     (0.494)     (0.261)
                                                                        [8,012]     [4,049]     [3,963]

                          Earnings > $1,000                              0.911       0.831       0.992
                                                                        (0.285)     (0.374)     (0.087)

                          Graduated college                  0.862       0.855       0.851       0.859
                                                            (0.345)     (0.352)     (0.356)     (0.348)

                          Earned advanced degree             0.573       0.545       0.508       0.582
                                                            (0.495)     (0.498)     (0.500)     (0.493)

                          Any children                                   0.704       0.703       0.705
                                                                        (0.457)     (0.457)     (0.456)

                          Married                                        0.759       0.742       0.777
                                                                        (0.428)     (0.438)     (0.416)

                          N                            6,335             8,012       4,049       3,963
                           Conditional on being married:

                          Spousal advanced                               0.507       0.597       0.419
                              degree                                    (0.500)     (0.491)     (0.493)
                                                                        [6,009]     [2,954]     [3,055]

                          Spousal earnings >                             0.692       0.922       0.469
                              $1,000                                    (0.462)     (0.269)     (0.499)
                                                                        [5,965]     [2,914]     [3,051]

                          Log(spousal earnings)                         10.976      11.140      10.662
                                                                        (0.707)     (0.705)     (0.597)
                                                                        [4,102]     [2,674]     [1,428]

Notes: All statistics are from the matched-applicant sample and outcomes are reported for the year 1995. Standard deviations are in
parentheses, and number of observations are in brackets when it differs from the matched-applicant sample. Means are weighted to
reflect sampling procedures at public universities. Spousal earnings are defined as the difference between household earnings and
respondent earnings, hence the loss in sample size due to zeros. Means and standard deviations from Dale and Krueger’s (2002)
sample are copied from their Table II and are reported when available. Dale and Krueger’s (2002) sample includes both men and
women and includes only full-year full-time workers. Our sample also includes part-time workers and non-workers.




                                                                29
      Table 2: Summary Statistics on College Admissions and Choices


                                                   All       Women          Men
Attended a less selective school than the        0.293        0.278        0.309
     most selective school accepted at          (0.455)      (0.448)      (0.462)

Rejected from most selective school              0.202        0.166        0.239
    applied to                                  (0.401)      (0.372)      (0.426)

Rejected from less selective                     0.059        0.058        0.061
    school than one admitted to                 (0.236)      (0.234)      (0.239)

Rejected from at least one school                0.251        0.219        0.285
                                                (0.434)      (0.413)      (0.452)

First choice school was most                     0.613        0.632        0.594
      selective application                     (0.487)      (0.482)      (0.491)

SAT range of acceptances                        111.788      113.675     109.842
                                                (87.989)     (88.263)    (87.674)

Observations                                     8,012        4,049        3,963
 Notes: All statistics are from the matched-applicant sample. Standard deviations are
in parentheses. Means are weighted to reflect sampling procedures at public universi-
ties.




                                         30
               Table 3: Effects of College Selectivity on Career Outcomes


                               Panel A: Men and Women
                                                                       Outcome:       Outcome:
                                                                      earnings >       FTFY
                                  Outcome: ln(earnings)                 $1,000         worker
                                            Self-
                            Basic        revelation     Matching       Matching        Matching
                            model          model         model          model           model
School-average SAT         0.134***       0.047**        0.071*          0.009           0.001
    score/100               (0.016)       (0.021)        (0.041)        (0.006)         (0.010)

Adjusted R2                  0.196         0.198          0.208          0.099           0.171
N                            8,012         8,012          8,012          8,012           8,012
                                     Panel B: Women
                                                                       Outcome:       Outcome:
                                                                      earnings >       FTFY
                                  Outcome: ln(earnings)                 $1,000         worker
                                            Self-
                            Basic        revelation     Matching       Matching        Matching
                            model          model         model          model           model
School-average SAT         0.189***       0.084**        0.139*         0.023**          0.004
    score/100               (0.029)       (0.039)        (0.069)        (0.011)         (0.022)

Adjusted R2                  0.029         0.031          0.046          0.032           0.021
N                            4,049         4,049          4,049          4,049           4,049
                                      Panel C: Men
                                                                       Outcome:       Outcome:
                                                                      earnings >       FTFY
                                  Outcome: ln(earnings)                 $1,000         worker
                                            Self-
                            Basic        revelation     Matching       Matching        Matching
                            model          model         model          model           model
School-average SAT         0.078***        0.009          0.011          -0.004         -0.002
    score/100               (0.016)       (0.022)        (0.033)        (0.003)         (0.008)

Adjusted R2                  0.026         0.031          0.047          0.026           0.030
N                            3,963         3,963          3,963          3,963           3,963
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The
data come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. Estimates
are weighted using sampling weights from the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling
procedures at the four public universities. Other control variables included in all regressions,
but whose coefficients are not reported, are sex (basic and self-revelation models in Panel A
only), race, ethnicity, SAT score, high school class rank, (predicted log of) parental income and
an indicator for being an athlete in college. The basic model includes no additional selection
controls, the self-revelation model additionally controls for the average SAT score of the colleges
to which the student applied and indicator variables for the number of additional applications
submitted, and the matching model replaces the self-revelation selection controls with a set of
group indicator variables for students who applied to, were accepted at, and were rejected from
the same set of similar schools.




                                                31
     Table 4: Earnings Effects for Alternative Samples and Matching Rule


                                  Panel A: Men and Women
                                            Matching         Matching
                                             model            model            FTFY
                           Matching        on earners        on FTFY        workers with
                            model         above $1,000        sample        D&K matches
School-average SAT          0.071*            0.037            0.018             0.019
    score/100               (0.041)          (0.027)          (0.028)           (0.020)

Adjusted R2                  0.208            0.176            0.128             0.118
N                            8,012            7,309            5,647             6,200
                                       Panel B: Women
                                            Matching         Matching
                                             model            model
                           Matching        on earners        on FTFY
                            model         above $1,000        sample
School-average SAT          0.139*            0.046            0.006
    score/100               (0.069)          (0.048)          (0.043)

Adjusted R2                  0.046            0.042            0.074
N                            4,049            3,381            2,146
                                         Panel C: Men
                                            Matching         Matching
                                             model            model
                           Matching        on earners        on FTFY
                            model         above $1,000        sample
School-average SAT           0.011            0.033            0.026
    score/100               (0.033)          (0.029)          (0.031)

Adjusted R2                  0.047            0.056            0.056
N                            3,963            3,928            3,501
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-
matriculation level. The data come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976
college entering cohort. Estimates are weighted using sampling weights from the College
and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures at the four public universities. Sam-
ples using the FTFY worker outcome are further conditioned on having positive earnings
at all. Other control variables included in all regressions, but whose coefficients are not
reported, are race, ethnicity, SAT score, high school class rank, (predicted log of) parental
income and an indicator for being an athlete in college. All models are matching models
and all outcomes are log 1995 earnings. The matching model controls for selection by
including a set of group indicator variables for students who applied to, were accepted
at, and were rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                             32
             Table 5: College Selectivity and Maternal Labor Supply


                                       Women                             Men
                                                 Outcome:                      Outcome:
                                                  school-                       school-
                              Outcome:            average      Outcome:         average
                             ln(earnings)        SAT/100      ln(earnings)     SAT/100
School-average SAT              0.135*                           0.011
    score/100                   (0.068)                         (0.032)

Mother worked during           0.276***            0.011        -0.053           -0.005
    senior year HS              (0.087)           (0.010)       (0.043)          (0.013)

Adjusted R2                      0.051            0.815          0.047            0.789
N                                4,049            4,049          3,963            3,963
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-
matriculation level. The data come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976
college entering cohort. Estimates are weighted using sampling weights from the Col-
lege and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures at the four public universities.
Other control variables included in all regressions, but whose coefficients are not re-
ported, are race, ethnicity, SAT score, high school class rank, (predicted log of) parental
income and an indicator for being an athlete in college. All models are matching models,
which control for selection by including a set of group indicator variables for students
who applied to, were accepted at, and were rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                            33
         Table 6: Decomposing the Effects of College Selectivity on Earnings Using Education


                                                          Panel A: Women
                                                    Outcome:
                                    Outcome:       has advanced        Outcome:         Outcome:          Outcome:
                                    graduated         degree          ln(earnings)     ln(earnings)      ln(earnings)
School-average SAT                   -0.006          0.048***            0.021            0.159*            0.096
    score/100                        (0.009)          (0.015)           (0.094)           (0.080)          (0.128)

Graduated × School-                                                      0.140                              0.081
    average SAT score/100                                               (0.095)                            (0.122)

Graduated                                                                -1.626                             -1.018
                                                                        (1.154)                            (1.485)

Advanced degree × School-                                                                 -0.088           -0.096
    average SAT score/100                                                                 (0.092)          (0.085)

Has advanced degree                                                                        1.597            1.693
                                                                                          (1.097)          (1.000)

Adjusted R2                           0.094            0.087             0.051             0.071            0.068
N                                     4,049            4,049             4,049             4,049            4,049
                                                            Panel B: Men
                                                    Outcome:
                                    Outcome:       has advanced        Outcome:         Outcome:          Outcome:
                                    graduated         degree          ln(earnings)     ln(earnings)      ln(earnings)
School-average SAT                   -0.004           -0.005            -0.060             0.003           -0.043
    score/100                        (0.007)          (0.018)           (0.071)           (0.030)          (0.072)

Graduated × School-                                                      0.051                              0.039
    average SAT score/100                                               (0.072)                            (0.067)

Graduated                                                                -0.175                             -0.090
                                                                        (0.831)                            (0.755)

Advanced degree × School-                                                                 -0.001            0.014
    average SAT score/100                                                                 (0.037)          (0.036)

Has advanced degree                                                                        0.285            0.046
                                                                                          (0.449)          (0.443)

Adjusted R2                           0.027            0.081             0.072             0.068            0.085
N                                     3,963            3,963             3,963             3,963            3,963
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Standard errors
are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The data come from the College and
Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. Estimates are weighted using sampling weights from the
College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures at the four public universities. Other control variables
included in all regressions, but whose coefficients are not reported, are race, ethnicity, SAT score, high school class
rank, (predicted log of) parental income and an indicator for being an athlete in college. All models are matching
models, which control for selection by including a set of group indicator variables for students who applied to,
were accepted at, and were rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                                          34
      Table 7: Effects of College Selectivity on Educational and Occupational Fields


                       College Major           Advanced Degree Field                Occupation
                    Women          Men          Women             Men           Women            Men
STEM                -0.021       -0.096**       -0.016         -0.052**       -0.035***       -0.032**
                    (0.018)       (0.036)       (0.014)         (0.019)         (0.010)        (0.015)

Social science      0.039*      0.081***         0.020          -0.005           0.014         -0.011
                    (0.022)      (0.027)        (0.012)         (0.008)         (0.014)        (0.011)

Humanities          -0.032       -0.024*       0.028***         -0.002           0.009          0.010
                    (0.028)      (0.014)        (0.011)         (0.008)         (0.010)        (0.008)

Business            -0.026         0.035        -0.024           0.006          -0.028          0.023
                    (0.017)       (0.028)       (0.022)         (0.016)         (0.018)        (0.021)

Health                                           0.014           -0.004         0.027*          -0.010
                                                (0.010)         (0.007)         (0.015)        (0.010)

Law                                             0.021*           0.029          0.020*          0.016
                                                (0.011)         (0.019)         (0.011)        (0.015)

Other                0.012        -0.007        -0.015          -0.002          -0.007          0.003
                    (0.011)       (0.005)       (0.012)         (0.006)         (0.009)        (0.015)

N                    4,049         3,963         4,049           3,963           4,049          3,963
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The data
come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. Estimates are
weighted using sampling weights from the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling proce-
dures at the four public universities. Other control variables included in all regressions, but whose
coefficients are not reported, are race, ethnicity, SAT score, high school class rank, (predicted log of)
parental income and an indicator for being an athlete in college. All models are matching models,
and each coefficient is the coefficient on school-average SAT score from a separate regression. The
matching model controls for selection by including a set of group indicator variables for students
who applied to, were accepted at, and were rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                                   35
Table 8: Effects of College Selectivity on Earnings with Major and Occupation Field Controls


                                 Outcome: has
                                advanced degree                   Outcome: ln(earnings)
                                Women         Men        Women         Men       Women         Men
    School-average SAT         0.049***       0.001      0.128*       0.000      0.124*       -0.001
        score/100               (0.015)      (0.016)     (0.068)     (0.032)     (0.066)     (0.029)

    Major field controls           X            X           X           X
    Occupation controls                                                             X           X

    Adjusted R2                  0.101        0.102       0.049       0.088       0.065       0.166
    N                            4,049        3,963       4,049       3,963       4,049       3,963
     Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respec-
    tively. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level.
    The data come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. Es-
    timates are weighted using sampling weights from the College and Beyond survey to reflect
    sampling procedures at the four public universities. Other control variables included in all re-
    gressions, but whose coefficients are not reported, are race, ethnicity, SAT score, high school
    class rank, (predicted log of) parental income and an indicator for being an athlete in college.
    All models are matching models, which control for selection by including a set of group indi-
    cator variables for students who applied to, were accepted at, and were rejected from the same
    set of similar schools.




                                                    36
     Table 9: Decomposing the Effects of College Selectivity on Earnings Using Family Status


                                                       Panel A: Women
                                                 Outcome:
                                   Outcome:        any           Outcome:         Outcome:         Outcome:
                                    married      children       ln(earnings)     ln(earnings)     ln(earnings)
School-average SAT                 -0.039**        -0.024         -0.023             0.009           -0.054
    score/100                       (0.019)        (0.018)        (0.072)           (0.070)          (0.071)

Married × School-                                                0.179***                            0.141*
    average SAT score/100                                         (0.051)                            (0.073)

Married                                                          -3.039***                          -2.084**
                                                                  (0.580)                            (0.877)

Any children × School-                                                             0.168**            0.093
    average SAT score/100                                                          (0.066)           (0.080)

Any children                                                                      -3.025***         -1.894*
                                                                                   (0.766)          (0.935)

Adjusted R2                          0.021          0.017          0.095            0.113            0.119
N                                    4,049          4,049          4,049            4,049            4,049
                                                         Panel B: Men
                                                 Outcome:
                                   Outcome:        any           Outcome:         Outcome:         Outcome:
                                    married      children       ln(earnings)     ln(earnings)     ln(earnings)
School-average SAT                   0.022          0.021         -0.011            -0.040           -0.019
    score/100                       (0.017)        (0.020)        (0.041)           (0.040)          (0.038)

Married × School-                                                  0.017                             -0.051
    average SAT score/100                                         (0.035)                            (0.065)

Married                                                            0.235                              0.827
                                                                  (0.396)                            (0.747)

Any children × School-                                                              0.062*            0.085
    average SAT score/100                                                           (0.030)          (0.060)

Any children                                                                         -0.294           -0.686
                                                                                    (0.343)          (0.688)

Adjusted R2                          0.016          0.016          0.089            0.099            0.106
N                                    3,963          3,963          3,963            3,963            3,963
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Standard
errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The data come from the College
and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. Estimates are weighted using sampling weights from
the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures at the four public universities. Other control
variables included in all regressions, but whose coefficients are not reported, are race, ethnicity, SAT score,
high school class rank, (predicted log of) parental income and an indicator for being an athlete in college. All
models are matching models, which control for selection by including a set of group indicator variables for
students who applied to, were accepted at, and were rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                                      37
                          Table 10: Effects of College Selectivity on Spousal Characteristics


                                          Married Women                                          Married Men
                           Outcome:                                             Outcome:
                           spouse has        Outcome:           Outcome:        spouse has        Outcome:           Outcome:
                            advanced          spousal            spouse’s        advanced          spousal            spouse’s
                             degree        earnings > $0       ln(earnings)       degree        earnings > $0       ln(earnings)
School-average SAT          0.080***            0.008              0.043           -0.005           -0.0003            -0.074
    score/100                (0.017)           (0.011)            (0.031)         (0.023)           (0.015)            (0.044)

Adjusted R2                   0.082             0.002                0.047         0.066             -0.004             0.061
N                             2,954             2,914                2,674         3,055              3,051             1,428
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Standard errors are in
parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The data come from the College and Beyond survey for
the 1976 college entering cohort. Spousal earnings are defined as the difference between household earnings and respondent
earnings, and the sample for this variable is limited to observations with positive values. Estimates are weighted using
sampling weights from the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures at the four public universities. Other
control variables included in all regressions, but whose coefficients are not reported, are race, ethnicity, SAT score, high school
class rank, (predicted log of) parental income and an indicator for being an athlete in college. All models are matching models,
which control for selection by including a set of group indicator variables for students who applied to, were accepted at, and
were rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                                                38
A      Appendix: Additional Figures and Tables

Figure A1: SAT Difference Between Chosen School and Most Selective Acceptance for Women with Different Labor
Supply




                       (a) Women, FTFY Workers                                (b) Women, FTFY Workers (Excluding Zero)




                     (c) Women, Part Time Workers                           (d) Women, Part Time Workers (Excluding Zero)




                       (e) Women, Non-Workers                                  (f) Women, Non-Workers (Excluding Zero)


Notes: The data come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. The figure plots the difference between the
school-average SAT score at the most selective school the student was accepted at minus the school-average SAT score at the school the student
chose. The difference in SAT scores are grouped into 20-point intervals.



                                                                    A-1
                   Figure A2: SAT Difference of Chosen School Relative to Most Selective Application




                               (a) Men                                                       (b) Men (Excluding Zero)




                             (c) Women                                                     (d) Women (Excluding Zero)




                        (e) Men and Women                                             (f) Men and Women (Excluding Zero)


Notes: The data come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. The figure plots the difference between the
school-average SAT score at the most selective school the student applied to minus the school-average SAT score at the school the student chose.
The difference in SAT scores are grouped into 20-point intervals.




                                                                     A-2
                                 Figure A3: Average Income by College Major and Occupation




              (a) Average Income by College Major                                      (b) Average Income by Occupation


Notes: The data come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. The figure plots the average reported income for
individuals in the matched applicant sample within each college major or occupation field.



                               Table A1: Illustration of Matched-Applicant Group Construction

                                                                   Student applications to college
                                   Application 1               Application 2                Application 3               Application 4
               Matched-       School        School         School        School        School         School        School         School
               applicant      average     admissions       average     admissions      average      admissions      average      admissions
Student         group          SAT         decision         SAT         decision        SAT          decision        SAT          decision
Student A          1           1280         Reject          1226        Accept*         1215          Accept          na             na
Student B          1           1280         Reject          1226         Accept         1215         Accept*          na             na
Student C          2           1360         Accept          1310         Reject         1270         Accept*         1155          Accept
Student D          2           1355         Accept          1316         Reject         1270         Accept*         1160          Accept
Student E          2           1370        Accept*          1316         Reject         1260          Accept         1150          Accept
Student F      Excluded        1180        Accept*           na            na            na             na            na             na
Student G      Excluded        1180        Accept*           na            na            na             na            na             na
Student H          3           1360         Accept          1308        Accept*         1260          Accept         1160          Accept
Student I          3           1370        Accept*          1311         Accept         1255          Accept         1155          Accept
Student J          3           1350         Accept          1316        Accept*         1265          Accept         1155          Accept
Student K          4           1245         Reject          1217         Reject         1180         Accept*          na             na
Student L          4           1235         Reject          1209         Reject         1180         Accept*          na             na
Student M          5           1140         Accept          1055        Accept*          na             na            na             na
Student N          5           1145        Accept*          1060         Accept          na             na            na             na
Student O      No match        1370         Reject          1038        Accept*          na             na            na             na
 Notes: This table is reproduced from Dale and Krueger (2002), Table I.
* Denotes school attended.
na = did not report submitting application.
The data shown on this table represent hypothetical students. Students F and G would be excluded from the matched-applicant subsample
because they applied to only one school (the school they attended). Student O would be excluded because no other student applied to an
equivalent set of institutions.




                                                                     A-3
Table A2: Summary Statistics for the Full Sample of the College and Beyond Survey: 1976 College Entering Cohort


                                                        Panel A: 1976 Characteristics
                                                       DK
                                                    statistics    All      Women      Men
                       Female                        0.392        0.507     1.000     0.000
                                                    (0.488)      (0.500)   (0.000)   (0.000)

                       Black                         0.050        0.042     0.051     0.034
                                                    (0.218)      (0.202)   (0.219)   (0.182)

                       Hispanic                      0.013        0.011     0.010     0.011
                                                    (0.115)      (0.102)   (0.101)   (0.103)

                       Asian                         0.023        0.020     0.019     0.022
                                                    (0.150)      (0.140)   (0.135)   (0.145)

                       Other race                    0.003        0.003     0.004     0.003
                                                    (0.059)      (0.059)   (0.059)   (0.056)

                       Predicted log(parental        9.984        9.919     9.928     9.909
                            income)                 (0.353)      (0.302)   (0.303)   (0.300)

                       Own SAT/100                  11.672       11.170    10.933    11.414
                                                    (1.634)      (2.795)   (2.824)   (2.744)

                       School average SAT/100       11.655       11.642    11.632    11.653
                                                    (0.943)      (0.941)   (0.948)   (0.934)

                       High school top 10 percent    0.418        0.395     0.393     0.397
                                                    (0.493)      (0.489)   (0.488)   (0.489)

                       High school rank missing      0.356        0.388     0.398     0.377
                                                    (0.479)      (0.487)   (0.489)   (0.485)

                       College athlete               0.078        0.079     0.060     0.099
                                                    (0.268)      (0.270)   (0.237)   (0.298)

                       Average SAT/100 of           11.513       11.495    11.448    11.543
                           schools applied to       (0.940)      (0.943)   (0.943)   (0.941)

                       One additional application    0.225        0.234     0.239     0.228
                                                    (0.417)      (0.423)   (0.426)   (0.420)

                       Two additional                0.214        0.207     0.202     0.213
                           applications             (0.410)      (0.405)   (0.402)   (0.409)

                       Three additional              0.156        0.139     0.127     0.152
                           applications             (0.363)      (0.346)   (0.333)   (0.359)

                       Four additional               0.040        0.032     0.026     0.037
                            applications            (0.196)      (0.175)   (0.159)   (0.190)

                       N                             14,238      19,658    9,917     9,738


                                                       A-4
Continued: Summary Statistics for the Full Sample of the College and Beyond Survey: 1976 College Entering Cohort


                                                                Panel B: 1995 Characteristics
                                                              DK
                                                           statistics      All       Women        Men
                         Log(annual earnings)              11.096       10.475        9.818     11.152
                                                           (0.747)      (1.580)      (1.819)    (0.872)

                         Full-time, full-year worker                     0.753        0.585      0.927
                                                                        (0.431)      (0.493)    (0.260)
                                                                        [19658]      [9,917]    [9,738]

                         Earnings > $1,000                               0.911        0.833      0.992
                                                                        (0.285)      (0.373)    (0.089)

                         Graduated college                  0.839        0.837        0.834      0.840
                                                           (0.367)      (0.370)      (0.372)    (0.367)

                         Earned advanced degree             0.542        0.515        0.482      0.549
                                                           (0.498)      (0.500)      (0.500)    (0.498)

                         Any children                                    0.699        0.696      0.701
                                                                        (0.459)      (0.460)    (0.458)

                         Married                                         0.756        0.741      0.772
                                                                        (0.429)      (0.438)    (0.419)

                         N                            14,238             19,658       9,917      9,738
                          Conditional on being married:

                         Spousal advanced                                0.487        0.572      0.403
                             degree                                     (0.500)      (0.495)    (0.490)
                                                                        [14695]      [7,234]    [7,460]

                         Spousal earnings >                              0.696        0.923      0.475
                             $1,000                                     (0.460)      (0.267)    (0.499)
                                                                        [14603]      [7,144]    [7,458]

                         Log(spousal earnings)                           10.940      11.101     10.635
                                                                         (0.709)     (0.710)    (0.599)
                                                                        [10,093]     [6,566]    [3,527]

Notes: All statistics are from the full sample and outcomes are reported for the year 1995. Standard deviations are in parentheses,
and number of observations are in braces when it differs from the matched-applicant sample. Means are weighted to reflect sampling
procedures at public universities. Spousal earnings are defined as the difference between household earnings and respondent
earnings, hence the loss in sample size due to zeros. Means and standard deviations from Dale and Krueger’s (2002) sample are
copied from their Table II and are reported when available. Dale and Krueger’s (2002) sample includes both men and women and
includes only full-year full-time workers. Our sample also includes part-time workers and non-workers.




                                                               A-5
Table A3: Full Results for Men and Women: Effect of College Selectivity on Career Outcomes


                                                                 Outcome:    Outcome:
                                                                earnings >    FTFY
                                 Outcome: ln(earnings)            $1,000      worker
                                          Self-
                             Basic     revelation   Matching    Matching     Matching
                             model       model       model       model        model
 School-average SAT        0.134***     0.047**      0.071*       0.009        0.001
     score/100              (0.016)     (0.021)      (0.041)     (0.006)      (0.010)

 Predicted log(parental      -0.068     -0.105*       -0.110     -0.039**    -0.068***
      income)               (0.060)     (0.060)      (0.083)      (0.015)      (0.024)

 Own SAT score/100           0.004        -0.010      -0.011      0.001        -0.004
                            (0.014)      (0.014)     (0.020)     (0.003)      (0.005)

 Own SAT score missing       0.160        0.031       0.077       0.061        0.029
                            (0.168)      (0.171)     (0.278)     (0.044)      (0.056)

 Female                    -1.347***   -1.333***
                             (0.051)     (0.051)

 Black                     0.321***     0.300***    0.368***    0.085***     0.136***
                            (0.090)      (0.088)     (0.107)     (0.017)      (0.028)

 Hispanic                    -0.028       -0.044      -0.001      -0.010       -0.001
                            (0.146)      (0.146)     (0.173)     (0.032)      (0.036)

 Asian                     0.479***     0.452***    0.488***    0.061***     0.105***
                            (0.091)      (0.092)     (0.107)     (0.015)      (0.025)
  Continued below




                                           A-6
Continued: Full Results for Men and Women: Effect of College Selectivity on Career Outcomes


                                                                            Outcome:       Outcome:
                                                                           earnings >       FTFY
                                        Outcome: ln(earnings)                $1,000         worker
                                                  Self-
                                   Basic       revelation    Matching       Matching       Matching
                                   model         model        model          model          model
  Other/missing race                0.086         0.077         0.127         0.018         0.185*
                                   (0.292)       (0.301)       (0.314)       (0.054)        (0.091)

  High school top 10             0.188***      0.184***       0.206***      0.024***        0.033*
      percent                     (0.047)       (0.048)        (0.059)       (0.009)        (0.018)

  High school rank               0.094***       0.071**        0.091*        0.017**         0.004
      missing                     (0.032)       (0.033)        (0.050)       (0.008)        (0.014)

  Athlete                        0.167***      0.157***       0.218***      0.024***        0.028**
                                  (0.042)       (0.043)        (0.037)       (0.008)        (0.012)

  Average SAT score/100                        0.116***
      of schools applied to                     (0.023)

  One additional                                -0.278**
      application                                (0.112)

  Two additional                                -0.285**
      applications                               (0.116)

  Three additional                                -0.197
      applications                               (0.116)

  Adjusted R2                      0.196         0.198          0.208         0.099          0.171
  N                                8,012         8,012          8,012         8,012          8,012
   Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
  Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The data
  come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort of men and women.
  Estimates are weighted using sampling weights from the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling
  procedures at the four public universities. The basic model includes no additional selection controls,
  the self-revelation model additionally controls for the average SAT score of the colleges to which the
  student applied and indicator variables for the number of additional applications submitted, and the
  matching model replaces the self-revelation selection controls with a set of group indicator variables
  for students who applied to, were accepted at, and were rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                                  A-7
   Table A4: Full Results for Women: Effect of College Selectivity on Career Outcomes


                                                                Outcome:     Outcome:
                                                               earnings >     FTFY
                                Outcome: ln(earnings)            $1,000       worker
                                         Self-
                            Basic     revelation   Matching     Matching     Matching
                            model       model       model        model        model
School-average SAT        0.189***     0.084**      0.139*      0.023**        0.004
    score/100              (0.029)     (0.039)      (0.069)     (0.011)       (0.022)

Predicted log(parental    -0.321***   -0.367***    -0.358**    -0.081***     -0.111**
     income)               (0.105)     (0.108)      (0.139)     (0.027)       (0.041)

Own SAT score/100           0.024        0.008       0.006        0.003        -0.003
                           (0.024)      (0.026)     (0.035)      (0.006)      (0.008)

Own SAT score missing      0.550**       0.395       0.450        0.117        0.100
                           (0.238)      (0.263)     (0.397)      (0.076)      (0.093)

Black                     0.690***     0.663***    0.817***     0.141***     0.255***
                           (0.120)      (0.123)     (0.145)      (0.024)      (0.039)

Hispanic                    -0.194       -0.204      -0.112       -0.027       0.033
                           (0.256)      (0.254)     (0.278)      (0.065)      (0.069)

Asian                     0.808***     0.793***    0.797***     0.108***     0.180***
                           (0.123)      (0.117)     (0.141)      (0.024)      (0.040)
Continued below




                                          A-8
   Continued: Full Results for Women: Effect of College Selectivity on Career Outcomes


                                                                             Outcome:       Outcome:
                                                                            earnings >       FTFY
                                        Outcome: ln(earnings)                 $1,000         worker
                                                  Self-
                                  Basic        revelation     Matching       Matching        Matching
                                  model          model         model          model           model
Other/missing race                0.621*         0.592          0.646          0.064          0.331*
                                  (0.360)       (0.363)        (0.631)        (0.116)         (0.192)

High school top 10               0.235***      0.233***       0.262***        0.035**          0.037
    percent                       (0.079)       (0.079)        (0.094)        (0.016)         (0.025)

High school rank                   0.093         0.074          0.118         0.028*          -0.014
    missing                       (0.074)       (0.074)        (0.089)        (0.016)         (0.021)

Athlete                            0.156         0.146        0.273***        0.045**          0.031
                                  (0.101)       (0.103)        (0.072)        (0.018)         (0.032)

Average SAT score/100                          0.137***
    of schools applied to                       (0.039)

One additional                                  -0.822*
    application                                 (0.421)

Two additional                                  -0.833*
    applications                                (0.427)

Three additional                                 -0.694
    applications                                (0.417)

Adjusted R2                        0.029         0.031          0.046          0.032           0.021
N                                  4,049         4,049          4,049          4,049           4,049
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The data come
from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort of women. Estimates are
weighted using sampling weights from the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures
at the four public universities. The basic model includes no additional selection controls, the self-
revelation model additionally controls for the average SAT score of the colleges to which the student
applied and indicator variables for the number of additional applications submitted, and the matching
model replaces the self-revelation selection controls with a set of group indicator variables for students
who applied to, were accepted at, and were rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                                  A-9
    Table A5: Full Results for Men: Effect of College Selectivity on Career Outcomes


                                                                 Outcome:    Outcome:
                                                                earnings >    FTFY
                                Outcome: ln(earnings)             $1,000      worker
                                         Self-
                           Basic      revelation   Matching     Matching     Matching
                           model        model       model        model        model
School-average SAT        0.078***      0.009        0.011        -0.004      -0.002
    score/100              (0.016)     (0.022)      (0.033)      (0.003)      (0.008)

Predicted log(parental    0.204***    0.176***      0.156**       0.005       -0.019
     income)               (0.063)     (0.061)      (0.069)      (0.005)      (0.019)

Own SAT score/100           -0.017     -0.029*       -0.031       -0.002       -0.004
                           (0.017)     (0.015)      (0.018)      (0.002)      (0.003)

Own SAT score missing       -0.283     -0.391*       -0.421       -0.018       -0.075
                           (0.236)     (0.225)      (0.283)      (0.020)      (0.056)

Black                    -0.249***    -0.264***    -0.308***      -0.000       -0.042
                           (0.056)      (0.055)      (0.073)     (0.010)      (0.029)

Hispanic                    0.138       0.121        0.131        0.010        -0.025
                           (0.169)     (0.164)      (0.176)      (0.008)      (0.041)

Asian                     0.188**      0.156*       0.177*       0.014**       0.026
                          (0.086)      (0.091)      (0.087)      (0.007)      (0.018)
Continued below




                                         A-10
    Continued: Full Results for Men: Effect of College Selectivity on Career Outcomes


                                                                            Outcome:       Outcome:
                                                                           earnings >       FTFY
                                       Outcome: ln(earnings)                 $1,000         worker
                                                 Self-
                                  Basic       revelation     Matching       Matching       Matching
                                  model         model         model          model          model
Other/missing race               -0.640         -0.630         -0.580         -0.055        -0.000
                                 (0.418)       (0.411)        (0.395)        (0.050)        (0.078)

High school top 10              0.145***      0.140***       0.138**         0.012*          0.025
    percent                      (0.038)       (0.039)       (0.053)         (0.006)        (0.020)

High school rank                0.101***       0.077**         0.068          0.005          0.027
    missing                      (0.033)       (0.032)        (0.044)        (0.005)        (0.018)

Athlete                         0.191***      0.181***       0.186***       0.011***        0.030**
                                 (0.039)       (0.039)        (0.043)        (0.004)        (0.013)

Average SAT score/100                         0.094***
    of schools applied to                      (0.021)

One additional                                 -0.204**
    application                                 (0.095)

Two additional                                 -0.198**
    applications                                (0.088)

Three additional                                -0.146
    applications                               (0.103)

Adjusted R2                       0.026         0.031          0.047          0.026          0.030
N                                 3,963         3,963          3,963          3,963          3,963
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The data come
from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. Estimates are weighted
using sampling weights from the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures at the
four public universities. The basic model includes no additional selection controls, the self-revelation
model additionally controls for the average SAT score of the colleges to which the student applied
and indicator variables for the number of additional applications submitted, and the matching model
replaces the self-revelation selection controls with a set of group indicator variables for students who
applied to, were accepted at, and were rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                                 A-11
                  Table A6: Matching Estimates Based on Applications Only


                                           Panel A: Men and Women
                                                                                             Outcome:
                                             Outcome:        Outcome:                        spouse has
                           Outcome:         earnings >      has advanced      Outcome:        advanced
                          ln(earnings)        $1,000           degree          married         degree
School-average SAT           0.077**           0.010          0.035***          -0.008        0.051***
    score/100                (0.035)          (0.007)          (0.009)          (0.012)        (0.011)

Adjusted R2                   0.205            0.097            0.094            0.022          0.100
N                             8,012            8,012            8,012            8,012          6,009
                                                Panel B: Women
                                                                                             Outcome:
                                             Outcome:        Outcome:                        spouse has
                           Outcome:         earnings >      has advanced      Outcome:        advanced
                          ln(earnings)        $1,000           degree          married         degree
School-average SAT           0.150**          0.025*          0.047***          -0.030*       0.076***
    score/100                (0.064)          (0.014)          (0.013)          (0.015)        (0.019)

Adjusted R2                   0.041            0.026            0.093            0.025          0.081
N                             4,049            4,049            4,049            4,049          2,954
                                                  Panel C: Men
                                                                                             Outcome:
                                             Outcome:        Outcome:                        spouse has
                           Outcome:         earnings >      has advanced      Outcome:        advanced
                          ln(earnings)        $1,000           degree          married         degree
School-average SAT            0.020            -0.003          0.025*            0.012          0.027
    score/100                (0.030)          (0.003)          (0.013)          (0.013)        (0.017)

Adjusted R2                   0.042            0.010            0.087            0.017          0.064
N                             3,963            3,963            3,963            3,963          3,055
 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Stan-
dard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The data come from
the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort of men and women. Estimates are
weighted using sampling weights from the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures
at the four public universities. All models are matching models in which the matching process is based
on applying to the same set of similar schools, but is not conditional on acceptances or rejections, and
are estimated on the original matched-applicant sample.




                                                  A-12
Table A7: Self-Revelation Model Estimates of the Effect of College Selectivity on Career and Marriage Outcomes


                                                   Panel A: Men and Women
                                                                                                     Outcome:
                                     Outcome:       Outcome:        Outcome:                           spouse
                                    earnings >       FTFY          has advanced       Outcome:      has advanced
                                      $1,000         worker           degree           married         degree
          School-average SAT           0.006           0.004         0.026***         -0.024**         0.023**
              score/100               (0.005)         (0.009)         (0.009)          (0.010)         (0.010)

          Adjusted R2                  0.086           0.169           0.087            0.018            0.096
          N                            8,012           8,012           8,012            8,012            6,009
                                                         Panel B: Women
                                                                                                     Outcome:
                                     Outcome:       Outcome:        Outcome:                           spouse
                                    earnings >       FTFY          has advanced       Outcome:      has advanced
                                      $1,000         worker           degree           married         degree
          School-average SAT           0.014           0.012         0.036***        -0.042***          0.024*
              score/100               (0.009)         (0.017)         (0.012)         (0.013)           (0.012)

          Adjusted R2                  0.015           0.023           0.091            0.021            0.070
          N                            4,049           4,049           4,049            4,049            2,954
                                                          Panel C: Men
                                                                                                     Outcome:
                                     Outcome:       Outcome:        Outcome:                           spouse
                                    earnings >       FTFY          has advanced       Outcome:      has advanced
                                      $1,000         worker           degree           married         degree
          School-average SAT           -0.003         -0.004           0.016            -0.008           0.021
              score/100               (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.010)          (0.012)          (0.015)

          Adjusted R2                  0.003           0.001           0.075            0.013            0.064
          N                            3,963           3,963           3,963            3,963            3,055
           Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Stan-
          dard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-matriculation level. The data come
          from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 college entering cohort. Estimates are weighted using
          sampling weights from the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures at the four pub-
          lic universities. All models are self-revelation models, which control for the average SAT score of the
          colleges to which the student applied and indicator variables for the number of additional applications
          submitted.




                                                            A-13
Table A8: Full Results: Effect of College Selectivity on Career Outcomes with Controls for Maternal Labor Supply


                                                        Women                            Men
                                                               Outcome:                        Outcome:
                                                                school-                         school-
                                               Outcome:         average       Outcome:          average
                                              ln(earnings)     SAT/100       ln(earnings)      SAT/100
                 School-average SAT              0.135*                          0.011
                     score/100                   (0.068)                        (0.032)

                 Mother worked during           0.276***           0.011        -0.053          -0.005
                     senior year HS              (0.087)          (0.010)       (0.043)         (0.013)

                 Own SAT score/100                0.005        0.024***          -0.030        0.034***
                                                 (0.035)        (0.007)         (0.018)         (0.010)

                 Predicted log(parental          -0.236*           0.021        0.134*          -0.010
                      income)                    (0.133)          (0.018)       (0.072)         (0.028)

                 Own SAT score missing            0.433           0.269**        -0.410        0.457***
                                                 (0.401)          (0.102)       (0.281)         (0.141)

                 Black                          0.776***          0.092**     -0.297***         0.095*
                                                 (0.146)          (0.039)       (0.073)         (0.046)

                 Hispanic                         -0.110          0.248**        0.133           0.045
                                                 (0.287)          (0.095)       (0.174)         (0.101)

                 Asian                          0.786***           -0.008      0.182**           0.036
                                                 (0.140)          (0.032)      (0.088)          (0.038)

                 Other/missing race               0.664           0.325**        -0.581          -0.136
                                                 (0.604)          (0.143)       (0.390)         (0.204)

                 High school top 10             0.255***           0.029       0.137**          -0.027
                     percent                     (0.091)          (0.022)      (0.053)          (0.024)

                 High school rank                 0.117           -0.002         0.068          -0.083
                     missing                     (0.084)          (0.035)       (0.044)         (0.056)

                 Athlete                        0.268***       0.078***        0.187***        0.075**
                                                 (0.072)        (0.023)         (0.043)        (0.029)

                 Adjusted R2                      0.051            0.815         0.047          0.789
                 N                                4,049            4,049         3,963          3,963
                  Notes: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
                 respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the school-of-
                 matriculation level. The data come from the College and Beyond survey for the 1976 col-
                 lege entering cohort of men and women. Estimates are weighted using sampling weights
                 from the College and Beyond survey to reflect sampling procedures at the four public
                 universities. All models are matching models, which control for selection by including a
                 set of group indicator variables for students who applied to, were accepted at, and were
                 rejected from the same set of similar schools.




                                                           A-14
            Table A9: Summary Statistics on Educational and Occupational Fields


                                    Women                                       Men
                                Advanced                                   Advanced
                    College      degree                        College      degree
                     major        field        Occupation       major        field        Occupation
STEM                 0.190         0.106          0.087         0.339         0.126           0.137
                    (0.392)       (0.307)        (0.282)       (0.474)       (0.332)         (0.344)

Social sciences      0.335         0.129          0.141         0.289         0.054           0.075
                    (0.472)       (0.335)        (0.348)       (0.453)       (0.226)         (0.263)

Humanities           0.244         0.091          0.088         0.138         0.055           0.048
                    (0.430)       (0.287)        (0.283)       (0.345)       (0.228)         (0.214)

Business             0.083         0.164          0.367         0.142         0.199           0.369
                    (0.276)       (0.370)        (0.482)       (0.349)       (0.400)         (0.483)

Health                             0.058          0.129                       0.105           0.098
                                  (0.234)        (0.335)                     (0.307)         (0.298)

Law                                0.093          0.071                       0.149           0.097
                                  (0.291)        (0.258)                     (0.356)         (0.296)

Other                0.073         0.038          0.117         0.021         0.023           0.176
                    (0.261)       (0.190)        (0.321)       (0.142)       (0.151)         (0.381)

Observations         4,049         4,049          4,049         3,963         3,963           3,963
 Notes: All statistics are from the matched-applicant sample. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
Means are weighted to reflect sampling procedures at public universities. Some college majors and
advanced degree fields are missing (for individuals who did not graduate college or did not obtain an ad-
vanced degree, respectively), meaning that the means of these variables will not add up to 1 (in columns
1, 2, 4, and 5).




                                                 A-15
