NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNIONS AND WAGE INEQUALITY:
THE ROLES OF GENDER, SKILL AND PUBLIC SECTOR EMPLOYMENT
David Card
Thomas Lemieux
W. Craig Riddell
Working Paper 25313
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25313

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We thank David Green and two anonymous referees for very helpful comments and Pablo
Gutierrez for excellent research assistance. We are also grateful to the Bank of Canada and
SSHRC for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by David Card, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Unions and Wage Inequality: The Roles of Gender, Skill and Public Sector Employment
David Card, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell
NBER Working Paper No. 25313
November 2018
JEL No. J31,J45,J51
ABSTRACT
We examine the changing relationship between unionization and wage inequality in Canada and
the United States. Our study is motivated by profound recent changes in the composition of the
unionized workforce. Historically, union jobs were concentrated among low-skilled men in
private sector industries. With the steady decline in private sector unionization and rising
influence in the public sector, half of unionized workers are now in the public sector.
Accompanying these changes was a remarkable rise in the share of women among unionized
workers. Currently, approximately half of unionized employees in North America are women.
While early studies of unions and inequality focused on males, recent studies find that unions
reduce wage inequality among men but not among women.
In both countries we find striking differences between the private and public sectors in the effects
of unionization on wage inequality. At present, unions reduce economy-wide wage inequality by
less than 10%. However, union impacts on wage inequality are much larger in the public sector.
Once we disaggregate by sector the effects of unions on male and female wage inequality no
longer differ. The key differences in union impacts are between the public and private sectors –
not between males and females.
David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu
Thomas Lemieux
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
CANADA
and NBER
thomas.lemieux@ubc.ca

W. Craig Riddell
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
Canada
craig.riddell@ubc.ca

1. Introduction
The relationship between unions and wage inequality continues to attract
research and policy interest as analysts struggle to understand the relative importance
of market-based and institutional forces in explaining the rise in income inequality
throughout the industrialized world. A central issue is whether trends in inequality can
be rationalized by technological change and globalization (Acemoglu and Autor, 2011;
Helpman, 2016), or whether labour and product market institutions such as minimum
wages, collective bargaining and product market deregulation have played some
independent role (Fortin and Lemieux, 1997; Card and DiNardo, 2002; Salverda and
Checchi, 2015). Numerous studies have concluded that the decline in unions within
specific countries has contributed to growing inequality.1 Other research shows that
differences in the extent of unionization contribute to cross-country differences in the
level of wage inequality (e.g. Lemieux, 1993; DiNardo and Lemieux, 1997), and that
differences in the rate of de-unionization are correlated with differences in the growth
of inequality (Card, Lemieux and Riddell, 2004; Gosling and Lemieux, 2004). This
evidence has led some pundits (e.g. Stiglitz, 2012) to argue that labour law reforms
should be part of any policy response to rising inequality and secular declines in labour’s
share of national income.
This paper examines the changing nature of the relationship between
unionization and wage inequality in Canada and the United States over the past four to
five decades. Our study is motivated by profound changes in the composition of the
unionized workforce during this period, and the implications of these changes for the
wage structure. Historically, union jobs in both countries were largely held by unskilled
and semi-skilled men working in private sector industries such as manufacturing,
transportation, construction, forestry and mining. With the steady decline in private
sector unionization and rising union influence in the public sector, however, union
coverage rates are now 5 times higher in the public sector than the private sector in

1

We present a brief overview of this work in Section II of this paper.

1

both the U.S. and Canada.2 As a consequence, though the public sector contains only 1520% of all jobs in the two economies, approximately half of the unionized workers in
both countries are in the public sector. These sectoral changes have been accompanied
by a remarkable rise in the share of women in the unionized workforce. Currently, 47%
percent of all unionized employees in the U.S., and 53% of those in Canada, are women.
A typical union worker today is more likely to be a female teacher or nurse with a
university degree than a male factory worker with only a high school education.
A key lesson of earlier research is the importance of accounting for
heterogeneity in the rate of union membership and the size of the union effect on
wages. The effect of unions on overall wage inequality depends critically on which skill
groups are most likely to be represented by unions, and on the extent to which unions
raise wages for more versus less highly paid groups (see Card 1992, 1996; Lemieux,
1993). Estimates of this effect when these differentials are taken into account are
typically lower than in the simple two sector homogeneous worker model originated by
Freeman (1980) in his seminal study of unions and inequality.
While many early studies of unions and inequality focused on male workers,
more recent studies examine men and women and reveal striking gender differences. A
consistent finding in Canada, the U.S. and the U.K. is that unions tend to reduce wage
inequality among men but not among women (e.g., DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux, 1996;
Card, 2001; Card, Lemieux and Riddell, 2004; Gosling and Lemieux, 2004). In this paper
we build on this approach and allow for heterogeneity by skill group and gender, but
extend the analysis to account for differences across the public and private sectors.
Disaggregating by sector also allows us to explore the extent to which differences in
union impacts between men and women found in earlier studies are attributable to

2

See Appendix Table 1 for summary statistics on unionization and public/private sector employment. We
use the definitions of the public sector employed by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and Statistics
Canada. In both countries public sector employment includes those who work for a federal,
state/provincial or municipal government, for a government service or agency or a government owned
public establishment such as a school, college, university or hospital. In Canada this also includes
employees of Crown corporations.

2

public-private differences in the coverage patterns and wage effects, rather than to a
gender-specific effect.
We focus on the U.S. and Canada for several reasons. The two countries share a
common legal framework that results in a sharp distinction between union and nonunion workplaces. In this setting workers have the right to form and join unions, and if a
majority of employees agree their chosen union will be certified as the exclusive
representative of all workers in the bargaining unit, whether they join the union or not. 3
This framework creates a highly decentralized form of collective bargaining in which
most non-managerial employees in a given enterprise are either covered by a union
contract, and pay membership dues to the union, or have their wages set by the
employer with no influence of unions. In contrast, in Australia and many European
countries collective agreements between unions and employer associations are often
extended to all workers in a sector, creating large gaps between the fraction of workers
whose wages are set by collective bargaining and the fraction of union members (Visser,
2015) and a fuzzy boundary between the union and non-union sectors.4 In addition, in
both Canada and the U.S. the non-union sector is large, yielding a good approximation
to the wage structure that would prevail in the absence of unions.
Canada and the U.S. also provide contrasting experiences that are relevant for
our study. Although their economies and labour markets have many common features,
the level of inequality is lower in Canada than the U.S. during our sample period, and
also rose more slowly. Unionization rates in the two countries followed similar trends in
the immediate post-war period, and were approximately equal in the early 1960s. Since
then, however, unionization rates have diverged – rising in Canada until the early 1980s,
followed by a gradual decline to 30% in 2016, but falling steadily in the U.S. to a rate of

3

Key features of this legal framework were introduced with the passage of the U.S. Wagner Act in 1935.
During World War II the Canadian federal government passed the National War Labour Order, Order-inCouncil P.C. 1003, that incorporated Wagner Act-type provisions relating to union recognition and
formation together with long-standing Canadian laws designed to prevent and settle disputes such as
compulsory conciliation and “cooling off” periods. After the war ended, jurisdiction over labour matters
reverted back to the provinces, and most provinces passed similar legislation.
4
The extreme example is France where 8 percent of workers in 2010 were union members but 98 percent
were covered by collective agreements (Visser, 2015).

3

only 12% in 2016. These differences in the timing of union growth and decline and in
levels and movements in wage inequality provide an opportunity to further assess the
contribution of institutional change to trends in income inequality.
An additional objective of this paper is to provide estimates of the impact unions
exert on the current wage structure. Previous studies conclude that the decline of
unionization has made a significant contribution to rising inequality, but what is the
impact of unions on wage inequality at the present time? Because labour law reform – if
ever enacted -- would likely influence the extent of union coverage at the margin,
estimates of the consequences of such reforms should reflect the dramatic changes that
have already taken place in the structure of the unionized workforce.
The next section of the paper reviews the economics literature on unions and
wage inequality. We then describe our empirical strategy. Section four describes our
data sources and provides our results. The final section concludes.

2. Unions and Wage Inequality: An Overview of the Previous Literature
The impacts of unions on the wage structure and the distribution of earnings
have long intrigued social scientists. This section briefly reviews this large literature,
focusing on Canada and the U.S.5
Prior to the 1980s, most economists agreed that by creating an average pay gap
between the union and non-union sectors, unions tended to increase overall inequality
(e.g., Johnson, 1975).6 This view was challenged by Freeman (1980), who argued that
union wage setting tends to lower wage dispersion among more and less skilled workers,
and between higher and lower-paying establishments, leading to a “within sector”
inequality effect that may offset the “between sector” effect arising from the average union
pay gap. Freeman’s (1980) analysis showed that the within-sector effect was large and
negative, particularly in the manufacturing sector. For other sectors he concluded that the
net impact of unions was smaller, reflecting both a smaller within-sector effect and
5

See Card, Lemieux and Riddell (2004) for a more detailed review up to the early 2000s.
An interesting exception to this general view was Ashenfelter’s (1972) study showing that unions tended
to lower the black-white pay gap.
6

4

larger between-sector effect. Subsequent work (e.g., Freeman, 1982 for the U.S.; and
Meng, 1990 for Canada) confirmed that wages tend to be less disperse in the union sector,
and that the net effect of unions was to lower wage inequality relative to the level in the nonunion sector. Freeman (1993) used this framework to study the impact of falling union
coverage rates on the trend in male wage inequality, concluding that de-unionization could
explain 20-25% of the rise in wage inequality over the 1980s.
Freeman’s (1980) approach was generalized by DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996)
and DiNardo and Lemieux (1997), who introduced a reweighting technique that takes
into account potential differences in the union-nonunion pay gap for workers with different
observed skill characteristics, and differences in the probability of union coverage for
different skill groups. Using this method DiNardo and Lemieux (1997) estimated that in
the early 1980s the presence of unions reduced the variance of male wages by 6 percent
in the U.S. and 10 percent in Canada. By the late 1980s, their estimates showed that the
equalizing effect of unions had fallen to 3 percent in the U.S., but had risen to 13
percent in Canada, contributing to the divergence in pay inequality in the two countries.
DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) (hereinafter, DFL) examined wage
distributions for both male and female workers in the U.S. in 1979 and 1988. For men,
their estimates suggest that shifts in unionization accounted for 10-15 percent of the
overall rise in wage dispersion in the 1980s. For women, on the other hand, the
estimated contribution of changing unionization is very small.7
Card (2001) uses a related skill-grouping approach to compare the effects of unions
on trends in male and female wage inequality in the U.S. public and private sectors. His
findings suggest that unions had similar equalizing effects on male workers in the two
sectors and similarly small effects on wage dispersion for female workers in both sectors.
Interestingly, by the end of Card’s sample period (1993) there is some evidence that

7 Gosling and Lemieux (2004) use the DFL method to compare the effects of unions on trends in wage

inequality in the U.S. and the U.K. between 1983 and 1998. Their estimates confirmed that in both countries
unions have a much smaller equalizing effect on females than males. They estimate that declining
unionization can explain up to 33% of the rise in male wage inequality in the U.K. between 1983 and 1998,
and up to 40% of the corresponding rise in the U.S., but very little of the rise in female wage inequality.

5

public sector unions were starting to have a modest dampening effect on wage
inequality for female workers in the public sector – a result we re-examine below.
Finally, Card, Lemieux and Riddell (2004) use a DFL style technique to analyse the
link between unions and wage inequality in Canada, the U.K. and the U.S. They show that
unions have an equalizing effect on male wage dispersion in all three countries, and that
declines in male union coverage can explain a modest share of the rises in male pay
inequality between the early 1970s and the early 2000s in the U.S., and between the
early 1980s and the early 2000’s in the U.K. and Canada. As in earlier studies they find
that the effects of unions on female wage inequality are substantially smaller than for
men, a result that arises from the tendency for unionized jobs held by women to be
relatively high-paying, and from the fact that union-nonunion wage gaps do not seem to
be any larger for lower-skilled than higher-skilled women.
A longstanding concern with simple comparisons based on the structure of wages for
union and nonunion workers is that unionized workers may have different unobserved
characteristics than nonunion workers with the same observed skills (e.g., Lewis, 1986).
Depending on the selection process determining union status, this could lead to an
overstatement of the equalizing effect of unions. One way of addressing this concern is to
use longitudinal data to follow workers as they move between sectors. Freeman (1984,
1993) showed that wage dispersion falls when workers enter the union sector and rise
when they leave, confirming that unions have an equalizing effect even on the same
worker. Nevertheless, his estimates suggested that this effect is smaller than would be
inferred from a simple cross-sectional approach.
A problem with longitudinal comparisons is that union status can be mismeasured, leading to a high rate of falsely measured transitions between sectors. Using
estimates of this mismeasurement rate to correct the observed longitudinal data Card (1992)
concluded that unions still have a significant equalizing effect on male wages, and that the
fall in unionization from the early 1970s to the late 1980s explained around 20 percent of
the increase in U.S. male wage inequality, not far off Freeman’s earlier estimate.
Lemieux (1993) used the 1986-87 Labour Market Activity Survey to study the effects

6

of union sector changes in Canada. His results showed that unionized workers from the
lowest skill group are positively selected, whereas those in the upper skill groups are
negatively selected – a pattern similar to the one found in the U.S. by Card (1992). An
implication of this pattern is that the between-group “flattening effect” of unions
apparent in the raw data is somewhat exaggerated, although there is still evidence that
unions raise wages of low-skilled men more than those of high-skilled men. Overall,
Lemieux concluded that the presence of unions lowers the variance of male wages in
Canada in the late 1980s by about 15 percent.
Lemieux’s findings for women in Canada were much different: neither the crosssectional nor longitudinal estimates showed a systematic flattening effect of unions.
Coupled with the fact that union coverage is lower for less-skilled women, these results
implied that unions raise the between-group variance of wages for women. This effect is
larger than the modest negative effect on the within-group variance, so Lemieux’s results
imply that on net unions raised wage dispersion among Canadian women.
Lemieux (1998) presented an estimation method that accounts for the potential
“flattening” effect of unions on the returns to both observable and unobservable skills.
Using data on men who were forced to change jobs involuntarily, he concluded that
unions tend to compress the pay associated with observed and unobserved skills.
Moreover, the variance of wages around the expected level of pay is lower in the union
sector. As a result of these tendencies, Lemieux’s results implied that unionization
reduced the variance of wages among Canadian men by about 17 percent – not far off
the estimate in his 1993 study.
To summarize, we believe the existing evidence points to four main conclusions.
1. Unions tend to reduce wage dispersion for male workers. As a result, declining
unionization has contributed to rising wage inequality among men since the 1970s or
early 1980s.
2. Unions have little impact -- or even a small disequalizing effect -- on female wage
inequality. An unresolved puzzle is whether this is a pure gender effect or due to other
factors such as differences between male-dominated and female-dominated types of

7

employment.
3. There is some evidence of non-random selection into union and nonunion jobs.
Existing evidence suggests that this selectivity leads to a relatively small over-estimate of
the equalizing effect of unions on male workers.
4. Relatively little is known about the impacts of unions on the wage structure in the
public sector, and how this differs from the private sector.

3. Estimating the Effects of Unions on Wage Inequality
In this section we present a simple framework for studying the effect of unions on
wage inequality. We begin with a conceptual overview that clarifies the relationship
between what we can actually measure with available data and the potential channels
through which the presence of unions alters the degree of wage inequality in the overall
labour market. We then discuss our measurement approach, which is based on the
reweighting methods developed by DFL and DiNardo and Lemieux (1997), and develop a
simple within- and between-skill group decomposition that helps illustrate the
differences in the effect of unions on males versus females, and between the public and
private sectors.
Building on the potential outcomes approach that is now widely used in the
program evaluation literature (e.g., Angrist and Krueger, 1999) we assume that a given
worker could earn a wage in either the union or nonunion sectors. We depart slightly
from the standard approach, however, and allow these two potential wages to depend
on the overall level of unionization in the economy.8 Specifically, let
WiU(U) and WiN(U) represent the potential wages that worker i could earn at a
union or non-union job, respectively, assuming that a fraction U of all jobs are
unionized. In general, these two potential wages could depend not only on the average
level of unionization but on which specific jobs were incorporated in the union sector.
Since our interest is in comparing the economy with the current observed level of
unionism to a counterfactual with U=0, however, we abstract from this concern.
8

The idea that wages of a given worker in the two sectors could potentially depend on the economy-wide
level of unionization was first formalized in Lewis (1963).

8

Let VU(U) and VN(U) denote the variances of potential union and nonunion
wages, respectively, given a level of unionization, and let V(U) denote the variance of
wages observed in the economy given U. With this notation, the “effect” of
unionization on the overall dispersion of wages, given the present level of unionization
U, is V(U) - VN(0). Notice that this effect can be written as the sum of two terms:
V(U) - VN(0) = [ V(U) - VN(U) ] + [ VN(U) - VN(0) ]

(1)

The first, V(U) - VN(U), represents the difference in the current variance of wages and
the variance that would prevail if we held constant the current level of unionization but
all workers were paid their nonunion wage, WiN(U). The second term is a “general
equilibrium” effect, representing the difference in dispersion of non-union wages that
would prevail with the current level of unionization and in the counterfactual world of
U=0.
As noted by DFL and DiNardo and Lemieux (1997), although we do not directly
observe VN(U), under strong assumptions we can form an estimate by extrapolating
from the non-union wages we do observe (at the current level of unionization) being
paid to workers in the nonunion sector. Assuming this problem can be solved we can
estimate the first term in equation (1).
The second term is more elusive. Researchers since Lewis (1963) have argued
that two main factors determine its size: (i) labour supply spillovers – if unions raise
wages, doing so may reduce the number of jobs in the union sector, increasing labour
supply elsewhere and lowering wages in the nonunion sector; and (ii) the threat effect –
some nonunion employers may raise wages to reduce the threat of unionization.
Interestingly, these two effects operate in opposite directions, and may offset each other
to some extent. We note also that the magnitude of the general equilibrium effect
VN(U)-VN(0) depends on the size of U. Given currently low levels of unionization in the
North American private sector, we suspect that the magnitude of VN(U)-VN(0) is small
for that sector, though it may have been larger in the past.9 For the public sector, U is
9

Fortin, Lemieux, and Lloyd (2018) find that general equilibrium effects of unionization reduce wage
dispersion in the non-union sector, indicating that threat effects are more important than spillover effects
in the U.S. labour market. This suggests that our estimates of union effects, V(U)-VN(U), understate the

9

higher but one might argue that spillover effects are small in the public sector (because
of inelastic demand for labour) and that threat effects are also small (because the extent
of unionization is determined largely by the political process, rather than by the
preferences of workers to support or not support unionization). Thus, in the rest of this
analysis we focus on comparisons between V(U), the observed variance of wages, and
VN(U), the variance that would prevail if everyone were paid according to the current
nonunion wage structure.

Estimating the Variance of Potential Nonunion Wages.
In order to estimate VN(U), which from now on we denote as VN, we have to make an
assumption about how current union workers would be paid if they worked in the
nonunion sector. One starting point is the assumption that union status is “as good as
randomly assigned,” conditional on observed skill characteristics, gender and sector of
employment. In this case, the variance VN can be estimated as the variance of wages for
a suitably reweighted sample of nonunion workers. In this section we show how the
resulting calculations are related to three key factors: the variation in the union coverage
rate by wage level in the absence of unions, the size of the union wage effect for
different skill groups, and the union-nonunion difference in the variance of wages within
skill categories.10
Let WiN (c) represent the log wage that a given individual in skill group c would
earn in the nonunion sector and let WiU (c) denote the log wage for the same individual if
employed in a union job. Assume that
WiN (c) = WN (c) + eiN and
WiU (c) = WU (c) + eiU
where WN(c) and WU(c) are the mean nonunion and union log wages for individuals in
effect of unions on wage dispersion (in absolute terms) since VN(U)-VN(0)<0. Fortin, Lemieux, and Lloyd
(2018) also find that, for U.S. men, general equilibrium effects of unionization VN(U)-VN(0) are about three
times as small in 2017 as they were in 1979, and that general equilibrium effects are substantially smaller
for women than men.
10
Card, Lemieux and Riddell (2004) discuss how the assumption that union status is independent of
unobserved productivity factors can be relaxed.

10

skill group c, respectively, and the deviations eiN and eiU are independent of actual union
status (conditional on gender, sector of employment and the observed skill level c). Let
VU(c) and VN(c) denote the variances of potential wage outcomes for individuals in skill
group c in the union and nonunion sectors, respectively, where implicitly we are now
holding constant the overall level of unionization in the workforce at its current level.
The union-nonunion gap in average wages for workers in skill group c is
DW (c) = WU (c) - WN (c),
while the corresponding variance gap is
DV (c) = VU (c) - VN (c)
Under the independence assumption, WN(c) and VN(c) provide unbiased estimates of the
mean and variance of nonunion wage outcomes for all workers in skill group c, not just
those who are actually working in the nonunion sector. The variance of wages in the
nonunion sector will not necessarily equal VN, however, if the distribution of nonunion
workers across skill groups differs from the distribution of the overall work force. A
simple way to estimate VN is to reweight individual observations from the nonunion
work force to account for this difference. Letting U(c) denote the fraction of workers in
skill group c in union jobs, the appropriate weight for nonunion workers in group c is
1/(1-U(c)).
Under the conditional independence assumption, the reweighted variance VN
provides an unbiased estimate of the variance of log wages in the absence of unions.
The variance of log wages across all groups is the sum of the variance of mean wages
across groups and the average variance within groups
V = Var (W(c)) + E[ V(c)]

(2)

where W(c) is the mean wage in cell c and V(c) is the within cell variance. Similarly, the
counterfactual variance VN is the sum of “between group” and “within group”
components
VN = Var (WN(c)) + E[ VN(c)]

(3)

where WN(c) is the mean nonunion wage in cell c, VN(c) is the within cell variance of

11

nonunion wages, and cells are weighted by the fractions of all workers in each cell. Thus
the impact of unions on the variance of log wages can be written as the sum of
“between group” and “within group” components
V - VN = [ Var (W(c)) - Var (WN(c)) ] + [ E[ V(c)] - E[ VN(c)] ]

(4)

Card, Lemieux and Riddell (2004) further discuss how the between and within
group components depend on the wage gap, variance gap, and unionization rate at the
cell level. Since W(c) = WN(c) + U(c)DW(c), the magnitude of the between group effect
depends on how the effect of unions on average wages, or union wage gain U(c)DW(c), is
distributed across the different skill groups. For example, unions will reduce the
between group component if the wage gain is larger for lower than higher skill
workers.11 This can either happen because unions “flatten” the wage structure (DW(c)
declines with the skill level) or because unionization is relatively concentrated among
lower skill workers.
In the next section we present evidence on the pattern of union coverage and
the magnitude and of the flattening effect. We then report estimates of the total effect
of unions on the variance of log wages, including the contributions of the between and
within group components.

4. Data and Estimation Results
Data Sources. We use two micro data files – the U.S. Current Population Survey (CPS) and
the Canadian Labour Force Survey (LFS) together with supplements to these surveys to study
the effects of unions on the wage structure since the early 1970s in the U.S. and the early
1980s in Canada. When suitably weighted these very similar household surveys provide
representative samples of the adult population in the two countries. The CPS has been
11

Since Var[W(c)] = Var[WN(c) + U(c)DW(c)] = Var[WN(c)] + 2Cov[WN(c),U(c)DW(c)] + Var[U(c)DW(c)], the
union effect on the between group component is Var (W(c)) - Var (WN(c)) = 2Cov[WN(c),U(c)DW(c)] +
Var[U(c)DW(c)]. As the variance of the union wage gain is positive, unions can only reduce the between
group component if the covariance between the non-union wage and the union wage gain is negative
enough to offset the variance term. As Tables 1 and 2 indicate, the covariance term is negative enough in
most specifications to yield a negative ‘between group’ component. While the covariance term can be
readily computed (as in Card, Lemieux, and Riddell, 2004), it is not reported in the tables to simplify the
exposition.

12

collecting data on wages and union status annually since 1973. We use the pooled May
1973 and May 1974 CPS samples as our first U.S. observation. For later years, we use the
monthly earnings supplements data (the “outgoing rotation group” files) for 1984, 1993
and 2015.
The Canadian LFS added questions on wages and union status in 1997. Prior to
that time several surveys carried out as supplements to the regular LFS included
questions that provide this information. We use the 1984 Survey of Union Membership
as a source of information for the early 1980s and combine two smaller surveys – the
1991 and 1995 Surveys on Work Arrangements (SWA) – as a source of information for the
early 1990s. For the most recent period we use the 2015 LFS. In both the CPS and LFS
data the earnings and union status information pertain to an individual’s main job as of
the survey week.
A key variable for our analysis is the measurement of union status. The 1984 and
later CPS files as well as LFS data since 1997 include questions on both union
membership and union coverage. The 1973 and 1974 May CPS surveys, however, only
ask about union membership. For comparability over time, we therefore focus on union
membership as our measure of union status in the U.S. In the case of Canada, we use
union coverage as our measure of unionization because consistent information on union
membership cannot be recovered from the 1991 and 1995 SWA’s. We believe that this
choice has little effect on the results, since only about two percent of Canadian
employees are covered by collective agreements but are not union members.12
Another difference between the Canadian and U.S. data is that public sector
affiliation is not measured in the same way in the two countries. In the CPS workers are
asked directly whether they work for the government. 13 In the LFS workers are simply
asked “who they work for”, with options including the “name of business, government

12

For example, in 2015 union membership was 28.6% versus coverage of 30.6%. The two different
measures of union density result in nearly identical estimates of the union wage premium in a
conventional regression of log wages on union status, education and experience.
13
The CPS question used to determine the class of worker is: “Were you employed by government, by a
private company, a nonprofit organization, or were you self –employed (or working in the family
business)?”

13

department or agency, or person” and “what kind of business, industry or service this
is.” Statistics Canada then uses this information to code workers as working in the private
or public sector.14 Despite these measurement differences, Appendix Table 1 indicates
that, as expected, a slightly higher fraction of Canadian workers (20%) are classified as
working in the public sector than their U.S. counterparts (15.4%). This difference likely
reflects true differences in the scope of the public sector, as opposed to the way public
sector employment is measured in the two countries. 15
In the data appendix we explain in detail how we process the various data sets to
arrive at our final estimation samples. Generally speaking, our samples include only
wage and salary workers age 16 to 64 (15 to 64 in Canada) with non-allocated wages and
earnings (except in 1984 and 2015 in Canada). We use hourly wages for workers who are
paid by the hour and compute average hourly earnings for other workers by dividing
weekly earnings by weekly hours (or earnings for a longer time period divided by the
corresponding measure of hours). We also exclude workers with very low or very high
hourly wage values. Sample weights are used throughout.
To implement the methods developed in the previous section we divide workers
in each sample into skill groups based on age and educational attainment. The number of
skill groups used differs by country, reflecting differences in the sample sizes and the age
and education codes reported in the raw data files. In the earlier Canadian data sets, age
is only reported in 10-year categories (a total of 5 categories for workers age 15 to 64),
and education can only be consistently coded into 5 categories. Thus, we use 25 skill
groups for Canada. In our U.S. samples, we are able to use a much larger number of skill
categories because of the larger sample sizes and detailed age and education information
14

Individuals reporting working for a local, provincial or federal government, for a government service or
agency, a crown corporation, or an organization that receives the majority of its funding from government
such as a school, college, university or hospital are coded as working in the public sector.
15
The most important difference in the scope of the public sector in the two countries is the health care
sector which is overwhelmingly public in Canada, but not in the U.S. This is confirmed by Appendix Table 2
that shows that 9.7% of public sector employees are health care professionals in Canada, compared to
only 0.8% in the private sector. By contrast, only 4.7% of public sector employees are health care
professionals in the U.S., compared to 6.4% in the private sector. Unlike health care, the education sector
is mostly public in both countries, and Appendix Table 2 shows that teachers and other education-related
occupations represent a much larger share of the workforce in the public than the private sector in both
countries.

14

in the CPS. We have re-analyzed the U.S. data using about the same number of skill
groups as in Canada, however, and found that this has little impact on our results.

Patterns of Union Coverage. Summary measures of union coverage are shown in the first
row of Tables 1 and 2. Tables 1(a) and 2(a) report results for the private and public
sectors pooled for U.S. and Canada respectively, while Tables 1(b) and 2(b) contain
results separately by sector of employment.
Table 1(a) shows the steady and dramatic decline in union density among men in
the U.S. over the past four decades -- from 31% in 1973/74 to 12% in 2015. In contrast,
little change in coverage took place among U.S. women – unionization was stable at 13%14% during this extended period of time. For the U.S. workforce as a whole, male and
female union density rates are now approximately equal. Perhaps the most striking
feature is the dramatic divergence between the private and public sectors that is evident
for the U.S. in Table 1(b). In the private sector the male unionization rate fell from 31% in
1973/74 to 9% in 2015, while it rose in the public sector from 29% to 43%, with most of
the increase occurring between 1973/74 and 1984. Similarly, union coverage among U.S.
private sector women, already low at 13% in 1973/74, declined to 6% in 2015, while the
rate in the public sector rose even more than that for men – from 18% to 41%.
The changes over time in Canada between 1984 and 2015 exhibit similar patterns
although coverage levels are very different. For the labour force as a whole, male union
coverage declined by 17 percentage points (from 46% to 29%) between 1984 and 2015 –
an even larger decrease than in the U.S. over this time period. The decline for women
was much smaller although again was greater than in the U.S. – from 37% to 32%. Private
sector unionization fell by almost one-half for both groups – from 37% to 19% for males
and 25% to 13% for females. In contrast, rates of union coverage in the public sector
were stable for both men and women at 75-80%.
The divergence in union coverage rates between the public and private sectors in
both Canada and the U.S. raises questions about the comparability of the various control
groups of non-union workers used to compute the potential (or counterfactual) variance

15

VN. For example, since over 90% of U.S. private sector workers are in the non-union
sector in 2015, the wage distribution among these workers is likely very close to the
distribution that would prevail if all private sector workers were non-union. By contrast,
less than 25% of Canadian public sector workers are in the non-union sector in 2015,
which raises potential challenges attempting to extrapolate what the wage distribution
would look like if all public sector workers were non-union.
Although we partly address these issues by controlling for observed skills
(education and experience) when computing the potential variance, there may still be
differences in other observed or unobserved characteristics over different groups of
workers. Appendix Table 2 helps alleviate some of these concerns by showing that the
pattern of unionization across occupations is surprisingly similar in the public and private
sectors in both countries. In particular, the unionization rate in management occupations
is always lower than in other occupations in the same sector, while the opposite is true
among trade and other blue-collar occupations. Looking across all occupations, the
correlation coefficient between the unionization rate in the private and public sector is
0.63 in Canada, and 0.73 in the U.S.16
The framework developed in Section 3 suggests that the effect of unions on wage
inequality depends in part on how union coverage varies by skill level. Figures 1 and 2
show the unionization rates of men and women in the private and public sectors in the
U.S. and Canada, by the level of real hourly wages. These graphs are constructed by
calculating union membership/coverage rates for workers in narrow wage bins and
smoothing across bins.17 The wage values reported on the x-axis range from the 1st to the
99th percentile of the distribution of wages for U.S. males in 2015 (expressed in 2001
dollars). Vertical lines identify the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles of the wage distribution.
As the wage distribution is approximately log normal, the mid-point on the x-axis is close
to the median, while the $6.69 and $34.81 markers are close to the 10th and 90th wage

16

Also, in many instances the public and private sectors hire from the same pool of potential workers, so
the private sector nonunion wage structure exerts some influence on its public sector counterpart.
17
The densities are estimated using a bandwidth of 0.05. See DiNardo et. al (1996) for more detail.

16

percentiles, respectively.18
Several noteworthy features of the differences between Canada and the U.S. and
among the four groups within each country, as well as trends over time, are evident. One
prominent development is that declines in coverage in the private sector have been
largest in the middle of the wage distribution for both men and women, resulting in the
gradual disappearance over time of the “hump- shaped” distribution of union coverage in
both countries. In the early part of our sample period, unionization rates of men
employed in the private sector tended to be low at the bottom and top of the wage
distribution and to peak for workers near the middle or upper middle of the distribution.
However, by 2015 this hump-shaped pattern had largely disappeared in the U.S. and
substantially disappeared in Canada, yielding a distribution of union coverage that is
much more uniform across the wage distribution. To the extent that a peak still exists it
has also shifted to the right, higher up the wage distribution. A similar, but less dramatic,
change has also taken place among women in the private sector. Also noteworthy are
the decreases in coverage among private sector women at the very top of the
distribution in both countries.
In contrast, the shape of the distribution has changed much less over time in the
public sector. Unionization rates of public sector women in Canada are low at the bottom
of the wage distribution (although there have been increases over time at the very bottom),
rise to a peak around the middle, and remain almost as high for workers at the top of the
distribution as for those in the middle. This pattern is driven in part by relatively high
rates of unionization for teachers, nurses, and other highly skilled public sector workers,
who are near the top of the female wage distribution. The U.S. pattern is similar. Among
public sector male employees there is a slight hump-shape to the coverage distribution,
but the decline in unionization at higher wage levels is modest in both countries and has
become less pronounced over time in the U.S. due to further increases in the upper part

18

The 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the 2015 wage distribution for U.S. males are $6.9, $14.2, and
$35.2, respectively (2001 dollars). The wage distribution is shifted to the left for U.S. women, and to the
right (in Canadian dollars) for Canadian men and women.

17

of the earnings distribution. In Canada public sector unionization has been very stable
over time in the upper half of the male distribution. The same pattern holds for women
except for recent declines in coverage at the very top. In the lower half of the distribution
decreases in coverage just below the peak have been offset by increases at the very
bottom, a pattern evident for men and women.

Union Effects on Mean Wages. The top section in Tables 1 and 2 shows union wage
effects for men and women in the two countries, both for the labour force as a whole
(Tables 1a and 2a) and separately for the private and public sectors (Tables 1b and 2b).
The unadjusted wage gap refers to the mean difference between union and nonunion log
wages in the raw data, while the adjusted gap controls for compositional differences in
the distribution of skills between the union and nonunion sectors. The adjusted gap is
computed by averaging (over the distribution of union workers) the cell-specific wage
gap DW(c). The composition effect reported in the tables represents the difference
between the adjusted and unadjusted gap.19
Looking first at the estimates for the pooled samples, the unadjusted wage gaps
are larger for women than for men in both countries. The adjusted gaps are generally
smaller than the unadjusted gaps, and in the U.S. the difference between the two has
increased over time, reflecting the decline in union coverage in the middle and lower end
of the wage distribution relative to the top, as was seen earlier in Figure 1. The increase
over time in the skill composition adjustment is especially large for U.S. women. In
Canada the composition effect adjustment is more stable over time, but larger for
women than for men. Nonetheless, the adjusted wage gaps remain larger for Canadian
females than for males in all sample years.
Over time, there is a large decline in the union wage impact in the U.S., especially
for female employees (Table 1a). Almost all of this change took place between 1993 and
19

The mean wage in the union sector is
, where θU(c) is the fraction of union
workers in cell c. Similarly, the mean non-union wage is
. The unadjusted union
wage gap can be rewritten as
. The
first term in the equation is the adjusted union wage gap, while the second term is the composition effect.

18

2015; for example, the adjusted wage gap for men fell from 23% to 16% and that for
women from 20% to 9% over this time period. Interestingly, the unadjusted wage gaps
actually rose over the 1973/74 to 2015 period for both men and women (although they
fell from 1993 to 2015).
One might be tempted to attribute this drop in the union wage impact to the
declining importance of unions in the economy. However, Table 1(b) indicates that
sectoral changes in the composition of the unionized workforce play an important role.
Among men the adjusted union wage impact actually rises over time in the public sector
and declines only modestly in the private sector; however, the magnitude of the unionnonunion wage gap is much lower in the public sector (12.5% versus 20.3% in 2015).
Thus, a key part of the change over time is due to the growing importance of a sector in
which unions have a smaller impact on wages. A similar, although less dramatic,
compositional effect is occurring over time for women. These results demonstrate the
importance of disaggregating by sector of employment for the interpretation of union
impacts.
In Canada there is a steady but moderate decline in the union-nonunion wage
gap (both unadjusted and adjusted) over the 1984 to 2015 period (Table 2(a)).
Disaggregating by sector of employment again reveals noteworthy differences between
the public and private sectors. Adjusted union-nonunion wage gaps are much larger in
the private sector than in the public sector, especially in 1984 and 1993, but fall sharply
between 1993 and 2015. This steep decline in the private sector wage gap is masked by
the growing importance of the public sector, where wage gaps are smaller and more
stable over time.
Perhaps surprisingly, the union-nonunion wage gap is negative for male public
sector workers in 2015, and very small in 1984 and 1993. One likely explanation for this
finding is that, as shown in Appendix Table 2b, public sector managers are much less
likely to be unionized than other public sector workers.20 Adding occupation controls
In unionized organizations in the public sector those who rise up the hierarchy to become senior
managers (e.g. Deans or above at universities, principals at schools and senior bureaucrats in the
public service) typically must relinquish union representation.
20

19

(dummies for the occupation categories shown in Appendix Table 2b) to the wage
regression indeed increases the union-nonunion wage gap from -0.023 to 0.036 in 2015,
and to 0.054 in 1984 and 1993.
The combination of declining unionization and a fall in the adjusted wage
differential implies that the average impact of unions on wages – the union wage gain
E[U(c)Dw(c)] – has declined substantially in both countries in recent decades. For example,
the adjusted impact on male wages in the U.S. went from 6.3 percentage points in
1973/74 (unionization rate of 0.307 times an adjusted wage gap of 0.204) to 2.0
percentage points in 2015. For U.S. female workers the average impact went from 3.2
percentage points to 1.1 percentage points. In Canada the average impacts of unions on
wages are much larger due to greater union coverage and adjusted wage gaps that are
generally larger than their U.S. counterparts. For Canadian men the average union
impacts fell from 10.4 percentage points in 1984 to 3.6 percentage points in 2015, while
that for women went from 11.5 percentage points to 7.1 percentage points.

Wage Flattening Effects of Unions. As noted in section 3, the effect of unions on wage
inequality depends in part on how the union wage gap DW(c) varies across the skill
distribution. Figures 3a to 3c illustrate the evolution of this dimension of the union and
nonunion wage structures by gender and sector of employment for Canada over the
1984 to 2015 period (similar results for the U.S. are available on request). These figures
plot mean union wages in a given age – education cell (i.e. WU(c)) by the mean nonunion
wage for the same skill group (WN(c) ) . If union and nonunion workers in the same skill
group have the same average wage the points will lie on the 45-degree line (the solid line
in the figures). If the mean union wage exceeds its nonunion counterpart, however, the
points will lie above the 45-degree line. If, in addition, unions tend to raise the wages of
lower skilled workers more than the wages of higher-skilled workers, then the scatter of
points will be flatter than the 45 degree line – the so-called “flattening effect” (Lewis,
1986). This tendency of unions to compress skill differences is evident, for example, in
the lower left panel of Figure 3a for male workers in the private sector. A similar

20

tendency is evident for males and females in the public sector. For private sector female
workers, however, the scatter is nearly parallel to the 45 degree line, suggesting little or
no flattening effect.
Comparisons of the graphs for 1984 (Figure 3a), 1993 (Figure 3b) and 2015 (Figure
3c) reveal several interesting facts about the evolution of union wage differentials in
Canada. Among private sector men, compression of the union wage structure is
strongest in 1984, lessens over time as union coverage among this group declines, and is
limited by 2015. Based on the discussion in Section 3, we would expect these changes to
result in a substantially lower effect of unions on the between group component of the
variance.
In the case of private sector females, there is very little compression by skill level
of the union wage structure over the sample period. Consistent with Table 2, the primary
change has been a decline over time in the union – nonunion wage gap, a gap that is
relatively constant across the skill distribution. By 2015 the gap between union and
nonunion women in the private sector is very small. The story is very different in the
public sector where there is substantial wage compression in all periods for both men
and women. Note that the union – nonunion wage gap is systematically negative for
public sector men at the top of the skill distribution. As discussed above, this likely
reflects the fact that higher-paid public sector managers are typically not covered by
unions, even in organizations in which most employees are represented by unions.
To quantify the extent to which unions compress the wage structure between
skill groups we estimate the following regression model:

where

is the mean nonunion wage (over all cells c) and e(c) is a random error term.

The parameter a estimates the union – nonunion wage gap for the skill group c whose
average nonunion wage equals the overall average nonunion wage while the parameter
b provides an estimate of the extent to which unions flatten the wage distribution
across skill groups. If b equals zero there is no compression of the union wage
distribution relative to the nonunion distribution; with flattening b < 0, and the more

21

negative the value of b the greater the amount of compression. The results of
estimating this equation for the U.S. (approximately 150 skill groups) and Canada (25
skill groups) are shown in Tables 3a and 3b respectively. We also report estimates of the
union- nonunion wage gap for low wage workers (a – 0.5 b) -- those earning 50 log
points below the mean nonunion wage -- and for high wage workers, those earning 50
log points above the nonunion average wage (a + 0.5 b).
For male workers in the U.S. private sector we see a steady decline over the
1984 to 2015 period in the union – nonunion wage gap estimated at the mean nonunion
wage. In contrast, the wage gap for men in the public sector is relatively stable over this
time period. There is substantial evidence that unions flatten the male wage structure in
both the private and public sectors, with the amount of compression consistently being
greater in the public sector. The story is different for women in the U.S.; compression of
the wage structure by skill is lower in the public sector than for men, and close to zero in
the private sector after the 1970s. The female union – nonunion wage gap has also
fallen dramatically since the early 1990s in both the public and private sectors.
Union impacts on the Canadian male wage structure are broadly similar to those
for men in the U.S. The union – nonunion wage gap at the mean of the nonunion wage
fell substantially – from 26.4% in 1984 to 7.7% in 2015. As in the U.S. the male wage gap
in the public sector is much lower – and not significantly different from zero in 2015.
However, unions substantially compress the male wage structure in both sectors, with
the extent of flattening consistently greater in the public sector. One consequence of
substantial compression combined with a small wage differential at the nonunion
average wage is that high-skilled unionized men in the public sector earn less than their
nonunion counterparts, as is illustrated in Figures 3a to 3c (see also the estimated
implied gaps for high wage workers).21 As in the U.S., compression of the female wage
structure in Canada’s private sector is minimal – and essentially zero in 1993 and 2015.
21

As noted previously this apparent negative effect appears to be driven to an important extent by the
fact that public sector managers in both unionized and nonunion organizations are not represented by
unions. The propensity to become a senior manager could in turn reflect differences in unobserved skills
between highly educated and more experienced public sector ‘managers’ and ‘non-managerial’
employees.

22

This contrasts dramatically with the public sector in which there is substantial flattening
of female wages across the skill distribution throughout the sample period. However, as
is the case in the U.S., the degree of compression of the female public sector wage
structure is lower than that for men.

Effects of Unions on Wage Inequality. Our estimates of the impacts of unionization on
wage inequality are reported in the two lower panels of Tables 1 and 2. We begin in the
first panel by showing the variance of log wages for all workers, the difference between
the overall variance and the variance of nonunion wages, and the ‘composition effect’
associated with reweighting – the difference between the variance of log wages for
nonunion workers and the reweighted variance. The estimated effect of unions on wage
inequality is then the sum of the overall variance minus the nonunion variance and the
composition effect.
Pooled sample results are reported in Tables 1a and 2a. In the U.S. the overall
variance of log wages has increased steadily and substantially for both men and women
since the early 1970s, as has been observed in many studies of trends in wage inequality.
For men the nonunion variance has risen less rapidly; as a result, the difference between
the overall and nonunion variances has steadily increased (became less negative). As was
found in previous studies, the impact of unionization on wage inequality among U.S.
male workers is consistently negative. The composition effect has also fallen over time,
and is essentially zero in 2015, reflecting the growing similarity between the skill
distributions in the union and nonunion sectors, as illustrated in Figure 1, as well as the
decline in unionization.22 As expected, given the substantial decline in unionization
among U.S. men, the impact of unions on male wage inequality fell sharply – from over
10 percent of the variance in the 1970s (-0.027 / 0.261) to 4 percent in 2015 (-0.014 /
0.399).
In the bottom panel we report the results of the decomposition into the between
and within group components illustrated in equation (3). For U.S. males both effects
22

As the unionization rate gets very low, the skill composition in the nonunion sector has to get
increasingly close to the one for the whole workforce, limiting the scope of potential composition effects.

23

have the same sign and contribute to lower wage inequality in each year. The impact of
unions on the variance of average wages across skill groups is generally the more
important of the two -- contributing about 60% of the reduction in inequality. But the
effect of unions on the average variance of wages within skill groups is also quantitatively
important.
Among U.S. female workers the estimated impact of unions on wage dispersion is
close to zero from the early 1970s to early 1990s. However, by 2015 unionization among
women has a small equalizing effect, reducing the variance by 3.4 percent (-0.012 /
0.349). Most of this estimated impact is associated with differences in the skill
composition of the union and nonunion female workforces in the U.S. Although the
magnitude of this effect is small it is not much different from the comparable estimate
for U.S. males in 2015. Both the between and within group effects contribute, but most
of the reduction in inequality arises from the impact of unions on lowering the average
variance within skill groups.
The trends for Canadian men are broadly similar to those in the U.S., but there
are some noteworthy differences. The overall variance of male wages has been relatively
stable, in contrast to the U.S. experience, while the variance of nonunion wages has
declined sharply, resulting in an even larger decline in the actual – nonunion variance gap
over the 1984 to 2015 period than for U.S. men.23 As in the U.S., the composition effect
has also fallen as the union and nonunion male skill distributions have become more
similar. The result is a steady decline in the equalizing impact of unions on male wage
inequality – from 20 percent of the variance in 1984 to 8 percent in 2015. The within
group effect is the dominant factor accounting for the reduction in male wage inequality,
especially in the 1990s and 2000s. Consistent with the large decline in the flattening
effect illustrated in Table 3b, the between group effect becomes much less important
over time, and is close to zero by 2015.
Among Canadian women, the total variance of log wages exceeds the nonunion
variance -- in contrast to the case for men. This small difference is offset by a
23

Note that there was a sharp increase in wage inequality in Canada in the early 1980s during the 1981-82
recession. Our sample period begins after this increase.

24

composition effect of similar magnitude working in the opposite direction. As a result,
unions have a very small effect on female wage inequality, similar in size to that found in
Card, Lemieux and Riddell (2004) for the 1984 to 2001 period. In 1984 and 2015 the
overall effect is slightly inequality-increasing, whereas the opposite holds in the early
1990s, a period of sustained economic weakness in Canada’s economy (Fortin, 1996).
The decomposition in the bottom panel provides insights into this gender difference:
among women, unionization increases the variance in average wages across skill groups
and this inequality-increasing effect approximately offsets the reduction in inequality
coming from the within-sector effect that contributes to lower wage inequality.
The findings from our analysis of the impacts of unions on wage inequality by
gender and sector of employment are reported in Tables 1b and 2b. There are striking
differences between the public and private sectors for men and women in both Canada
and the U.S. These differences have generally become more pronounced over time.
In the U.S., the variance of log wages has increased over time among all four
groups and the extent of the increase has been greater in the private sector where union
coverage has fallen sharply. The variance of wages is also higher among males in both
sectors. In the private sector, unions reduce male wage inequality in each sample year,
but after the 1970s the effect is modest in size –- a reduction of 4.0% of the variance in
1984, declining to 1.7% in 2015. In contrast, in the U.S. public sector unionization
reduces male wage inequality substantially, especially since the 1970s, with impacts
ranging from 16% to 20% of the overall variance for that group. Both the between cell
and within cell effects contribute, with the between sector effect being the more
important of the two (about 2/3 of the total over the 1984 to 2015 period).
Among U.S. female employees, differences in the impacts of unions on the wage
structure in the public and private sectors are equally striking. In the private sector
unions have essentially no impact on female wage inequality, a feature that has not
changed over the sample period. However, since 1984 unionization has reduced wage
inequality among women in the public sector and the magnitude of this effect has grown
over time – to 10.7% of the overall variance in 2015. Clearly, the evidence of a modest

25

reduction in female wage inequality that appeared in the pooled sample in 2015 was
driven by the public sector. Both the between and within sector effects contribute to
this impact, with the within cell effect being the more important of the two.
In Canada the variance of log wages is more stable over time than in the U.S. for
all four groups, with the variance of male wages being larger than that of female
employees in the private sector, but about the same in the public sector. Unions reduce
male wage inequality in both sectors, but the magnitude of the impact is much lower in
the private sector. With the decline in union coverage among men in the private sector,
the size of the union impact has also fallen – from 11.3% of the variance in 1984 to 4.8%
in 2015. In most sample years the between cell and within cell effects contribute about
equally to this reduction. There is also little evidence of union impacts on female wage
inequality in the private sector – estimated effects are close to zero in each sample year.
In contrast, the effects of unionization in the public sector are very large, and the
magnitudes of the estimated impacts are similar for men and women. The size of the
effect has fallen over time – from a reduction in the variance of over 70% in 1984 to
almost 60% in 1993 to 50% in 2015. A large part of the decline comes from the between
cell effect that has fallen by almost half between 1984 and 2015. This is again consistent
with the large decline in the flattening effect summarized by the slope parameter b that
went from -0.569 to -0.343 between 1984 and 2015 for men, and from -0.423 to -0.298
for women.
As we noted earlier, the unionization rates among men and women have
converged over time due, in large part, to the large decline in unionization in the private
sector that used to be concentrated among men. One interesting pattern that emerges
from Tables 1b and 2b is that the effect of unions on inequality is also increasingly similar
for men and women, especially in the U.S. For instance, by 2015 the effect of unions on
inequality is negative, and generally comparable in magnitude, for men and women in
the public and private sectors in both countries. In contrast, the equalizing effect of
unions on inequality was generally smaller for women in 1984, and went in the “wrong”
direction (inequality enhancing) in the private sector in both countries. Thus, one key

26

finding of the paper is that the well documented difference in the direction of the
equalizing effects of unions for men and women no longer prevails in recent data for
both the U.S. and Canada, and the magnitudes of the gender differences are now quite
small.

5. Conclusions
The relationship between unionization of the workforce and the distribution of labour
income has long been of interest to economists and other social scientists. The nature of
this relationship has received renewed attention recently as wage inequality has
increased in many developed countries. In these countries, a salient development has
been the decline of union influence and a natural question to investigate is whether the
rise in inequality and the decline in unionization (as well as other changes in labour
market institutions) are linked. Numerous studies reviewed previously in this paper
conclude that the decline in union coverage in Canada and the U.S. -- the countries we
focus on in this study -- did indeed contribute to increasing wage inequality, although
this institutional change was not the only (or even the dominant) factor. Initially most
research focused on men employed in the private sector. Subsequent studies examined
both male and female employees and reached a puzzling conclusion – that unionization
decreases male wage inequality but has no or even a positive effect on female wage
inequality.
Another salient development has been the divergence of unionization in the
private and public sectors. Over the past four or five decades, unionization has grown
or remained stable in the public sector but declined substantially in the private sector.
The gap in union coverage is now enormous – 39% in the U.S. public sector vs 7% in the
private sector and 76% vs 17% in Canada (Appendix Table 1). As a consequence, almost
one-half of unionized workers in the U.S. and close to 60% in Canada are employed in
the public sector even though that sector accounts for only 15% (U.S.) to 20% (Canada)
of total employment.
A central objective of this paper is to investigate the implications of this dramatic

27

divergence for the impacts of unions on the wage structure. With the exception of
Card’s (2001) study of the U.S., previous studies have either focused on the private
sector or pooled together the public and private sectors. A second objective of the
paper is to assess whether distinguishing between the public and private sectors might
shed light on the puzzling gender difference found in previous studies of the relationship
between unionization and wage inequality.
In both countries we find that there are striking differences between the private
and public sectors in the effects of unionization on male and female wage inequality.
These differences have become more pronounced over time as private and private
sector unionization have diverged. In 2015, the overall effects of unions on the
economy-wide wage structure are modest in size – reductions in male wage inequality
of 3.5% in the U.S. and 7.9% in Canada, and a reduction in female inequality of 3.4% in
the U.S. and an increase in inequality of 0.4% in Canada. However, disaggregating by
sector of employment yields striking differences: reductions in male wage inequality in
the private sector of 1.7% in the U.S. and 4.8% in Canada versus reductions in male
wage inequality in the respective public sectors of 16.2% and 48.5%. Similarly, our
estimates imply that unionization reduces female wage inequality by 0.6% and 2.5% in
the U.S. and Canadian private sectors respectively but 10.7% and 50% in those
countries’ public sectors. Note also that once we disaggregate by sector the effects of
unions on male and female wage inequality no longer differ – union coverage reduces
wage inequality among women and men to a similar extent in both sectors and in both
countries. The key differences in the impacts of unions are between the public and
private sectors – not between male and female employees.
In both Canada and the U.S. the impact of unions on wage inequality has fallen
substantially in the private sector. Differences in wage levels between union and
nonunion workers are also much smaller now than in the past. With the distributions of
union and nonunion wages now very similar in the private sector, it seems unlikely that
marginal changes in the extent of private sector unionization will have much impact on

28

inequality.24 With the decline in employment in traditional areas of union strength such
as manufacturing and primary industries, major gains in collective bargaining coverage
require making inroads in the service sector. This has proven very difficult in the Wagner
Act framework with its emphasis on making collective representation decisions at the
enterprise level. Although many service sector firms such as Starbucks, Walmart and
retail banks are large employers, individual outlets have few employees and relatively
high turnover, both obstacles to union organization. Achieving significant increases in
unionization in the service sector probably requires moving outside the Wagner Act
framework.

24

Legree, Skuterud and Schirle (2016) examine this issue for Canada and reach a similar conclusion. They
analyse the potential impact of more union-friendly laws on union density and, through that, on the
degree of inequality in the wage distribution. Their estimates suggest that if all Canadian jurisdictions
adopted the most union-friendly laws among those currently in place, union coverage would increase
substantially among male college and university graduates employed in the public sector but would
change little among women and less-educated men in either sector. Their simulations suggest that
impacts of wage inequality would be small – a 2% reduction in the 90-10 differential for males and no
change for females.

29

REFERENCES	  

	  

Acemoglu,	  Daron	  and	  David	  H.	  Autor.	  “Skills,	  Tasks	  and	  Technologies:	  
Implications	  for	  Employment	  and	  Earnings”	  In	  Orley	   Ashenfelter	  and	  
David	  Card,	  eds.	  Handbook	  of	  Labor	  Economics	  Volume	  4b.	   Amsterdam:	  
Elsevier,	  2011.	  
	  
Angrist,	  Joshua	  D.	  and	  Alan	  B.	  Krueger.	   “Empirical	  Strategies	  in	  Labor	  
Economics.”	  In	  Orley	   Ashenfelter	  and	  David	  Card,	  eds.	  Handbook	  of	  Labor	  
Economics	  Volume	  3a.	   Amsterdam:	   Elsevier,	  1999.	  
	  
Ashenfelter,	  Orley.	  “Racial	  Discrimination	  and	  Trade	  Unionism.”	  Journal	  of	  
Political	  Economy	  80	  (June	   1972):	  435-­‐‑64.	  
	  
Card,	  David.	  “The	  Effects	  of	  Unions	  on	  the	  Distribution	  of	  Wages:	  Redistribution	  
or	  Relabelling?”	   NBER	  Working	  Paper	  4195,	  Cambridge:	  Mass.:	  National	  
Bureau	  of	  Economic	  Research,	  1992.	  
	  
	  	  
.	  “The	  Effects	  of	  Unions	  on	  the	  Structure	  of	  Wages:	  A	  Longitudinal	  
Analysis.”Econometrica	  64	  (July	  1996):	  957-­‐‑79.	  
	  
	  	  
	  

	  
	  

	   .	  “The	  Effect	  of	  Unions	  on	  Wage	  Inequality	  in	  the	  U.S.	  Labor	  Market.”	  
Industrial	  and	  Labor	   Relations	  Review	  54	  (January	  2001):	  296-­‐‑315.	  

Card,	  David	  and	  John	  DiNardo.	  “Skill-­‐‑Biased	  Technological	  Change	  and	  Rising	  
Wage	  Inequality:	  Some	   Problems	  and	  Puzzles.”	  Journal	  of	  Labor	  Economics	  
20	  (October	  2002):	  733-­‐‑83.	  
Card,	  David,	  Thomas	  Lemieux	  and	  W.	  Craig	  Riddell.	  “Unions	  and	  Wage	  Inequality”	  
Journal	  of	  Labor	  Research	  25	  (Fall,	  2004)	  519-­‐‑562.	  
DiNardo,	  John,	  Nicole	  M.	  Fortin,	  and	  Thomas	  Lemieux.	  “Labor	  Market	  Institutions	  
and	  the	  Distribution	   of	  Wages,	  1973-­‐‑1992:	  A	  Semi-­‐‑Parametric	  Approach.”	  
Econometrica	  64	  (September	  1996):	  1001-­‐‑1044.	  

	  

DiNardo,	  John	  and	  Thomas	  Lemieux.	  “Diverging	  Male	  Wage	  Inequality	  in	  the	  
United	  States	  and	  Canada,	   1981-­‐‑88:	  Do	  Institutions	  Explain	  the	  
Difference?”	  Industrial	  and	  Labor	  Relations	  Review	  50	   (July	  1997):	  629-­‐‑51.	  
	  
Fortin,	  Nicole	  and	  Thomas	  Lemieux.	  “Institutional	  Changes	  and	  Rising	  Wage	  
Inequality:	  Is	  There	  a	  Linkage?”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Perspectives	  1	  (1997,	  
no.	  2)	  75-­‐‑96.	  
	  
Fortin,	  Nicole,	  Thomas	  Lemieux,	  and	  Neil	  Lloyd.	  “Labor	  Market	  Institutions	  and	  
the	  Distribution	  of	  Wages:	  The	  Role	  of	  Spillover	  Effects”	  UBC	  Working	  

Paper,	  September	  2018.	  

	  
Fortin,	  Pierre.	  “The	  Great	  Canadian	  Slump”	  Canadian	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  29	  
(November	  1996)	  	  761-­‐‑87.	  
	  
Freeman,	  Richard	  B.	  “Unionism	  and	  the	  Dispersion	  of	  Wages.”	  Industrial	  and	  
Labor	  Relations	  Review	  34	   (October	  1980):	  3-­‐‑23.	  
	  
	  	  

	   .	  “Union	  Wage	  Practices	  and	  Wage	  Dispersion	  Within	  
Establishments.”	  Industrial	  and	   Labor	  Relations	  Review	  36	  (October	  
1982):	  3-­‐‑21.	  

	  
	  	  

	  	  	  .	  “Longitudinal	  Analyses	  of	  the	  Effects	  of	  Trade	  Unions.”	  Journal	  of	  Labor	  
	  Economics	  2	  (January	  1984):	  1-­‐‑26.	  

	  
	  	  

	  

	  

	  

	   .	  “How	  Much	  has	  Deunionization	  Contributed	  to	  the	  Rise	  of	  Male	  
Earnings	  Inequality?”	  In	   Sheldon	  Danziger	  and	  Peter	  Gottschalk,	  eds.	  
Uneven	  Tides:	  Rising	  Income	  Inequality	  in	  America.	   New	  York:	  Russell	  Sage	  
Foundation,	  1993,	  pp.	  133-­‐‑63.	  

Gosling,	  Amanda	  and	  Thomas	  Lemieux.	  “Labor	  Market	  Reforms	  and	  Changes	  in	  
Wage	  Inequality	  in	  the	   United	  Kingdom	  and	  the	  United	  States”	  in	  David	  
Card,	  Richard	  Blundell	  and	  Richard	  B.	  Freeman	  (eds.)	  Seeking	  a	  Premier	  
Economy.	  Chicago:	  University	  of	  Chicago	  Press	  and	  NBER,	  2004,	  pp.	  275-­‐‑
312.	  
Helpman,	  Elhanan.	  “Globalization	  and	  Wage	  Inequality”	  NBER	  Working	  Paper	  
22944.	  Cambridge:	  NBER,	  December	  2016.	  
	  
Hirsch,	  Barry	  T.	  and	  Edward	  J.	  Schumacher.	  “Match	  Bias	  in	  Wage	  Gap	  Estimates	  Due	  
	  
	  	  to	  Earnings	  Imputation.”	  Journal	  of	  Labor	   Economics	  22	  (July	  2004)	  689-­‐‑722.	  
Johnson,	  George.	  “Economic	  Analysis	  of	  Trade	  Unionism.”	  American	  Economic	  
Review	  65	  (June	  1975):	   23-­‐‑28.	  

	  
	  	  Legree,	  Scott,	  Tammy	  Schirle	  and	  Mikal	  Skuterud.	  “Can	  Labour	  Relations	  Reform	  
	  Reduce	  Wage	  Inequality?	  In	  David	  A.	  Green,	  W.	  Craig	  Riddell	  and	  France	  St-­‐‑	  
	  Hilaire	  (eds.)	  Income	  Inequality:	  The	  Canadian	  Story.	  Montreal:	  Institute	  for	  
	  Research	  on	  Public	  Policy,	  2016,	  pp.	  399-­‐‑434.	  
	  	  	  
Lemieux,	  Thomas.	  “Unions	  and	  Wage	  Inequality	  in	  Canada	  and	  the	  United	  States.”	  In	  
David	  Card	  and	   Richard	  B.	  Freeman,	  eds.	  Small	  Differences	  That	  Matter:	  
Labor	  Markets	  and	  Income	  Maintenance	   in	  Canada	  and	  the	  United	  States.	  
Chicago:	  University	  of	  Chicago	  Press,	  1993,	  pp.	  69-­‐‑107.	  

	  
	  	  

	   .	  “Estimating	  the	  Effects	  of	  Unions	  on	  Wage	  Inequality	  in	  a	  Panel	  
Data	  Model	  with	   Comparative	  Advantage	  and	  Non-­‐‑Random	  Selection.”	  
Journal	  of	  Labor	  Economics	  16	  (April	   1998):	  261-­‐‑91.	  

	  
Lewis,	  H.	  Gregg.	  Unionism	  and	  Relative	  Wages	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  Chicago:	  University	  
of	  Chicago	   Press,	  1963.	  
	  
	  	  
.	  Union	  Relative	  Wage	  Effects:	  A	  Survey.	  Chicago:	  University	  of	  Chicago	  Press,	  
1986.	  
	  
Meng,	  Ron.	  “Union	  Effects	  on	  Wage	  Dispersion	  in	  Canadian	  Industry.”	  Economics	  
Letters	  32	  (April	  1990):	  399-­‐‑403.	  
	  
Salverda,	  Wiemer	  and	  Danielle	  Checchi.	  “Labour	  Market	  Institutions	  and	  the	  
Dispersion	  of	  Wage	  Earnings”	  chapter	  18	  in	  Handbook	  of	  Income	  Distribution,	  
volume	  2B,	  edited	  by	  Tony	  Atkinson	  and	  Francois	  Bourgignon.	  
Elsevier/North	  Holland,	  2015.	  
	  
Stiglitz,	  Joseph.	  The	  Price	  of	  Inequality.	  New	  York:	  W.W.	  Norton,	  2012.	  
	  
Visser,	  J.	  ICTWSS	  Data	  base,	  version	  5.0.	  Amsterdam:	  Amsterdam	  Institute	  for	  
Advanced	  Labour	  Studies	  AIAS,	  October	  2015.	  Open	  access	  database	  at	  
www.uva.aias.net/208.	  
	  

DATA APPENDIX
U.S. Data: Since 1979, the U.S. Census Bureau has been collecting data on weekly hours,
weekly earnings, and hourly earnings (for workers paid by the hour) for all wage and salary
workers in the “outgoing rotation group” (ORG) of the Current Population Survey (CPS).
Beginning in 1983, the ORG supplement of the CPS also asks about the union membership
status of workers (and union coverage). Similar variables are also available in the May
supplement of the CPS between 1973 and 1978, though only union membership (and not
coverage) is available for this period.
In both the May and ORG supplements of the CPS, workers paid by the hour are
asked their hourly rate of pay. We use this variable, which is collected in a consistent fashion
over time, as our measure of the hourly wage rate for these workers. The May and ORG
supplements also provide information on usual weekly earnings for all workers. For workers
not paid by the hour, we use average hourly earnings (weekly earnings divided by weekly
hours) as our measure of the wage rate.
Note, however, that weekly earnings are not measured consistently over time. From
1973 to 1993, this variable was collected by asking individuals directly about their earnings
on a weekly basis. Since 1994, individuals have the option of reporting their usual earnings on
the base period of their choice (weekly, bi-weekly, monthly, or annually). Weekly earnings
are then obtained by normalizing the earnings reported by workers to a weekly basis. The
available evidence does not suggest, however, that this change in the way earnings are
collected had a significant impact on the distribution of wages (see Card and DiNardo (2002)
and Gosling and Lemieux (2004) for more detail).
Another potential problem is that weekly earnings are top-coded at different values for
different years throughout the sample period. Before 1988, weekly earnings were top-coded at
$999. The top-code was later increased to $1,923 in 1988 and $2,884 in 1998 where it has
remained since then. For an individual working 40 hours a week, the weekly earnings topcode corresponds to an hourly wage ranging from $57.0 in 1984 ($2015) to $133.3 in 1973
($2015). While very few workers are top-coded in 1973/74, in the case of men over 3% of
workers are top-coded in 1984 and 2015. Following most of the literature (e.g. Lemieux
(2006)), we adjust for this problem by multiplying the wages of top-coded workers by a
factor of 1.4. We also trim a few outliers with wages below $3.35 ($2015) and above $172
($2015). The wage deflator used is the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U). All the U.S. wage
statistics reported herein are also weighted using the CPS earnings weights.
Questions about educational achievement were changed substantially in the early
1990s. Until 1991, the CPS asked about the highest grade (or years of schooling) completed.
Starting in 1992, the CPS moved to questions about the highest degree. We have recoded
the post-1992 data in term of completed years of schooling to have a measure of schooling
that is consistent over time. We then use years of schooling to compute the standard measure
of years of potential experience (age-schooling-6). Only observations with potential
experience larger or equal than zero are kept in the analysis samples.
Finally, in the ORG supplements of the CPS, wages or earnings of workers who
refuse to answer the wage/earnings questions were allocated using a “hot deck” procedure.
We exclude observations with allocated wages and earnings for two reasons. First, wages
and earnings were not allocated in the May 1973-1978 CPS. We thus need to exclude
allocated observations from the 1984, 1993, and 2015 ORG supplement data to maintain a
consistent sample over time. Second, union status is not one of the characteristics used to
match observations with missing earnings to observations with non-missing earnings in the
imputation procedure (hot deck) used by the U.S. Census Bureau. As a result, estimates of
union wage effects obtained from a sample with allocation observations included can be

severely biased downward (see Hirsch and Schumacher, 2004 for more details).

	  

Canadian Data: As mentioned in the text, for Canada we use the 2015 Labour Force Survey
(LFS), the 1991 and 1995 Surveys on Work Arrangements (SWA), and the 1984 Survey of
Union Membership (SUM). These data sets are all relatively comparable since both the
SUM and the SWA were conducted as supplements to the Labour Force Survey. Relative to
the U.S. data however, there are some important limitations in the Canadian data. First, as
mentioned in the text, it is not possible to distinguish union membership from union coverage
in the SWA. For the sake of consistency over time, we thus use union coverage as our
measure of unionization in Canada.
A second limitation is that in the 1984 SUM and the 2015 CLFS missing wages and
earnings were allocated but no allocation flags are provided. We thus have to include
observations with allocated wages and earnings in the analysis which generates an
inconsistency relative to the SWA (where missing wages and earnings are not allocated) and
the U.S. data. This likely understates the effect of unions on wages in 1984 and 2015, though
it is not possible to quantify the extent of the bias. Another limitation is that age is only
provided in broad categories, unlike in the U.S. data where age is reported in years. In
particular, it is not possible to separate workers age 15 from those age 16. This explains why
we use all wage and salary workers age 15 to 64 in Canada, compared to workers age 16 to
64 in the U.S.
A further limitation is that hourly wages are top-coded at a relatively low level in the
1991 SWA ($50) and the 1995 SWA ($40). More than 1% percent of workers are top-coded in
these two years. By contrast, only about 0.1% or workers are top-coded in the 1984 SUM (topcode of $45) and in the 1995 CLFS (top-code of $100). For the sake of consistency, we topcode the 1984 SUM and the 2015 CLFS data at $94 (in $2015) which corresponds to the 1984
top-code of $45 expressed in 2015 dollars. We then use the 1997 CLFS data to compute
average wages among workers earning between the lowest SWA top-code ($40 in 1995) and
the consistent top-code used for the other years ($94 in $2015).1 This yields an adjustment
factor of 1.143. 1991 and 1995 wages adjusted for top-coding are obtained by multiplying
wages at the top-code by the adjustment factor. Wages are deflated using the Canadian CPI for
all items. We also trim observations with wages below $3.2 in $2015.
One final limitation is that only five education categories are consistently available over
time. These categories are: 0 to 8 years of school, high school (some or completed), some postsecondary education, post-secondary degree or diploma (less than university), and university
degree. As in the CPS, all statistics for Canada are computed using sample weights.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

1	  1997	  is	  the	  closest	  year	  available	  for	  computing	  the	  top-­‐‑coding	  adjustment	  factor	  for	  the	  1991	  and	  

1995	  SWA	  since	  the	  CLFS	  only	  started	  collecting	  wage	  information	  in	  that	  year.	  

Table 1a: Summary of Effect of Unions on U.S. Wage Inequality ‐‐ Private and Public Sectors Combined
1973/74
male
female
Union Membership Rate

1984
male
female

1993
male
female

male

2015
female

0.307

0.141

0.236

0.141

0.185

0.132

0.119

0.128

Union Effect on Mean Wages:
Unadjusted Union Wage Gap
Composition Effecta
Adjusted Union Wage Gap

0.195
‐0.009
0.204

0.230
0.003
0.227

0.282
0.064
0.218

0.328
0.108
0.221

0.299
0.073
0.226

0.349
0.150
0.199

0.240
0.083
0.156

0.294
0.208
0.086

Union Effect on Variance of Wages:
Actual Variance
Actual ‐ Nonunion Variance
Composition Effectb
Total union effect

0.261
‐0.048
0.022
‐0.027

0.195
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.316
‐0.036
0.012
‐0.024

0.227
0.006
‐0.005
0.000

0.346
‐0.025
0.008
‐0.016

0.273
0.005
‐0.007
‐0.002

0.399
‐0.016
0.002
‐0.014

0.349
‐0.002
‐0.010
‐0.012

Decomposition of Union Effect on Variance:
Between cell effect
‐0.016
Within cell effect
‐0.011

‐0.002
0.001

‐0.014
‐0.010

0.001
0.000

‐0.007
‐0.009

0.002
‐0.004

‐0.011
‐0.003

‐0.004
‐0.009

Note: samples include wage and salary workers age 16‐64 with non‐allocated hourly or weekly pay, and hourly wages between $3.35 and $172 per hour
in 2015 dollars. Wages for weekly workers with topcoded earnings are adjusted using 1.4 factor. Wages are deflated by CPI‐U. Calculations are weighted
by CPS Earnings Supplement sample weights.
a
Composition effect measures component of the union non‐union wage gap attributable to non‐random coverage, and is measured by difference
between fraction of union workers and fraction of nonunion workers in each age/education cell, multiplied by mean wage of non‐union workers in the
cell.
b
Composition effect measures component of the variance of nonunion wages that is due to nonrandom coverage, and represents the difference between
the actual variance of wages for non‐union workers and a reweighted variance that weights nonunion workers in each age/education cell by the fraction
of the overall labor force in the cell.

Table 1b: Summary of Effect of Unions on US Wage Inequality ‐‐ by Gender and Private and Public Sectors

Union Membership Rate

1973‐1974
Public Sector
Private Sector
Male
Female
Male
Female
0.289
0.180
0.311
0.130

1984
Public Sector
Private Sector
Male
Female
Male
Female
0.396
0.334
0.206
0.094

1993
Public Sector
Private Sector
Male
Female
Male
Female
0.392
0.369
0.147
0.071

2015
Public Sector
Private Sector
Male
Female
Male
Female
0.428
0.413
0.087
0.062

Union Effect on Mean Wages:
Unadjusted Union Gap
0.095
Composition Effect a
‐0.008
Adjusted Union Wage Gap 0.103

0.230
0.018
0.211

0.216
‐0.009
0.225

0.202
‐0.028
0.230

0.156
0.058
0.099

0.272
0.134
0.138

0.297
0.021
0.276

0.275
‐0.002
0.277

0.193
0.040
0.153

0.297
0.122
0.175

0.283
0.015
0.269

0.237
0.007
0.230

0.160
0.035
0.125

0.237
0.125
0.111

0.188
‐0.014
0.203

0.192
0.074
0.118

Union Effect on Variance of Wages:
Actual Variance
0.233
Actual ‐ Nonunion Variance ‐0.041
Composition Effect b
0.014
Total union effect
‐0.027

0.204
0.000
0.002
0.002

0.263
‐0.048
0.024
‐0.023

0.173
‐0.003
0.002
‐0.001

0.249
‐0.068
0.019
‐0.049

0.204
‐0.003
‐0.008
‐0.010

0.325
‐0.029
0.016
‐0.013

0.222
0.002
0.002
0.004

0.272
‐0.066
0.022
‐0.044

0.237
‐0.009
‐0.003
‐0.012

0.350
‐0.020
0.012
‐0.007

0.267
0.000
0.001
0.001

0.296
‐0.063
0.015
‐0.048

0.289
‐0.026
‐0.005
‐0.031

0.411
‐0.011
0.005
‐0.007

0.352
‐0.001
‐0.001
‐0.002

Decomposition of Total Union Effect on Variance:
Between cell effect
‐0.016
‐0.001
‐0.014
Within cell effect
‐0.011
0.002
‐0.009

‐0.003
0.002

‐0.032
‐0.017

‐0.002
‐0.008

‐0.008
‐0.005

‐0.001
0.005

‐0.028
‐0.017

‐0.002
‐0.010

‐0.004
‐0.004

0.000
0.001

‐0.033
‐0.016

‐0.012
‐0.018

‐0.007
0.000

‐0.001
‐0.001

Note: samples include wage and salary workers age 16‐64 with non‐allocated hourly or weekly pay, and hourly wages between $3.35 and $172 per hour in 2015 dollars. Wages for weekly workers with topcoded earnings
are adjusted using 1.4 factor. Wages are deflated by CPI‐U. Calculations are weighted by CPS Earnings Supplement sample weights.
a
Composition effect measures component of the union non‐union wage gap attributable to non‐random coverage, and is measured by difference between fraction of union workers and fraction of nonunion workers in
each age/education cell, multiplied by mean wage of non‐union workers in the cell.
b
Composition effect measures component of the variance of nonunion wages that is due to nonrandom coverage, and represents the difference between the actual variance of wages for non‐union workers and a
reweighted variance that weights nonunion workers in each age/education cell by the fraction of the overall labour force in the cell.

Table 2a: Summary of Effect of Unions on Canadian Wage Inequality ‐‐ Private and Public Sectors Combined
1984
male
female

male

female

Union Coverage Rate

0.464

0.369

0.408

0.352

0.288

0.320

Union Effect on Mean Wages:
Unadjusted Union Wage Gap
Composition Effect a
Adjusted Union Wage Gap

0.312
0.088
0.224

0.426
0.115
0.311

0.300
0.117
0.184

0.388
0.127
0.262

0.200
0.075
0.125

0.331
0.111
0.221

0.246
‐0.060
0.012
‐0.049

0.226
0.017
‐0.011
0.006

0.249
‐0.038
0.007
‐0.031

0.245
0.003
‐0.012
‐0.009

0.253
‐0.022
0.003
‐0.020

0.230
0.007
‐0.007
0.001

Decomposition of Union Effect on Variance:
Between cell effect
‐0.020
Within cell effect
‐0.028

0.014
‐0.008

‐0.006
‐0.025

0.012
‐0.021

‐0.002
‐0.018

0.014
‐0.013

Union Effect on Variance of Wages:
Actual Variance
Actual ‐ Nonunion Variance
b
Composition Effect
Total union effect

1993

2015
male
female

Note: samples include wage and salary workers age 15‐64 with hourly wages between $3.20 and $92.00 per hour in 2015
dollars. Topcoded wages in 1993 (1991 and 1995 SWA) are adjusted using a 1.143 factor based on mean upper tail wages in
the 1997 LFS. Calculations are weighted by LFS sample weights.
a
Composition effect measures component of the union non‐union wage gap attributable to non‐random coverage, and is
measured by difference between fraction of union workers and fraction of nonunion workers in each age/education cell,
multiplied by mean wage of non‐union workers in the cell.
b
Composition effect measures component of the variance of nonunion wages that is due to nonrandom coverage, and
represents the difference between the actual variance of wages for non‐union workers and a reweighted variance that weights
nonunion workers in each age/education cell by the fraction of the overall labor force in the cell.

Table 2b: Summary of Effect of Unions on Canadian Wage Inequality ‐‐ by Gender and Private and Public Sectors
1984
Public Sector
Male
Female
0.799
0.780

1993
Private Sector
Male
Female
0.371
0.251

Public Sector
Male
Female
0.790
0.769

2015
Private Sector
Male
Female
0.319
0.238

Public Sector
Male
Female
0.737
0.767

Private Sector
Male
Female
0.194
0.132

Union Coverage Rate
Union Effect on Mean Wages:
Unadjusted Union Gap
0.049
a
Composition Effect
0.036
Adjusted Union Wage Gap
0.013

0.290
0.080
0.210

0.293
0.044
0.249

0.336
0.059
0.277

0.078
0.045
0.033

0.219
0.074
0.145

0.260
0.069
0.191

0.300
0.065
0.236

0.040
0.062
‐0.023

0.119
0.032
0.086

0.120
0.021
0.099

0.084
0.021
0.063

Union Effect on Variance of Wages:
Actual Variance
0.164
Actual ‐ Nonunion Variance
‐0.190
b
Composition Effect
0.055
Total union effect
‐0.135

0.155
‐0.107
‐0.005
‐0.112

0.248
‐0.042
0.014
‐0.028

0.206
0.007
‐0.002
0.005

0.159
‐0.143
0.049
‐0.094

0.165
‐0.090
‐0.005
‐0.096

0.249
‐0.029
0.010
‐0.019

0.229
‐0.003
‐0.001
‐0.005

0.194
‐0.139
0.045
‐0.094

0.164
‐0.098
0.017
‐0.082

0.249
‐0.017
0.005
‐0.012

0.199
‐0.005
0.000
‐0.005

‐0.015
‐0.013

0.005
0.000

‐0.048
‐0.046

‐0.013
‐0.083

‐0.005
‐0.014

0.005
‐0.010

‐0.030
‐0.064

‐0.019
‐0.062

‐0.005
‐0.007

0.000
‐0.005

Decomposition of Total Union Effect on Variance:
Between cell effect
‐0.074
‐0.035
Within cell effect
‐0.061
‐0.077

Note: samples include wage and salary workers age 15‐64 with hourly wages between $3.20 and $92.00 per hour in 2015 dollars. Topcoded wages in 1993 (1991 and 1995
SWA) are adjusted using a 1.143 factor based on mean upper tail wages in the 1997 LFS. Calculations are weighted by LFS sample weights.
a
Composition effect measures component of the union non‐union wage gap attributable to non‐random coverage, and is measured by difference between fraction of union
workers and fraction of nonunion workers in each age/education cell, multiplied by mean wage of non‐union workers in the cell.
b
Composition effect measures component of the variance of nonunion wages that is due to nonrandom coverage, and represents the difference between the actual variance of
wages for non‐union workers and a reweighted variance that weights nonunion workers in each age/education cell by the fraction of the overall labour force in the cell.

Table 3a: Summary of Flattening Effect of Unions on Between‐Group Wages in the U.S., by Gender and Sector
1973‐74
Private
Public

Private

Public

Private

Public

Private

Public

Models for Male Workers:
a
Intercept
(standard error)
Coefficient on Non‐Union Wageb
(standard error)
R‐squared

0.184
(0.007)
‐0.392
(0.021)
0.531

0.110
(0.009)
‐0.435
(0.030)
0.449

0.215
(0.009)
‐0.336
(0.023)
0.393

0.117
(0.009)
‐0.480
(0.024)
0.588

0.213
(0.010)
‐0.258
(0.024)
0.323

0.160
(0.008)
‐0.423
(0.022)
0.664

0.169
(0.013)
‐0.337
(0.033)
0.365

0.117
(0.012)
‐0.407
(0.033)
0.565

Implied Gap: 0.5 below meanc
d
Implied Gap: 0.5 above mean

0.380
‐0.012

0.328
‐0.107

0.383
0.047

0.357
‐0.124

0.342
0.084

0.371
‐0.052

0.337
0.000

0.320
‐0.087

Models for Female Workers:
a
Intercept
(standard error)
Coefficient on Non‐Union Wageb
(standard error)
R‐squared

0.213
(0.008)
‐0.261
(0.040)
0.137

0.197
(0.013)
‐0.154
(0.049)
0.045

0.251
(0.007)
‐0.050
(0.029)
0.010

0.171
(0.008)
‐0.304
(0.030)
0.290

0.209
(0.009)
‐0.027
(0.029)
0.004

0.203
(0.007)
‐0.283
(0.026)
0.402

0.130
(0.012)
‐0.084
(0.034)
0.035

0.143
(0.012)
‐0.275
(0.039)
0.292

0.343
0.082

0.274
0.120

0.276
0.226

0.323
0.019

0.223
0.196

0.344
0.061

0.172
0.088

0.281
0.006

Implied Gap: 0.5 below meanc
d
Implied Gap: 0.5 above mean

1984

1993

2015

Note: See Tables 1a and 1b for description of samples. Entries are estimated intercept and slope coefficient (plus R‐squared and standard errors) from
regressions of mean union‐non‐union wage gap for a particular skill group on the deviation of the mean nonunion log wage for the skill group from the mean log
wage for all nonunion workers. Each skill group is based on single year of education (up to 14 categories) and single year of age (up to 48 categories).
Regressions are estimated by weighted least squares using number of nonunion workers in cell as weight.
a
Estimated intercept from between‐skill‐group regression is interpretable as union‐nonunion wage gap for workers in skill group earning mean nonunion wage.
b

Estimated coefficient on deviation of skill‐group‐specific mean nonunion wage from overall mean wage for nonunion workers of same gender and sector.
Implied union‐nonunion wage gap for workers in skill group with mean nonunion wage 50 log points below overall mean nonunion wage.
d
Implied union‐nonunion wage gap for workers in skill group with mean nonunion wage 50 log points above overall mean nonunion wage.
c

Table 3b: Summary of Flattening Effect of Unions on Between‐Group Wages in Canada, by Gender and Sector
1984
Private Public

1993
Private Public

2015
Private Public

0.264

0.031

0.191

0.060

0.077

‐0.009

(0.009)
‐0.479

(0.015)
‐0.569

(0.014)
‐0.319

(0.020)
‐0.559

(0.021)
‐0.324

(0.021)
‐0.343

R‐squared
Implied Gap: 0.5 below meanc
Implied Gap: 0.5 above meand

(0.027)
0.931
0.504
0.025

(0.036)
0.916
0.315
‐0.253

(0.044)
0.696
0.350
0.032

(0.055)
0.823
0.340
‐0.220

(0.079)
0.422
0.239
‐0.085

(0.060)
0.620
0.162
‐0.181

Models for Female Workers:
Intercepta
(standard error)
b
Coefficient on Non‐Union Wage
(standard error)
R‐squared
Implied Gap: 0.5 below meanc
Implied Gap: 0.5 above meand

0.282
(0.012)
‐0.173
(0.059)
0.273
0.368
0.195

0.222
(0.014)
‐0.423
(0.050)
0.765
0.433
0.011

0.229
(0.012)
‐0.053
(0.051)
0.044
0.256
0.203

0.153
(0.017)
‐0.321
(0.071)
0.482
0.314
‐0.008

0.056
(0.013)
‐0.052
(0.061)
0.031
0.082
0.031

0.092
(0.017)
‐0.298
(0.061)
0.531
0.241
‐0.058

Models for Male Workers:
Intercepta
(standard error)
Coefficient on Non‐Union Wageb
(standard error)

Note: See Tables 2a and 2b for description of samples. Entries are estimated intercept and slope coefficient (plus R‐squared and standard errors)
from regressions of mean union‐non‐union wage gap for a particular skill group on the deviation of the mean nonunion log wage for the skill group
from the mean log wage for all nonunion workers. Skill groups are based on five education categories and five age groups. Regressions are
estimated by weighted least squares using number of nonunion workers in cell as weight.
a

Estimated intercept from between‐skill‐group regression is interpretable as union‐nonunion wage gap for workers in skill group earning mean
nonunion wage.

b

Estimated coefficient on deviation of skill‐group‐specific mean nonunion wage from overall mean wage for nonunion workers of same gender and
sector.
c
Implied union‐nonunion wage gap for workers in skill group with mean nonunion wage 50 log points below overall mean nonunion wage.
d

Implied union‐nonunion wage gap for workers in skill group with mean nonunion wage 50 log points above overall mean nonunion wage.

Appendix  Table  1  
Union  Coverage,  Composition  of  Unionized  Workforce  and  
Employment  by  Sector,  Canada  and  US,  2015  
          
Employment  by  Sector  (%)  
Public  Sector  
Private  Sector  
  
Composition  of  Unionized  Workforce  (%)  
Female  
Male  
Public  Sector  
Private  Sector  
  

  

Canada  
20.0  

U.S.  
15.4  

80.0  
  
Canada  
52.2  
47.8  
58.4  
41.6  

84.6  
  
U.S.  
46.7  
53.3  
48.8  
51.2  

  

  

Union  Coverage  (%)  
Canada  
U.S.  
Female  
32.4  
11.9  
Male  
28.9  
12.6  
Public  Sector  
75.5  
39.0  
Private  Sector  
16.7  
7.4  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sources:  
Canada:  Statistics  Canada,  Labour  Force  Survey,  Tables  14-­‐10-­‐0027-­‐01  
and  14-­‐10-­‐0132-­‐01,  available  at  www.statcan.ca  
  
U.S.:  Current  Population  Survey,  available  at  www.unionstats.com  
    

Appendix Table 2a: Distribution of Employment and Unionization Rate (in %)
by Sector and Occupation in 2015, U.S.
Occupation:

Management
Business and financial operations
Computer and mathematical science
Architecture and engineering
Life, physical, and social science
Community and social service
Legal occupations
Education, training, and library
Arts, entertainment, and media
Healthcare professionals and technicians
Healthcare support
Protective service
Food preparation and serving
Cleaning and maintenance
Personal care and service
Sales and related
Office and administrative support
Farming, fishing, and forestry occupations
Construction and extraction
Installation, maintenance, and repair
Production occupations
Transportation and material moving
Note: Computed using the 2015 CPS

Employment
Private
Public
10.3
4.9
3.4
2.2
0.8
1.4
1.0
2.7
1.7
6.4
2.7
0.8
6.4
3.7
3.2
11.7
12.8
0.8
5.3
3.8
7.1
7.0

8.0
4.5
2.6
1.6
2.1
4.0
1.7
27.4
0.8
4.7
1.3
10.6
2.0
3.3
2.5
0.8
13.9
0.1
2.2
2.0
1.2
2.8

Unionization rate
Private
Public
3.0
2.4
2.7
5.7
5.0
6.0
3.3
16.4
7.3
11.5
8.1
9.1
3.9
7.6
4.8
3.6
4.9
2.1
17.0
13.6
12.9
15.3

22.0
23.8
23.0
26.3
22.7
39.8
18.5
53.4
27.0
37.8
25.2
52.5
23.1
31.9
28.9
20.7
39.0
16.5
36.6
40.1
30.6
41.4

Appendix Table 2b: Distribution of Employment and Unionization Rate (in %)
by Sector and Occupation in 2015, Canada
Occupation:

Senior management
Other management
Professionals in business and finance
Financial, secretarial and administration
Clerical, including supervisors
Natural and applied sciences
Health professionals
Technical and assisting health occupations
Social science, government and religion
Teachers and professors
Art, culture, recreation and sport
Wholesale, insurance and real estate
Retail salespersons, sales clerks, cashiers
Cooks and food and beverage service
Protective services
Childcare and home support
Sales and service occupations
Contractors & superv. in trades & transp.
Construction trades
Other trades occupations
Transport and equipment operators
Construction and transportation labourers
Occupations in primary industry
Machine Operators and Assemblers
Other labourers
Note: Computed using the 2015 LFS

Employment
Private
Public
0.1
5.9
3.4
4.5
10.2
8.4
0.8
2.8
4.0
0.5
2.4
3.7
9.4
5.2
0.8
0.8
10.4
1.4
2.7
6.8
4.3
2.8
2.2
5.2
1.3

0.3
4.7
3.2
6.4
11.1
7.3
9.7
8.0
8.6
18.3
2.8
0.1
0.7
0.6
4.0
3.2
4.7
0.4
0.4
2.0
2.0
0.8
0.3
0.4
0.0

Unionization rate
Private
Public
4.0
3.6
7.2
7.1
11.0
10.1
31.8
30.2
15.8
20.8
16.2
5.7
10.7
8.3
39.1
23.6
19.0
23.9
37.8
30.5
27.0
26.8
13.0
32.6
30.2

10.1
42.4
57.8
74.3
75.3
69.3
84.4
87.9
72.0
86.8
53.1
38.1
74.8
61.1
79.0
75.1
80.6
75.7
92.7
86.2
85.3
81.3
73.6
73.3
51.0

10th

50th

90th

4.71 6.69
11.02 15.64 24.53 34.81 51.93
Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)

Males Private Sector

4.71 6.69
11.02 15.64 24.53 34.81 51.93
Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)

Union Coverage Rate
0 .25 .5 .75

Males Public Sector

Union Coverage Rate
0 .25 .5 .75

Union Coverage Rate
0 .25 .5 .75

Union Coverage Rate
0 .25 .5 .75

Figure 1: Union Coverage by Wage Level, USA
Females Public Sector

4.71 6.69
11.02 15.64 24.53 34.81 51.93
Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)

Females Private Sector

4.71 6.69
11.02 15.64 24.53 34.81 51.93
Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)

2015
1993
1984
1973/74

10th

50th

90th

4.71 6.69
11.02 15.64 24.53 34.81 51.93
Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)

Males Private Sector

4.71 6.69
11.02 15.64 24.53 34.81 51.93
Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)

Union Coverage Rate
0 .25 .5 .75 1

Males Public Sector

Union Coverage Rate
0 .25 .5 .75 1

Union Coverage Rate
0 .25 .5 .75 1

Union Coverage Rate
0 .25 .5 .75 1

Figure 2: Union Coverage by Wage Level, Canada
Females Public Sector

4.71 6.69
11.02 15.64 24.53 34.81 51.93
Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)

Females Private Sector

4.71 6.69
11.02 15.64 24.53 34.81 51.93
Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)

2015
1991/1995
1984

Figure 3a: Union and Nonunion Wage Structures, Canada 1984
Females Public Sector
Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Males Public Sector

1.75

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

3.75

1.75

3.75

Females Private Sector
Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Males Private Sector

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

1.75

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

3.75

1.75

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

3.75

Note: Each point represents an age-education cell. Solid line is the 45 degree line, dashed line is fitted regression line.

Figure 3b: Union and Nonunion Wage Structures, Canada 1993
Females Public Sector
Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Males Public Sector

1.75

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

3.75

1.75

3.75

Females Private Sector
Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Males Private Sector

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

1.75

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

3.75

1.75

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

3.75

Note: Each point represents an age-education cell. Solid line is the 45 degree line, dashed line is fitted regression line.

Figure 3c: Union and Nonunion Wage Structures, Canada 2015
Females Public Sector
Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Males Public Sector

1.75

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

3.75

1.75

3.75

Females Private Sector

Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Mean Union Wage
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Males Private Sector

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

1.75

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

3.75

1.75

2.25
2.75
3.25
Mean Non-union Wage

3.75

Note: Each point represents an age-education cell. Solid line is the 45 degree line, dashed line is fitted regression line.

