NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CAUSAL LINK BETWEEN RELATIVE AGE EFFECT AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
EVIDENCE FROM 17 MILLION USERS ACROSS 49 YEARS ON TAOBAO
Youwei Wang
Yuxin Chen
Yi Qian
Working Paper 25318
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25318

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

We are grateful to Tuan Phan, K. Sudhir, Pradeep Chintagunta, Baohong Sun, Song Yao, and
seminar participants at New York University Shanghai and Fudan University for many helpful
comments and suggestions. We thank Taobao for kindly providing data. We thank the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (grant 71371056) for generous funding support.
Corresponding Author: Yi Qian The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Youwei Wang, Yuxin Chen, and Yi Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Causal Link between Relative Age Effect and Entrepreneurship: Evidence from 17 Million
Users across 49 Years on Taobao
Youwei Wang, Yuxin Chen, and Yi Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 25318
November 2018
JEL No. I24,I38,J21,J24
ABSTRACT
We use an extensive panel of 17 million individuals born between 1947 and 1995 from China’s
largest online marketplace, Taobao, to study the impact of RAE on the propensity to become an
entrepreneur. Using events surrounding the Cultural Revolution and the issuance of the
Compulsory Education Law whereby COD policies varied, we conceptualize a natural
experiment to identify the RAE effects. The youngest students are 5.4% less likely to become an
entrepreneur compared to the oldest within the cohort, translating to approximate 43.7 thousand
additional sellers born in September with an estimated USD 1.29 billion in additional annual
sales.
Youwei Wang
Fudan University
Department of Information Management
and Information Systems
Room 714, Siyuan Building
Shanghai
China
ywwang@fudan.edu.cn
Yuxin Chen
NYU Shanghai
Center for Business Education and Research
1555 Century Avenue
Pudong New Area
Shanghai 200122
China
yc18@nyu.edu

Yi Qian
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
CANADA
and NBER
yi.qian@sauder.ubc.ca

I. INTRODUCTION
Identifying factors that lead to a high propensity of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity has
been a focus of research over the past four decades (Zhao and Seibert 2006). For example, openness to
experience (Shane et al. 2010, Zhao and Seibert 2006), extraversion (Reichard et al. 2011, Shane et al.
2010), and conscientiousness (Zhao and Seibert 2006) have been found to be related to
entrepreneurship, as are self-esteem (Thompson, Barnsley and Battle 2004), self-leading (Kamata et al.
2009), and impulsivity/sensation seeking (Derringer et al. 2010, Lesch et al. 1996). This paper will
examine a new factor, relative-age effect (RAE), which has rarely been examined in the labor economics
and entrepreneurship literature.
RAE refers to the age-based performance differential due to the cutoff date (COD) policy at the
start of formal schooling (Angrist and Krueger 1991, Bedard and Dhuey 2006). Students in some
countries, for example, can enroll in primary school only after their sixth birthday as of September 1 of
the school year, thus making the oldest students 17% older than the youngest students within the same
cohort. The COD policy, although easy to implement, systematically penalizes some younger students
who are relatively less mature, both mentally and physically, while benefitting older ones born within
the same school year.
Researchers in a variety of disciplines, including psychology, education, economics, sociology, and
political science, as well as policymakers are interested in the COD policy’s impact on individuals’
outcomes, including sports (Allen and Barnsley 1993), academic performance (Angrist and Krueger
1991, Bedard and Dhuey 2006, Kuhn and Weinberger 2005, Plug 2001), and mental health (Thompson,
Barnsley and Battle 2004). To the best of our knowledge, however, RAE has not been causally linked
to entrepreneurship in the literature. Indeed, drawing a causal inference from RAE to long-term effects
on entrepreneurship for large populations has been difficult due to the lack of long-term time series
data, the statistical challenges and endogeneity issues, and the inability to run controlled interventions.

2

The lack of long-term data has limited studies to short-term outcomes, such as academic performance
in primary school (McEwan and Shapiro 2008), secondary school (Cabus and De Witte 2011), and postsecondary school (Bedard and Dhuey 2006, Dhuey and Lipscomb 2008), and, thus, little is known about
outcomes later in life. Bedard and Dhuey (2006) have argued that the long-term effects are of greater
importance to the economy, as the short-term effects could eventually disappear with age. Although
others provide evidence for short-term links between RAE and increased opportunities in the short term
and between increased opportunities and entrepreneurship, this paper aims at establishing the long-term
link between RAE and entrepreneurship.
Further, the inability to separate RAE from the birth-month effect creates a methodological
challenge. Certain birth months have been associated with higher levels of dopamine receptors due to
extended photoperiods in prenatal and postnatal periods (Chotai and Adolfsson 2002, Grosse and Davis
1999), which results in more sensation-seeking behavior (Benjamin et al. 1996, Derringer et al. 2010)
and entrepreneurship (Joseph et al. 2009). Notably, RAE can benefit older students due to a higher level
of maturity, which translates to better test scores (Jacob and Lefgren 2004), increased likelihood to enter
a university (Bedard and Dhuey 2006), a higher propensity to be a leader in high school (Dhuey and
Lipscomb 2008), and a greater likelihood of becoming a chief executive officer (CEO) (Du, Gao and
Levi 2012).
The inability to separate RAE from the birth-month effect can lead to overestimates or biased
estimates. For example, those born in September might be more likely to become an entrepreneur due
to climate and cultural factors rather than due to RAE. Previous studies on RAE have either ignored the
birth-month effect by assuming that birth month is unrelated to unobservable factors, such as innate
abilities, or relied on variations of starting month of school year across countries as a measurement
instrument (Bedard and Dhuey 2006). The validity of such instruments rests on the assumption that
school year CODs are randomly assigned across countries and not driven by systematic considerations,

3

such as climate, social, cultural, or economic conditions. Finally, truly randomized experiments may
not be possible due to human-subject issues or political considerations.
To disentangle RAE from birth-month effects, we conceptualize a natural experiment to establish
the long-term causal link by analyzing historical -data from China’s largest online marketplace, Taobao,
of 17 million randomly selected sellers and buyers born before, during, and after the Chinese Cultural
Revolution (CR). Taobao is an online marketplace that allows for small businesses to sell directly to
consumers with reduced efforts and costs. Sellers offer products across a variety of categories, including
apparel, electronics, and household goods. The marketplace has become one of the largest platforms for
entrepreneurship in China and has reached over 10 million active sellers and 423 million monthly active
buyers with USD 294.4 billion in annual GMV as of March 2016. i It is ranked as the eleventh most
visited website in the world and the third within China. ii The sellers on Taobao exemplify spirits of
entrepreneurship and leadership, and serve as a valuable sample for our study.
To separate the causal link associated with RAE from other confounds, we analyze sellers and
buyers born after 1947, including those affected by the CR that occurred between 1966 and 1976.
Although China had admitted children into primary school in September prior to the CR (Gao 1985),
many schools shifted the admission date to March during the CR between 1966 and 1976 or ceased
normal operations at least in the first few years (Meng and Gregory 2002, Zhang, Liu and Yung 2007).
As a result, those who were entering the school system during the CR are free of RAE that resulted
from the COD policy associated with autumn admission both during the pre- and post-CR eras but still
exhibit birth-month effects. During the post-CR era, several laws came into place. Most notably, the
Compulsory Education Laws (Law 86), effective July 1, 1986, introduced a COD policy for all children
who turned 6 years old by August 31 and required a minimum number of years of free education
(Postiglione 1999). Although there is a lack of national-level statistics, we collected data from local and
regional registries and school yearbook records to verify the COD policy and school age of students

4

who entered primary school between 1949 and 1990. These series of events provide a natural
experiment context to test a causal link by focusing on four key periods: those unaffected, who entered
primary school before the CR (born before 1960); those affected by CR (born between 1960 and 1970);
those who attended primary school after CR but before Law 86 (born between 1971 and 1979); and
those who faced the COD policy under Law 86 (born during or after 1980). The natural experimental
framework allows us to draw causal inference based on historical and observational data, and is one “in
which social and political processes, or clever research-design innovations, create situations that
approximate true experiments” (Dunning 2012, p.2).
The findings of this study are presented as follows. Overall, the percentages of entrepreneurs are
significantly higher for those born in September than that for those born in other months, especially
June, July, and August. For example, the oldest cohort (i.e., those born in September) has a 5.4%
premium in terms of possibility of becoming (as proxied by the percentage of those who become)
entrepreneurs as compared to the youngest cohort (i.e., those born in August). When splitting the
samples into different time periods, we find a striking pattern. Particularly, before the CR, RAE is
significant. During the CR, however, the effect disappeared entirely. After the CR, RAE becomes
visible again. After the Compulsory Education Law, RAE is the most salient among all of the historical
periods that we examined. These findings are consistent with our theoretical prediction. More
importantly, when splitting the samples by ethnic nationality regions, RAE is not significant for samples
drawn from ethnic minority regions but is salient for ethnic majority regions, probably because the
enforcement of the Compulsory Education Law was flexible in ethnic minority regions.
A series of statistical analyses are conducted to check the robustness of the findings in the baseline
analysis. First, we redefine the CR-affected population according to the adjustments of schooling
seasons we found in the archive data (born between 1966 and 1977) and obtained very similar results.
Second, we suppose the school entry age to be 7, rather than 6, as in the baseline analyses. Third, we

5

limit our samples (sellers) to those who were still in the market as of the date of data collection, with
the objective of excluding the attrition effects. Fourth, we limit entrepreneurs to the ones who
established an online store and achieved a minimum of transactions and replicate the analyses above.
This robustness check is designed to exclude casual sellers not committed to online start-ups. The
empirical results are quite robust across all of those analyses, thus lending strong support to the causal
link between the relative maturity in early childhood and the online entrepreneurship. Finally, we make
sure that all the empirical results are not subject to Multiple Hypotheses Testing issues.
The current study makes the following contributions. First, it disentangles RAE and birth-month
effect (seasonal effect) in a quasi-experimental setting as a result of the CR and the enforcement of the
Compulsory Education Law in China. Second, it provides evidence for the significance of RAE in a
new context—entrepreneurship. Third, we utilize big data that comprise aggregate information on
millions of sellers and buyers. As the economy in the next century will be driven by innovation, the big
gap in the rate of establishing new business for people born in different months has important
implications for policymakers who are committed to educational fairness.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a review of the literature on RAE
and birth-month effect. Section III offers background information on the CR and Compulsory Education
Law. Section IV presents the sample used in the analysis and summary statistics. Section V describes
the empirical results. Section VI concludes through a discussion of the implications of the findings.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Training and selection characterize nearly all education systems. Recent studies, however, provide
evidence that the selection process is subject to systematic error (Allen and Barnsley 1993, Deaner,
Lowen and Cobley 2013). This is caused by the relative maturity of children, which is not
distinguishable from ability, and the fact that those who are older have been given more training

6

opportunities, which is referred to as the relative age effect (RAE) (Angrist and Krueger 1991, Bedard
and Dhuey 2006, Dhuey and Lipscomb 2008). A short-term and mid-term RAE were found in many
areas, including sports (Allen and Barnsley 1993, Hancock, Young and Ste-Marie 2011), education
(Allen and Barnsley 1993, Angrist and Krueger 1991, Bedard and Dhuey 2006, Hauck and Finch 1993,
Plug 2001), and psychology (Joinson and Nettle 2005, Thompson, Barnsley and Battle 2004). What
remains unclear is whether such effects persist in the later stage of one’s life cycle. Although some
studies indicate that RAE does persist (Angrist and Krueger 1991, Bedard and Dhuey 2006, Deaner,
Lowen and Cobley 2013, Du, Gao and Levi 2012, Kuhn and Weinberger 2005, Plug 2001), other studies
suggest that such effects will eventually disappear after one enters the labor market (Black, Devereux
and Salvanes 2011, Dobkin and Ferreira 2010, Fredriksson and Ockert 2014, Fredriksson and Ockert
2005, Hauck and Finch 1993, Hurwitz, Smith and Howell 2015, Nam 2014).
Chetty, Hendren and Katz (2016) show that children grow up in high exposure to innovation are
much more likely to become inventors, and exposure to better environment during childhood improves
children’s overall mental health and IQ (Aghion et al. 2017). In addition to simple exposure to
innovations, exposure to same-gender inventors during childhood is shown to increase the chance that
children grow to be inventors due to psychological effect (Yglesias 2017). Overall, there are supportive
evidences that education, parental background (including multiple generations), individuals’ openness
to innovations/disruption, timing of innovation, income and social mobility are positively associated
with likelihood to have inventions (Acemoglu, Akcigit and Celik 2014, Akcigit, Grigsby and Nicholas
2017, Bell et al. 2017). We include as many of these factors as we are able to collect data for as control
variables in our analyses. This paper adds to the literature by providing an examination of the causal
link between early maturity and online entrepreneurship behaviors.
Although educational policies vary from country to country, virtually all have a single COD of
school entrance. This causes big differences in students’ age as of the school entry. For example, in an

7

education system in which the minimal age of primary school entry is 6 years, students born in the first
eligible month are, on average, 17% older than are students born in the last eligible month (Angrist and
Krueger 1991, Bedard and Dhuey 2006). This endows children who are relatively older with a
significant advantage. Because innate capability cannot be directly observed independent of relative
maturity, relatively mature infants are given more opportunities in the course of learning, as exemplified
by greater chances of being classroom monitors, sports team captains, and chairs of extracurricular
clubs (Dhuey and Lipscomb 2008). In school systems in which students are grouped by ability, those
who receive more training time and better experience are selected to the top tier when they are young
and, thus, are more likely to be selected to the top tier again when they are older (Allen and Barnsley
1993, Deaner, Lowen and Cobley 2013).
It is a common notion that older children usually out-perform among peers because they are more
mature in cognition and emotional development. However, in long run, this advantage is not significant.
Moreover, there is evidence that entering school late reduces educational attainment, which eventually
reduces lifelong earnings due to late labor-market entries (Deming and Dynarski 2008). Researchers
analyzing kindergarten-entering age and academic performances show that kids who enter kindergarten
early will initially perform worse than older kids, but this effect diminishes when kids enters third grade.
However, there is no evidence showing that age of entering school could affect a child’s social skills,
school engagement and interpersonal relationships (Stipek and Byler 2001).
RAE was first observed in sports. In the National Hockey League in Canada, in which the COD of
ice hockey school registration is January 1, twice as many players were born in the first quarter of the
year as in the last (Allen and Barnsley 1993, Deaner, Lowen and Cobley 2013). In addition, RAE in
terms of academic performance was found for students in different stages of learning, including primary
school (McEwan and Shapiro 2008), secondary school (Cabus and De Witte 2011), post-secondary
school (Dhuey and Lipscomb 2008), and even university attendance (Bedard and Dhuey 2006). A few

8

studies focus on the salience of RAE in post-university stages of human life, including earnings/wages
(Angrist and Krueger 1991, Fredriksson and Ockert 2005, Kuhn and Weinberger 2005, Plug 2001) and
becoming a CEO (Du, Gao and Levi 2012).
Past literature on entrepreneurship emphasizes the role of accumulating resources over the lifecycle, from the perspectives of human-capital (e.g., Lucas 1978; Kihlstrom and Laffont 1979; Dunn
and Holtz-Eakin 2000, Fairlie and Robb 2007, Gruber et al. 2008), education and experience (e.g.,
Iyigun and Owen 1998; Lazear 2004, 2005; Amaral et al. 2011, Jones and Weinberg 2011, Lafontaine
and Shaw 2014), and access to finance (Florin et al. 2003; Gompers et al. 2005, 2010). A recent study
analyzed the ages of entrepreneurs and the success of the venture using administrative data at the U.S.
Census Bureau (Azoulay et. al. 2018). The authors found that the high-growth start-up founders are
middle-aged, although their childhood relative age of education were not traced. To the best of our
knowledge, no prior study has directly examined the relationship between RAE and entrepreneurship. iii
Examining the long run effects of RAE poses major challenges in terms of identification methods.
The majority of the studies that examine RAE take advantage of the fact that birth-month is exogenous
and unrelated to unobservable factors such as innate abilities. Therefore, it is possible to obtain
consistent estimates of RAE by using birth-month as an instrument, and Bedard and Dhuey (2006)
supplied evidence to support the existence of RAE. They found significant long-lasting effects of initial
maturity on students’ academic performance across OECD countries iv in which the school CODs vary.
However, the validity of such evidence rests on the assumption that the school entry COD is randomly
assigned. The findings might be called into question if the choices of school entry CODs in different
nations were based on certain systematic reasons, such as social and economic conditions locally. In
this regard, the literature highlights seasonal patterns that concur with the school entry CODs, including
level of food stocks (Eisenberg et al. 2007, Huber and Fieder 2009, Lummaa and Tremblay 2003), risk
of diseases, such as influenza (Currie and Schwandt 2013) and monsoons (Lokshin and Radyakin 2012).

9

In our research context, birth month could be related to online entrepreneurship for at least two
theoretical reasons, both of which have strong support in the literature. The RAE account emphasizes
selection bias due to the unobservable innate ability and the single school entrance CODs that favor
older students. Hence, any individual differences due to RAE are the result of training/education
systems that are in effect after one’s birth. In line with this argument, the literature provides evidence
that older students have better achievement-test scores (Bedard and Dhuey 2006, Datar 2006, Jacob and
Lefgren 2004), are more likely to occupy leadership positions in high school (Dhuey and Lipscomb
2008), to enter into universities (Bedard and Dhuey 2006), and to become CEOs later in their lives (Du,
Gao and Levi 2012). It follows that the benefits accrued from the education system could enable them
to become entrepreneurs who are characterized by a self-leading personality (Kamata et al. 2009),
extraversion (Reichard et al. 2011, Shane et al. 2010), openness to experience (Shane et al. 2010, Zhao
and Seibert 2006), and conscientiousness (Zhao and Seibert 2006). Further, if such effects were found
in the context of entrepreneurship, this could be seen as the salience of RAE in adulthood,
complementing the literature on the short-term and medium-term effects of RAE.
One alternative explanation for the overrepresentation of people with certain birth months in
entrepreneurship (if found) points to the birth-month (or seasonal) effect. The birth-month account of
individual differences highlights the fact that “all men are not created equal.” That is, systematic
differences among people born in different months come into existence well before the intervention of
the education/training system. In particular, season of birth has been found to be associated with diverse
physiological and psychological traits, such as birth weight (Currie and Schwandt 2013, Tanaka et al.
2007), adult height (Tanaka et al. 2007, Weber, Prossinger and Seidler 1998), life expectancy
(Doblhammer and Vaupel 2001, Flouris et al. 2009, Lowell and Davis 2010, Ueda et al. 2013), and
novelty/sensation seeking (Benjamin et al. 1996, Ebstein et al. 1996, Lesch et al. 1996), among others.

10

The novelty-seeking trait is particularly relevant to the current paper. The entrepreneurship
literature has established that novelty seeking is a distinguishing characteristic of entrepreneurs (in
comparison to non-entrepreneurs) (Derringer et al. 2010, Hur and Bouchard 1997, Joinson and Nettle
2005, Roberti 2004, Savitz and Ramesar 2004). As long as starting a new business is accompanied by
high risk, it requires the spirit of novelty seeking for one to give up a “safer” job (Stewart Jr and Roth
2004). In 1996, a series of articles reported the findings on the genetic basis of the novelty-seeking trait,
which is the dopamine receptor genes (Benjamin et al. 1996, Ebstein et al. 1996, Lesch et al. 1996).
The research suggests that entrepreneurship propensity is heritable from parents. By exploring the data
from monozygotic identical (twins) and dizygotic (fraternal) twins, Nicolaou and colleagues were able
to compare a twin’s creative personality score with his or her co-twin’s score on the tendency to start a
business to determine whether these cross-characteristic, cross-twin correlations are greater for
monozygotic than for dizygotic twins (Nicolaou and Shane 2009, Nicolaou et al. 2008, Nicolaou et al.
2009, Shane and Nicolaou 2015). They determined that genetic factors account for a significant fraction
of the correlation between creative personality and the tendency to start a business.
Studies in the discipline of behavioral genetics provide theoretical justification of these findings.
Dopamine is a catecholamine neurotransmitter that plays a key role in reward and reinforcement (Neve
2009). High-sensation seekers are prone to have dopamine receptor gene variations that increase the
arousal necessary to achieve a given level of dopamine in the central nervous system (Van Tol et al.
1991), and this higher arousal threshold leads to greater chances of sensation-seeking activity, including
entrepreneurship (Nicolaou et al. 2011). Further, multiple single-nucleotide polymorphisms in
dopamine genes were found to account for significant variance in sensation-seeking behavior among
individuals (Derringer et al. 2010). Medical evidence on the increased risk for drug abuse and
schizophrenia for entrepreneurs support these findings (Derringer et al. 2010, Joseph et al. 2009).

11

The metabolism of dopamine, however, is not fully genetically determined. It also is affected by
environmental factors, such as the photoperiod during a baby’s gestation period (Chotai and Adolfsson
2002, Chotai et al. 2001, Chotai et al. 2002, Chotai, Lundberg and Adolfsson 2003, Eisenberg et al.
2007). A well-recognized finding in the field of genetics is that the mutually inhibitory systems of
dopamine and melatonin are the paracrine signals of day and night, respectively (Grosse and Davis
1999). Thus, the maternal entrainment of these systems during the prenatal period are different for those
born during the short photoperiod of October–March as compared to those born during the longer
photoperiod period of the year (Chotai et al. 2002). Stated differently, those born during October–March
are more likely to be novelty seeking due to higher levels of dopamine, which may lead to more
entrepreneurial activities. Therefore, the birth-month effect is potentially confounded with RAE in
earlier studies and is particularly relevant in our research in the context of entrepreneurship.
In this study, we use a novel method to disentangle RAE and birth-month effect. Specifically, we
leverage two special periods in the history of education in China: the CR and enforcement of the
Compulsory Education Law. In China, the minimal age of primary school registration has been 6 years
since the 1920s (Gao 1985). During CR (1966–1976), however, the school entry date was subject to a
major adjustment, and people who attended primary school during this period were free of RAE (Meng
and Gregory 2002, Zhang, Liu and Yung 2007). After the issuance of Compulsory Education Law,
which mandates that parents to have their children at age 6 entered into primary schools by August 31
of the corresponding schooling year, RAE should be salient again. Further, the Compulsory Education
Law specifies that pupils who live in ethnic minority regions can register for primary school as late as
age 7 (Postiglione 1999). This, in effects, blurs the COD of school registration in these areas and cancels
out RAE. Using this unique quasi-experimental setting, we are able to identify RAE by conducting both
treatment-removal and treatment-reintroduction studies.

12

III. CULTURAL REVOLUTION AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION LAW
III.A. THE CULTURAL REVOLUTION (1966-1976)
Similar to many industrialized nations, China adopted a U.S.-style school system with a “6-3-34/5” structure beginning in 1922 (Deng and Treiman 1997, Gao 1985). v For the first four years after
the People’s Republic of China was founded (1949–1952), no consensus was reached on when to enroll
new students in primary schools. While some enrolled students in the spring (typically in March), others
registered in the fall (usually in August or September), while yet others took in students in both spring
and fall (two times in each year). To resolve such inconsistencies, the Ministry of Education in China
issued a new policy titled, “Directions on the implementation of the 5 years’ education system in
primary schools,” in November 1952, requiring all primary schools to start the new semester in the fall.
The majority of the primary schools shifted to the new system from 1953 until the beginning of the CR
in 1966.
At the beginning of the CR in 1966, all primary schools in China were closed for two to three years.
During this period, no formal education was available, and, thus, no new students were admitted (Meng
and Gregory 2002, Zhang, Liu and Yung 2007). The widespread resumption of the normal curriculum
occurred in 1976, when the CR ended (Meng and Gregory 2002, Zhang, Liu and Yung 2007). During
the period of the CR, many educational reforms were carried out in reaction to Chairman Mao’s decree,
“The term should be shortened, and the education system should be revolutionized” (published on May
5, 1966). In particular, between 1966 and 1968, most schools ceased operation. In the following years,
between 1969 and 1973, many schools shifted from a fall to a spring COD. From then to 1976, all
schools reverted to the September COD, but with significant variation in implementing the change
across schools and provinces. By the time that the CR ended in 1976, the majority of the schools had
changed back to admitting students in September. In January 1978, the Ministry of Education published

13

a new policy, “Pilot scheme for the teaching plan of primary and secondary schools,” that set forth a
national decree, requiring primary schools to admit students only on September 1.
As noted in the literature, official national-level statistical reports are not available for the period
during the CR to confirm these key events (Law 1999). To develop a detailed picture of the effect of
the policy changes, we gathered yearbooks from local schools’ and local governments’ annals records.
We searched using keywords such as “school entry,” “school registration,” and “season of entry” in one
of the major Chinese online databases, Wanfang Data (s.g.wanfangdata.com.cn). This yielded 206
county records and school yearbooks with accurate documentation on the COD of primary school
students in Mainland China since the 1940s. These yearbooks and annals cover 124 prefecture-level
cities in 28 provinces, autonomous regions, and municipality cities. For the Qinghai province and Tibet
autonomous regions, we did not find any yearbook or annals with information on the school season. vi
The trends for the percentage of counties that took in students in spring, fall, vii or both are depicted
in Figure I. The education system in China in terms of registration seasons can be categorized into four
distinct periods. The first period, between 1949 and 1952, is characterized by incongruence across the
country. The second period, from 1953 to 1965, is dominated by fall enrollment. The third period,
between 1966 and 1977, during the CR, is characterized by the changing admission dates, with most
schools’ ceasing operations between 1966 and 1968. Finally, the last period, starting in 1978, is
characterized by primary schools’ admitting students only in the fall.

[FIGURE I ABOUT HERE]

In addition to determining the COD, we further establish the actual age of entering students by
conducting an additional search through local and provincial documents. Because no official reports are
available on the school age for primary school students in our observation period across the country,

14

we again rely on the yearbooks and annals for local education found in the Wanfang database. We used
keywords such as “school age,” “minimum age,” and “years old.” This search resulted in 263 county
annals and yearbooks for local education history for 29 provinces, autonomous regions, and
municipality cities. The only province-level region for which we do not have any information is Tibet. viii
On average, we found 62.4 yearbooks and annals with sufficient information for each year, with more
records for more recent years.
We plotted the mean of the minimum entry age and the mean of the maximum entry age for each
year of the trend in Figure II. First, we note that the minimum entry age and maximum entry age in the
yearbooks and annals reflect the actual age of school entry, rather than those specified in the law
decrees. Second, the actual age of school entry is often distributed non-uniformly, with more students
who are younger. However, only a small portion of the yearbooks and annals have detailed statistics on
the ratio of each age cohort as of school entry for certain years.

[FIGURE II ABOUT HERE]

We note the following from Figure II. First, the minimum school age is consistent across the years,
at about 7 years from 1952 to 1977, and dropped a little from 1978, which is consistent with the end of
the CR, and remained almost unchanged until 1985. After 1986, the minimum schooling age had a
slight drop to 6.5 years and remained stable after that. The small but significant drop in minimum age
of entering students since 1986 is related to the issuance of the Compulsory Education Law. Compared
to the minimum school age, the maximum age of students who entered the educational system reflects
only a small portion of the children who missed their chance of entering primary school at their earliest
age. Figure II shows that the maximum ages are consistent and have little fluctuation from 1952 to 1982.

15

The ages rose significantly from 1983 to 1985 but dropped to a lower level in 1986 and have remained
stable since then.
The increase in the maximum school age of entering students might reflect the efforts of the
educators and government officials to absorb children during the CR and prior years into the new system.
During this period, local governors were evaluated on the “percentage of primary school entry for
children between 7 and 12 years old.” Similar to what is seen for minimum school age, the data suggest
that the decline in the maximum age of entering students in 1986 is linked to the enforcement of the
Compulsory Education Law in the same year. Using the results from Figure II to determine individuals’
school cohort, we assume that students are 6 years old. We also will show that the statistical results are
robust if we assume the schooling age to be 7.

III.B. THE COMPULSORY EDUCATION LAW
After the CR, the National People’s Congress (the highest lawmaking body) enacted Compulsory
Education Law (enforced on July 1, 1986 [Law 86]) as an integral part of the national rebuilding efforts
(Law 1999). It is the first time in the history of China that the basic rights of children to access a
minimum period of free schooling was protected and enforced by law (Law 1999). More importantly,
it clearly specifies the age of entry and, thus, in effect, reduces the variance of schooling age across the
country and, hypothetically, makes RAE more significant.
Law 86 specifies: “The state shall implement nine-year compulsory education. All children who
have reached the age of six [emphasis added], irrespective of gender, ethnicity, or race, shall enter
schools to receive compulsory education for the stipulated number of years.”
In principle, compulsory education was free of charge: “The state shall waive collection of school
fees from students receiving compulsory education.” In terms of financing, Law 86 also specified the
responsibilities for different administrative levels. Local governments were allowed to collect education

16

taxes to finance compulsory education. In particular, “The state shall provide subsidies toward the funds
for implementing compulsory education in regions that have economic difficulties.” To promote the
enforcement of Law 86, it contains the requirement that “all organizations or individuals are prohibited
from recruiting and employing school-age children and juveniles who should be receiving compulsory
education.”
The central government made a concerted effort to promote the 9-years’ compulsory education
law.7 For example, the decrees were broadcast and discussed in the major national newspapers (e.g.,
People Daily, Guangming Daily, China Education Daily) in 1986 and the years that followed. Hundreds
of counties that did a good job of promoting compulsory education were praised on Teacher’s Day, a
new holiday in China that was first proclaimed in 1985 to acknowledge educators’ contributions. In
addition, compulsory education laws in the province level were enacted. By the end of 1986, 10
provinces had passed detailed decrees and execution plans for compulsory education (Zong 2010).
Official statistics show that, at the end of 1988, 97% of the children were enrolled in primary schools
in their schooling years and that 66% of the counties has been accredited to meet the 9-years’
compulsory education requirements (Li 1990).
Law 86 also allows some flexibility for certain geographical areas to overcome the difficulties in
implementing the law on a national scale. In particular, it stipulates that, “In regions that lack the
conditions for doing so, entry into school may be deferred until seven years of age.”
Although Law 86 did not specify which areas are “regions that lack the conditions for doing so,”
autonomous administrative regions clearly fall into this category. In fact, China has a tradition of
enforcing favorable policies in Han minority areas since the founding of the nation in 1949. In the Law
of the People’s Republic of China on Regional National Autonomy, ix which was enforced two years
prior to Law 86 (Postiglione 1999), Article 36 specified:

17

“In accordance with the state’s educational policies and in line with the stipulations of the law, the
organs of self-government in areas of national self-government decide on the educational plans as well
as the facilities, educational systems, forms of operation, teaching contents, languages used for teaching,
and student recruitment methods for schools of various levels and categories in their own areas.”
The freedom of parents to enroll their children in primary school at age 6 or age 7, together with
the flexibility in enforcing Law 86 in ethnic minority regions, could, in effect, blur the COD of school
entry. For children born right before August 31 of the academic year, but who are psychologically or
physically underdeveloped, the parents could choose late entry (i.e., at age 7) to avoid their children’s
having to compete with older peers. Alternatively, younger children who are psychologically and
physically well-developed could opt for school entrance at age 6. Thus, “self-selection” could mitigate
or even cancel out RAE in regions with lax enforcement.
To reinforce our conjecture on the effects of Law 86 on schooling age in Han majority and Han
minority areas, we split the schooling age samples into two groups. For the Han majority group, it
includes the 25 provinces and municipality cities; for the Han minority group, it includes the four
autonomous regions (with a total of 16 counties or prefectures). Although the sample size for the
autonomous regions is quite small, the sub-sample analyses yield some interesting findings (Figure III).
First, before the ending of the CR in 1977, both the minimum schooling age and maximum schooling
age are larger for Han minority regions than that of Han majority regions. This reflects the fact that Han
minority regions are relatively tardy in initiating children’s primary education. After the CR, but before
Law 86, the maximum schooling age of Han minority regions dropped somewhat, although the
minimum schooling age is almost identical to that for Han majority regions. From 1986 on, one striking
finding is that the minimum schooling age for Han minority regions stays unchanged, while that for
Han majority regions drops significantly. This finding is consistent with the decrees in Law 86, which
push the minimum schooling age downward in Han majority regions, while leaving the education

18

system in Han minority regions less affected. As for the maximum schooling age, it goes down for Han
majority regions but goes up a little for Han minority regions. This finding is also consistent with Law
86, which gives parents in the Han minority regions more flexibility in deciding when to enter their
children in school. Putting this statistical evidence together, we conjecture that RAE will become
stronger for Han majority regions but weaker or even disappear for Han minority regions after 1986.

[FIGURE III ABOUT HERE]

IV. DATA AND SAMPLE STATISTICS
In collaboration with Taobao, we collected a random sample of 9 million sellers and 8 million
buyers among registered users up to September 2013 x. We narrow our analyses to those born after
September, 1947 because (1) the number of sellers and buyers before 1947 are relatively small, and (2)
those born in 1947 entered into primary school in 1953 (assuming that the schooling age is 6), the first
year in China that a majority of the schools enrolled students in the fall. The data were anonymized and
contained only the user’s birth year, birth month, birth location at the province level, and gender. Similar
to other major online marketplaces in China, Taobao requires sellers to provide government-issued
identification. This policy is enforced to counter opportunistic or fraudulent behavior and is the primary
source of our data. xi
Table I reports the sample statistics for sellers and buyers included in the analyses. Sellers are 29.3
years old on average, which is a little bit younger than buyers (30.0 years old averagely). As to the
gender distribution, 47.5% of entrepreneurs are females, while this ratio is 44.4% for buyers. Therefore,
although female sellers are fewer than 50%, they represent a relatively larger proportion relative to the
ratio of female buyers. Finally, in terms of geographical distributions, we have more sellers and buyers
coming from economically developed regions (such as Guangdong, Zhejiang, and Jiangsu).

19

Comparatively, fewer sellers and buyers originate from economically underdeveloped areas (such as
Tibet, Qinghai, and Ningxia).

[TABLE I ABOUT HERE]

Figure IV presents the mean-centered birth rates across three decades from the 1998 census data
from the China Population Information Center and from our data of buyers and sellers on Taobao. xii
Overall, we find consistent birth rate patterns between census data and Taobao users for both sellers
and buyers. There are higher birth rates in September through December. The largest difference comes
in October, with a birth rate that is 18.7% and 28.2% above the yearly average from census data and
Taobao users, respectively. The lowest birth rates come in May, with 12.8% and 13.3% below the yearly
average offline and among Taobao users, respectively. Later decades also experience a greater skew.
Online users also are more skewed toward the later months in the year than from census data. This can
be driven by sundry factors that affect adoption of the online platform. For example, the birth rates
across months may vary over different income groups that also may have different propensities of
Internet adoption. There are similar rates, however, for both sellers and buyers. Thus, we use the ratio
of sellers to buyers in every subgroup on Taobao to measure the propensity of being sellers for that
subgroup.
[FIGURE IV ABOUT HERE]

Second, we compute the average of the ratio of sellers to buyers on Taobao for each birth month.
We use the ratio to control for selection bias, such as accessibility to the Internet and adoption of the
site. We also count all sellers (i.e., those who ever registered as sellers) and not just successful sellers
to avoid survival bias (Henrekson and Sanandaji 2014). xiii Figure V shows the mean-centered

20

percentage differences in the ratio of sellers and buyers according to birth month for all birth years. It
shows that those born in the last quarter of the year (September through December) are more likely to
become entrepreneurs, with a peak in September at 2.54% and a minimum in July at -3.53%, relative
to the mean across all 12 months.

[FIGURE V ABOUT HERE]

V. REGRESSION ANALYSIS
V.A. ESTIMATES FOR THE ENTIRE SAMPLE
We conduct a regression analysis to quantify the impact of RAE on entrepreneurship. We aggregate
users into subgroups by birth year, birth month, gender, and province. We estimate the following model
for each subgroup i xiv:

Yi = α + β1Agei + β 2Genderi + β 3 Pi + β 4Q i + β 5Ti + β 6 RAE i + ε
where Y is the natural log of the ratio of sellers and buyers for a particular subgroup, Age is the age of
the subgroup by the time of data collection, Gender is the gender dummy variable (1 for female), P is
the vector of province dummy variables, and Q is the vector of dummy variables for each calendar
quarter (i.e., Q2, Q3, and Q4 as dummies) using the first quarter (Q1) as the baseline. We use quarters
rather than monthly dummies to avoid collinearity with RAE. T is the time elapsed (in months) that are
subgroup-specific since the establishment of the online stores. We construct RAE as the relative month
according to the COD, using integers between 1, representing the oldest in the cohort born in September,
and 12, representing the youngest in the cohort born in August of the following calendar year. β 6
reflects the causal impact of one fewer month of maturity of a student in a given cohort.
Table II presents the coefficient estimates for different subgroups. Column (1) provides the
ordinary least squares (OLS) results for all users across all age groups, ranging from 18 to 66 years.
21

Columns (2), (3), (4), and (5) present the OLS results for age cohorts who attended primary school
before the CR (born between 1947 and 1959), during the CR (born between 1960 and 1970), post-CR
(born between 1971 and 1979), and after Law 86 (born between 1980 and 1995), respectively. While
controlling for birth-month effects, using quarters, we find that, overall, RAE has a significant and
negative effect on the seller-buyer ratio at the p<0.001 level (Column 1). Similarly, before the CR, RAE
is also significant at the p<0.001 level and negative (Column 2). However, we find that, during the CR,
RAE has a non-significant effect on entrepreneurship (Column 3). The post-CR (but prior to Law 86)
period experienced a significant (at the p<0.001 level) negative effect (Column 4). RAE is strongest,
however, after Law 86 was enforced (Column 5). For each additional month within a cohort after Law
86, individuals were 0.49% less likely to become a seller on Taobao. Those born in August are 5.4%
less likely to become entrepreneurs as compared to their peers born in September. xv Based on the
number of active sellers (10 millions) and retailing GMV (USD 294.4 billion) for Taobao, this translates
to approximately 43,700 additional sellers born in September, with an estimated USD 1.29 billion in
additional sales every year. We also find that females are 19.46% more likely to become entrepreneurs
on the platform. Younger individuals also are more likely to use the platform as a seller.

[TABLE II ABOUT HERE]

According to Figure I, the schooling season is inconsistent in 1977, one year after the ending of the
CR. Thus, we considered the CR a period from 1966 to 1977 and redid the analyses. The corresponding
results as in Table III are consistent with the baseline analysis in Table II.

[TABLE III ABOUT HERE]

22

So far, we assume that students enter primary school at age 6. Although this holds true in most
cases, some schools in some administrative regions admit students when they reach age 7 (one year
late). Table IV presents the analyses while redefining the age cohorts by considering the alternative
school entry ages. The major findings remain the same as in the baseline analyses, providing further
support to our theoretical arguments.

[TABLE IV ABOUT HERE]

To determine whether there are any differences in RAE for different geographical regions, we
dichotomize the entire sample into groups, such as north/south provinces, rural/urban provinces, and
high/low level of education provinces, and observe the findings. xvi No obvious differences were found
for those dichotomized groups of samples. Therefore, weather and economic factors could not explain
our empirical findings as above.
Establishing and operating a business online requires less investment in contrast to offline (Wang
et al. 2013). This leads to many casual entrepreneurs, characterized by having little time or monetary
investments in operating their stores. As a robustness check, we limit our analyses to sellers who
complete a minimum number of transactions and redo all of the analyses in earlier sections. Particularly,
we require a seller to complete at least one transaction and the sample size for sellers who had completed
one or more transactions shrinks to 8.19 million sellers (in contrast to 9 million sellers originally).
Despite this change, we get significant coefficients for RAE after Law86 (refer to Table V).

[TABLE V ABOUT HERE]

23

By the time of data collection, a significant portion of the sellers had exited the market. To examine
whether attrition leads to different results, we conduct another robustness check by limiting sellers to
those who are still in the market as of the date of data collection and recalculate the dependent variable.
Table VI shows that two major results remain unchanged as compared to the baseline. The coefficients
for RAE are insignificant during the CR but are salient both before and after the CR. Thus, despite the
fact that the new results are subject to attrition effects, RAE is still salient, thus providing strong
supports to our baseline results using all samples.

[TABLE VI ABOUT HERE]

V.B. ESTIMATES FOR THE ETHNIC MAJORITY AND MINORITY SUB-SAMPLES
China has a tradition of treating ethnic minorities differently, as embodied by decrees in the
Compulsory Education Law. According to Law 86, it is legal for parents in the minority nationality
areas to send their children to primary schools when they are as old as 7, while for other areas, the age
is 6. In addition, Law 86 encourages but does not mandate compulsory enforcement of the school entry
COD (Law 1999). It is important to point out that such enforcement flexibility was never clarified in
any formal law decree before 1986 (Postiglione 1999). This, in effects, weakens the control of law
enforcement on school entry COD, rather than strengthening it. For this reason, we expect RAE to be
relatively weak or even insignificant after the law in minority nationality areas, while the key findings
for other age cohorts should remain largely unchanged.
Table VII presents the OLS results for minority nationality samples. xvii What is most striking in
this table is the insignificant RAE after Law 86. As noted, this is in keeping with the lax enforcement
of the school entry COD during this period.

24

[TABLE VII ABOUT HERE]

Table VIII presents the findings in regard to Han majority provinces. As expected, the empirical
results are similar to those in the baseline analyses after Law 86. In particular, the coefficient of RAE
is significant both before CR and after Law86. It becomes insignificant during CR.

[TABLE VIII ABOUT HERE]

According to Law86, children in ethnic minority provinces could delay school entry until age 7,
and we thus wonder whether the analysis results are sensitive to this law decree. Therefore, we replicate
the analysis in Tables VII and VIII but define school entry age as 7. The findings are largely unchanged.
For succinctness, this set of findings is not included.

V.C. ESTIMATES FOR THE INTERACTION EFFECTS BETWEEN RAE AND GENDER IN MAJOR
CITIES
The past literature suggested that the RAE is stronger for boys than for girls (McEwan and Shapiro
2008), probably because boys usually experience intellectual and psychological development at a later
age than girls do. It follows that there is an interaction effect of RAE and gender, provided that the
enforcement of school entry policy is stringent enough across the country. However, this assumption
might not hold all the time. Taking geographical region as an example, it is more likely for the boys to
delay school entry in rural areas of China where the policy implementation is relatively flexible (Chen
2015, Tsui and Rich 2002). Consequently, this makes it difficult to identify the interaction effect of
RAE and gender.

25

To circumvent the issue, one strategy is leveraging the more fine grained information on buyers’
and sellers’ locations of registration in the data, in particular the prefecture-level cities. There are overall
365 prefecture-level cities in China, which vary significantly with the level of economic development
and administrative capacity. For major cities such as municipality cities (Beijing and Shanghai as
examples) and provincial capitals, we expect that the enforcement of the policy is stringent. For underdeveloped prefecture-level cities, we expect that the enforcement of the policy is flexible. However,
there are many other cities that lie in-between the two extremes. For the purpose of this study, we
primarily rely on two standards in categorizing cites. First, the list of top tier cities taking into account
such factors as size of population, GDP, education system is utilized as the candidate set (Ma 2010).
Second, this set is cross-validated by the ratio of households registered in urban areas (as compared to
rural areas) according to statistical yearbooks (Sheng 2010). In particular, only fourth tier cities or above
are included in the analyses. As a result, 161 prefecture-level cities (which represents 47% of the cities)
were identified as the major cities for data analysis. The results are reported in Table IX.
The findings concerning the main effects of RAE are largely unchanged in the full sample and subsample for different time periods. Interestingly, the interaction effects of RAE and gender are positive
and significant in each analysis (at p<0.01 level or above), thus providing strong support for our
conjecture. Males suffer more from the RAE than girls in terms of ratio of online entrepreneurs. We
further narrowed the analysis to 75 third tier cities or above and the results are similar. This set of results
are available upon requests. Overall, it seems that RAE differs for males and females, especially in
major cities where the enforcement of the education policy is more rigorous.

[TABLE IX ABOUT HERE]

26

V.C. MULTIPLE HYPOTHESES TESTING
In case there are multiple treatments of interest and it is desired to determine which treatments have
an effect, the probability of a false rejection may be much higher than desired. This is generally known
as Multiple Hypothesis Testing (MHT) problem in the literature (List, Shaikh and Xu 2016, Romano
and Wolf 2005). In this paper, we aim at identifying the existence of RAE in four historical periods
when the school COD policy was enforced or removed. It is possible for some of the RAE coefficients
to be significant simply due to MHT, leading to false rejection of the null hypotheses. To understand
why this may happen, we consider testing 𝑁𝑁 null hypotheses simultaneously and suppose that all null
hypotheses are true and that the p-values are independent and uniformly distributed. If we were to test

each null hypothesis in the usual way at traditional significance level (𝛼𝛼 = 0.05), then the probability
of at least one false rejection equals to 1 − (1 − 0.05)𝑁𝑁 , which approaches rapidly to one as 𝑁𝑁

increases. For instance, it equals to 0.185 when 𝑁𝑁 = 4, equals to 0.401 when 𝑁𝑁 = 10 and to 0.994
when 𝑁𝑁 = 100 (Romano and Wolf 2007).

One measure by which we account for MHT is the familywise error rate (FWER), defined as the

probability of rejecting at least one of the true null hypotheses. A multiple testing method is said to
control the FWER at level 𝛼𝛼 if 𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 < 𝛼𝛼 for any underlying probability mechanism of the

parameter to be tested (Romano and Wolf 2005).

Many methods have been proposed to control the FWER (see (Romano and Wolf 2007) for a
comprehensive review). The Bonferroni method is the most conservative one that falls into the category
of single step method. In single-step methods, individual test statistics are compared to their critical
values simultaneously, and after this comparison, the procedure stops. As an example, one could
consider the Bonferroni method with 𝑁𝑁 hypotheses and 𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖 is an individual p-value for hypothesis 𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖 .

There is a common critical value 𝛼𝛼/𝑁𝑁 and 𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖 is rejected if and only if 𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖 < 𝛼𝛼/𝑁𝑁.

27

Single-step methods can be improved in terms of power via stepwise methods, which can
nevertheless control for the error rate as well. Stepdown methods start with a single-step method but
then continue by possibly rejecting further hypotheses in subsequent steps. This is achieved by
decreasing the critical values for the remaining hypotheses depending on the hypotheses already
rejected in previous steps. As soon as no further hypotheses are rejected anymore, the procedure stops.
Holm method (Holm 1979) is the most well-known step-down method and a simplified version can be
formulated as follows.

Holm Algorithm (Step-down method for control of the FWER)
1. Relabel the 𝑁𝑁 null hypotheses in ascending order of the p-values: hypothesis 𝐻𝐻1 corresponds

to the smallest p-value 𝑝𝑝1 and hypothesis 𝐻𝐻𝑁𝑁 to the largest p-value 𝑝𝑝𝑁𝑁 .

2. For 𝑗𝑗 = 1,2, … , 𝑁𝑁, if 𝑝𝑝𝑗𝑗 < 𝛼𝛼/(𝑁𝑁 − 𝑗𝑗 + 1), then: (1) reject the null hypothesis 𝐻𝐻𝑗𝑗 , (2) let 𝑗𝑗 =

𝑗𝑗 + 1, and continue; Otherwise, accept 𝐻𝐻𝑗𝑗 and all subsequent hypotheses and stop.

To exclude the possibility that our findings concerning RAE is driven by MHT, we relabeled the
level of significance for the coefficients of RAE for all the regression results by applying the Holm
Algorithm (see Table X). As is evident in column 2 through column 5, the conclusions concerning RAE
remain valid after taking into account of MHT xviii. In particular, the RAE is significant before CR in all
analysis results (column 2); RAE is insignificant for all analysis results during CR (column 3); RAE is
significant again after CR but before Law86 (column 4); RAE is also significant after Law86 (column
5) except for the analysis results for the minority nationality regions (in Table VII), which is consistent
to our theoretical prediction. Thus, MHT is unlikely to be a major issue in our empirical results.

[TABLE X ABOUT HERE]
28

VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The findings of this study should be interpreted with the following caveats. First, our data come
from the largest developing country—China. One advantage of big data is that contributions of minor
factors that drive the results are likely to be evened out. Whether the findings are generalizable to other
countries with different cultural and economic conditions, however, is still an open question, and
warranting more research. Second, our study examined only online entrepreneurship. Whether the
findings are generalizable to offline entrepreneurship or other forms of entrepreneurial behaviors also
warrants further research.
Despite these limitations, our search calls into question the school systems in the majority of the
countries worldwide that are characterized by a single COD of entrance. The literature has shown large
and significant advantages in academic achievement for pupils who are more mature than their
classmates (Angrist and Krueger 1991, Bedard and Dhuey 2006, Datar 2006, Jacob and Lefgren 2004,
Plug 2001). Prior works, however, are split in terms of the endurance of this RAE into adulthood. While
one body of literature supports the view that the effect will propagate into career development (Angrist
and Krueger 1991, Bedard and Dhuey 2006, Deaner, Lowen and Cobley 2013, Du, Gao and Levi 2012,
Kuhn and Weinberger 2005, Plug 2001), another body holds that the effect will diminish (Black,
Devereux and Salvanes 2011, Dobkin and Ferreira 2010, Fredriksson and Ockert 2014, Fredriksson and
Ockert 2005, Hauck and Finch 1993, Hurwitz, Smith and Howell 2015, Nam 2014). To the best of our
knowledge, the literature falls short of presenting evidence for the persistence of RAE after one enters
the job market.
By exploiting a unique dataset that contains information about 9 million online entrepreneurs in
China, this study finds a causal relationship between birth month and the likelihood of becoming an
online entrepreneur as a result of COD. Overall, people born in September are 5.4% more likely to
become entrepreneurs compared to those born in August of the same school year, ceteris paribus.

29

Further, we show evidence that the findings are unlikely to be driven by seasonal effects. During the
CR, RAE vanished but is salient both before and after the CR. After the enforcement of the Compulsory
Education Law, RAE came back and became more salient. Because the seasons are unaffected by
human intervention in the education system, we conclude that our findings are driven primarily by the
dynamics of education policy; i.e., what we identified is an RAE rather than a birth-month effect.
Finally, the enforcement of the Compulsory Education Law in terms of COD of school entry in ethnic
minority regions of China is flexible: Children are eligible to enter into primary school after passing
age 6; alternatively, they can delay school entry for one year. Correspondingly, people from those areas
are less likely to be subjected to RAE. Our data support this conjecture and lend more credibility to the
persistence of RAE into adulthood.
The literature on RAE also is split on the benefits and costs of early school entry. Some empirical
results support early entry. For example, Nam (2014) indicates that, for the oldest children in a cohort,
educational achievement decreases as their age increases. In contrast, other studies support the idea of
late entry. For example, Bedard and Dhuey (2012) found that backing up the COD by one month
increases average hourly earnings. McEwan and Shapiro (2008) show that a one-year delay decreases
the probability of repeating first grade and increases fourth and eighth grade test scores, with larger
effects for boys. Muhlenweg et al. (2012) find more favorable outcomes for higher age at school entry
in regard to several temperamental dimensions; such children are more persistent, less often
hyperactive, and more adaptable to change. Ponzo and Scoppa (2014) find that younger children score
substantially lower than do older peers in the fourth, eighth and tenth grades.
Indeed, more empirical findings are inconclusive. For example, Elder and Lubotsky (2009) find
that having older classmates boosts a child’s test scores but increases the probability of grade repetition
and diagnoses of learning disabilities. Black et al. (2011) find that starting older leads to lower earnings
but that boys who start older are less likely to have poor mental health. Suziedelyte and Zhu (2015) find

30

that an early school start generally improves children’s cognitive skills but negatively affects their noncognitive skills.
The results reported in this paper add to the literature through the consideration of a new dimension:
entrepreneurship. Some may think that a single schooling COD is a necessary and beneficial educational
component. We found that RAE, which was believed to exist only in the early educational stages, could
propagate into later stages of life and affect important career decisions, such as establishing an online
business. We also found that RAE is not significant in areas where the enforcement of the school starting
date is flexible. Therefore, an alternative policy that aims at ameliorating RAE might endow parents
with more rights in deciding when their children are ready to enter school. For example, if children can
enter school one year earlier or one year later than scheduled, this would largely cancel out RAE.
Because the relative maturity of children in early childhood is confounded with factors such as
gender and race, adopting a flexible school entry date could effectively promote educational fairness.
In current educational systems, parents who are aware of the negative effects of relative age react by
keeping their children out of school so that they enter school a year later or through grade retention.
Such practices could be viewed as passive and post hoc interventions applicable to a small student
population. Our research supports a more formal rule as an integral part of the education system. It is
worth noting that this recommended system is different from existing systems that are widely adopted
in places such as England and the United States, where students are separated into ability-specific
curriculum groups (Bedard and Dhuey 2006). Rather than splitting students into groups according to
their observed ability (which is confounded with maturity and, thus, subject to measurement errors), it
is advisable to give parents more flexibility in deciding when their children are prepared to enter school.
While our research yield robust and novel results, it is worth mentioning that due to lack of exact
dates of birth for most entrepreneurs in our sample, we could not leverage the exact dates as McCrary
and Royer (2011) in identifying the effect of female education on fertility and infant. Grouping of

31

subjects according to common treatment periods has been used in the natural experiment literature for
program evaluations (Qian 2007). Future research could aim at gathering finer information of birth
dates. We hope this study serves as a stepping stone for future research on this important topic.

32

REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit and Murat Alp Celik. 2014. "Young, Restless and Creative:
Openness to Disruption and Creative Innovations." National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper Series, No. 19894.
Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Ari Hyytinen and Otto Toivanen. 2017. "The Social Origins of
Inventors." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 24110.
Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby and Tom Nicholas. 2017. "The Rise of American Ingenuity: Innovation
and Inventors of the Golden Age." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series,
No. 23047.
Allen, J. and R. Barnsley. 1993. "Streams and Tiers - the Interaction of Ability, Maturity, and Training
in Systems with Age-Dependent Recursive Selection." Journal of Human Resources, 28(3): 64959.
Amaral, A. Miguel, Rui Baptista and Francisco Lima. 2011. “Serial entrepreneurship: Impact of
human capital on time to re-entry.” Small Business Economics, 37, 1-21.
Angrist, J. D. and A. B. Krueger. 1991. "Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and
Earnings." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4): 979-1014.
Azoulay, P., Jones, B., Kim, J.D., and Miranda J. 2018. "Age and High-growth Entrepreneurship."
NBER Working Paper 24489, http://www.nber.org/papers/w24489, accessed Aug.-5-18.
Bedard, K. and E. Dhuey. 2012. "School-Entry Policies and Skill Accumulation across Directly and
Indirectly Affected Individuals." Journal of Human Resources, 47(3): 643-83.
Bedard, Kelly and Elizabeth Dhuey. 2006. "The Persistence of Early Childhood Maturity:
International Evidence of Long-Run Age Effects." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): 143772.
Bell, Alexander M., Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova and John Van Reenen. 2017.
"Who Becomes an Inventor in America? The Importance of Exposure to Innovation." National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 24062.
Benjamin, J., L. Li, C. Patterson, B. D. Greenberg, D. L. Murphy and D. H. Hamer. 1996.
"Population and Familial Association between the D4 Dopamine Receptor Gene and Measures of
Novelty Seeking." Nature Genetics, 12(1): 81-84.
33

Black, S. E., P. J. Devereux and K. G. Salvanes. 2011. "Too Young to Leave the Nest? The Effects of
School Starting Age." Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2): 455-67.
Cabus, Sofie J. and Kristof De Witte. 2011. "Does School Time Matter?-on the Impact of Compulsory
Education Age on School Dropout." Economics of Education Review, 30(6): 1384-98.
Chen, Qihui. 2015. "Ready for School? Impacts of Delayed Primary School Enrollment on Children's
Educational Outcomes in Rural China." International Journal of Educational Development, 45:
112-28.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. "The Effects of Exposure to Better
Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment."
American Economic Review, 106(4): 855-902.
Chotai, J. and R. Adolfsson. 2002. "Converging Evidence Suggests That Monoamine
Neurotransmitter Turnover in Human Adults Is Associated with Their Season of Birth." European
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 252(3): 130-34.
Chotai, J., T. Forsgren, L. G. Nilsson and R. Adolfsson. 2001. "Season of Birth Variations in the
Temperament

and

Character

Inventory

of

Personality

in

a

General

Population."

Neuropsychobiology, 44(1): 19-26.
Chotai, J., M. Jonasson, B. Hagglof and R. Adolfsson. 2002. "The Temperament Scale of Novelty
Seeking in Adolescents Shows an Association with Season of Birth Opposite to That in Adults."
Psychiatry Research, 111(1): 45-54.
Chotai, J., M. Lundberg and R. Adolfsson. 2003. "Variations in Personality Traits among Adolescents
and Adults According to Their Season of Birth in the General Population: Further Evidence."
Personality and Individual Differences, 35(4): 897-908.
Currie, J. and H. Schwandt. 2013. "Within-Mother Analysis of Seasonal Patterns in Health at Birth."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(30): 12265-70.
Datar, A. 2006. "Does Delaying Kindergarten Entrance Give Children a Head Start?" Economics of
Education Review, 25(1): 43-62.
Deaner, R. O., A. Lowen and S. Cobley. 2013. "Born at the Wrong Time: Selection Bias in the Nhl
Draft." PLoS ONE, 8(2): 7.
Deming, David and Susan Dynarski. 2008. "The Lengthening of Childhood." The Journal of
34

Economic Perspectives, 22(3): 71-92.
Deng, Z. and D. J. Treiman. 1997. "The Impact of the Cultural Revolution on Trends in Educational
Attainment in the People's Republic of China." American Journal of Sociology, 103(2): 391-428.
Derringer, J., R. F. Krueger, D. M. Dick, S. Saccone, R. A. Grucza, A. Agrawal, P. Lin, L. Almasy,
H. J. Edenberg, T. Foroud, et al. 2010. "Predicting Sensation Seeking from Dopamine Genes: A
Candidate-System Approach." Psychological Science, 21(9): 1282-90.
Dhuey, Elizabeth and Stephen Lipscomb. 2008. "What Makes a Leader? Relative Age and High
School Leadership." Economics of Education Review, 27(2): 173-83.
Dobkin, Carlos and Fernando Ferreira. 2010. "Do School Entry Laws Affect Educational Attainment
and Labor Market Outcomes?" Economics of Education Review, 29(1): 40-54.
Doblhammer, G. and J. W. Vaupel. 2001. "Lifespan Depends on Month of Birth." Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 98(5): 2934-39.
Du, Qianqian, Huasheng Gao and Maurice D. Levi. 2012. "The Relative-Age Effect and Career
Success: Evidence from Corporate Ceos." Economics Letters, 117(3): 660-62.
Dunn, Thomas A, and Douglas J. Holtz-Eakin. 2000. "Financial Capital, Human Capital, and the
Transition to Self-Employment: Evidence from Intergenerational Links." Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 282-305.
Dunning, T. 2012. Natural Experiments in the Social Sciences: A Design-Based Approach. Cambridge,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ebstein, R. P., O. Novick, R. Umansky, B. Priel, Y. Osher, D. Blaine, E. R. Bennett, L. Nemanov,
M. Katz and R. H. Belmaker. 1996. "Dopamine D4 Receptor (D4dr) Exon Iii Polymorphism
Associated with the Human Personality Trait of Novelty Seeking." Nature Genetics, 12(1): 78-80.
Eisenberg, D. T. A., B. Campbell, J. MacKillop, J. K. Lum and D. S. Wilson. 2007. "Season of Birth
and Dopamine Receptor Gene Associations with Impulsivity, Sensation Seeking and Reproductive
Behaviors." PLoS ONE, 2(11).
Elder, T. E. and D. H. Lubotsky. 2009. "Kindergarten Entrance Age and Children's Achievement
Impacts of State Policies, Family Background, and Peers." Journal of Human Resources, 44(3):
641-83.
Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2007. "Families, Human Capital, and Small Business:
35

Evidence from the Characteristics of Business Owners Survey," (with Alicia Robb), Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 60(2): 225-245.
Florin, J., Michael Lubatkin and William Schulze. 2003, “A Social Capital Model of High-Growth
Ventures.” The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 46, No. 3 (Jun., 2003), pp. 374-384.
Flouris, A. D., Y. Spiropoulos, G. J. Sakellariou and Y. Koutedakis. 2009. "Effect of Seasonal
Programming on Fetal Development and Longevity: Links with Environmental Temperature."
American Journal of Human Biology, 21(2): 214-16.
Fredriksson, P. and B. Ockert. 2014. "Life-Cycle Effects of Age at School Start." Economic Journal,
124(579): 977-1004.
Fredriksson, Petert and Bjorn Ockert. 2005. "Is Early Learning Really More Productive? The Effect
of School Starting Age on School and Labor Market Performance." Working Paper.
Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner and David Scharfstein. 2005 “Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public
Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999.” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 60,
No. 2, pp. 577-614.
Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner and David Scharfstein. 2010, "Performance persistence
in entrepreneurship." Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 96, Issue 1, April, Pages 18-32.
Gruber, Marc, Ian MacMillan and James Thompson. 2008. “Look Before You Leap: Market
Opportunity Identification in Emerging Technology Firms.” Management Science, Vol. 54, No. 9,
September 2008, pp. 1652-1665.
Gao, Qi. 1985. The History of Contemporary Chinese Education (in Chinese). Beijing: Beijing Normal
University Press.
Grosse, Julia and Fred C. Davis. 1999. "Transient Entrainment of a Circadian Pacemaker During
Development by Dopaminergic Activation in Syrian Hamsters." Brain Research Bulletin, 48(2):
185-94.
Hancock, David J., Bradley W. Young and Diane M. Ste-Marie. 2011. "Effects of a Rule Change
That Eliminates Body-Checking on the Relative Age Effect in Ontario Minor Ice Hockey." Journal
of Sports Sciences, 29(13): 1399-406.
Hauck, A. L. and A. J. Finch. 1993. "The Effect of Relative Age on Achievement in Middle School."
Psychology in the Schools, 30(1): 74-79.
36

Henrekson, Magnus and Tino Sanandaji. 2014. "Small Business Activity Does Not Measure
Entrepreneurship." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(5): 1760-65.
Holm, Sture. 1979. "A Simple Sequentially Rejective Multiple Test Procedure." Scandinavian Journal
of Statistics, 6(2): 65-70.
Huber, S. and M. Fieder. 2009. "Strong Association between Birth Month and Reproductive
Performance of Vietnamese Women." American Journal of Human Biology, 21(1): 25-35.
Hur, Y. M. and T. J. Bouchard. 1997. "The Genetic Correlation between Impulsivity and Sensation
Seeking Traits." Behavior Genetics, 27(5): 455-63.
Hurwitz, M., J. Smith and J. S. Howell. 2015. "Student Age and the Collegiate Pathway." Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 34(1): 59-84.
Iyigun, Murat F. and Ann L. Owen. 1998. “Risk, Entrepreneurship, and Human-Capital
Accumulation.” The American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the
Hundred and Tenth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, pp. 454-457.
Jacob, B. A. and L. Lefgren. 2004. "Remedial Education and Student Achievement: A RegressionDiscontinuity Analysis." Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1): 226-44.
Joinson, Carol and Daniel Nettle. 2005. "Season of Birth Variation in Sensation Seeking in an Adult
Population." Personality and Individual Differences, 38(4): 859-70.
Jones, Ben F, Reedy, EJ & Weinberg, BA. 2014. Age and Scientific Genius. in DK Simonton (ed.),
The Wiley Handbook of Genius. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., pp. 422-450.
Joseph, J. E., X. Liu, Y. Jiang, D. Lynam and T. H. Kelly. 2009. "Neural Correlates of Emotional
Reactivity in Sensation Seeking." Psychological Science, 20(2): 215-23.
Kamata, Mitsuhiro, Akihito Suzuki, Yoshihiko Matsumoto, Hitoshi Togashi and Koichi Otani.
2009. "Effect of Month of Birth on Personality Traits of Healthy Japanese." European Psychiatry,
24(2): 86-90.
Kihlstrom, Richard E. and Jean-Jacques Laffont. 1979. "A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial
Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion." Journal of Political Economy vol 87:4, 719748.
Kuhn, P. and C. Weinberger. 2005. "Leadership Skills and Wages." Journal of Labor Economics,
23(3): 395-436.
37

Lafontaine, F. and Kathryn S. 2014. “Serial Entrepreneurship: Learning by Doing?”
NBER Working Paper No. 20312.
Lazear, E. P. 2004. “Balanced skills and entrepreneurship.” American Economic Review, Papers
& Proceedings, 94, 208-11.
Lazear, E. P. 2005. “Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 23, no. 4
Law, Wing-Wah. 1999. "Compulsory Education Law of the People's Republic of China." Chinese
Education & Society, 32(3): 14.
Lesch, K. P., D. Bengel, A. Heils, S. Z. Sabol, B. D. Greenberg, S. Petri, J. Benjamin, C. R. Muller,
D. H. Hamer and D. L. Murphy. 1996. "Association of Anxiety-Related Traits with a
Polymorphism in the Serotonin Transporter Gene Regulatory Region." Science, 274(5292): 152731.
Li, T. 1990. "A Report on the Issues for China's Education." People's Education, 2: 4.
List, John A., Azeem M. Shaikh and Yang Xu. 2016. "Multiple Hypothesis Testing in Experimental
Economics." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 21875.
Lokshin, M. and S. Radyakin. 2012. "Month of Birth and Children's Health in India." Journal of
Human Resources, 47(1): 174-203.
Lowell, W. E. and G. E. Davis. 2010. "The Effect of Solar Cycles on Human Lifespan in the 50 United
States: Variation in Light Affects the Human Genome." Medical Hypotheses, 75(1): 17-25.

Lucas, Robert E. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms.” The Bell Journal of Economics,
vol. 9, no. 2, 1978, pp. 508–523.
Lummaa, V. and M. Tremblay. 2003. "Month of Birth Predicted Reproductive Success and Fitness in
Pre-Modern Canadian Women." Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
270(1531): 2355-61.
Ma, Jiantang. 2010. "Tabulation on the 2010 Population Census of the People's Republic of China,
Http://Www.Stats.Gov.Cn/Tjsj/Pcsj/Rkpc/6rp/Indexch.Htm," Population Census Office of the
State Council China Bureau of Labor Statistics. China Statistics Press, Beijing Info Press.
McCrary, J. and H. Royer, 2011. "The Effect of Female Education on Fertility and Infant Health:
Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth". The American Economic
Review, Vol. 101, No. 1, pp. 158-195
38

McEwan, P. J. and J. S. Shapiro. 2008. "The Benefits of Delayed Primary School Enrollment Discontinuity Estimates Using Exact Birth Dates." Journal of Human Resources, 43(1): 1-29.
Meng, X. and R. G. Gregory. 2002. "The Impact of Interrupted Education on Subsequent Educational
Attainment: A Cost of the Chinese Cultural Revolution." Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 50(4): 935-59.
Muhlenweg, A., D. Blomeyer, H. Stichnoth and M. Laucht. 2012. "Effects of Age at School Entry
(Ase) on the Development of Non-Cognitive Skills: Evidence from Psychometric Data."
Economics of Education Review, 31(3): 68-76.
Nam, K. 2014. "Until When Does the Effect of Age on Academic Achievement Persist? Evidence from
Korean Data." Economics of Education Review, 40: 106-22.
Neve, Kim. 2009. The Dopamine Receptors. Totowa: NJ: Humana Press.
Nicolaou, Nicos and Scott Shane. 2009. "Can Genetic Factors Influence the Likelihood of Engaging
in Entrepreneurial Activity?" Journal of Business Venturing, 24(1): 1-22.
Nicolaou, Nicos, Scott Shane, Georgina Adi, Massimo Mangino and Juliette Harris. 2011. "A
Polymorphism Associated with Entrepreneurship: Evidence from Dopamine Receptor Candidate
Genes." Small Business Economics, 36(2): 151-55.
Nicolaou, Nicos, Scott Shane, Lynn Cherkas, Janice Hunkin and Tim D. Spector. 2008. "Is the
Tendency to Engage in Entrepreneurship Genetic?" Management Science, 54(1): 167-79.
Nicolaou, Nicos, Scott Shane, Lynn Cherkas and Tim D. Spector. 2009. "Opportunity Recognition
and the Tendency to Be an Entrepreneur: A Bivariate Genetics Perspective." Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 110(2): 108-17.
Plug, E. J. S. 2001. "Season of Birth, Schooling and Earnings." Journal of Economic Psychology, 22(5):
641-60.
Ponzo, M. and V. Scoppa. 2014. "The Long-Lasting Effects of School Entry Age: Evidence from
Italian Students." Journal of Policy Modeling, 36(3): 578-99.
Postiglione, Gereard A. 1999. "Articles Concerning Ethnic Minority Education in the Law of the
People's Republic of China on Regional National Autonomy." Chinese Education & Society, 32(5):
23.
Qian, Yi. 2007. "Do National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in a Global Patenting
39

Environment?--a Cross-Country Analysis of Pharmaceutical Patent Protection, 1978-2002”
Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2007, 89(3): 436-453. MIT Press.
Reichard, Rebecca J., Ronald E. Riggio, Diana Wright Guerin, Pamella H. Oliver, Allen W.
Gottfried and Adele Eskeles Gottfried. 2011. "A Longitudinal Analysis of Relationships
between Adolescent Personality and Intelligence with Adult Leader Emergence and
Transformational Leadership." Leadership Quarterly, 22(3): 471-81.
Roberti, J. W. 2004. "A Review of Behavioral and Biological Correlates of Sensation Seeking."
Journal of Research in Personality, 38(3): 256-79.
Romano, Joseph P. and Michael Wolf. 2007. "Control of Generalized Error Rates in Multiple
Testing." Ann. Statist., 35(4): 1378-408.
____. 2005. "Stepwise Multiple Testing as Formalized Data Snooping." Econometrica, 73(4): 1237-82.
Savitz, J. B. and R. S. Ramesar. 2004. "Genetic Variants Implicated in Personality: A Review of the
More Promising Candidates." American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B-Neuropsychiatric
Genetics, 131B(1): 20-32.
Shane, Scott and Nicos Nicolaou. 2015. "Creative Personality, Opportunity Recognition and the
Tendency to Start Businesses: A Study of Their Genetic Predispositions." Journal of Business
Venturing, 30(3): 407-19.
Shane, Scott, Nicos Nicolaou, Lynn Cherkas and Tim D. Spector. 2010. "Genetics, the Big Five, and
the Tendency to Be Self-Employed." Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(6): 1154-62.
Sheng, Laiyun. 2010. China Statistical Yearbook for Regional Economy 2010. Beijing: China Statistics
Press.
Stewart Jr, Wayne H. and Philip L. Roth. 2004. "Data Quality Affects Meta-Analytic Conclusions:
A Response to Miner and Raju (2004) Concerning Entrepreneurial Risk Propensity." Journal of
Applied Psychology, 89(1): 14-21.
Stipek, Deborah and Patricia Byler. 2001. "Academic Achievement and Social Behaviors Associated
with Age of Entry into Kindergarten." Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 22(2): 17589.
Suziedelyte, A. and A. Zhu. 2015. "Does Early Schooling Narrow Outcome Gaps for Advantaged and
Disadvantaged Children?" Economics of Education Review, 45: 76-88.
40

Tanaka, H., M. Sei, T. Q. Binh, H. Munakata, K. Yuasa and Y. Nakahori. 2007. "Correlation of
Month and Season of Birth with Height, Weight and Degree of Obesity of Rural Japanese
Children." Journal of Medical Investigation, 54(1-2): 133-39.
Thompson, Angus H., Roger H. Barnsley and James Battle. 2004. "The Relative Age Effect and the
Development of Self-Esteem." Educational Research, 46(3): 313-20.
Tsui, Ming and Lynne Rich. 2002. "The Only Child and Educational Opportunity for Girls in Urban
China." Gender and Society, 16(1): 74-92.
Ueda, P., A. K. Edstedt Bonamy, F. Granath and S. Cnattingius. 2013. "Month of Birth and
Mortality in Sweden: A Nation-Wide Population-Based Cohort Study." PLoS ONE, 8(2).
Van Tol, Hubert H. M., James R. Bunzow, Hong-Chang Guan, Roger K. Sunahara, Philip Seeman,
Hyman B. Niznik and Olivier Civelli. 1991. "Cloning of the Gene for a Human Dopamine D4
Receptor with High Affinity for the Antipsychotic Clozapine." Nature, 350(6319): 610-14.
Wang, Youwei, Shan Wang, Yulin Fang and Patrick Y. K. Chau. 2013. "Store Survival in Online
Marketplace: An Empirical Investigation." Decision Support Systems, 56(0): 482-93.
Weber, G. W., H. Prossinger and H. Seidler. 1998. "Height Depends on Month of Birth." Nature,
391(6669): 754-55.
Yglesias, Matthew. 2017. "Groundbreaking Empirical Research Shows Where Innovation Really
Comes From. ," Retrived from: https://www.vox.com/2017/12/4/16706352/innovation-inequalityrace-gender.
Zhang, J. S., P. W. Liu and L. Yung. 2007. "The Cultural Revolution and Returns to Schooling in
China: Estimates Based on Twins." Journal of Development Economics, 84(2): 631-39.
Zhao, Hao and Scott E. Seibert. 2006. "The Big Five Personality Dimensions and Entrepreneurial
Status: A Meta-Analytical Review." Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(2): 259-71.
Zong, S. 2010. "Research on the Legalization and Implementation of the Compulsory Education Law
of the People's Republic of China in 1986," Hebei Province, China: Hebei University PhD
Dissertation.

41

Table I
SAMPLE STATISTICS
Variable

Sellers

Buyers

Sample

9.0 millions

8.0 millions

Mean Age

29.3

30.0

Female

47.5%

44.4%

Top Five Provinces

Guangdong

Guangdong

Zhejiang

Zhejiang

Jiangsu

Jiangsu

Shanghai

Shanghai

Shandong

Beijing

Gansu

Gansu

Hainan

Hainan

Ningxia

Ningxia

Qinghai

Qinghai

Tibet

Tibet

Bottom Five Provinces

42

TABLE II
BASELINE REGRESSION RESULTS

Age

Female

Q2

Q3

Q4

T

RAE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All

Pre-CR

CR

Post-CR

Law 86

(1947-1995)

(1947-1959)

(1960-1970)

(1971-1979)

(1980-1995)

-0.0025***

-0.0243***

(0.0004)

(0.0020)

0.1946***

0.0180***
(0.0019)

0.2547***

0.2929***

0.0128***
(0.0030)
0.1247***

(0.0061)

(0.0147)

(0.0102)

(0.0050)

0.0088

0.0239

0.0128

-0.0113

(0.0097)

(0.0228)

(0.0160)

(0.0081)

0.0260**

0.0564**

0.0182

0.0227***

-0.0701***
(0.0015)
0.1011***
(0.0036)
0.0149**
(0.0053)
0.0204***

(0.0089)

(0.0204)

(0.0153)

(0.0068)

(0.0050)

0.0167

0.0357

0.0057

0.0071

0.0104

(0.0089)

(0.0212)

(0.0149)

(0.0066)

(0.0054)

0.0068***

0.0284***

(0.0008)

(0.0015)

-0.0049***

-0.0098***

(0.0011)

(0.0025)

0.0260***
(0.0024)
0.0006
(0.0020)

0.0026

0.0124***

(0.0031)

(0.0008)

-0.0027***

-0.0029***

(0.0008)

(0.0007)

P

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adj R2

0.40

0.63

0.64

0.74

0.69

F

642.31

297.60

602.00

1,070.34

1,004.91

N

35,916

9,210

8,157

6,653

11,896

Notes: Dependent Variable = ln (#seller/#buyer * 100 + 1). Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in brackets.
September is the baseline month of comparison. All models include controls for gender, age, time elapsed since the foundation
of online stores (T), and province fixed-effect (P). All models include the intercept term. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

43

TABLE III
REGRESSION RESULTS BASED ON A LONG PERIOD OF CULTURAL REVOLUTION

Age

Female

Q2

Q3

Q4

T

RAE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All

Pre-CR

Long CR

Post-CR

Law86

(1947-1995)

(1947-1959)

(1960-1971)

(1972-1979)

(1980-1995)

-0.0025***

-0.0243***

(0.0004)

(0.0020)

0.1946***

0.0222***
(0.0015)

0.2547***

0.2923***

0.0110***
(0.0032)
0.1130***

(0.0061)

(0.0147)

(0.0096)

(0.0051)

0.0088

0.0239

0.0126

-0.0136

(0.0097)

(0.0228)

(0.0150)

(0.0084)

0.0260**

0.0564**

0.0172

0.0239***

-0.0701***
(0.0015)
0.1011***
(0.0036)
0.0149**
(0.0053)
0.0204***

(0.0089)

(0.0204)

(0.0144)

(0.0067)

(0.0050)

0.0167

0.0357

0.0071

0.0047

0.0104

(0.0089)

(0.0212)

(0.0140)

(0.0066)

(0.0054)

0.0068***

0.0284***

(0.0008)

(0.0015)

-0.0049***

-0.0098***

(0.0011)

(0.0025)

0.0251***
(0.0024)
0.0004
(0.0019)

0.0031

0.0124***

(0.0033)

(0.0008)

-0.0027**

-0.0029***

(0.0008)

(0.0007)

P

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adj R2

0.40

0.63

0.64

0.75

0.69

F

642.31

297.60

662.74

1,011.81

1,004.91

N

35,916

9,210

8,894

5,916

11,896

Notes: Dependent Variable = ln (#seller/#buyer * 100 + 1). Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in brackets.
September is the baseline month of comparison. All models include controls for gender, age, time elapsed since the foundation
of online stores (T), and province fixed-effect (P). All models include the intercept term. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

44

TABLE IV
REGRESSION RESULTS BASED ON A SCHOOL ENTRY AGE OF 7

Age

Female

Q2

Q3

Q4

T

RAE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All

Pre-CR

CR

Post-CR

Law86

(1947-1995)

(1947-1959)

(1960-1970)

(1971-1979)

(1980-1995)

-0.0025***

-0.0249***

(0.0004)

(0.0023)

0.1946***

0.0144***
(0.0020)

0.2597***

0.2878***

0.0215***
(0.0031)
0.1461***

-0.0598***
(0.0013)
0.0987***

(0.0061)

(0.0156)

(0.0105)

(0.0058)

0.0088

0.0233

0.0124

-0.0125

(0.0097)

(0.0242)

(0.0165)

(0.0086)

0.0541*

0.0256

0.0173*

(0.0089)

(0.0214)

(0.0157)

(0.0081)

(0.0049)

0.0167

0.0426

0.0040

-0.0001

0.0067

(0.0089)

(0.0224)

(0.0157)

(0.0073)

(0.0052)

0.0260**

0.0068***

0.0281***

0.0265***

0.0058

(0.0035)
0.0138**
(0.0052)
0.0177***

0.0084***

(0.0008)

(0.0016)

(0.0023)

(0.0033)

(0.0007)

-0.0049***

-0.0097***

-0.0001

-0.0025*

-0.0028***

(0.0011)

(0.0026)

(0.0021)

(0.0011)

(0.0007)

P

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adj R2

0.40

0.63

0.64

0.73

0.71

F

642.31

269.04

576.95

1,051.04

1,029.13

N

35,916

8,478

8,145

6,655

12,638

Notes: Dependent Variable = ln (#seller/#buyer * 100 + 1). Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in brackets.
September is the baseline month of comparison. All models include controls for gender, age, time elapsed since the foundation
of online stores (T), and province fixed-effect (P). All models include the intercept term. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

45

TABLE V
REGRESSION RESULTS FOR SELLERS COMPLETING AT LEAST ONE TRANSACTION

Age

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All

Pre-CR

CR

Post-CR

Law86

(1947-1995)

(1947-1959)

(1960-1970)

(1971-1979)

(1980-1995)

0.0043***
(0.0003)

Female

Q2

Q3

Q4

T

RAE

0.2298***

-0.0158***

0.0362***

(0.0020)

(0.0018)

0.2747***

0.3732***

0.0137***
(0.0028)
0.1521***

-0.0694***
(0.0024)
0.1275***

(0.0064)

(0.0149)

(0.0112)

(0.0067)

(0.0047)

0.0026

0.0054

-0.0009

-0.0055

0.0103

(0.0101)

(0.0232)

(0.0174)

(0.0111)

(0.0068)

0.0202*

0.0443*

0.0151

(0.0093)

(0.0209)

(0.0163)

(0.0094)

(0.0067)

0.0143

0.0460*

-0.0088

0.0161

0.0011

(0.0094)

(0.0218)

(0.0164)

(0.0088)

(0.0072)

0.0142***

0.0344***

(0.0006)

(0.0012)

-0.0045***

-0.0077**

(0.0012)

(0.0026)

0.0257***

0.0316***

0.0122***

0.0093

0.0220***

(0.0016)

(0.0022)

(0.0011)

0.0010

-0.0025*

-0.0027**

(0.0022)

(0.0011)

(0.0010)

P

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adj R2

0.49

0.68

0.69

0.71

0.58

F

816.04

379.95

738.04

916.05

767.54

N

35,916

9,210

8,157

6,653

11,896

Notes: Dependent Variable = ln (#seller/#buyer * 100 + 1). Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in brackets.
September is the baseline month of comparison. All models include controls for gender, age, time elapsed since the foundation
of online stores (T), and province fixed-effect (P). All models include the intercept term. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

46

TABLE VI
REGRESSION RESULTS FOR SURVIVED SELLERS ONLY

Age

Female

Q2

Q3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All

Pre-CR

CR

Post-CR

Law86

(1947-1995)

(1947-1959)

(1960-1970)

(1971-1979)

(1980-1995)

-0.0030***

-0.0302***

(0.0003)

(0.0024)

0.2344***

RAE

0.2380***

0.3239***

(0.0022)
0.1473***

-0.0429***
(0.0019)
0.2228***

(0.0174)

(0.0125)

(0.0087)

(0.0039)

0.0034

-0.0137

-0.0100

-0.0039

0.0134*

(0.0113)

(0.0273)

(0.0195)

(0.0131)

(0.0058)

0.0473***

0.0409***
(0.0105)

T

(0.0020)

0.0308***

(0.0072)

(0.0104)
Q4

0.0208***

0.0120***

0.0872***

0.0216

(0.0248)
0.1019***
(0.0255)
0.0298***

0.0393**

0.0085

(0.0179)

(0.0120)

(0.0057)

-0.0226

0.0157

0.0041

(0.0180)

(0.0114)

(0.0058)

0.0164***

-0.0097***

0.0283***

(0.0006)

(0.0012)

(0.0015)

(0.0019)

(0.0011)

-0.0062***

-0.0082**

-0.0013

-0.0040**

-0.0032***

(0.0013)

(0.0032)

(0.0024)

(0.0014)

(0.0008)

P

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adj R2

0.45

0.63

0.67

0.68

0.80

F

787.43

478.73

689.24

951.17

2,159.21

N

35,916

9,210

8,157

6,653

11,896

Notes: Dependent Variable = ln (#seller/#buyer * 100 + 1). Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in brackets.
September is the baseline month of comparison. All models include controls for gender, age, time elapsed since the foundation
of online stores (T), and province fixed-effect (P). All models include the intercept term. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

47

TABLE VII
REGRESSION RESULTS FOR AGE COHORTS BORN IN HAN MINORITY PROVINCES (AUTONOMOUS
REGIONS) ONLY

Age

Female

Q2

Q3

Q4

T

RAE

P
Adj R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All

Pre-CR

CR

Post-CR

Law86

(1947-1995)

(1947-1959)

(1960-1970)

(1971-1979)

(1980-1995)

-0.0294***

-0.0696***

-0.0097

0.0030

(0.0010)

(0.0081)

(0.0073)

(0.0057)

0.1940***

0.3460***

0.2770***

0.0699**

-0.0792***
(0.0050)
0.0551***

(0.0224)

(0.0598)

(0.0442)

(0.0229)

(0.0121)

0.0293

0.1320

0.0043

-0.0354

0.0069

(0.0345)

(0.0901)

(0.0701)

(0.0398)

(0.0187)

0.0494

0.0594

0.0386

0.0532

0.0306

(0.0323)

(0.0819)

(0.0672)

(0.0332)

(0.0172)

0.0435

0.0647

0.0383

0.0571

0.0131

(0.0336)

(0.0895)

(0.0680)

(0.0312)

(0.0178)

0.0358***

0.0453***

(0.0015)

(0.0026)

-0.0092*

-0.0272**

(0.0042)

(0.0105)

Yes
0.47

0.0384***

0.0126*

0.0193***

(0.0036)

(0.0051)

(0.0028)

0.0025

-0.0087*

-0.0014

(0.0085)

(0.0038)

(0.0023)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.64

0.51

0.40

0.44

F

197.73

216.68

70.23

120.00

187.65

N

5,678

1,413

1,298

1,055

1,912

Notes: Dependent Variable = ln (#seller/#buyer * 100 + 1). Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in brackets.
September is the baseline month of comparison. All models include controls for gender, age, time elapsed since the foundation
of online stores (T), and province fixed-effect (P). All models include the intercept term. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

48

TABLE VIII
REGRESSION RESULTS FOR HAN MAJORITY PROVINCES ONLY

Age

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All

Pre-CR

CR

Post-CR

Law86

(1947-1995)

(1947-1959)

(1960-1970)

(1971-1979)

(1980-1995)

0.0047***
(0.0004)

Female

Q2

Q3

Q4

T

RAE

0.1933***

-0.0130***

0.0251***

(0.0020)

(0.0018)

0.2515***

0.2817***

0.0035*
(0.0015)
0.1215***

(0.0051)

(0.0130)

(0.0085)

(0.0035)

0.0049

0.0072

0.0094

-0.0051

(0.0084)

(0.0207)

(0.0130)

(0.0053)

0.0182*

0.0518**

0.0081

0.0158***

-0.0680***
(0.0013)
0.1103***
(0.0035)
0.0163**
(0.0051)
0.0182***

(0.0075)

(0.0177)

(0.0123)

(0.0048)

(0.0050)

0.0131

0.0379*

-0.0039

0.0033

0.0097

(0.0073)

(0.0175)

(0.0120)

(0.0048)

(0.0054)

-0.0075***

0.0158***

(0.0009)

(0.0019)

-0.0038***

-0.0066**

(0.0009)

(0.0021)

0.0117***

-0.0102***

0.0110***

(0.0034)

(0.0014)

(0.0007)

0.0009

-0.0013*

-0.0031***

(0.0017)

(0.0006)

(0.0007)

P

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adj R2

0.41

0.55

0.65

0.86

0.72

F

889.84

317.60

788.59

1,381.38

1,052.48

N

30,238

7,797

6,859

5,598

9,984

Notes: Dependent Variable = ln (#seller/#buyer * 100 + 1). Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in brackets.
September is the baseline month of comparison. All models include controls for gender, age, time elapsed since the foundation
of online stores (T), and province fixed-effect (P). All models include the intercept term. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

49

TABLE IX
REGRESSION RESULTS FOR INTERACTION EFFECTS BETWEEN RAE AND GENDER IN MAJOR CITIES

Age

Female

Q2

Q3

Q4

T

RAE

RAE*Female

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All

Pre-CR

CR

Post-CR

Law86

(1947-1995)

(1947-1959)

(1960-1970)

(1971-1979)

(1980-1995)

-0.0150***

-0.0936***

-0.0022

(0.0002)

(0.0019)

(0.0015)

0.2243***

0.1247***

0.3192***

0.0094***
(0.0008)
0.1322***

(0.0081)

(0.0246)

(0.0149)

(0.0060)

-0.0101

-0.0484*

-0.0151

-0.0111*

(0.0063)

(0.0206)

(0.0130)

(0.0055)

0.0233***

0.0711***

(0.0060)

(0.0193)

-0.0801***

-0.1396***

(0.0067)

(0.0203)

0.0243***

-0.0008
(0.0124)
0.0255*
(0.0121)

0.0425***

0.0225***

0.0144**

-0.0486***
(0.0008)
0.1108***
(0.0051)
0.0088**
(0.0033)
0.0076*

(0.0050)

(0.0032)

-0.0295***

-0.1859***

(0.0051)

(0.0046)

-0.0027***

0.0087***

(0.0003)

(0.0005)

(0.0008)

(0.0006)

(0.0004)

-0.0042***

-0.0120***

-0.0023

-0.0025**

-0.0048***

(0.0010)

(0.0032)

(0.0021)

(0.0008)

(0.0005)

0.0031*
(0.0012)

0.0125**

0.0066**

(0.0038)

(0.0024)

0.0039***
(0.0010)

0.0041***
(0.0007)

City

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adj R2

0.29

0.50

0.32

0.48

0.50

F

240.65

148.52

146.54

318.82

393.87

N

161,956

34,429

40,640

33,839

53,048

Notes: Dependent Variable = ln (#seller/#buyer * 100 + 1). Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in brackets.
September is the baseline month of comparison. All models include controls for gender, age, time elapsed since the foundation
of online stores (T), and prefecture-level city fixed-effect (City). All models include the intercept term. *p < .05, **p < .01,
***p < .001

50

TABLE X
SUMMARY OF REGRESSION RESULTS ON RAE AFTER ACCOUNTING FOR MULTIPLE HYPOTHESES
TESTING

Table II&

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All

Pre-CR

CR

Post-CR

Law86

-0.00273,*

-0.00291,*

(0.0008)

(0.0007)

-0.00273,*

-0.00291,*

-0.0049***

-0.00982,*

(0.0011)

(0.0025)

-0.0049***

-0.00982,*

(0.0011)

(0.0025)

(0.0019)

(0.0008)

(0.0007)

-0.0049***

-0.00972,*

-0.00014,ns

-0.00253,*

-0.00281,*

(0.0011)

(0.0026)

(0.0021)

(0.0011)

(0.0007)

-0.0045***

-0.00771,*

-0.00253,*

-0.00272,*

(0.0012)

(0.0026)

(0.0022)

(0.0011)

(0.0010)

-0.0062***

-0.00823,*

-0.00134,ns

-0.00402,*

-0.00321,*

(0.0013)

(0.0032)

(0.0024)

(0.0014)

(0.0008)

-0.0092*

-0.02721,*

-0.00872,*

-0.00143,ns

(0.0042)

(0.0105)

(0.0038)

(0.0023)

-0.0038***

-0.00662,*

-0.00133,*

-0.00311,*

(0.0009)

(0.0021)

(0.0017)

(0.0006)

(0.0007)

Table IX

-0.0042***

-0.01202,*

-0.00234,ns

-0.00253,*

-0.00481,*

(RAE)

(0.0010)

(0.0032)

(0.0021)

(0.0008)

(0.0005)

Table III

Table IV

Table V

Table VI

Table VII

Table VIII

Table IX

0.0031*

(RAE*Female) (0.0012)
Notes.

ns

0.00064,ns
(0.0020)
0.00044,ns

0.00104,ns

0.00254,ns
(0.0085)
0.00094,ns

0.01253,*

0.00664,*

(0.0038)

(0.0024)

0.00392,*
(0.0010)

0.00411,*
(0.0007)

Not Significant, *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001; the numbers appeared in the superscripts indicate the order of

statistical tests in Holm algorithm. &The Tables (II, III, IV, and so on) are corresponding to the tables in the paper.

51

FIGURE I
Statistics on the School Entry Seasons in China
Note. N = 206

52

FIGURE II
The Minimal and Maximal Ages of Primary School Entry in China

53

FIGURE III
Statistics on Age of Students Who Enter Primary Schools for Han Majority Regions and Han Minority
Regions in China
Notes. N = 247 and 16 for Han majority counties and Han minority counties, respectively.

54

FIGURE IV
The Mean-Centered Birth Rates per Month
Notes. The top panel shows birth rates for people born between 1950 and 1959. The second panel shows birth rates for people
born between 1960 and 1969. The third panel shows birth rates for people born between 1970 and 1979. The bottom panel
shows birth rates for all people born between 1950 and 1979. The statistics are organized by three groups: people born in the
whole society (1998 census data), Taobao buyers, and Taobao sellers.

55

FIGURE V
The Mean-Centered Ratio of Sellers to Buyers on Taobao

56

i

GMV (Gross Merchandise Volume) refers to the value of confirmed orders of products and services

on Taobao, regardless of whether the buyer and seller settle the transaction. GMV is the metric
commonly used to reflect the gross sales for e-commerce companies. The numbers come from
Alibaba Group’s Annual Report for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2016, which were downloaded
from http://www.alibabagroup.com/en/ir/pdf/agm160524_ar.pdf. The USD 294.4 billion is calculated
based on the Taobao GMV of RMB 1,877 billion and an exchange of 6.38 RMB to USD 1.
ii

http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/taobao.com

iii

Using a small sample (N = 375), Du et al. (2012) found that the proportion of CEOs born in different

months in the Fortune 500 companies differ and favor those born early in the corresponding academic
years.
iv

Significant differences in achievement test scores were found for students in Grades 4 and 8 in

various OECD countries (Bedard and Dhuey 2006). In terms of attending universities, evidence of
RAE was found in the United States and Canada only.
v

The 6-3-3-4/5 structure refers to six years of elementary school, three years of lower secondary

school (corresponding to U.S. junior high school), three years of upper secondary school
(corresponding to U.S. senior high school), and four or five years of university education.
vi

Hainan province was a part of Guangdong province before 1988. Thus, we do not have any records

on the school season for Hainan province.
vii

A large majority of the spring COD was March 1. Similarly, the fall COD was set for September 1.

viii

There are no records for Hainan province because it had been a part of Guangdong province before

1988.
ix

Enacted on May 31, 1984.

x

Simple random sampling procedure was applied. Each seller is attached to a randomly generated

serial number and 8 million sellers were randomly drawn from the seller population (each with equal
probability, without replacement). The 9 million buyers were drawn in a similar manner.
xi

The data are obtained pursuant to the company’s standard data usage agreement to support

academic research. These confidential data have been deposited with Taobao, and can be requested in
accordance with Taobao’s data sharing protocol. More information about Alibaba Research Institute is
available from http://www.aliresearch.com/. We are happy to release our statistical code used to
generate the analysis results so that others who are able to obtain the data can replicate our analyses.
57

xii

We would be happy to share these non-proprietary databases, including the Chinese census data,

the archive data concerning school entry dates in China, and the city-level macro-economic variables.
xiii

We obtain similar results using a surviving sample.

xiv

Alternatively, RAE could be quantified by 11 dummies that correspond to each birth month except

September (which is the baseline month). In this model specification, a negative and significant
coefficient estimate for a month dummy variable would indicate the salience of RAE. We replicate the
analyses using this model specification and obtain very similar findings to those reported in this section.
xv

The coefficient estimate of 0.49% will translate into a 5.4% disadvantage for the youngest cohort,

which is 11 months younger than the oldest cohort within the same school age group.
xvi

North China includes 16 provinces (Heilongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning, Neimenggu, Beijing, Tianjin,

Hebei, Henan, Shandong, Xinjiang, Tibet, Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia, Shaanxi, and Shanxi) and is
defined by the line formed by the Huai River and Qinling Mountain range, the former of which
follows the January zero degree average temperature line (Celsius). Urban Provinces refer to the 13
provinces with a higher ratio of residents who work in cities (larger than median) based on data from
the 2010 statistical yearbook for a regional economy (Beijing, Tianjin, Neimenggu, Liaoning, Jilin,
Heilongjiang, Shanghai, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Fujian, Guangdong, Hainan, and Xinjiang). High
Education provinces include those 13 provinces with a higher ratio of students per 100,000 inhabitants
(above the median), based on the data in the statistical yearbook for regional economy (Beijing,
Tianjin, Shanxi, Neiminggu, Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang, Shanghai, Jiangsu, Hubei, Hunan,
Guangdong, and Sihaanxi).
xvii

China has five province-level autonomous regions, which include Xinjiang, Neimenggu, Ningxia,

Tibet, and Guangxi.
xviii

Analysis results in column 1 of Table X are free from MHT issue, because all data samples are

utilized in the analyses.

58

